

THE HISTORY OF THE EMPIRE
THE LAND OF SIGMAR
The first records of the lands known as the Empire were made not by Men but by Dwarfs, over two and a half thousand years before the reign of the present Emperor Karl Franz.
Following the great war between the Elves and the Dwarfs, and the consequent collapse of their empires, these ancient times were a period of great disorder, and exact historical detail is scarce.
After many years of war, the great empires of the past, the coastal realms of the High Elves and the Empire of the Dwarfs in the east, finally fell apart.
The High Elves abandoned their towers and cities, leaving behind a small number of their people who were unwilling or unable to leave their adopted homeland.
The Elves who remained were to found the Wood Elf realms of the Old World.
The Dwarf Empire of the Worlds Edge Mountains survived the wars but many powerful old Dwarfs were slain and Dwarf rule was seriously weakened.
When the mountains erupted into flame and the lands were riven by earthquakes the Dwarf Empire was finally broken and its people scattered.
Many of the Dwarf Holds that escaped the lava and destruction were engulfed by enemies of a different kind: Skaven, Goblins and Orcs.
A few Holds survived, most notably Karaz a Karak, the Dwarf capital and greatest underground city of all.
With the decline of the Elves and the Dwarfs new creatures began to grow in number and power.
Orcs and Goblins poured over the Worlds Edge Mountains through passes previously guarded by the Dwarfs, while in the northern forests human tribes began to move southwards.
The Dwarf records describe these primitive humans as skin-clad and uncouth, living in crude huts or caves, and fighting with weapons of stone and bronze.
The records also describe the humans as fierce and determined, recounting how they battled against the Orcs for possession of the empty lands.
Somewhere, somehow, the Dwarfs and the humans began a relationship that was to prove mutually beneficial over the next few hundred years.
Many Dwarfs fled westwards away from the ruins of the Worlds Edge Mountains, and some founded Holds in the Grey Mountains to the south.
Perhaps it was the Dwarf merchants trading for fur, charcoal or mineral ore who were the first to deal with men on a regular basis.
In any case, the Dwarfs saw in the savage human tribes potential allies to help them fight the Orcs and, ultimately, to help them win back the lost Dwarf fortresses.
The humans were eager to learn all that the Dwarfs could teach them, especially the secret arts of metal working and sword making.
The human tribes were divided amongst themselves, but the Dwarfs were able to strike up alliances which brought thousands of well-armed, fierce warriors eastwards.
The greatest of these was Sigmar, the first son of the chief of the Unberogen tribe.
He was the mightiest warrior of his age, and he led the terrifying Unberogens into battle against the Orcs countless times.
On one famous occasion Sigmar rescued several Dwarfs from captivity, one of whom was no less than King Kurgan Ironbeard.
The old king rewarded Sigmar by giving him the warhammer Ghal Maraz, or Skull Splitter, an ancient magic heirloom of Kurgan's house.
This powerful gift was gladly received and subsequently wielded effectively in many battles, earning Sigmar his nickname of Heldenhammer.
Upon the death of his father, Sigmar became chieftain and began to draw the human tribes together under his leadership.
The few human tribes that opposed him, mostly ancient enemies of the Unberogens, were defeated in battle or driven beyond the Grey Mountains to the south and northwards into the forests beyond the Middle Mountains.
When the Dwarfs were once again threatened by a massive invasion of Orcs and Goblins, King Kurgan sent the Runesmith Alaric the Mad to ask Sigmar for help.
An alliance was made and Sigmar's army marched east to the beleaguered hold of Zhufbar.
The Dwarf Hold was saved and Alaric kindled the ancient forges and refilled the Black Water, the huge lake whose waters powered the workshops of the Runesmiths.
Later that year a combined army of men led by Sigmar and Dwarfs led by King Kurgan met and defeated a huge horde of Goblins and Orcs as they attempted to cross the Worlds Edge Mountains at the Black Fire Pass.
There have since been many battles at this strategic crossing place, but this was the first, the greatest and the most hard fought.
After many hours of fighting Sigmar Heldenhammer drove the greenskins from the field in rout and ended the threat to the Dwarf Empire for many years.
In the following spring Sigmar was crowned Emperor of all the lands between the Grey Mountains in the south and  the Middle Mountains in the north.
King Kurgan presented Sigmar with a crown made by Alaric the Mad, and Sigmar was crown Emperor by the Priest of Ulric.
Sigmar and Kurgan swore eternal friendship and Alaric the Mad embarked upon the forging of twelve magic swords as payment for Sigmar's aid at Zhufbar.
These twelve blades, the Runefangs, were not completed until after Sigmar's passing.
The calendar of the Empire is reckoned from the year of Sigmar's crowning (year 1).
The current Emperor Karl Franz was elected in the year 2502.
THE PASSING OF SIGMAR
Sigmar ruled the Empire for over fifty years.
During this time the rough villages blossomed into small towns, the people multiplied, and many new settlements were founded.
Of course there were still enemies to fight: marauding Goblins continued to cross over the Worlds Edge Mountains, and there were plenty of savage human tribes in the northern forests beyond the Middle Mountains.
Of Sigmar's reign very little is known, for the Dwarf annals are concerned chiefly with their own affairs and Sigmar's part in them.
All that is known for certain is that Sigmar eventually put aside his crown and journeyed eastwards, supposedly to Karaz a Karak to meet his old friend Kurgan Ironbeard.
If he ever arrived at that most famous of all Dwarf Holds the Dwarf records do not tell.
The time of Sigmar passed, and he became a legend, the heroic forebear of his people.
Temples and shrines were built to his memory, and a cult grew up to venerate him as founder of the Empire.
Within a generation Sigmar was openly worshipped as a god, with his own priesthood headed by a Grand Theogonist.
The first Grand Theogonist was Johann Helsturm, and he became one of the most powerful men in the whole land, with many thousands of loyal followers.
Sigmar took his place alongside the chief old gods of the Empire: Taal, Ulric, and Morr.
THE AGE OF THE ELECTOR COUNTS
Sigmar divided his land between the allied chiefs who had helped him during his many wars.
These divisions were based around the old tribal territories to some extent, but absorbed many of the smaller tribes and lands that had previously belonged to tribes hostile to the Unberogens.
These chiefs were bound to Sigmar by oaths of loyalty, and in return they and their heirs were to rule in his name.
From its inception the Empire was therefore a loosely organised confederacy of allies, bound by common friendship and a mutual loyalty to the Emperor.
The new provinces occupied pretty much the same areas as they do today.
The leaders of the provinces took the title of Count.
Sigmar left no heir and his passing must have caused some apprehension amongst the people of the Empire.
Who would rise to claim the Imperial throne?
Would the counts now war amongst themselves to establish the strongest?
The whole future of the fledgling Empire must have seemed in grave doubt.
In the end there was no war and no division, the counts instead agreed that one of their number should be chosen to be Emperor, and that the Emperor should hold his title only with the majority consent of the counts themselves.
The counts therefore became Elector Counts, and the Empire's system of elected Emperors was established.
This system was to continue in some form right up until the present day, through wars and periods of anarchy, even surviving long periods where powerful Emperors manipulated the elective body in the interests of their own family.
Over the years the body of Electors grew from the original Elector Counts to include representatives of the cults of Sigmar and Ulric.
Today there is a total of fifteen Electors, although there were originally twelve — one for each of the Runefangs which Alaric the Mad forged for Sigmar.
ANARCHY AND WAR
The early years of the Empire's history are not well recorded.
Some of the early Emperors built tombs and temples which survive in part, and whose intricate carvings can still be made out.
A few of the better examples are of superior Dwarf workmanship, and on these can be read Dwarf runes which tell something of the history of the Emperors and their times.
Later chroniclers attempted to compile this information into histories of the Empire, and some ventured to make lists of reigning Emperors.
Even these compilations are incredibly ancient, and not always consistent or reliable themselves.
As a consequence, very little is known about the first thousand years of Imperial history.
That the Empire grew in power is certain, but there were civil wars, periods where there was no Emperor, where rival Emperors warred against each other, and times when Orcs and Goblins plundered the lands.
On the whole, the Empire's fortunes were good, and the land remained united despite interludes of disarray.
In the reign of Boris Goldgather a great disaster overtook the Empire.
According to legend, the rule of Boris was something of a disaster: the Empire struggled under the burden of excessive taxation and corrupt officials, while the army was neglected and many border forts abandoned.
Dispirited and half-starving, the population was in no state to weather the greatest catastrophe ever to strike the Old World: the Black Plague of 1111.
Many thousands died over the winter of 1111–1112.
Whole villages were wiped out at a stroke, towns were abandoned, and in the chief provincial cities nearly three quarters of the people were taken by disease.
To make matters worse, the Skaven erupted from their tunnels, looting and destroying where the plague had done its work.
The Black Plague subsided over the next four years.
The only good news in all this time was that Boris Goldgather became one of its victims in 1115, and news of his death helped to raise morale amongst the oppressed population.
In 1124 the Skaven were finally driven out of the Empire      and the people began to rebuild their towns.
With its population reduced to little over a tenth of pre-plague levels, many villages were abandoned, and much of the Empire became wasteland.
After the devastation an uneasy peace settled over the Empire.
Count Mandred, the acclaimed defeater of the Skaven, was elected Emperor and his respected generalship and charismatic personality held the Empire together during a vulnerable period of recovery.
After his death at the hands of a Skaven assassin in 1152 the Elector Counts failed to reach a decision as to who should be the new Emperor.
Personal rivalries and conflicting ambitions drove them apart.
Ottilia, the Elector Countess of Talabecland, declared war on her rival the Elector Count of Stirland, and open hostilities broke out between the two provinces.
The Imperial crown passed from one Elector Count to another, and the whole Empire devolved into separate warring states.
Although there were Emperors during the following eight hundred years, the Empire itself was never united in the old sense.
From 1360 until the complete collapse of the Imperial system in 1979 there were two Emperors: the elected Emperor and the Elector Count of Talabecland, who continued to claim hereditary position as Emperor following the self-appointed reign of Ottilia.
In effect, Talabecland had ceded from the Empire, and was joined at various times by other provinces that were dissatisfied with the current elected Emperor.
The Court at Talabheim, the capital of Talabecland, was a natural refuge for enemies of the Elector Count of Stirland.
From 1547 the Elector Count of Middenland proclaimed himself Emperor too, making a total of no less than three pretenders, each soliciting allies and supporters amongst the other provinces.
By 1979 the provinces themselves had become ungovernable, with even the Elector Counts facing rivals and rebellions within their own lands.
In 1979, when the infant Countess Magritta of Marienburg was elected Empress, the Grand Theogonist himself refused to acknowledge the appointment and the Imperial system was effectively ended.
The Elector Counts did not meet again for over four hundred years.
During this time the cities governed their own affairs and many of the larger towns became prosperous under the leadership of Burgomeisters elected from the mercantile classes and other wealthy citizens.
The power of the Elector Counts declined as that of the Burgomeisters grew, and many cities began to recruit their own troops.
THE GREAT WAR AGAINST CHAOS
The power of Chaos lies in the far north of the Warhammer World far beyond the borders of the Empire.
It centres upon the roughly circular territory around the north pole, directly below the ancient collapsed warp gate which pours magic energy into the world.
This region is known as the Realm of Chaos; a black zone of unreality where time and space have no meaning.
The Realm of Chaos is inhabited by Chaos Gods and daemons who are able to exist within the magic-saturated atmosphere.
The whole area around the Realm of Chaos is polluted with magic.
It is a desert of stone and shifting sands, where periods of increased magical activity have overwhelmed the land, leaving behind twisted rocks and a barren landscape as the magic subsided.
This desolation is known as the Chaos Wastes or the Northern Wastes, and is surrounded in turn by only slightly less corrupted lands of distorted trees and broken rocks called the Troll Country.
All these lands lie to the north of the Empire, beyond the land of Kislev.
The wastelands are inhabited by all kinds of monstrous creatures and it is here that the armies of Chaos gather their strength.
When the tides of magic flow strongly from the broken warp gate the Realm of Chaos expands, the Northern Wastes are swallowed up, and the armies of Chaos pour down through the Troll Country into Kislev and the Empire.
The success of these Chaos armies further strengthens the tides of magic, and the Realm of Chaos grows even larger, threatening to overwhelm the north.
The furthest the Realm of Chaos has ever expanded since Sigmar's time was during the Great War Against Chaos which began in the year 2302.
The power of Chaos had been growing for some years.
Beastmen prowled the forests and many of the more outlying human settlements had to be abandoned.
The deep division within the provinces of the former Empire meant than no-one had sufficient forces to root out the Beastmen.
Warriors of Chaos, human outcasts from the wars, flocked to join the Beastmen and other creatures of Chaos.
As the power of Chaos grew the warp gates began to spew out dark magic and the Realm of Chaos expanded quickly.
In the winter of 2301 the Chaos armies moved southwards, fuelled by the growing darkness of Chaos.
Daemons moved with them, sustained by the fresh tides of life-giving magic, and everywhere the agents of Chaos became powerful.
In the heartlands of the Empire Chaos Sorcerers and worshippers of the Chaos Gods emerged from their secret conclaves to attack human society from within.
As the dark days of winter engulfed the Old World the Chaos armies struck.
The northern lands of Kislev were quickly overwhelmed.
A mighty army of Kislevites and the Elector Count of Ostland was crushed north of Praag, and the Chaos army advanced along the western foothills of the Worlds Edge Mountains.
Spring of 2302 was noted as the coldest for centuries, and the Chaos army crossed the river Lynsk above Praag, destroying a contingent of Kislevites defending its bridges.
With the last of the Kislevite armies defeated, the Chaos hordes advanced upon Praag and laid siege to the city.
The Siege of Praag lasted throughout the spring and summer, during which time the brave defenders held back the greater part of the Chaos forces.
Eventually, as winter    set in and the year drew to a close, Praag fell and the hordes of Chaos ran amuck.
The Realm of Chaos swept over the city and engulfed it, and Praag was changed forever, its stone walls and building melding into hellish and inhuman shapes.
Those citizens unlucky enough to still be alive were swept into the Realm of Chaos, their living bodies melted into the walls of the city itself, so that it was no longer possible to tell man from stone.
Distorted faces peered from walls, agonised limbs writhed from the pavements, and pillars of stone groaned with voices that came from once human lips.
Praag had become a living nightmare and a taste of what lay ahead if the Chaos armies conquered the rest of the land.
MAGNUS THE PIOUS
Remnants of the defeated Kislevite army fled south, spreading the word of their defeat.
A leader arose from among the confusion and panic of those troubled times: Magnus, a noble of Nuln.
He later became known as Magnus the Pious because of his unflinching devotion to the cult of Sigmar and to the ideals of nationhood which Sigmar still signified in the divided Empire.
Magnus was a great orator whose rousing speeches soon created a massive following among the common folk of the Empire.
He marched northwards from city to city, addressing the people in the market places, gathering about him an army.
The Elector Counts and Burgomeisters recognised in Magnus a leader they were all prepared to follow, and soon the citizen army was swollen by provincial troops and the troops of the Elector Counts themselves.
By the time the army reached Middenheim it was the largest single force in the history of the Empire, and Magnus had to divide his troops into two forces as no one place could provide enough food and water to support the entire army.
The first army, consisting mostly of the Kislevites and fast-moving mounted troops, marched with all speed to Praag in the hope of relieving the siege.
This army arrived too late, and stopping only to destroy part of the Chaos Army's rearguard, quickly turned back south in pursuit of the main Chaos force.
The second army, led by Magnus himself, marched to Kislev hoping to reprovision at the capital before continuing northwards.
This second army discovered the city already under attack by the Chaos hordes and attacked immediately.
Kislev was already defended by the few remaining Kislevites and a large Dwarf army which had marched northwards once the fall of Praag became known in Karaz a Karak.
Concentrating on the trapped defenders, the Chaos army was ill-prepared for this fresh assault from Magnus's army.
The battle went well for Magnus initially: the Chaos forces were scattered and their generals unable to prevent wholesale slaughter.
Soon the greater numbers of the Chaos force began to tell, and Magnus's army was gradually pushed back into a defensive circle.
The Dwarfs inside Kislev attempted to break out to help Magnus but they were contained and forced back behind the city's walls.
As the Chaos army regrouped for its final attack, the Kislevites returning from Praag arrived from the north and struck the Chaos force in the back.
Caught between no less than three armies the Chaos hordes faltered and began to charge in every direction, bewildered and confused by this new turn of events.
The Kislevites were driven to wild fury by what they had witnessed in Praag, and the Chaos army began to crumble before their implacable anger.
Magnus seized the opportunity and led his troops forward.
The Dwarfs and remaining Kislevite defenders burst from the city itself.
The Chaos troops fled and many were caught and destroyed as they turned to run.
The Old World was saved and the Realm of Chaos shrank away to the north.
Magnus was elected Emperor in 2304.
The Elector Counts could not have done otherwise even if they had wanted; the people demanded it, and were not to be denied.
Magnus the Pious proved an extremely able Emperor and immediately set about restoring order to the provinces of the Empire.
The servants of Chaos were hunted down in the forests, and many wild and long-abandoned lands were re-settled.
When Magnus died the Imperial crown passed to Count Leopold of Stirland, and subsequently to his grandson Dieter.
It was during the reign of Dieter that the city of Marienburg ceded from the Empire in return for a huge donation to the Imperial coffers.
Dieter did not prove a popular leader –many thought that he had accepted the Marienburger's money a little too readily –and he was replaced by Wilhelm III, Prince of Altdorf and Elector Count of the Reikland.
Since the accession of Wilhelm in 2429 the crown has remained with the Princes of Altdorf until the present Emperor Karl Franz.
-30 Sigmar is born to the chief of the Unberogen tribe.
-15 Sigmar rescues Dwarf prisoners from the Orcs.
Included among them is King Kurgan Ironbeard.
Sigmar is given the magic hammer Ghal Maraz, or Skull Splitter, an ancient heirloom of the Dwarf King's family.
-8 Upon the death of his father, Sigmar becomes chief of the Unberogen tribe.
-1 The Battle of Black Fire Pass.
An alliance of human tribes led by Sigmar and a Dwarf army under Kurgan Ironbeard defeats a large Orc and Goblin army.
1 Sigmar is crowned Emperor by the High Priest of Ulric.
50 After a half century of building and prosperity in the newly proclaimed Empire, Sigmar vanishes into the east.
The system of Elector Counts is established whereby the provincial leaders elect one of their number to be Emperor.
73 The spreading cult of Sigmar the Patron God of the Empire receives its first Grand Theogonist, Johann Helsturm.
1111 The Black Plague.
The plague lasts until 1115, and almost nine-tenths of the human population of the Empire is wiped out.
Skaven erupt to take advantage of the disaster.
Many small settlements are abandoned due to falling populations and the depredations of the Skaven.
1115 The death of Emperor Boris Goldgather from the Black Plague.
His reign was noted for the corruption of Imperial officials, exorbitant taxes, and neglect of the Imperial army.
No successor is elected during the ensuing anarchy.
1124 Count Mandred Skaven Slayer finally drives out the Skaven and is elected Emperor.
1152 Assassination of the Emperor Mandred.
The Elector Counts cannot agree upon a successor and the Empire divides into self-governing provinces.
War between Talabecland and Stirland as rival would-be Emperors vie for power.
1360 The Ottilia of Talabecland declares herself Empress.
Over the next few hundred years there are to be two Emperors, the elected Emperor and the reigning Count of Talabecland.
c1450–1550 The Crusades against Araby.
1547 The Count of Middenheim proclaims himself Emperor.
There are now three Emperors.
None of them commands much loyalty amongst the other provinces and each effectively rules an independent state.
1707 The Orc Warlord Gorbad Ironclaw invades the Empire through Black Fire Pass.
Nuln is sacked and the Moot devastated.
Solland is overrun and Eldred Count of Solland slain — after this Solland ceases to exist as a separate land.
The Solland Runefang is captured by Orcs.
Gorbad advances north along the Upper Reik.
A large Imperial army under the Count of Wissenland is defeated at the Battle of Grunberg just south of Altdorf.
Altdorf is besieged.
The Emperor Sigismund (the remaining elected Emperor at this time) is killed by Orc wyverns during the siege but Altdorf holds out.
1979 Magritta of Marienburg is elected Emperor by the Elector Counts not otherwise claiming the crown for themselves.
The Grand Theogonist of Sigmar refuses to acknowledge the appointment and the Imperial system is effectively ended.
From now until the time of Magnus the Pious there are no Emperors and the lands becomes increasingly divided.
As individual cities look to their own government the mercantile Burgomeisters gain in power.
2010 Wars of the Vampire Counts begin with devastation of Ostermark by Vlad von Carstein, the first of the notorious Vampire Counts of Sylvania.
Undead armies rampage between Stirland and the northern border.
2145 The Battle of Hel Fen.
Manfred von Carstein, the last of the Vampire Counts of Sylvania, is destroyed along with his Undead hordes.
2302 The Great War against Chaos begins as the forces of Chaos march across the Lynsk and lay siege to Praag.
Praag falls in winter of 2302/2303.
2303 Magnus the Pious meets and defeats the Chaos armies at the gates of Kislev.
2304 Magnus the Pious of Nuln elected Emperor.
Rebuilding of the Empire.
Magnus establishes his court at Nuln.
2429 Marienburg secedes from the Empire after the Burgomeisters collude with Emperor Dieter IV to secure their independence in return for Marienburger gold.
Dieter is deposed after the ensuing scandal.
Accession of Wilhelm III.
The crown passes to the Princes of Altdorf.
2502 Accession of Karl Franz, the reigning Emperor.
THE LAND OF THE EMPIRE
The Empire is the largest and most powerful of all the many and varied realms of the Old World.
It stretches from the borders of Bretonnia in the west to the sweeping plains of Kislev in the east.
Its borders encompass vast forests, towering mountains, and many miles of wilderness as well as cities, farmlands, and bountiful rivers.
THE MOUNTAINS
The Empire is partly bounded by three tall mountain ranges: the Grey Mountains to the west, the Black Mountains to the south and the Worlds Edge Mountains to the east.
These mountains converge in the high mountainous land to the south called the Vaults.
The mountains form a defensive barrier which keeps invaders out, but they also harbour many dangerous foes both on the surface and beneath their tall peaks.
There are only a few passes which remain open all year, although many smaller routes can be traversed freely throughout the summer months.
These permanent passes are vitally important to the security of the Empire, and it is hardly surprising that fortresses guard these strategic points.
The Grey Mountains divide the Empire from Bretonnia, the other great realm of Men in the Old World.
There are Dwarf settlements within the mountains, but these are fewer in number and less wealthy than the mighty Dwarf Holds of the Worlds Edge Mountains.
The few large passes through the Grey Mountains are guarded by Bretonnian and Imperial fortresses.
Most of the passes are small and dangerous, wide enough for a merchant and his donkeys but unsuitable for carts or horses.
The largest pass lies to the south-west of Altdorf and is known as Axe Bite Pass .
The Empire end of this pass is protected by the fortress of Helmgart, a massive tower which rises out of the mountain-side and whose battlements overlook the narrow path below.
This is the favoured route of invading armies marching in either direction.
The northern tip of the Grey Mountains gradually declines into a hilly upland region known as the Gisoreux Gap — the principal route between Bretonnia and the Empire.
The Worlds Edge Mountains are extremely tall and almost impossible to cross where they border the Empire.
There is a pass in the far north in the land of Kislev called the Peak Pass , and in the far south there is a pass where the Worlds Edge Mountains and Black Mountains divide —Black Fire Pass .
In between these two routes there is no way across the surface but there are plenty of underground passages which lead under the mountains.
Many centuries ago the whole mountain range was the domain of the Dwarfs who cut vast cities and fortresses into the rock.
The underground realm was connected by tunnels stretching from the far north to the south beyond the Old World itself.
At strategic points the tunnels led east and west to gates in the mountain sides, allowing access from one side to the other.
Many of these workings were destroyed by volcanic activity and earthquakes following the wars between Elves and Dwarfs, whilst others were abandoned or taken over by Night Goblins, Skaven and other evil creatures.
Some of the ancient fortresses and cities still harbour Dwarfs, but the connecting tunnels are dangerous places which even the Dwarfs use with due caution.
The Black Mountains lie between the Grey and the Worlds Edge Mountains and divide the Empire from the wild southern lands of the Border Princes.
The Black Mountains are possibly the least hospitable of all the Empire's borders.
The weather is unpredictable and the mountains exceptionally high as they climb towards the Vaults.
The only reliable pass is Black Fire Pass , a deep cleft in the rock whose sides rise like sheer walls above the track below.
The pass widens out in the middle of its length, revealing a massive upland valley.
It was here that Sigmar fought his famous battle against the Orcs.
The Black Mountains are riddled with Goblin tunnels.
They are crude and narrow compared to the Dwarf mines of the other mountain chains and prone to collapsing unexpectedly.
The whole mountain range is infested with Night Goblins, Trolls, Skaven and countless other less numerous but equally deadly creatures.
The other main upland region within the Empire is the Middle Mountains range.
This lies in the northern part of the Empire and beyond it is Ostland, the northernmost of the Empire's provinces.
This massive range is surrounded by dense forest and is largely shunned by humans with the possible exception of bandits and other undesirables.
There are no Dwarf delvings here, and the rocky uplands are used as a refuge by Chaos warbands, Beastmen, Orcs and marauding Goblins.
Occasionally the Imperial forces try to clear out the worst of these foes, but the area remains wild and dangerous.
The Forest of Shadows to the north is dense and dark, and inhabited by Forest Goblins and ferocious wolf packs.
This is an area of the Empire which has never really been tamed.
THE RIVERS
Because it is surrounded by uplands the Empire acts like a huge basin into which drain countless mountain torrents.
Beginning as crashing streams and spectacular waterfalls high up in the mountains, these quickly converge to form raging rivers.
By the time they reach the flat lands they have become deep and substantial — the greatest waterways in all the Old World.
These deep and very broad rivers are characteristic of the Empire, where travel by boat is often faster and more practical than travel along the primitive roads.
The principal rivers of the Empire flow from the east to the west, and as they converge they become greater still.
The accompanying map shows the most substantial rivers, but the scale does not permit us to show every stream and tributary, of which there are many thousands.
The principal river systems and their major tributaries are described below.
The people of the Empire tend to refer to the areas adjoining rivers by the names of the rivers themselves, for example Talabecland around the river Talabec, the Reikland by the banks of the Reik, and so on.
Some of these names represent principalities and have a political significance; others are simply regional tags which identify the surrounding population, for example the Solland in the far south, which used to be an independent realm but which is now part of Wissenland.
The river Sol is the southernmost of the Empire's rivers.
It rises in the Vaults and its fast flowing waters are further augmented by the many streams flowing from the eastern edge of the Grey Mountains.
During the spring the Sol becomes a torrent as melt waters vastly increase the volume of water.
The waters of the Sol are notoriously cold, and the hardy people that live in that region are used to the mountains and extreme climate.
The Upper Reik begins just south of Black Fire Pass where countless mountain streams converge to form what many people take as the beginnings of the mighty river Reik.
Its waters are fast and crystal clear.
The Upper Reik is joined by the Sol to the south of Nuln and continues northwards until it converges with the blue waters of the Aver to form the Reik at Nuln itself.
The river Aver begins as a number of fast mountain streams which flow from the western slopes of the Dwarf fortress of Karak Varn just north of Black Fire Pass.
Plunging over a series of tall waterfalls, these become two broad and very blue rivers which finally unite in the Moot.
These rivers are the Aver Reach to the north and the Blue Reach to the south.
The river Aver continues westward past the provincial capital at Averheim and finally flows into the Reik at Nuln.
The Stir may be traced to the streams which flow from the western slopes of the Dwarf fortress of Karak Kadrin.
It quickly develops into a major river flowing within a deep, wooded valley.
For nearly all of its length the Stir flows through the Great Forest and is fed by numerous springs and brooks.
The great breadth of the river and few crossing points means that the Stir forms a defensive barrier and a natural border between Stirland to the south and Talabecland to the north.
The river Talabec originates in the rapid streams of the Worlds Edge Mountains between the Dwarf fortresses of Karak Kadrin and Karak Ungor.
Two main forks flow westward, the Upper and Lower Talabec, converging in dark pine forests which have an evil reputation.
Here on the borderlands of the Empire there are many roving bands of Orcs and Goblins, as well as Chaos warbands, Beastmen, and other creatures.
South of where it joins the Urskoy the river is broad and impossible to cross, becoming steadily wider as it flows west towards Talabheim.
At Talabheim there is a major ferry point, the river being far too wide to bridge.
Between Talabheim and Altdorf the  river is joined by many streams which flow south from the Middle Mountains, laden with dark soils washed from the mountain slopes.
Taken as a single body of water, between its source and where its waters reach the sea at Marienburg as the Reik, this is the longest and most substantial river system in the Old World.
The name of the river reveals its association with the god Taal, Lord of the Beasts and master of wild places.
The river is sometimes called Taal's River, and the surrounding land of Talabecland is the heartland of the god's worship.
The Reik is actually the longest single river in the Old World, although only because it bears its name from its source in the Upper Reik to where it joins the sea at Marienburg.
The Talabec/Lower Reik watercourse is in fact greater in total length.
The Reik is undoubtedly the most important river in the Empire, and its surrounding territories, the Reikland, are the most prosperous.
It is a busy waterway, with water traffic between Marienburg and Nuln more than 500 miles inland.
This stretch of broad water actually carries more shipping than the rest of the rivers of the Empire put together, and it is the principal route for trade in the Empire.
North of Nuln, the Reik is far too wide and deep to bridge.
The last bridge at Nuln is one of the marvels of the Old World, and its wooden centre section can be raised and lowered to form a defensive barrier.
At Altdorf the Reik and Talabec join together.
As they do so the Talabec deposits the black soil of the Middle Mountains and a vast area of mud-flats is formed.
The city of Altdorf is built upon a island formed of these deposits and is surrounded by marshes and islands which divide the Reik into many shifting channels.
These reunite into a single large body of water just north of Altdorf, and from here the river takes on a different character.
Broad and deep, it runs over a rocky bed that sometimes breaks out of the river to form steep rocky islands midstream.
These islands are secure places and are used as sites for villages, small towns and even imposing fortresses.
The Reik finally reaches the sea at Marienburg, the largest and wealthiest trading port and most populous city in the old World.
Formally part of the Empire, Marienburg and its surrounding territory is now an independent city ruled by its powerful Burgomeisters.
THE FORESTS
Most of the Empire is covered by gloomy, tangled, deciduous forests.
Towards the north these turn into pine forests and eventually thin out to form the grassy plains of Kislev.
The forests are wild and dangerous places, although there are towns and innumerable villages situated within the woodlands.
The forests serve to hide many of the Empire's enemies, including the Forest Goblins, Chaos warbands and rampaging Orcs.
The deeper forests are virtually hostile territory where few humans venture.
The Forest Of Shadows encompasses most of the principality of Ostland and lies to the north of the Middle Mountains.
It is a dark and brooding pine forest thick with raiders, bandits, and Chaos warbands.
The road between Middenheim and the Kislevite city of Erengrad runs through this forbidding forest.
The Reikwald Forest lies to the south of Altdorf between the river Reik and the Grey Mountains.
This is a favourite haunt of the Empire's outcasts, where refugees from justice or persecution take to a life of banditry.
The main road between Bretonnia and the Empire runs through this forest and climbs over the Axe Bite Pass.
The Drakwald Forest lies in the area around Middenheim.
It is a fairly sparse forest mostly of birch trees on a light, sandy soil.
The area is not very fertile, and so has never been cleared for cultivation.
In places the trees do grow more thickly and pines occur in some hilly areas.
The road between Marienburg and Middenheim runs through this forest.
The Great Forest is an ancient, vast and very varied woodland.
It contains many majestic old oaks and hoary willows.
It stretches from the Middle Mountains in the north to Nuln in the south, and from Altdorf in the west to the borders of Kislev in the east.
Together with the other forests of the Empire it forms a continuous block of woodland which dominates the whole central area of the Empire.
CITIES AND SETTLEMENTS
Cities and towns within the Empire are built in a variety of styles from many different materials.
The western towns tend to be the richest and the oldest, and here the architecture may be rendered in stone.
In the east wood is often used instead, and the border settlements of Ostland and Ostermark are often constructed from solid logs cut from the surrounding forest.
The largest and most important cities of the Empire are Altdorf, Nuln, Talabheim and Middenheim.
Altdorf is the seat of the Emperor Karl Franz and has been the Imperial capital since the accession of Wilhelm Prince of Altdorf.
The Empire has no capital as such, as the Emperor is chosen from amongst the Elector Counts throughout the provinces.
During the time of Magnus the Pious the Imperial court was at Nuln, for example.
Altdorf is a bustling city with a substantial community of foreigners, traders, adventurers and fortune seekers.
The Imperial court itself supports a flourishing economy which naturally attracts all kinds of people.
Altdorf stands on a series of islands amongst the broad mud flats which surround the confluence of the rivers Reik and Talabec.
At this point the river is divided into three main channels and there are numerous bridges crossing these waterways throughout the city.
The three channels reunite to the north of Altdorf, where a large deep water harbour has been built.
This is the Reiksport, home of the Imperial navy, where ocean-going ships can unload their cargos.
The Reiksport is the furthest point that these really big ships can travel from the coast.
The narrow channels around Altdorf itself are impassable to ocean-going ships, although once beyond Altdorf the Reik and the Talabec broaden out again.
Altdorf is renowned as a seat of learning, and the University of Altdorf is the most highly respected academic institution in the Empire, where lords and princes from many lands come to sit at the feet of the foremost thinkers in the Old World.
Altdorf is also the centre of magic lore and its eight Colleges of Magic are justly famous throughout the Old World and beyond.
The majestic wizards’ towers of the Colleges of Magic rise above Altdorf, glittering needles of stone and brick from which the wizards observe currents in the Winds of Magic.
It is here that the Old World's finest wizards learn their art, and where the Empire's deadly Battle Wizards are trained.
Another wonder is the Imperial Zoo which houses large and fearsome monsters as well as curiosities and abominations from the Northern Wastes.
The zoo has a practical function, because its stables also house the Emperor's war monsters: the Griffons, Pegasi and other creatures he rides to battle.
These monsters are collected from the most dangerous parts of the Old World by adventurers who hope to be well rewarded for their efforts.
Thanks to the extraordinary daring of these individuals the collection has grown considerably since its inception by the Emperor Dieter IV.
Another great institution is the Imperial Engineers School.
The Engineers School is responsible for many of the Empire's technical innovations over the past few centuries.
It was founded by the Tilean genius Leonardo of Miragliano, inventor of the Steam Tank and pioneer of heavier-than-air flight (a fatal obsession which led to his early demise and the destruction of many of the original Engineers School buildings).
Many of the Engineers are Dwarfs.
Some of them are renegades from the Dwarf Engineers Guild which frowns upon innovation and regards much of the Empire's new technology as a heinous break with ancient tradition.
The Engineers School attracts inventors from all over the Old World and has provided the Empire with a number of experimental weapons such as repeating muskets and pistols, multiple-barrelled cannons, mobile battle-towers called War Wagons, and the formidable Steam Tank.
As well as its human population, Altdorf is also home to many Dwarfs whose ancestors settled there when their mountain strongholds fell to enemy attack.
These Dwarfs are capable smiths and keen-minded merchants, and their presence is one of the reasons why Altdorf has become the dominant city in the Empire.
Nuln is the second biggest city of the Reikland and like Altdorf it sits astride the great river Reik.
In previous times Nuln was the seat of the Emperor.
Its reputation as a seat of learning precedes that of Altdorf, although it has been overshadowed by the new capital over the last few centuries.
Its universities are still favoured by the more academic and old-fashioned.
Nuln is the focus of the entire economy of the southern Reikland, where travellers from Wissenland, Stirland, Averland and further east converge.
North of Nuln the Reik is too wide to bridge, so the city forms a natural meeting point for traders and adventurers travelling from east to west.
The bridge at Nuln is the last bridge before the sea, although there are ferries which cross the Reik at various points.
There are also bridges at Altdorf where the Reik divides into a number of lesser channels; hence none of the bridges at Altdorf can be said to cross the entire Reik.
This is a point of some pride in Nuln where the bridge is seen as one of the great marvels of the Old World.
Its wooden centre section can be raised and lowered to form a defensive barrier.
Nuln is the home of the Imperial Gunnery School, where cannons are cast and artillerymen learn the arts of ballistics.
Here they study the many practical problems associated with moving and servicing the artillery trains.
Thanks to their efforts the Empire is served by a large and efficient corps of cannons which is far superior to anything outside its borders.
Middenheim stands atop a sheer-sided pinnacle of rock that rises out of the surrounding forest.
The great and impregnable fortress is accessible by means of four highways built on lofty viaducts.
These contain wooden drawbridges which can be raised to isolate the city.
In addition there are numerous cranes, chairlifts and rope ladders which are used to pull goods (and sometimes people) up the side of the cliffs.
The rock is also riddled with tunnels, some of which come out at secret entrances in the forest below.
Access to these tunnels is limited to the town guard and to certain licensed adventurers who are permitted to search for ancient treasures amongst the ancient tombs and catacombs.
From Middenheim's many tall towers it is possible to look out over the Great Forest to the south and the Drakwald to the west, a carpet of treetops stretching in every direction save eastwards, where the rising Middle Mountains burst from the forest floor, tall and jagged, and the colour of thunder clouds.
Middenheim is the City of the White Wolf, the symbol of the god Ulric, patron deity of the city and its territories.
The Temple of Ulric is the centre of his cult throughout the Old World.
The cult is very powerful and its High Priest is one of the Electors of the Empire.
Talabheim lies in the centre of the Great Forest and for this reason it is sometimes known as the Eye of the Forest, where, like the eye of a cyclone, all is calm amidst the danger all around.
The city lies on the main trade route between the Reikland and lands further west, and the Kislevites to the north.
Talabheim is built within a huge shallow crater, many miles across, whose outer edge forms a rocky rim and a natural wall.
This rim wall has been built up and fortified and marks the boundary of the town.
The land inside the wall is extensive and includes farmlands as well as the city itself.
The river Talabec flows around the outside of the crater.
Where the river flows past the southern edge of the rim wall there is a settlement called Talagaad and a deep harbour.
From Talagaad a narrow roads climbs up the side of the crater and enters the city via a tunnel bored through the rock of the rim wall.
This tunnel is the only entrance to the city itself, and it is protected by a fortress at each end.
Its combination of natural and man-made defences makes Talabheim virtually impregnable.
There are other large towns and innumerable smaller settlements in the Empire.
Of particular interest is the area around the upper reaches of the Aver known as the Moot.
This province is the homeland of the Halflings, where they live under their own government and laws.
They are part of the Empire in name, and provide troops for the Imperial army when required.
The Moot is close enough to the mountains to suffer occasional raids by Night Goblins and so the Halflings maintain a vigilant force of border guards and watchmen who double as warriors in time of war.
COUNTS AND ELECTORS
Although we often speak of the Empire as if it were a single nation, this is not really the case.
The Empire is a group of individual and independent states, joined together by ties of culture, language and common interests.
Today, in the time of the Emperor Karl Franz, these states are of two distinct kinds: City States and Provinces.
Originally there were only what are now called provinces, but over the years the largest cities have grown in importance and have become self-governing.
The provinces are based upon the ancient tribal homelands whose people were ruled by their own chieftains.
During the time of Sigmar these chieftains became counts and the boundaries of their realms were formally established.
Originally there were twelve counts but today there are only ten.
Over the centuries the boundaries changed and new states emerged while others shrank.
The ancient realm of Solland in the far south and Drakwald in the north no longer exist and consequently have no counts.
Solland is now part of Wissenland and Drakwald is divided between Nordland and Middenland, but its memory is preserved in the name of the Drakwald forest.
The counts are hereditary rulers whose families have long and famous histories.
Many of them number former Emperors amongst their ancestors.
Over the centuries the title of Count has passed from family to family as old dynasties withered away, intermarried or perished in battle.
On numerous occasions the succession has passed to near relatives; at other times an entirely new dynasty has taken over either peaceably or otherwise.
Intermarriage between the noble families means that all the counts are related at least distantly, and many are cousins or half-cousins.
When the ruling Emperor dies a successor is chosen from amongst the counts.
In practice it is usual for the new Emperor to be the son and heir of the old Emperor, as the Imperial family will use all its power and influence to prepare the way for its own candidate.
However there is not always a suitable candidate from the Imperial house, or there may be another powerful count who is preferred.
The current Emperor is Karl Franz, Prince of Altdorf and Count of Reikland.
Many of the counts also hold titles associated with towns or cities, such as the Prince of Altdorf.
These titles date from centuries ago before many of the larger cities became self-governing states.
The titles themselves do not always carry political power within the places so named, and very often the individual does not live in the city whose title they hold.
In many cases this would be impossible as the count may hold titles in two or more places!
An interesting example is the Count of Nordland who is the Prince of Marienburg from which the ruling Burgomeisters have forbidden him to return upon pain of death, Marienburg having seceded from the Empire.
Fortunately the Count of Nordland is also the Prince of Salzenmund, where he has an imposing and comfortable fortress.
The counts are entitled to elect one of their own number as Emperor.
Hence in addition to being counts they are also Electors, and for this reason their full title is more properly Elector Counts.
All counts are Electors but there are other Electors too.
These other Electors can vote for their chosen candidate, but they cannot put themselves forward as Emperor.
When the first elected Emperor was enthroned there were only Elector Counts, but later on  other powerful individuals won the right to cast their vote and help decide which count would become Emperor.
During the reign of Karl Franz there are five of these Electors: three representing the cult of Sigmar, one representing the cult of Ulric, and the Elder of the Moot representing the Halflings.
The Sigmar representatives are very influential, and because they cast their votes for the same candidate they wield influence out of proportion to their numbers.
Historically the Sigmar votes tend to be cast on behalf of the Count of the Reikland, while the Ulric vote almost invariably goes to the Count of Middenheim should he be contesting the election.
POLITICAL DIVISIONS OF THE EMPIRE
Province City State And also…
Averland Altdorf The Moot
Hochland Nuln
Middenland Talabheim
Nordland Middenheim
Ostland
Ostermark
Reikland
Stirland
Talabecland
Wissenland
THE ELECTORS
Elector Count of Averland
Elector Count of Hochland
Elector Count of Middenland
Elector Count of Nordland
Elector Count of Ostland
Elector Count of Ostermark
Elector Count of Reikland
Elector Count of Stirland
Elector Count of Talabecland
Elector Count of Wissenland
Elector, Grand Theogonist of Sigmar
Electors, Arch Lectors of Sigmar (2)
Elector, High Priest of Ulric
Elector, Elder of the Moot (Halfling)
THE RUNEFANGS
After a combined army of Men and Dwarfs put paid to an Orc invasion at the battle of Black Fire Pass, thus saving the Dwarf realm from destruction, King Kurgan Ironhand showed his gratitude by presenting a gift of magic to the men of the Empire.
He set the great Runesmith Alaric the Mad to work making twelve rune swords, one for each of the great chieftains of men who commanded Sigmar's armies.
Each blade was forged from a solid nugget of the magic metal Gromril, worked under the light of the full moon, fired by the breath of the dragon Snarkul the Red, and cooled in daemon blood.
With incredible patience and skill, runes were carved upon them, secret Dwarf signs whose shape and carving traps magic and binds its power into their works.
It took many long years for the twelve swords to emerge from the workshops of Alaric, long years even for a Dwarf, and, as it proved, more than the lifetime of a man.
By the time Alaric finally finished the twelfth Runefang Sigmar has long since passed eastward to whatever fate became him, and the original chieftains who had fought at Black Fire Pass were long dead.
The Runefangs were presented to the ruling Emperor who divided them between the Elector counts.
Since that distant time the Runefangs have served the counts of the Empire, having passed from ruler to ruler until the present day.
As there are now only ten counts, as opposed to the original twelve, the two spare Runefangs, the Drakwald and Solland swords, are held by the Emperor as part of the Imperial armoury.
They are kept securely locked away in the treasure house of the Emperor, but are sometimes brought out and used in times of extreme need by mighty heroes or powerful wizards.
The Solland Sword was lost for many years, having disappeared during the destruction of Solland by Gorbad Ironclaw's Orcs.
The sword was later recovered from a long forgotten underground lair by a combined expedition of Dwarfs and Men.
SPECIAL RULES AND WAR MACHINES
This section introduces new game rules and machines for the Empire army.
Thanks to the Engineers School at Altdorf and the Artillery School at Nuln, the Empire army is particularly well equipped with war machines.
Of particular note is the Steam Tank, which is both destructive and difficult to destroy, and the War Wagon, which carries a varied load of experimental weaponry such as the Hochland Long Rifle and Repeater Hand Gun.
The Repeater Hand Gun is also used from horseback by gallant Imperial Engineers who find it a devastating if temperamental device.
THE DETACHMENT RULE
A regiment of state troops may include one or two detachments if you wish.
Detachments are semi-independent units that are armed differently from their associated regiment, but which benefit from any leadership bonuses which apply to the main unit.
State troops are included in the army lists as Halberdiers, Spearmen, Greatswords, Swordsmen, Hand Gunners, Archers, and Crossbowmen.
Other kinds of troops may not include detachments.
When you choose a regiment of state troops from the army list you may also choose one or two detachments to fight with it.
You do not have to take any detachments if you do not wish to do so; it is entirely up to you.
A detachment consists of state troops armed in a different way to the regiment itself.
For example, you might have a regiment of halberdiers and a detachment of hand gunners, or you could have a regiment of hand gunners with a detachment of swordsmen plus a detachment of spearmen.
The troops that form the detachment are chosen from the army list in the usual way, and they may be armed and equipped in any way permitted by the army list.
A detachment cannot be larger than half the size of its parent regiment, so a regiment of twenty men could have a detachment of ten.
As a regiment can have two detachments this means it could consist of, for example, the twenty men who compose the regiment plus two detachments each of ten men.
A detachment may not include standard bearers or musicians.
It may include a leader model who is armed in the same way as the rest of the detachment, but the detachment may not have a champion.
A detachment must be deployed within 8″ of its regiment at the start of the game.
So long as it remains within 8″ of its regiment during the game, the detachment may take any leadership-based tests on the leadership value of the parent regiment, including any bonuses that apply for standards, magic items, and so forth.
In other respects, the detachment acts just like an ordinary independent unit.
If the detachment moves more than 8″ away from its regiment then it must use its own leadership value for tests, but if it moves back within 8″ it will regain the leadership benefit.
However, the detachment can only use the leadership value of its own parent regiment — it cannot move to within 8″ of a different regiment and use its leadership value instead.
A detachment represents a body of troops that has been split off from the rest of their regiment and armed as small, independent units whose role is to operate within sight of their regiment.
Detachments are extremely useful because they enable you to field a small unit without the high cost of providing a hero to boost its leadership value.
They are also a useful means of providing missile support for non-missile troops.
By using detachments you can shield your main unit from attack, preserving your front-line troops until they are needed.
REPEATER HAND GUNS
The Engineers School of Altdorf is a hive of invention and development where ever more complex weapons of war are created for the Imperial arsenals.
As well as the larger weapons of destruction, the Engineers have devised many cunning types of swords, clubs, maces and hand guns.
Most are eccentric in the extreme and have improbable and rather grandiose names like Von Tropp's Spring-assisted Chain Lasso and Kurstein's Whirling Blade of Doom.
None of these more ambitious weapons actually work very well and they are sensibly avoided by the military.
One of the more successful devices is the Repeater Hand Gun (the inventor's name of Von Meinkopt's Whirling Cavalcade of Death being a bit of a mouthful for everyday usage).
This unusual weapon has a heavy revolving chamber with six separate barrels.
The barrels are spun round and heavy firing pins ignite each charge in turn, unleashing a volley of shots.
The weapon is carried by Engineers either on horseback or in one of the Engineers School's War Wagons.
WEAPON RANGE STRENGTH Repeater Hand Gun 20″ 4
1.
When you shoot the Repeater Hand Gun work out the first shot normally.
If the first shot hits you can fire again.
If your second shot hits you can fire yet again, and so on, up to a maximum of six shots.
If you miss then you cannot fire any further shots that turn.
Note that it doesn't matter whether the hit scores a wound or whether a wound is saved, it is whether you hit or not that allows you to fire again.
Each shot can be at the same target, or at a different target within 2″ of the last one.
This means you can shoot your way down a line of troops, picking off each one in turn.
2.
Because of the Repeater Hand Gun's innovative construction and tendency to jam, a roll of a 1 is always a miss regardless of the BS of the firer or any modifiers to hit.
3.
The Repeater Hand Gun is better at penetrating armour than its strength value of 4 would suggest.
Therefore the enemy must deduct a further -1 from its armour save, so the save modifier is -2 rather than -1 as is normal for a strength 4 hit.
REPEATER PISTOLS
The Repeater Pistol is a smaller version of the Repeater Hand Gun, and is fired in one hand, leaving the other free to wield a sword.
The weapon has a shorter range than the Repeater Hand Gun but it has the advantage that it can also be used in hand-to-hand fighting.
It is favoured by senior members of the Engineers School such as Steam Tank Commanders.
WEAPON RANGE STRENGTH Repeater Pistol 10″ 4
1.
When you shoot the Repeater Pistol work out the first shot normally.
If the first shot hits you can fire again, regardless of whether you wounded or killed with your first shot.
If your second shot hits you can fire again, and so on, up to a maximum of six shots.
If you miss then you cannot fire any further shots that turn.
Each shot can be at either the same target, or at a different target within 2″ of the last one.
This means you can shoot your way down a line of troops, picking off each one in turn.
2.
Because of its innovative construction and tendency to jam, a roll of a 1 is always a miss regardless of the BS of the firer or any modifiers to hit.
3
The Repeater Pistol is better at penetrating armour than its strength value of 4 would suggest.
Therefore the enemy must deduct a further -1 from its armour save, so the save modifier is -2 rather than -1 as is normal for a strength 4 hit.
4.
The Repeater Pistol may also be used as a hand-to-hand weapon in the same way as an ordinary pistol (see the Warhammer rulebook).
A trooper armed with a sword and a pistol has +1 extra attack.
Resolve the pistol attack exactly as you would an attack from another hand-to-hand weapon.
A hit from a Repeater Pistol has a strength of 4 regardless of the firer's strength, and the extra -1 armour penetration applies as with shooting.
EMPIRE WAR WAGON
The War Wagon is an extremely heavy version of a chariot, an armoured battle tower with a crew of six warriors, pulled by two sturdy warhorses.
The high walls of the tower protect the crew from arrows and attack from the ground.
Its crew are armed with a variety of experimental weaponry from the Imperial Engineers.
In general terms the War Wagon fights like a chariot, and players should familiarise themselves with the chariot rules in the Warhammer rulebook.
However, the War Wagon differs from an ordinary chariot in several details — its heavily armoured tower makes it harder to destroy, for example.
MOVEMENT
The War Wagon moves in exactly the same way as a regular chariot pulled by two warhorses.
To summarise, it moves independently in the same way as a large monster or individual character model, cannot make a march move, but is obviously unaffected by penalties for wheeling or turning as such manoeuvres are unnecessary.
Like a chariot, a War Wagon cannot move over obstacles or difficult terrain other than to cross a bridge or ford.
If the War Wagon is forced to move into terrain it cannot cross it automatically sustains D6 strength 6 hits.
As the War Wagon is pulled by two warhorses it will normally move 8″ per turn.
Should one warhorse be slain the wagon can still move but its speed is reduced to 4″.
FIGHTING THE WAR WAGON
The War Wagon fights in hand-to-hand combat in the same way as a chariot, except that its crew are armed with a variety of experimental weaponry as described below.
Enemy models attempting to fight against the chariot in hand-to-hand fighting always compare their weapon skill against that of the crew.
If the crew are all slain the War Wagon's weapon skill counts as zero.
Hits from shooting and hand-to-hand combat are randomly allocated between the War Wagon tower, the horses, or crew as shown on the chart below.
For each hit scored roll a separate dice and then resolve damage against the part of the War Wagon that has been hit.
In the case of hits on the crew randomise hits between surviving crew members.
Note that this chart is slightly different from that used for chariots because it is much harder to hit the crew or warhorses on a War Wagon because of the size of the tower.
The War Wagon tower has its own toughness value, wounds, and other characteristics as shown below.
Profiles for the crew and warhorses have also been included for convenience.
The warhorses pulling the War Wagon wear barding armour and so have a saving throw of 6 on a D6.
The crew wear breastplates as depicted on the models, also giving them a saving throw of 6.
A War Wagon can continue to fight so long as there is at least one crew member left alive.
If all the crew are slain, and assuming the War Wagon can still move, the model is moved 2D6″ randomly in its own side's movement phase.
Roll a scatter dice to establish the direction taken and 2D6 to determine the distance moved.
If you roll two doubles for distance then the horses collapse with exhaustion and the model is removed from the battle.
Otherwise the War Wagon is moved as indicated and if it collides with troops it comes to a halt and a round of hand-to-hand combat follows just as if the War Wagon had charged.
This procedure is the same as for ordinary chariots as described in the Warhammer rulebook.
The War Wagon itself can sustain 5 wounds as shown on its profile; this is 2 wounds more than a chariot to take into account its heavier construction.
Should the War Wagon take 5 wounds it is destroyed and the model removed from the battle.
The warhorses are assumed to be slain or incapacitated, but any surviving crew may continue to fight on foot.
WAR WAGON ATTACK
War Wagon attacks are the same as chariot attacks except that the crew are armed with a variety of special weapons.
The War Wagon has three types of attack: attacks from the War Wagon itself, attacks from the warhorses, and attacks from the crew.
Attacks from the War Wagon only apply when the War Wagon charges, crushing the enemy beneath its wheels and knocking foes to the floor.
When the War Wagon charges it automatically causes D6 hits.
These attacks are made first before attacks from either side.
Note that hits are inflicted automatically, there is no roll required to hit.
All hits from the War Wagon are worked out using the strength value of the War Wagon itself, ie 7.
The warhorses have their own attacks and these are resolved in the normal way.
All the crew may fight against any enemy in contact with the War Wagon, whether to its front, sides, or rear.
They strike blows in normal initiative order, and attack first during a charge, exactly like other warriors.
All the crew fight, including those with missile weapons, who are assumed to have swords as well.
FLEE AND PURSUIT
War Wagons flee and pursue exactly like chariots and other troops.
If broken in hand-to-hand combat and forced to flee they move 3D6″ with two horses, 2D6″ with one.
If caught by pursuers they are destroyed.
Similarly, they pursue fleeing enemies at the same rate, and will destroy them if they are caught.
WAR MACHINES AND WAR WAGONS
As with chariots, when you are firing at a War Wagon with a stone thrower, or any other weapon which has a template to represent its effect, it is possible to hit the horses, the War Wagon, or the crew depending on the position of the template.
Position the template normally.
Each part of the War Wagon is treated as a separate target, so the War Wagon/warhorses/crew are potentially hit if these actual models are within the template area.
Treat each crew member, warhorse, and the chariot body as separate targets, just like single models in an ordinary unit.
EXPERIMENTAL ENGINEER WEAPONS
The Imperial Engineers are technical innovators whose products are carried by some of the most unusual troops in the Imperial army.
Although often unreliable, the weapons carried by the crew of a War Wagon are sufficiently varied that even if some of them malfunction, some of the others are bound to work.
Hochland Long Rifle
These weapons were developed from the long-barrelled hunting weapons used in Hochland, and their long barrels make them very accurate.
A rifleman armed with the deadly Hochland Long Rifle can pick off individual enemy amongst the opposing army.
Because the War Wagon tower is so high the rifleman can see over the heads of intervening troops and low terrain features such as low walls and hedges.
He cannot see over tall buildings, over hills, or through woods, however.
Because the rifleman can see over enemy ranks he is allowed to pick out any individual he can see, including enemy character models who would not otherwise be eligible as targets.
The weapon has a strength of 4, a range of 40″ and an armour save modifier of -2 instead of the usual -1 because of the power of gunpowder weapons.
Repeater Hand Gun
This unusual weapon has a heavy revolving chamber with six separate barrels.
The barrels are spun round and heavy firing pins ignite each charge in turn, unleashing a volley of fire.
When you shoot the repeater hand gun work out the first shot normally with a strength of 4.
If the first shot hits you can fire again, regardless of whether you wounded or killed with your first shot.
If your second shot hits you can fire yet again, and so on, up to a maximum of six shots.
If you miss then you cannot fire any further shots that turn.
Each shot can be at either the same target, or at a different target within 2″ of the last one.
This means you can shoot your way down a line of troops, picking off each one in turn.
The repeater hand gun has a range of 20″.
See separate entry for full description.
Blunderbuss
The blunderbuss fires a hail of shot including lead balls, rusty bolts, bent nails, and other assorted scrap metal.
To fire the blunderbuss use the large teardrop-shaped flame template to represent the spread of shot from the gun's barrel.
This template is included in the Warhammer game itself.
Position the template as you wish, with the thin, pointed end next to the model.
Any model under the template will be hit on the D6 roll of a 4, 5 or 6.
As with other weapons which use templates you will have to use your own judgement to decide whether models are potential targets.
The usual rule of thumb is that a model may be hit if half or more its base area is covered by the template, while a model whose base is only grazed is not hit.
Resolve all hits with a strength of 3.
Man Catcher
The Man Catcher is an iron collar on a long pole.
The collar is ringed with spring-loaded spikes and can be slipped over an enemy's head, breaking his neck and killing him instantly.
If the model armed with a Man Catcher hits his opponent roll a D6: if the score is more than the target's toughness he is caught and killed automatically, regardless of the number of wounds he has or armour.
No saving throw is permitted.
Hook Halberd
The Hook Halberd is a long halberd which includes a hook to catch passing riders and pull them from their mounts.
The model equipped with a Hook Halberd has a +1 strength bonus on all hits.
Ball and Chain
This consists of a heavy studded ball suspended on a long chain hanging from a pole.
The wielder swings the heavy ball over the side of the War Wagon, knocking riders from their mounts and sending foot troopers flying.
The model equipped with a ball and chain adds +1 strength bonus on all hits, and no saving throw is permitted for damage inflicted.
HELBLASTER VOLLEY GUN
The Helblaster volley gun has nine separate barrels fixed on a circular crank.
As the crank is turned a clever system of cams ignites each charge in turn propelling a cannon ball from the gun.
The advantage of the Helblaster is that it can fire several shots at once in a devastating volley.
A full volley will rip through the toughest regiment causing immense casualties in the blink of an eye.
The disadvantage of the Helblaster is that it is impossible to reload on the battlefield — each barrel has to be removed and fitted with a new charge before it can be replaced on the gun.
The other, and more serious, disadvantage of the Helblaster is that it is inclined to jam or misfire, and once it has misfired it is useless.
In fact the chances of being able to fire all nine barrels are slim, as the weapon is likely to misfire first.
The Helblaster has nine shots, one for each barrel.
When you shoot you can discharge as many barrels as you wish, but you cannot fire more than nine shots in the entire game.
So, for example, you might decide to spread out the shots by firing one or two per turn, or you can blow the lot in a spectacular nine-shot volley — it's your choice.
As you fire the Helblaster note down how many shots you have used.
Once all nine barrels have been discharged the weapon is of no further use, although hopefully it will have done its job by this time, and your enemies will be running for the hills.
The procedure for firing the Helblaster is as follows.
The gun has a range of 24″.
First nominate your target and turn the gun to face it as you would a cannon.
Then fire your first shot.
Each shot causes a variable number of hits as described below.
Once you have worked out how many hits your first shot has caused you may, if you wish, fire a second shot at the same target, then a third, and so on.
You can continue to fire as many shots as you have remaining loaded barrels, but you must fire at the same target.
To work out if you hit and how many hits are caused you will require the special artillery dice marked 2, 4, 6, 8, 10 and MISFIRE.
Roll the artillery dice for each shot.
If the target lies within half the weapon's range (ie, 12″) the number rolled is the number of hits scored on the target.
If the target lies beyond half the weapon's range (ie, more than 12″) the number of hits scored is half the number rolled (eg, a roll of 8 would equal 4 hits).
Determine the number of hits from all of your shots before calculating the damage inflicted.
Once you have fired all the barrels you wish you must roll for each hit to determine damage.
This is done in exactly the same way as hits from bows, crossbows or other missile weapons.
The Helblaster has a strength of 5 at short range and 4 at long range.
Refer to the To Wound Chart to determine the roll needed to wound, and roll a dice per hit as you would for multiple bow or crossbow hits.
Normal saving throw modifiers apply: -2 at short range and -1 at long range.
MISFIRES
If you roll a ‘misfire’ result then the gun jams immediately.
No shot is fired and no further shots may be fired that game — the gun is now useless.
If the gun misfires on the very first shot of the game then something spectacular and unusual has happened.
Either the gunners have packed in too much gunpowder or the igniting charges all go off at once.
All nine barrels burst into flame sending nine cannon balls hurtling towards their target.
Roll the artillery dice nine times and add the result.
Ignore further misfires (these are misses and cause no casualties) and work out damage on the target as normal.
The volley gun is burst apart and its crew blasted to pieces.
PROFILES
The Helblaster volley gun's profile summarizes its abilities.
Volley guns are solid devices built from iron and brass.
They are difficult to destroy, although a hit from another war machine or large monster may be sufficient to cause damage.
The volley gun's move rate assumes it has a full crew — if crew are slain then its movement is reduced proportionally.
A volley gun cannot move and shoot in the same turn except to turn to face its target.
LOSS OF CREW
A Helblaster volley gun requires a full crew of three to work properly.
If one crewman is slain then the remaining crew can just about cope without reducing the rate of fire.
If two crewmen are slain, leaving just one to operate the gun by himself, then the rate of fire is reduced.
When the gun fires the crewman must spend an entire turn preparing to fire again, reducing the weapon's rate of fire to once every other turn.
If all the crew are slain the Helblaster cannot fire and is useless.
SUMMARY OF HELBLASTER FIRE
1.
Align Helblaster on target and measure range.
2.
Roll the artillery dice for each barrel you wish to fire.
Halve the score at over half range.
This indicates the number of hits.
3.
If you roll a ‘misfire’ stop immediately.
The weapon does not fire and cannot be used again for the rest of the game.
If the first shot of the game is a misfire then all nine barrels go off at once and the gun is destroyed in the explosion.
4.
Resolve the number of hits as normal with saving throws as appropriate.
HALFLING HOT POT
Originally a desperate innovation, the Halfling Hot Pot has now become something of an institution amongst Halflings.
The Hot Pot is exactly that, a pot of boiling liquid hurled at the enemy's ranks, burning, scalding and even dissolving the foe.
The ingredients which make up the special stew are a closely kept secret and vary from chef to chef.
At a push boiling oil on its own will do the job, but a typical mixture has corrosive properties and is sticky so that it adheres to exposed flesh.
The Halfling Hot Pot is fired in a similar manner to a stone thrower, so you will need the large circular template with a hole in the centre.
Begin by aligning the catapult in the direction you wish to fire then declare how far you wish to fire.
The greatest distance you can nominate is 36″.
It is important that you guess the range without measuring, in exactly the same way as for a stone thrower.
Once you have made your guess place the template with the centre of the hole directly over the point you have guessed.
To see whether the Hot Pot lands on target roll the scatter and artillery dice together.
This procedure is exactly the same as that already described for stone throwers.
If the scatter dice rolls a HIT then the missile lands where you have aimed it.
If you roll an arrow then the missile veers off in the direction indicated.
If the artillery dice rolls a MISFIRE then something has gone wrong — roll a D6 and consult the Hot Pot Misfire Chart below.
A misfire roll automatically cancels out the whole shot regardless of the scatter dice result.
If you roll a number on the artillery dice then this is the distance in inches the missile veers off target as shown by the arrow on the scatter dice.
Move the template the distance indicated in the direction shown by the arrow.
If you roll a HIT on the scatter dice then the numbers are ignored — a number simply indicates that the shot has not misfired.
DAMAGE
Damage is calculated in more or less the same way as a stone thrower.
The model that lies directly under the centre of the hole is hit by the cauldron itself.
Damage against this target is resolved with a strength of 5 representing the effect of the big heavy cauldron landing right on the victim's head.
Models whose base lies under the rest of the template are hit by flying Hot Pot gloop on the D6 roll of a 4, 5 or 6.
As with stone throwers/ mortars/etc you will have to use your judgement to decide which models are potential casualties.
The usual rule of thumb is that if at least half the model's base is covered by the template then it is potentially hit, while if the model's base area is just grazed the model is not affected.
Once you have worked out which models are struck work out damage as normal.
Note that the target struck by the cauldron suffers a strength 5 hit, while remaining targets suffer only a strength 3 hit.
However, because the clingy boiling stuff penetrates armour and seeps through cloth, no saving throw is allowed for Hot Pot hits.
PROFILES
A Hot Pot catapult is sturdy and difficult to damage.
However, it is possible for war engines and large monsters to damage them.
Once deployed, the Hot Pot catapult cannot be moved.
LOSS OF CREW
A Hot Pot catapult requires a crew of three to work it properly.
If one crewman is slain the other two can just about get by without reducing the rate of fire.
However, if two crewmen are slain, the remaining crewman will be unable to maintain the normal rate of fire.
If the Hot Pot has only one crewman left it may only fire every other turn.
If the Hot Pot has no crew at all it is unable to fire.
HOT POT SUMMARY
1.
Declare target and guess range.
2.
Position template and roll scatter and artillery dice.
3.
If the artillery dice is MISFIRE refer to Hot Pot Misfire Chart, otherwise…
4.
If the scatter dice is a HIT the mortar shell has struck home.
5.
If the scatter dice is an arrow the shell has landed in the direction shown 2, 4, 6, 8, or 10″ away from the aiming point as shown by the artillery dice.
6.
The single model in the exact centre is hit at strength 5.
Remaining models under the template are hit at strength 3 on the D6 score of a 4+.
7.
Work out hits as normal.
No saving throws are permitted.
MORTAR
Mortars are shorter, heavier weapons than cannons, designed to lob an explosive shell high into the air so that it drops down on the target from the sky.
Unlike the solid cannon ball a mortar shell is hollow and filled with gunpowder.
The crew light the fuse before dropping the mortar shell into the mortar.
While a cannon ball may plough through a line of troops and kill two or three victims, a mortar shell explodes with a tremendous bang, scattering mud, dirt, and bits of shell over a wide area.
A well placed mortar shell can therefore kill a great many victims at once.
Mortar shots are worked out in the same way as shots from stone throwers.
You will need the standard missile template with the hole in the centre, the artillery dice, and the scatter dice.
First pivot the mortar so that it is pointing in the direction you wish to fire.
Now declare how far you want to fire the mortar shell.
As with stone throwers, you must do this without measuring, guessing the range as accurately as you can.
You must guess a distance of between 12″ and 48″.
Once you have made your guess place the missile template directly over the spot you have guessed.
To see where the missile lands roll both the scatter and artillery dice.
If the scatter dice rolls a HIT then the missile lands where you have aimed it.
If you roll an arrow then the missile veers off in the direction indicated.
If the artillery dice rolls a MISFIRE then something has gone wrong — roll a D6 and consult the Misfire Chart below.
A misfire roll automatically cancels out the whole shot regardless of the scatter dice result.
If you roll a number on the artillery dice then this is the distance in inches the missile veers off target as shown by the arrow on the scatter dice.
Move the template the distance indicated in the direction shown by the arrow.
If you roll a HIT on the scatter dice then the numbers are ignored: a number simply indicates that the shot has not misfired.
DAMAGE
Once you have established where the mortar shell lands damage can be worked out.
Any model that lies directly under the hole in the template is hit automatically.
Note that only one model can lie within the hole and if there is any doubt it is the model which lies under the exact centre which is hit.
Models whose bases lie under the rest of the template are hit on the D6 roll of a 4+.
As with stone throwers this is a matter of judgement and common sense.
A good rule of thumb is that a model may be considered a potential hit if at least half its base area lies under the template, while models whose bases are only touched or grazed can be ignored.
Once you have worked out which models have been struck by the mortar work out damage in the normal way.
Roll for each target to see if you cause damage.
The exploding mortar shell has a strength of 7.
A damaging hit from a mortar causes D3 wounds, but as most creatures have only 1 wound it is not always necessary to take this dice roll.
This ability to inflict several wounds at once on a large target does, however, make the mortar extremely useful against big monsters.
PROFILES
Being substantial devices cast from iron or bronze, mortars are extremely difficult to damage.
However, it is possible for other war engines and large monsters to inflict damage on them.
A mortar has no wheels or other means to move it once it is on the battlefield, and so cannot move other than turn on the spot to face its target.
LOSS OF CREW
A mortar requires a crew of three to work it properly — to carry the shells, light fuses, and fire the mortar itself.
If one crewman is slain the other two can just about get by without reducing the rate of fire.
However, if two crewmen are slain, the remaining crewman will be unable to maintain the normal rate of fire.
If the mortar has only one crewman it is only fire every other turn.
If the mortar has no crew at all it is unable to fire.
MORTAR SUMMARY
1.
Declare target and guess range.
2.
Position template and roll scatter and artillery dice.
3.
If the artillery dice is MISFIRE refer to Misfire Chart, otherwise…
4.
If the scatter dice is a HIT the mortar shell has struck home.
5.
If the scatter dice is an arrow the shell has landed in the direction shown 2, 4, 6, 8, or 10″ away from the aiming point as shown by the artillery dice.
6.
The single model in the exact centre is hit.
Remaining models under the template are hit on the D6 score of a 4+.
7.
Work out hits as normal.
GREAT CANNON
Cannons are dangerous if sometimes unpredictable weapons whose manufacture is limited to a few groups of human and Dwarf experts.
When they work cannons can shatter the most determined enemy, pouring shot into his massed formations, levelling his cities and toppling huge monsters.
But cannons often go wrong.
Weaknesses in the casting methods can leave minute cracks or other deficiencies which cause them to explode when fired.
Gunpowder can fail to ignite or explode prematurely.
Despite the occasional spectacular accident, cannons are extremely deadly weapons that have been instrumental in winning more than one battle on behalf of their users.
Cannons are fired in the shooting phase along with other missile weapons.
To shoot your cannon first turn it on the spot so that it points towards your intended target.
Now declare how far you wish to shoot — eg 24″, 30″, 32″ etc.
The ball travels the distance you have nominated, plus the score of the Artillery dice.
Roll the Artillery dice, and add the score to the distance you have declared.
The ball travels the total distance towards the target, and will land short, pass straight over, or hit depending on how accurately you have guessed the range and what effect the dice has.
Remember the dice will always add at least 2″ to your estimate, and can add up to 10″, so you should aim a few inches short of your target.
Once you have established where the cannon ball hits place a small coin or other marker directly over the spot.
The cannon ball does not stop where it hits the ground, but bounces straight forward and cuts a line through any targets in the way.
To determine how far the ball bounces roll the Artillery dice again and mark the spot where the ball comes to land.
Any models between the points where the ball strikes the ground and where it eventually comes to land are hit by the flying cannon ball.
The diagram below shows how this works.
Any model struck by a cannon ball takes a strength 10 hit resolved in the normal manner.
If the cannon ball wounds its target then it causes not 1 but D6 wounds.
As most models have only one wound anyway it will not be necessary to roll this extra dice, but it is important when it comes to rolling for heroes, big monsters, and engines of war which can take several wounds.
Wounds caused by cannon shot cannot be saved by armour.
No saving throw is allowed.
For example: You are firing a cannon at a unit of Goblins in front of you.
You make your guess and declare that you are ‘aiming 12″ directly towards the middle of that Goblin unit.’
Having made your guess you roll the Artillery dice and score 4, which equals 4″.
This makes a total of 16″.
Measure 16″ towards the Gobins and place a marker where the ball hits.
If you have guessed well this will be just in front of them.
The ball now bounces forward the score of the Artillery dice.
This time you roll an 8 and the ball bounces straight through the Goblin unit hitting all the models in the way
MISFIRES
You roll the Artillery dice twice when a cannon is fired, so you have two chances of rolling a Misfire result.
However, the two results will be different.
If you roll a misfire when you roll the first dice the cannon has literally misfired and may explode.
If you roll a misfire on your bounce roll then this merely indicates the ball has stuck in the ground and does not bounce.
If you roll a misfire as you shoot the cannon then consult the chart below.
If you roll a misfire on your bounce roll then the cannon is unharmed, the Misfire result merely indicates that the cannon ball sticks in the ground where it hits.
If the shot lands on top of a model then that particular model is hit as normal, but there is no further bounce damage.
PROFILES
Cannons are hand forged by master craftsmen, and every cannon is different with little standardisation in the way of calibres or length.
Individual cannon can be extremely large, and the Empire's Great Cannon are amongst the largest.
Its range, strength value and the number of wounds it causes reflect this.
Cannons are cast from iron or bronze and are built into solid carriages.
They are very difficult to destroy although the enemy may try to attack them with other engines of war, large monsters or magic for example.
They therefore have a profile like a creature with a toughness value and a number of wounds which they can sustain before they are destroyed.
As with other details these might vary in specific cases, but a typical cannon has a value as shown here.
The move rate is the speed the cannon can be moved by a full human crew.
If any crew are slain the cannon's speed is reduced proportionally.
A cannon cannot move and shoot in the same turn except to turn to face its target.
Generally speaking cannons have such a long range that it is pointless moving them about.
LOSS OF CREW
A cannon requires a full crew to work properly — to carry cannon balls, load gunpowder, push the machine round to bear on its target, and so on.
If one crewman is slain then the rest can just about get by without reducing the rate of fire.
If two or more crewmen are slain then the remaining crew will be unable to cope, so when it shoots the cannon must miss a whole turn before it can shoot again.
This is in addition to any penalty imposed by a Misfire result.
Obviously the cannon requires at least one crewman to work, and should they all be slain the machine becomes useless.
SUMMARY OF CANNON FIRE
1.
Align cannon on target and declare the distance you are aiming.
2.
Roll the Artillery dice and add the score to the distance aimed.
The cannon ball travels forward this distance before striking the ground.
3.
If you roll a misfire refer to the Misfire Chart.
4.
Mark the point where the cannon ball strikes the ground and roll the Artillery dice to establish the bounce distance.
All models in the path of the bounce are hit.
5.
If you roll a misfire for the bounce the cannon ball has stuck in the ground and does not bounce.
6.
Work out the effect of hits normally.
Models have no saving throw for a cannon hit.
FLAGELLANTS
The rules for Flagellants appear in the Warhammer rulebook, but are repeated here for your convenience.
The Old World is a dangerous and often cruel place, where war, plague and the vagaries of nature can destroy whole towns and force their inhabitants to become beggars, vagabonds and brigands.
It is probably no wonder that many are driven mad by the terrible hardships that they suffer.
Many see their condition as a sign that the realms of men are about to collapse, that they are living in the last days of a dying world.
It quite common for these hordes of penniless zealots to band together under the leadership of some ranting madman, a preacher of apocalyptic doom.
These bands travel the towns and cities of the Old World spreading their nightmarish vision of doom and despondency.
When they hear there is a battle brewing Flagellants gather together in anticipation of the final apocalyptic conflict.
As the armies clash the Flagellants throw themselves into the fray in a gesture of sacrifice and doom.
Thanks to their constant hardships, many self-inflicted, Flagellants feel almost no pain and are difficult to kill.
They are also completely fearless — having long since confronted their own vision of world destruction, nothing holds any terror for them any longer.
Special Rules
Psychology
Flagellants are not affected by panic, fear, terror, or any of the psychology rules.
They are far too enwrapped by their own insane vision of imminent doom to be worried by such things.
Combat
Flagellants will fight on in hand-to-hand combat regardless of casualties or circumstances.
Flagellants need never take a break test in hand-to-hand combat.
They never flee from combat, and will fight to the death even if repeatedly beaten by their opponents.
Leadership Characteristic
As Flagellants don't take psychology or break tests they need no leadership value — in effect any test taken against their leadership is considered to have been automatically passed.
Should a leadership value ever be required for comparative purposes then use the value as 10.
POINTS VALUES
Points values for the new weapons and war machines described in this section are given all together here.
These points values are also included in the Army List entries, but are repeated here so that you can compare them.
Separate points values are included for the Repeater Hand Gun and Pistol.
Note that because these are special weapons used only by the Engineers School they are not available to character models.
Separate points values have also been included for the various Engineers School weapons carried by the War Wagon crew and described as part of the War Wagon rules.
Suddenly, for one brief instant, all was silence.
Not even the screams of the wounded and the moans of the dying broke the hush.
The roar of cannon halted.
No warcry rang out.
The whole world held its breath and waited, sensing that the battle had reached a crucial juncture.
It was one of those rare moments when the clamour of war receded, the smoke cleared and a wise man could take stock of the situation quickly, accurately, and with some hope of certainty.
The Chevalier Roget d'Armaniac twisted in the saddle to survey the battlefield.
Before him lay a pile of dead Tilean crossbowmen, polluting the sacred soil of Bretonnia with their inferior foreign blood.
Their brethren had fled screaming from the battlefield.
They were unworthy of pursuit.
By all the Gods he had showed those peasant scum.
How dare they believe that they could stand before the flower of Bretonnian chivalry!
Well, he had taught them a swift, certain lesson: that no ten hired lackeys of the Emperor Karl Franz were a match for a single noble son of Bretonnia.
Ten, a hundred, a thousand.
Bring them on!
He would kill them all, like the true knight he was.
He took a second to raise the visor of his leonine helmet.
Gods, how those clods had wailed when they had seen his proud lion-masked visage!
There, that was better.
Now he could see more clearly.
Yes, it was true, the Bretonnians were winning, he could tell.
True, there were a few pockets of stubborn resistance, where the Reiksguard refused to fall back in the face of certain defeat or where the thunder of Imperial arquebuses had shattered the Bretonnian infantry.
Still, what could you expect.
The infantry were peasants, coddled, soft and fat.
You simply could not expect them to know how to fight properly.
They did not understand the nature of honour or how to win glory in battle.
Roget's heart leapt.
He could see the Imperial banner fluttering on the nearby hilltop.
There was nothing to protect it save a company of disreputable rabble and a small strange looking nine-barrelled cannon.
Yes — this was his moment.
Now, he would bring renown to the house of d'Armaniac.
Bards would sing of this moment for a thousand years.
Down the generations the tale would be told of how bold Sir Roget had led the pride of Bretonnia to glorious victory.
He spat contemptuously at the thought of the Imperial halberdiers.
That little Imperial bang-box held no terrors for him.
Such things were typical of the Imperial troops.
They did not rely on mighty sinews and glittering steel as a true warrior should.
They were always looking for some cowardly advantage.
Well, it would do them no good.
He turned and waved to his fellows then gestured towards the hill.
His brother knights lined up beside him, ready for the charge.
Their great plumed helmets nodded.
Here were some of the most renowned chevaliers in all Bretonnia.
He recognised the boar's head helm of Marcel d'Ume, and the carp-helm of Lucien de Noir.
The sight of them filled him with pride.
It was almost unfair, he thought; ten true Bretonnians versus a mere thirty peasants and their puny gunpowder weapon.
‘Are you sure this is wise, Sir Roget?’ asked young Sir Edouard.
‘I have heard dire rumours of the Helblaster volley gun.’
Roget cursed loudly.
What could you expect from a pup with a mere nine peacock feathers in his eagle helmet's crest?
‘Are you a man or mouse, boy?
Where is your honour?’
This was too much for young Edouard.
He dug his spurs into his horse's flanks and, without waiting for the others, raced towards the hill.
With a great cry the knights followed him.
Exhilaration filled Roget as he thundered forward.
He dropped his lance into its rest.
He had already picked his target.
He didn't like the look of that rascal who was touching a taper to the base of the gun.
He was grinning and smirking too much by far.
It was almost as if the peasant couldn't believe his luck, the cheek of him.
Not far now.
Soon he would have the Imperial standard in his hand.
He could picture himself at the court of King Louis, accepting the thanks of his grateful monarch.
Suddenly a great cloud of smoke billowed out from the gun.
For a moment, it was like being in hell.
There were several huge bangs.
Bright muzzle flashes were visible even through the murk.
The reports echoed deafeningly within his helmet.
Clods of earth were thrown up all round him.
Shrapnel pattered off his shield.
The smell of gunpowder filled his nostrils.
Something wet and red splashed his face.
He licked his lips and tasted the salt tang of someone else's blood.
He ducked as something heavy whizzed past his head.
Behind him he heard Sir Leon scream in pain.
Roget's steed reared and whinnied in terror.
How dare they scare the beast like that!
He would make them pay.
The cloud of smoke dissipated.
Roget halted and waited for his fellow knights to form up again.
‘For Bretonnia and King Louis!’ he cried and waited for the response.
He glanced swiftly around and was horror-struck.
There were no other Bretonnians near.
They had all gone!
What vile magic was this?
Surely that gun could not have wreaked this havoc!
No, it was evil sorcery.
Grinning triumphantly the Imperial halberdiers advanced towards him.
HOT POT MISFIRE CHART — Roll a D6
1–2 DESTROYED !
The catapult breaks throwing boiling Hot Pot gloop everywhere.
The crew are slain and the Hot Pot destroyed.
Remove the model and its crew.
3–4 SPILL .
The Hot Pot is spilled before the Halflings have a chance to fire it.
The Hot Pot cannot fire this turn and may not fire next turn while a fresh pot is brewed up.
To help you remember it is a good idea to turn the catapult round so it faces away from the enemy.
In addition to, the spilling gloop splashes onto and injures one of the crew — remove one of the crew as a casualty.
5–6 MAY NOT SHOOT .
A minor problem prevents the machine firing this turn.
Perhaps a crewman stumbles, it could be the gloop isn't hot enough, maybe there isn't enough pepper in it for the cook's liking.
The machine is undamaged and may shoot as normal next turn.
MORTAR MISFIRE CHART
D6 Roll Result 
1–2 BOOM !
The mortar shell explodes before it is fired.
The mortar and crew are destroyed.
3–4 The fuses fizzle out and the gun fails to fire.
It takes a complete turn to replace the shell and prepare to fire, so you not only fail to shoot this turn but you cannot shoot next turn either.
5–6 The shell explodes in mid air causing no damage — your shot has no effect this turn.
CANNON MISFIRE CHART
D6 Roll Result 
1–2 DESTROYED !
The cannon explodes with a mighty crack.
Shards of metal and wood fly in all directions leaving a hole in the ground and a cloud of black smoke.
The cannon is destroyed and its crew slain or injured.
Remove the cannon and its crew.
3–4 MALFUNCTION .
The powder fails to ignite and the cannon does not fire.
The crew must remove the ball and powder before the cannon can shoot again — which takes another turn!
The cannon therefore cannot fire either this turn or the next turn.
It is a good idea to turn the cannon round to indicate this.
5–6 MAY NOT SHOOT .
A minor fault prevents the cannon firing this turn, perhaps the fuse is not set properly or maybe the crewmen mishandle the loading procedure.
The cannon is unharmed and may shoot as normal next turn.
‘Repent!
This is your last night on earth!
The end of the world is coming,’ the flagellant cried.
Felix Jaeger cursed the dark destiny that had dragged him into these terrible events.
He should be at home in his father's mansion, not listening to the ranting of some deranged maniac on the eve of what must surely be the one of the largest battles in the Empire's history.
This was no place for an aspiring poet.
Why did he have to be here?
And where was Gotrek?
The last time he had seen him the Trollslayer had been wandering off to booze with his fellow outcast Dwarfs.
What bad luck — they spend six days in the mountains hunting for Trolls and when they return they find the Imperial army camped outside the walls of Hauptmansburg and all able-bodied men called to serve.
All Felix had wanted was a decent meal and a comfortable bed, not a pitched battle with the hordes of Orcdom.
‘Cast off your worldly goods!
Dispose of your chattels!
They will profit you not!
The end is coming!’
The flagellant ranted.
Felix inspected the zealot with some distaste.
The flickering firelight revealed an appearance that was most disturbing.
His scrawny body was naked except for a loincloth and the tattered remains of a jerkin.
Old scars criss-crossed his chest and legs.
Fresh red blood dripped from a weal on his shoulders.
Festering open sores marred his face and abdomen.
Mad blue eyes glared out from his starved fanatic's face.
In one bony hand he clutched an oak club driven through with rusty nails.
Some of the puncture marks on his body were obviously self-inflicted.
‘Easy for you to say, father.
You don't have a copper pfennig to your name!
Me — I'm well paid to fight,’ shouted Eusebio.
His fine linen shirt lent an air of truth to his words.
Felix had seen noblemen less well-dressed than the foppish young Tilean mercenary.
‘Too well paid,’ called Sergeant Lothar to loud laughter from the gathering crowd.
‘All you have to do is stand back and fire your crossbow at those green-skinned devils.
It's we halberdiers who'll have to get to grips with them.
Doubtless while our noble lords and masters stand back and applaud themselves for winning yet another battle.’
Eusebio gave an eloquent shrug.
Obviously he thought that if Lothar wanted to risk his life in the press of the melee then more fool him.
‘Aye, laugh!’ thundered the flagellant.
‘Laugh while ye can.
Smile as skulls smile!
Tomorrow the grave yawns for you all!’
Felix shuddered and drew his tattered red cloak tighter about his body although it wasn't cold.
The hundreds of blazing campfires and the press of thousands of bodies kept the night chill at bay.
All around the soldiers fell silent.
They were a superstitious lot and tomorrow they would be fighting for their lives.
The fanatic's words held a harsh core of truth.
Sensing that he had the attention of the warriors the flagellant pulled himself up to his full height.
He pointed an accusing finger at Eusebio.
‘You, Tilean!
You're so proud of your appearance!
How will that fine shirt look tomorrow all rent and stained with blood?
Better to look like me.
Prepare your body for the wounds of the morrow.’
Eusebio made the sign of the Hammer across his chest like a peasant warding off the evil eye.
The Tilean had obviously been in the Empire long enough to look to its patron deity, Sigmar of the Hammer, for protection.
There was some muttering among the crowd now.
An archer with the guttural accent of a native of Reikwald forest agreed with the fanatic.
Felix heard a Stirlander Greatsword say that such words would bring ill-luck.
The Stirlander fingered the hilt of his mighty blade meaningfully.
A less religious or a more sane man than the fanatic would have shut up.
That blade was almost as tall as Felix, and Felix was a tall man.
The flagellant warmed to his theme.
A grinning young pistolier pulled faces behind his back and gestured to his fellows to indicate that the zealot was mad.
‘From the North, Chaos comes.
The minions of the four Great Powers ride forth, clad in black and bronze.
In their left hand is fire.
In their right hand is the sword.
Darkness is behind them.
Destruction to the fore.
Their castles are built of skulls!
Their garments are woven from the flayed skins of women!
They will trample the cities of men beneath iron-shod hooves.
In the woods lurk beasts that walk like men.
They gather now that the last days are near.’
He looked directly at Morrsleib, the lesser moon.
‘They have allies.
Men who have sold their souls to the darkness.
Mutants and foul creatures tainted by warpstone in their blood.
Fat merchants who seek the meaningless trappings of power and wealth!’
There was a commotion at the edge of the crowd.
Felix could see a man in the shining armour and plumed helmet of a Reiksguard knight.
He had come all the way from the silk pavilions of the nobility to investigate the disturbance.
Sweat stood out on the flagellant's brow now.
His eyes were glazed.
A fine trickle of drool leaked from the corner of his mouth.
His hands shook.
Felix was reminded of a man in the grip of a terminal fever.
‘From the mountains of the east come the Orcish hordes: green-skinned savages with the hearts of beasts and the fury of madmen.
They will cast down the kingdoms of men and dwell in the ruins before the last day dawns and Chaos swallows the world.
Tomorrow you will face them.
Tomorrow Morr will reach out for you with his bony claw.’
‘You there, that's enough of that talk!’
The powerful voice of the Reiksguard cut through the babble.
‘Tomorrow we will face the Orcish scum and will triumph, as men have done since the time of Sigmar!’
The fanatic stared at the knight.
He looked as if he were about to argue but then he shrugged.
‘There are none so blind as those who will not see!’
He stalked off towards the camp's edge where a huge band of his brothers waited.
The crowd parted round him and no-one would meet his gaze.
‘The rest of you get some sleep!
You have to fight a battle tomorrow.
The Empire needs you all well rested!’
The crowd dispersed.
Felix threw himself down next to the nearest fire, and pulled his cloak tight about him.
The frenzied wailing of the flagellants echoed through the night.
Even as Felix drifted into sleep he thought it an evil omen.
EMPIRE TACTICS
There are as many different ways of playing Warhammer as there are Warhammer players.
Some people like to play aggressively, moving forward to smash into their foes.
Other players like to hold back and fight defensively.
Many favour using massed war engines to rain doom down on the enemy, while others prefer fast-moving cavalry armies able to respond to any threat.
None of these is the one true way; all have their advantages and disadvantages.
One of the best things about the Empire army is that it can accommodate almost any style of play.
If you like fast hard-hitting cavalry you can choose to lead the Knights Panther, the Reiksguard Knights and the Knights of the White Wolf.
You can back these up with Kislev horse archers.
If you prefer to mount a stalwart defence you can wait behind long lines of hand gunners, massed ranks of halberdiers and hold important positions with volley guns while your artillery softens up the advancing enemy.
If you like mighty, if quirky, war machines, then you can choose steam tanks and war wagons.
Or you can build a flexible force able to attack or defend equally well.
As the Empire player you are spoiled for choice.
The Empire army is the supreme soldier's army.
There are so many options available to you that sometimes it's hard to know where to start!
Hopefully this brief article will go some way to redressing this.
If you want to field an Empire army, I believe the first question you should ask yourself is what sort of player you are.
Do you like to attack, taking the war to your foe?
If so, you'll probably want to have a high proportion of the mighty Imperial cavalry units, at least one steam tank and probably the war wagon as well.
These will enable you to get straight in there and hopefully smash up your opponent's force before he knows what's hit him.
Are you naturally more cautious, preferring to test the strength of your enemy before striking at his weak points?
If this is the case, then you may well want lots of hardy infantry and plenty of missile troops to scythe down the opposition as they advance on your army.
In either case, one thing you'll find essential is artillery, and plenty of it.
Cannons can be used to pound the enemy as you advance just as easily as they can blow holes in oncoming enemy formations.
Mortars, especially, are very nasty against large enemy units.
There will be times when you may want to tailor your style of play to fight particular opponents.
Some armies, such as Skaven, naturally favour players of an aggressive disposition.
They scurry quickly across the table, keen to get to grips as quickly as possible.
Other armies, such as High Elves, are magnificent at defence in depth.
Facing the loathsome rat-men I tend to opt for a defensive strategy and try and inflict as many casualties as possible at long range.
Against the superlative archers of Ulthuan my inclination is to get stuck in as quickly as possible.
Anyway these are the basic considerations you'll have to take into account when choosing your army.
In an ideal world you'd have sufficient troops of each type to pick the perfect force for facing any particular enemy.
However, if you're just starting your Empire army then my advice is to try and purchase one that suits your style of play.
You may not win every battle but you'll have fun.
Having covered these general principles it's time to look at the various troop types in more detail.
Infantry are the backbone of most armies.
When the fighting gets close and deadly, as it always does, you'll be glad to have them.
They are relatively cheap in terms of points which means that they can be numerous.
This is an important thing to keep in mind.
The trick with infantry is to use them in large units, at least four ranks deep, preferably more, and to always give them a banner.
This way you get the maximum possible bonus when combat resolution is calculated.
Under such circumstances they will have a chance against even a vastly more powerful foe.
Even if they can't inflict any wounds they can still swamp him with weight of numbers.
As an Empire player you can choose from a vast array of infantry types.
Halberdiers are, for me, the basic Imperial infantry.
I personally think the strength bonus their weapon gives more than compensates for their lack of a shield.
This is particularly the case against tough opponents such as Orcs.
And they do have the option of using a shield and not using the halberd.
This is a particularly useful option if your opponent is firing arrows at you.
The best of both worlds really.
If you're a defensive player spearmen are particularly useful.
Getting to use a whole extra rank of weapons in the face of a charge can come in very handy.
Double-handed weapons, such as used by the Greatswords, are brilliant for dealing death but do rather suffer from having to go last in the close combat.
This means that Greatswords may take a lot of casualties before their turn comes.
On the other hand, when they do get the opportunity to strike they are lethal.
They even have a chance of wounding monsters with a toughness of 8 — not bad for mere mortals!
Swordsmen are good general purpose troops.
Cavalry are one of the great strengths of the Imperial army.
From the light skirmishers of Kislev through the hammer-wielding White Wolves to the proud lancers of the Knights Panther, the army of Emperor is graced with a broad selection of mounted troops.
The Kislev horse archers have a variety of uses.
In a scouting role they can be used to pin down enemy troops by getting within 8″ of them and thus preventing march moves.
If charged by a powerful enemy they can turn and flee away, hopefully regrouping for a later return.
There's no need to feel too bad about having them turn and run.
If they draw out an enemy charge they've probably served their purpose.
Actually, you can do this deliberately.
If an enemy unit charges the horse archers and they flee, there's every possibility that the enemy unit will now be within charge distance of the slower moving but very powerful Imperial cavalry.
These highly mobile skirmishers can be used to draw Goblin fanatics out of their units prior to a charge by more heavily armed troops.
Pistoliers can also be useful in this role, as well as being able to ride up to your enemy and unload hard-hitting gunpowder weapons in his face.
The Knights Panther, the Reiksguard Knights, the White Wolves and other Imperial cavalry are superb shock troops.
They are the spearhead of the Imperial army, capable of shattering almost any enemy line under the right circumstances.
Give them a banner to enhance their chances and a good leader, and they can drive a hole right through most normal enemy troops.
Their armour provides excellent protection from incoming missile fire.
My own preference when using these elite units is to mass them in a body to provide the heaviest punch possible and then unleash them against one section of the enemy line with the hope that the breakthrough will start a general rout of the enemy force.
Given the chance, a flank attack with a massed force of cavalry is usually a sound plan.
If you can get round the edge of the enemy army you can roll along his line, taking foes in the flank and wreaking immense havoc.
The Knights of the White Wolf differ slightly from the lance-armed troops.
They don't have the advantage in a charge that the lancers have, but on the other hand they still have their +2 strength bonus in the succeeding rounds of combat.
This means that in battles with tough enemies that are likely to stand and fight for longer they can be a better choice.
The slight down side of all this is that your foe will usually know exactly how tough your cavalry is and target them with spells and artillery.
It can be very depressing watching these magnificent warriors being crushed by falling boulders.
Don't lose heart — when they hit the enemy vengeance will be yours.
Missile troops are often the key to a sound strategy.
As the Empire player you have a lot to draw on.
Archers favour an aggressive player since they can move and fire, covering your advance.
Crossbowmen and hand gunners are better in defence.
They can't move and fire but they can hit very hard.
The gunpowder weapons may have a lower range but their extra penetrative power makes them especially useful against heavily armoured foes.
Missile troops positioned on hilltops are very handy for protecting artillery units.
This allows the archers to be deployed in two ranks on the slopes where all of them get a chance to fire, not just the front rank.
Whereas the best formations for infantry are massed ranks, the best formations for missile troops are long thin lines where they can bring the maximum number of weapons to bear.
You can even get away with having missile troops in a line one deep with no second rank.
As a last word on the subject of missile troops, even if you're a defensive player, don't over-rely on them.
Yes, you can inflict a lot of casualties on an advancing foe, but you are extremely unlikely to stop him entirely.
There are few archers or hand gunners who can stand against decent combat troops in a pitched battle.
You need those infantrymen to protect your archers once the enemy is close.
Artillery is another of the great strengths of the Empire.
Believe me, all those cannon, mortars and volley guns should strike fear into the heart of the enemy.
If they don't then so much the better; he'll probably provide you with sitting targets.
The real power of most artillery lies in its long reach.
Right from the start of the battle you can start inflicting casualties.
Such weapons don't have to be anywhere near the enemy to inflict terrible punishment.
There is nothing that enjoys being on the end of a strength 10 hit from a cannon.
The best place for most artillery is on a hill commanding a wide field of fire with long clear lines of sight.
If you have the choice, position your cannon at the far ends of your line to allow yourself diagonal shots across the enemy line.
This enables to possibly hit more than one unit at a time.
Many people actually over-estimate the power of cannon.
It is true they hit very hard but they are often inaccurate and are not as useful against big units as you might suppose.
On the other hand, massed fire from several cannons can be devastating on even the largest enemy units.
In descending order of preference my choice of targets for cannon are, first, enemy war machines.
These are obvious threats to the health and well-being of your gun crews.
Even the most powerful cannon is not much use if its crew has been squashed by a boulder.
Next come large enemy  monsters or small powerful units such as knights.
One hit from a cannon can dispose of all but the most powerful monsters.
Even the heavy armour of a knight isn't much good against a strength 10 hit and and one casualty will sometimes cause a panic test in a small unit.
Enemy heroes and wizards are also fair game if they are on their own.
Only if none of these targets is available will I open fire on the big battalions with cannon.
Mortars are a different story.
These were designed for hitting large formations.
Once again, they are not terribly accurate, but when facing the massed ranks of a horde army such as the Skaven they can be devastating.
Just lob shells into the middle of the enemy's advance and watch them die.
The Helblaster volley gun is a special case, and every Imperial army should have at least one of these weapons.
It is so lethal that I cringe in terror every time I have to face it.
What can you say about a device that can potentially inflict 90 strength 5 hits in a single turn?
This is unlikely I admit, but, should it happen, virtually nothing in the Known World could withstand it.
The Helblaster is aptly named.
It is perfectly capable of wiping out even the largest enemy unit.
Sit it on a hill and wait till the enemy is within half range and then let fly.
The results are usually spectacular.
Unfortunately, if the enemy has any sense, he will know this.
Personally, when facing an Empire army, I never advance into the muzzle of a volley gun; too often it's tantamount to suicide.
Knowing this as the Empire player means that you can position your volley guns to block obvious enemy lines of advance.
You can use them to hold flanks, protect artillery and block easy routes to your positions.
Often the mere presence of the Helblaster is enough to make the enemy think twice about going somewhere.
Volley guns need never fire a shot to have a decisive effect on the game.
The other option for the Imperial opponent, and the one I tend to favour, is to target the volley gun and its crew with all the long range fire I can muster.
My plan is usually to remove the Helblaster from the battlefield before I advance.
If you are an Imperial player and facing a foe that uses such despicable tactics then console yourself with the thought that at least the units firing at the Helblaster are not firing at other targets.
In terms of effectiveness for points costs volley guns are very cheap, so shed no tears if you lose one.
The Empire can also field such specialised weapons as steam tanks and war wagons.
The steam tank is another device that I personally think every Empire army should have.
It has all the advantages of a cannon plus the ability to rumble forward through the middle of enemy formations crushing everything in its path.
It is the perfect complement for an aggressive cavalry advance.
The advantages of this should be obvious for all to see.
Its only drawback is that it can be somewhat unreliable.
It also tends to attract a lot of magic since this is about the only thing your opponent can rely on to slow it down.
It's useful to have at least one dispel magic scroll so that you can protect it.
The Empire has a very broad choice of magicians.
This is such a diverse field and so open to personal preference that I only intend to say a few words about it.
Remember that an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure.
It's better to have those dispel scrolls and protective artefacts than not.
Of course, a more aggressive player will probably want Frostblades and other such damage-inflicting weapons and who can blame him?
A sound general principle, if you are facing a foe who has a known preference for certain large monsters, is to have a magic weapon that can hurt them.
If your regular antagonist has a Chaos army and favours daemons then a Daemonslayer will do the business very nicely.
If he likes to use large dragons I think the choice of counter-measure if obvious.
The army general and standard bearer are very important to the Empire army.
Human soldiers just don't have the brute ferocity of Orcs or the haughty self-confidence of Elves.
They need a few outstanding individuals to lead them and to rally them when they flee.
I think that, all temptations to the contrary aside, the best place for the Emperor and the standard bearer is right in the middle of your line where they will have the greatest effect on the largest number of troops.
You should make sure these mighty heroes are well protected with magical items if you can.
My last two pieces of advice are simple.
The first is to watch the skies!
The Empire army is vulnerable to large terror-inducing monsters dropping on it from above.
As I have already mentioned, the best way to deal with these if your opponent has a predilection for using them is to prime a couple of heroes with the appropriate magic items.
These men don't need to be very tough to put the fear of Sigmar into your foe — he won't know how hard they are until he faces them.
If you have the spare points put a couple of heroes on Pegasi and send them into the sky where they can cover the field.
One is not enough.
If your enemy gets the drop on you he can kill one.
Two gives you a chance.
If your foe stoops on a ground unit and is locked in combat you'll have a good chance of catching him in the flanks.
The other thing I would say is keep a reserve behind your front line.
It doesn't have to be big, it just has to be there.
You can use these troops to close any gaps that appear in your line or face off against any flank attacks.
As I said at the beginning, there is no one true way to play Warhammer.
Everything I've said here is merely my informed opinion based on my own experience against a limited selection of foes.
Doubtless you will find yourself in positions where what I've said is worse than useless, and facing foes who have thought of tricks I would never have dreamed of.
In that case don't blame me, blame your opponent!
You will come up with your own favoured tactics based on your own preferred style of play.
This is one of the joys of Warhammer.
There's nothing to beat that sense of a victory achieved by your own efforts.
So what are you waiting for.
It's time to get out there and lead the Imperial army to victory, in the name of Sigmar and Karl-Franz!
FANTASY BATTLE
IMPERIAL STEAM TANK
The Steam Tank is the invention of the extra-ordinary Leonardo of Miraglio, the founder and former Chief Engineer of the Imperial Engineering School.
This remarkable pioneer created twelve of these machines, of which eight still survive, the remaining four having been lost in battle or exploded during trial runs.
The surviving machines are polished and maintained by the Engineers School and occasionally receive a fresh coat of paint or new decorative iron work.
They are not very reliable and it is a rare day when all eight can be persuaded to run!
As their name suggests the Steam Tanks are powered by steam engines fed by pressurised boilers.
Young engineers are reluctant to volunteer as Steam Tank crew as the boilers are renowned for bursting apart, turning the tank into a giant pressure cooker.
The Steam Tank is also very uncomfortable to ride in.
Whenever the cannon is fired the noise rebounds inside, making the whole machine vibrate furiously and churning the stomachs and brains of the crew.
The whole Steam Tank is protected by a thick armoured skin, making it immune to fire from arrows and light missiles and impervious to blows from most warriors.
Machines which have been destroyed or damaged in battle have so far been recovered and rebuilt, although since Leonardo's disappearance many of the secrets of their construction have been lost and the engines become increasingly unreliable and inefficient.
The Steam Tank is powered by a substantial iron boiler which feeds steam through a series of pipes and pistons to drive the wheels.
The pressure of steam is controlled in a  rather haphazard way by bleeding off excess pressure so that the build up of steam does not cause the boiler to explode.
If the tank commander wishes to move fast or manoeuvre then he allows the pressure to build so that is sufficient for his needs.
He has to be careful to judge the pressure properly otherwise the whole thing could quite easily go up.
As the Steam Tank is not provided with any instruments for determining the pressure in the boiler, the commander must rely on the intensity of the gurgling noises, the hissing sound as steam escapes from imperfectly sealed piping, and the clouds of vapour which accumulate around him.
In past battles Steam Tanks have exploded with spectacular results, but in each case the machine has been meticulously rebuilt.
At the start of the move phase the player declares how much steam he is using this turn — in effect how high a pressure he wants to run the boiler at.
He can choose any number of steam points between 0 and 5, with 0 being no steam at all and 5 being maximum power.
Each steam point allows the player to move, manoeuvre or shoot with the steam-powered cannon and once steam points have been declared they must all be used during that move phase.
Each point allows the Steam Tank to do one of the following:
Move 3″ directly forward
Pivot up to 90° to the right or left
Fire the Steam Cannon (once per turn)
So, for example, with 4 points a Steam Tank can move forward 6″, pivot up to 90° to its left and then shoot.
Before moving the Steam Tank it is necessary to test to see if the boiler holds out.
Roll a D6.
If the score is a 6 then some fault has developed placing the Steam Tank in danger.
To find out what has happened roll a further D6 add the number of steam points you have declared you will use this turn, and consult the table below.
THE CANNON
The Steam Tank is armed with a large and impressive cannon which has a breech fed with pressurised steam from the boiler.
Pressurised steam is less potent than gunpowder and so the cannon has a shorter range than muzzle-loaded cannons but otherwise it works in the same way.
It is of course impossible to use a conventional cannon inside the Steam Tank due to the muzzle being outside the tank, and also due to the inevitable risk of explosion.
The cannon is fired exactly like other cannon except that the Steam Tank cannot be turned to face its target, it always fires straight forward.
You must therefore manoeuvre the Steam Tank into a firing position using steam points.
The cannon firing rules are the same as for other cannon.
Pick a target that lies directly in front of the cannon and which you can see.
Now guess the range — the highest number you can guess is 36″ in the case of the cannon in a Steam Tank.
Roll the artillery dice and add the score to your guess.
If you roll MISFIRE work out a misfire result as explained below.
Assuming you do not roll a misfire the ball travels the distance indicated towards the target and strikes the ground — place a marker on the spot where the ball lands.
Now roll the artillery dice again.
The score indicates how far the ball  bounces forward before it comes to a halt.
If you roll a MISFIRE for your second roll the ball has struck in the ground and does not bounce.
Any models between where the ball strikes the ground and where it comes to land are hit.
Any model struck by a cannon ball takes a strength 10 hit resolved in the normal manner.
If the cannon ball wounds its target then it causes not 1 but D4 wounds.
As most models have only one wound it will not be necessary to roll this extra dice, but it is important when it comes to rolling for models that can take several wounds.
Wounds caused by cannon shot cannot be saved by armour.
No saving throw is allowed.
If the original artillery dice roll is MISFIRE rather than a number then something has gone wrong.
The cannon does not fire and you must test the boiler in the same way as at the start of the turn.
Roll a D6 and add the number of steam points used that turn, and consult the Imperial Steam Tank Boiler Table.
Whatever the result you cannot fire the cannon this turn when it MISFIRES.
HAND-TO-HAND COMBAT
The Steam Tank is an unstoppable mass of metal, and it does not halt simply because enemy are in the way!
When it moves any models in its path are run over, sustaining a strength 7 hit unless they can jump out of the way.
To jump out of the way a model must roll equal to or less than its initiative value on a D6.
For example a human with an initiative of 3 must roll 3 or less, a Dwarf with an initiative of 2 must roll 2 or less, and so on.
Character models are less likely to be hit as they tend to have higher initiative values.
When a Steam Tank ploughs through a unit it will probably hit several models and it may run over several units in a turn if it is lucky.
Attacking a Steam Tank is very difficult — not the least because it cannot be brought to hand-to-hand combat but will always move off in its own turn.
Any models in contact with the Steam Tank in the combat phase can fight a round of hand-to-hand combat as normal, but it is impossible to win a round of combat against the Steam Tank.
Your best hope is to cause enough damage to slow it down or destroy it.
A Steam Tank never needs to take a break test.
It has a token weapon skill of 3 which is used to determine the attacker's basic chance of scoring a hit in the normal manner.
The Steam Tank has no armour saving roll — instead its thick iron skin is represented by a very high toughness of 10, and enemies will need a very high strength to stand any chance of crushing or piecing its armoured shell.
Once it has been damaged, the Steam Tank becomes increasingly less reliable.
To simulate this add +1 to the D6 roll when testing for boiler problems for every wound the Steam Tank has sustained.
So, normally the boiler will malfunction on the D6 roll of a 6, but if the Steam Tank has sustained 1 wound it will malfunction on a 5 or 6, if it has 2 wounds it goes wrong on a 4, 5 or 6 and so on.
This is quite useful as it means there is a real point to damaging the Steam Tank even if you cannot destroy it in one go.
This modifier also applies to cannon misfires too.
COMMANDER
The commander is armed with a repeater pistol, which is a  multibarrelled pistol made by the skilled gunsmiths of the Engineers School.
It is not a very practical or reliable weapon, but engineers are notoriously fond of clever little devices like this even if they don't always work.
The pistol has a range of 10″ and hits with a strength of 4 and the commander has a BS of 3 (this is included in with the profile for the Steam Tank itself).
If the commander's shot hits then he can shoot again immediately, either at the same target or at a new target within 2″ of the previous one.
He can continue to shoot so long as he keeps hitting, up to a maximum of 6 shots per turn.
If he misses then the shot is his last for that turn.
Any saving throws are resolved with an additional -1, ie -2 rather than the usual -1 for a S4 weapon.
The commander himself is not eligible as a target — he usually keeps his head down and only appears over the rim of his armoured command turret to shoot his weapon.
In effect he is a treated as an integral part of the Steam Tank.
PSYCHOLOGY
Steam Tanks must take fear, panic and other psychology tests just like other units and characters, but it isn't possible for a Steam Tank to literally flee.
If the rules would otherwise indicate that the Steam Tank flees then the commander battens downs the hatch and does nothing until the end of his following turn.
No steam points are used and the Steam Tank neither moves nor shoots.
Once this turn is over the Steam Tank can continue normally.
If the Steam Tank is obliged to expend steam points because of a ‘malfunction’ result on the Boiler Table, the steam points must be used to move away from the enemy during the turn in which it is affected.
The Steam Tank has a high leadership value because its thick armoured plating does much to bolster the courage of the crew inside!
NOTES Hits any models run over as it moves
CANNON Range — maximum nominated distance 36″.
Strength 10.
D4 Wounds.
REPEATER PISTOL Range 10″.
Strength 4.
If you hit shoot again up to 6 shots.
-2 saving throw rather than -1.
See separate entry for full details.
ASSEMBLING THE STEAM TANK
The Imperial Steam Tanks were designed and built by Leonardo of Miraglio the Chief Engineer of the Imperial Engineering School.
They are powerful if unreliable weapons, and each one is a valuable artifact, encrusted with baroque decoration and intricate designs.
Like the War Wagon (featured in White Dwarf 149) the Steam Tank is a spectacular model and powerful gaming piece and should be painted to the highest possible standard.
As with all multi-part castings, the first stage is clean and assemble your model.
The Steam Tank comes in several large parts which must be glued and preferably pinned together.
You may find that the pieces do not quite fit together perfectly, this is because large areas of metal sometimes warp very slightly in the casting process.
The easiest way to rectify this is to carefully file away any excess metal until a closer fit is achieved.
Any gaps in the model can be filled with modelling putty or plasticine.
To assemble the model, first attach the wheels to the base plate of the main body.
As these wheels are going to take the weight of the entire model, it is best to pin them for extra strength.
We've found it best to glue the wheels onto the axles with superglue and wait until they are dry before the pin is added.
A hole should be drilled through the outside of the plastic wheel and into the metal casting, then cut a length of wire is to the correct length and glue it into place.
This method easier then drilling a separate hole in each piece and then trying to line them up accurately.
The engine and crew compartment can be assembled as two separate sections and stuck together when dry.
The cannon can then be glued to the front of the model.
The Commander is best left separate from the tank so that he can be painted up as an individual model and put in or left out of the hatch as desired.
PAINTING YOUR MODEL
Once the glue had dried, the model was given a thin undercoat of white paint.
This provides a smooth surface to paint over and ensures that the colours come up clean and bright.
The barrel of the gun and all the areas of the engine that were to be given a metal finish were then painted Chaos Black.
When this was dry, the engine was given a base coat of Boltgun Metal and highlighted with Chainmail and Mithril Silver.
The Steam Tank body itself was painted in the vivid reds, blues and yellows that are typical of the Engineers Guild.
The main panels on the body of the tank and some parts of the engine and wheels were given a base coat of Moody Blue highlighted up with Enchanted Blue and Skull White.
The hatches were painted Go Fasta Red with Skull White Crosses and some yellow detail was added to provide a strong contrast to the blue areas.
The gold areas were given a base coat of Dwarf Bronze and highlighted with Glistening Gold and Mithril Silver.
One of the focal points of the model is the lion's head which surrounds the barrel.
This has been painted in a strong colour to make it look more aggressive.
It was given a base coat of Go Fasta Red highlighted up with Blood Angel Orange and Sunburst Yellow.
The decoration is of a style typical throughout the Empire, laurel wreaths, cherubs and scrolls are all devices that are commonly found on banners and armour.
Painting a scene of cherubs holding scrolls takes a lot of patience and practice, but you can get an equally effective result if you just paint on the scrolls with some suitable motto.
The banner has been printed separately above for you to cut out and add to your own Steam Tank.
All you need to do is drill a hole into the back of the engine to take a piece of thin wire, then fold the banner in half and glue it to the wire with PVA glue.
IMPERIAL WAR ALTAR
When the Empire goes to war it is accompanied by the huge War Altar of Sigmar.
Astride this ancient artifact rides the Grand Theogonist head of the Cult of Sigmar and the most powerful religious leader in the Empire.
As the army advances he wields the magic Staff of Command, striking down his foes with devastating spells while the Jade Griffon allows him to survive wounds that would kill a lesser man.
The sight of this monstrous altar inspires acts of heroic bravery by the forces of the Empire, and strikes fear into the hearts of their enemies.
SOLDIERS OF THE EMPIRE
The page opposite illustrates some typical Empire soldiers dressed in the style and colours of their provinces and city states.
Although there are no uniforms as such, the various regiments of each state adopt a distinctive pattern utilising the colours of their native land.
How these colours are used differs from regiment to regiment, and the examples shown represent just one variation for each state.
Altdorf
Altdorf is the capital of the Empire and the most wealthy of the City States.
Its state regiments are well equipped and lavishly uniformed in a mixture of red and blue.
Hochland
The halberd is probably the most commonly carried weapon among Empire foot troops.
Because it is impossible to use a shield while swinging a halberd this trooper wears a substantial suit of armour to protect him.
The Hochland colours of red and green are shown here in conjunction with a black plume — the colours of plumes and ribbons are used to indicate individual regiments.
Middenland
The colour of Middenland's troops is blue.
Ribbons and slashing are of contrasting bright colours identifying the individual regiments.
Wissenland
Wissenland lies along the upper regions of the Reik and river Sol, and incorporates the former territory of Solland.
Its uniform colours are grey and white.
This archer wears a white smock over a grey uniform with distinguishing red ribbons and plume.
Carroburg Greatswords
Not all regiments are dressed in the common colours of their province or city state.
One such regiment is the Carroburg Greatswords which wears a uniform of dark red.
The regiment traces its history back to the Siege of Carroburg in 1865, when it mounted a valiant and wholly successful defence of the walls in the face of a huge army led by the Count of Middenland.
The defenders fought so hard, ignoring the many wounds upon their bodies, that by the end of the attack their white Reikland uniforms were drenched in blood.
From that day the Carroburg Greatswords have worn dark red uniforms.
Talabheim
Swordsmen such as this Talabheim trooper are usually assigned as small detachments where they can fight on the wings of larger regiments.
This swordsman wears red and white, the traditional colours of his province.
Nuln
Nuln is famous for its gunnery school where forge masters make cannons and where the best artillery men are trained.
As cannons are notoriously filthy, artillery men are often covered in soot and grime, so it is convenient that the colour used by Nuln is black!
Many artillery men wear a leather jerkin to protect them from the discharge.
Other Nuln regiments also wear black, with a contrasting ribbon and plume colour to distinguish them.
Stirland
Stirland stretches from the banks of the Reik to the Worlds Edge Mountains, encompassing forests and rolling hills.
It is not a rich land, and so its soldiers are often equipped with simpler weapons such as bows, and their costumes are more rustic.
This Stirlander bowmen wears a green and yellow uniform.
Middenheim
The City State of Middenheim is second only in power and influence to Altdorf.
It is the City of the White Wolf, and centre of worship of the god Ulric.
Shields carried by Middenheim troops often depict the wolf in some guise or other.
This halberdier wears the blue and white uniform of the city with distinguishing features in red.
Ostermark
Ostermark is a large and mostly rural province, lying at the north eastern edge of the Empire.
Its colours are probably the most spectacular in the Empire, consisting of purple and yellow, or alternatively purple and white.
The shade of purple varies a great deal because purple dye is notoriously difficult to make fast.
Nordland
Nordland uses a distinctive combination of blue and yellow to clothe its troops.
As is common amongst state regiments, different ribbons and plumes are used to distinguish the various regiments.
Ostland
Ostland lies on the far side of the Middle Mountains and a great part of it is occupied by the Forest of Shadows.
Its troopers wear black and white, a combination which lends itself to bold parti-coloured divisions, broad stripes, checks and diamonds.
The bull's head symbol is derived from the badge of Ostland and is a common motif.
Averland
Averland's soldiers wear black and yellow.
Soldiers dressed in this fashion guard the entrance to the Black Fire Pass, one of the few overland routes across the mountains and a route favoured by Orc raiders.
Reikland
The Emperor Karl Franz is prince of the Reikland and his troops are well equipped and clothed as might be expected.
The colour of the Reikland is white, often a slightly grey or fawn colour in practice.
Talabecland
Talabecland is a large province which is heavily forested and sparsely populated.
Talabecland troopers wear red and yellow.
This soldier carries a hand gun, a simple firearm which can propel a lead or stone shot with considerable velocity.
Although slow to load and fire, hand guns can penetrate armour more easily than arrows.
HALFLING HOTPOT
Gambo Hartstock took his iron ladle and stirred the contents of his bubbling cauldron thoughtfully.
The two assistant cooks Flabagon Dil and Frito Flatfoot savoured the delicious spicy smell and exchanged knowing glances…
This was going to be a meal to remember!
It would in fact be the first hot meal the Halflings had tasted in three weeks, ever since they said farewell to their kinfolk in the Moot and marched away to join the Emperor's army.
Since then it had gone very badly for the small Halfling regiment.
Half their supplies had been lost crossing the river including all the beer and tobacco.
Continuous rain had made it impossible to keep a cook fire burning.
The whole regiment had been cut to emergency rations of a mere three meals a day, and those cold and rain soaked, eaten in miserable silence.
Now, as the army camped for the night in the shadow of the Worlds Edge Mountains, Gambo Hartstock, Chief Cook, prepared a feast to restore the spirits of the famished Halflings.
That morning he had bought a whole barrel of Gunpowder Pepper from one of the human victuallers.
The barrel stood beside the cauldron — a good measure of its fiery contents had already disappeared into the seething pot together with some peppermint herbs, firebalm, and certain other ingredients gathered by Gambo early that morning (a good cook has his secrets, and Gambo had more than most).
‘Ah yes my lad,’ Gambo explained to Flabagon.
‘The Emperor he knows a fine hot pot when he smells it…
But this here hot pot,’ he winked knowingly, ‘this is too rich for your humans, even for an Emperor.’
Flabagon smiled weakly as his master fussed proudly over his stew.
The delicious smell was twisting his simple mind into knots of ravening hunger.
What was old Gambo on about?
He was hungry.
They were all hungry.
Was it time to eat yet?
‘Yup Flabby,’ Gambo continued proudly.
‘If one of those human soldiers were to get as much as a good whiff of this hot pot of mine, well like as not he'd be knocked clean off his feet, and should he, by some act of  unforgivable negligence on our part, actually eat some — well, I for one wouldn't like to be held responsible.’
Gambo ladled another heap of pepper  into the cauldron and added a couple of chillies and more garlic for good measure.
Suddenly a loud horn blast pieced the air, a thin strident note pregnant with urgency.
Gambo was so taken aback he dropped his ladle, sending gobbets of fizzling stew flying everywhere.
‘What's this?’ he gasped breathlessly.
‘It's not lunch time yet, is it?’
But it was already obvious that the horn blast had come from elsewhere entirely — not from the Halfling camp or even from the human regiments of the Empire army, but from the fierce goblin Wolf Riders who were hacking and biting at will as Halflings ran hither and thither in blind panic.
Utterly absorbed with their cooking, none of the Halflings had noticed the Wolf Riders as they sprung from the mountain valley, neatly enveloping the camp and driving a wedge between them and the rest of the Emperor's army.
It was an ambush.
Worst of all it was an ambush before lunch.
‘Those pitiless Goblin scum,’ sobbed Gambo as a Wolf Rider bound towards him brandishing a spear and grinning broadly in anticipation of an easy kill.
Picking up a hefty cleaver he chopped the green skinned creature clean in half as easily as if it had been a stick of celery.
Green blood spurted wildly into the air, much of it landing into the stew pot where it fizzed and crackled like little gun shots.
‘Ruined!’ bawled Gambo uncontrollably.
‘My hot pot — all the mint and garlic, half the pepper — all gone.’
He cleaved the head from another Goblin and reached into his apron for his bottle of Mootland Malt.
It was empty.
‘Arghh!’ he screamed as the horror of his predicament overwhelmed him.
And then something snapped inside the little cook.
His eyes glazed with grim courage uncharacteristic of his kind, his broad hands tightened their grip around the cleaver.
‘Flabagon…
Frito,’ he said.
‘It's time for the ultimate sacrifice…fetch that rope and bring the rest of the pepper.’
Within moments the bewildered assistant cooks had tied the ropes to the cauldron and suspended the boiling mass over a forked spit rest.
It might have been the scene of slaughter that brought tears to Frito's eyes as Goblins and Wolves marauded through the camp slaying the fleeing Halflings like startled rabbits.
But maybe it was all those onions.
‘That's right my lads!’ yelled Gambo waving his cleaver menacingly in the direction of another Wolf Rider.
‘Now pull that rope back as hard as you can.’
The Wolf Riders, who had learned that Gambo's cleaver was best avoided, were gathering ready to carry their assault into the Empire camp.
Sure of his victory, the Goblin King himself was hurrying to lead the charge in his battle chariot.
Fresh greenskins were already forming up for the attack, spear-wielding infantry and archers among them, and towards the rear two huge Trolls shambled slowly through a sea of frolicking Snotlings.
The assistant cooks heaved on the rope and the cook pot lurched slowly backwards.
The wooden spit stand began to bend and creak, the Halflings groaned and took the strain.
‘Just another couple of feet,’ cried Gambo as he nimbly moved aside and poised his cleaver ready to chop through the tortured ropes.
With a single stroke the rope parted.
Flabagon and Frito fell backwards into a heap, and the cauldron catapulted forward right towards the Goblin King.
Gambo began to jump up and down excitedly as he watched the projectile arc towards the massing foe.
‘Yeee…yah!’ he yelled.
‘Go for it my beauty, that's the way!
The best hot pot ever and I hope it chokes you!’
The Goblin King, Grom the Paunch of Misty Mountain, infamous old Goblin Warlord and Lord of the Crags, was suddenly and unexpectedly struck by what could have been a big rock were it not for the sploshy red stuff that exploded from it, showering the goblin horde.
Goblins screamed where the boiling stuff touched them.
Their skin peeled away and shrivelled while tears of agony rolled from their little red eyes.
Grom, having overcome his initial surprise, howled with pain and anger before he was overcome by the fumes.
The wolves yelped uncontrollably, throwing their riders into the mess before scampering off back to the hills their tails tucked firmly between their legs.
A Troll stepped unwittingly into a steaming puddle and immediately began to dissolve.
At that moment the Empire army, hastily drawing its ranks, thundered into battle, and the remaining horde was swept aside by charging Reiksguard Knights.
The Empire had been saved.
The Emperor found Gambo Hartstock sobbing despondently into his apron, an empty bottle of Mootland Malt in one hand and a gore-splattered cleaver dangling limply from the other.
Gesturing his captains aside he grasped the Halfling by the shoulder and gently shook him.
‘Master Cook!’ he said, ‘I don't know what was in that flame pot of yours but it undoubtedly saved the day and many noble lives.
Tell us the recipe and I'll have the Imperial Engineers build a weapon that will destroy the Goblin hordes forever.’
Gambo looked up into the sturdy face of his ruler and his eyes suddenly cleared.
‘Sire!’ he exclaimed, ‘I cannot tell you, it'd be a betrayal of every sacred vow in the cookbook.’
The Emperor, to his credit, did not press the point, but presented Gambo with a bag of gold for his part in the battle and quietly departed.
Over the years Gambo became quite famous, and found himself dragged from battle to battle and expected to launch his now famous Halfling hot pot into the enemy ranks.
It never again had quite the effect it did on that day when Grom the Paunch of Misty Mountain was driven from the field, and, in truth, Gambo couldn't quite remember that recipe to his dying day.
None-the-less the hot pot did much to boost the prestige of Halfling regiments and taught the Goblins a lesson it would be hard for them to forget.
THE EMPIRE ARMY
The Emperor's army is large and diverse, including troops from all over the Empire and beyond.
The different kinds of troops and their battlefield roles are described in this section.
To call the Emperor's troops an army is perhaps misleading, as there are really many different armies as well as garrison troops scattered throughout the Empire.
Each province and each city state has its own separate army which it recruits, trains, and maintains.
These provincial troops form the backbone of the Empire's defence.
When invaders appear, the first troops they will meet will almost certainly be from the provincial army.
The quality of these troops varies considerably, and although they are all brave some are better equipped than others.
The Empire's best troops are the Reiksguard, the knights and foot soldiers of the Emperor's guard, who form the core of the army.
These troops are professionals, equipped at the expense of the Emperor and barracked in Altdorf.
THE STATE REGIMENTS
Every province and each city state in the Empire has its own army which is equipped and maintained at its own expense.
In the case of the provinces these forces fall under the command of the Count, and in the case of the City States they are under the control of the Burgomeisters of the City.
Regardless of whether they are provincial troops or city state troops, these forces are known as the state regiments.
State regiments serve as town guards, the fire watch and police force, as well as forming a standing army ready to repel invasion.
State regiments are always infantry, and may be equipped in a variety of different ways with different types of armour and weapons.
Probably the most common weapon is the halberd which is wielded with both hands.
Other favoured weapons include hand guns, swords, and (in the northern provinces especially) bows and spears.
The crossbow is not a popular weapon amongst men from the Empire, but there are always foreigners eager to be recruited into the Empire armies so it is quite common to find crossbowmen amongst the state regiments.
State regiments wear uniforms in the traditional colours of their provinces or cities.
All the troops in a regiment wear a uniform which has its own distinctive pattern or mix of colours.
There are no strict rules about the use of these colours or the way in which they are worn, so it is usual to find a great deal of variation in clothing styles between regiments from the same place.
For example, the colour most associated with Middenland is blue, but this doesn't mean that all troops from Middenland wear uniforms entirely of this colour: some regiments might have blue coats, others blue-striped jackets, while some just sport blue feathers in their caps or blue ribbons.
It is also common for regiments to have differently coloured cuffs, sleeves, or other minor details whilst retaining the overall colour of their state.
For example, though the uniform colour of Nuln is black, regiments have differently coloured sleeves, cuffs, collars, and sometimes trousers and hats, which identify them.
The colour uniforms shown elsewhere depict examples of popular patterns and dress styles — it would be easy to find state regiments which mix the styles shown with any of the possible colour combinations.
The traditional colours associated with each city state and province are shown below.
Of course there are exceptions, such as the Scarlet Guard of Stirland, the Death's Head Regiment of Ostermark (black and red), and the Carroburg Greatswords (dark red, although it is actually a Reikland regiment).
DETACHMENTS
The Empire foot soldiers have developed a very effective method of fighting which has won many a battle: the detachment system.
Just like any other body of troops, a regiment can fight as a totally independent unit under the command of its own leader, but the Empire troops are also trained to fight in a slightly different way.
While the majority of the unit are armed and equipped as normal, some of its troopers are armed with different weapons and formed into a separate unit called a detachment .
The detachment forms up close to the main unit where it can offer support, either by using long range weapons such as bows or hand guns, or by employing hand-to-hand weapons to threaten an advancing enemy's exposed flanks.
A particularly favoured combination is to have two detachments supporting a main body of halberdiers, one of hand gunners and another of swordsmen.
The hand gunners deploy to one side of the halberdiers while the swordsmen deploy to the other.
As the enemy advances the hand gunners use their ability to change ranks as they fire so that they creep closer to the enemy.
Should the enemy charge the hand gunners will flee, and the attackers are either drawn onto the halberdiers or left  struggling in front of the main body of the regiment ready to be charged next turn.
Meanwhile the swordsmen move round to attack the enemy in the sides or to protect the halberdiers against a flanking attack.
The hand gunners hopefully rally to rejoin the fray or continue to shoot at approaching enemy.
Obviously there are many variations on this tactic, but all rely upon the principle of mutually supporting units.
THE REIKSGUARD
The Reiksguard is the personal army and bodyguard of the Emperor himself.
As an Elector Count the Emperor also has direct command of his own provincial army — the Reikland regiments in the case of the Emperor Karl Franz.
The Reiksguard forms an elite core of highly trained, expensively-equipped troops who are loyal to the Emperor in person.
Its ranks are open to all young men of noble birth regardless of where they live within the Empire.
The Reiksguard includes men from all the provinces from as far afield as Ostland and Nordland, Wissenland and Ostermark.
Its ranks include the heirs to many of the most powerful noble houses in the Empire, including the sons of Elector Counts.
The Reiksguard is barracked in the comparative comfort of Altdorf, and accompanies the Emperor on campaign and during diplomatic tours throughout the Empire.
Although few in number, the Reiksguard is the most important part of the army and usually forms up in the centre around the Emperor himself.
THE KNIGHTLY ORDERS
When a noble assumes his title and feudal responsibilities he becomes a member of one of the select brotherhoods of Knightly Orders.
There are many of these brotherhoods throughout the Empire.
Some are small in size and their members are recruited from the local community.
Others restrict their membership to worshippers of a particular god.
The three largest and most influential Orders are the Knights Panther, the Knights of the White Wolf, and the Knights of the Blazing Sun.
A knight displays the emblems of his order on his armour and shield, and the style of his armour and dress follow a traditional design.
Knights owe their allegiance directly to their lord: the Elector Count of their province.
The Count can call upon his knights to come to arms and fight as part of his army.
When a Count musters his forces all the knights from an order fight together, forming individual units of Knights Panther, Knights of the Blazing Sun, and so forth.
The history of the Empire is full of strife, and on occasion one Count has marched his armies against another, and knights from different provinces have fought each other despite being part of the same Order.
This is accepted as part of the natural order and causes no ill will amongst the Knightly Orders.
The Knights of the White Wolf are one of the most numerous and powerful of the Knightly Orders.
They are based in the City of Middenheim, where they were founded following a great victory against Chaos outside the city walls.
The knights are all followers of the god Ulric who is worshipped throughout the Empire, but most notably in the northern provinces, especially Middenland.
The Knights wear mantles of wolf skins over their red-coloured armour.
They carry neither shield nor helm, and ride to battle bare-headed to show off their long hair and beards.
Their weapon is a mighty double-handed hammer which they swing round their heads, knocking enemy horsemen from their saddles and pounding the skulls of foes on foot.
The Knights Panther trace their origins to the wars against Araby when returning crusaders brought back outlandish animals from the east.
Some of these Knights adopted the panther as their emblem, and the Knight Panther was created.
In contrast to the Knights of the White Wolf, the armour and weapons of the Knights Panther are of a more traditional nature — they wear full battle armour and carry tall lances as their main weapon.
The Knights of the Blazing Sun were created after the Battle of Magritta in 1457 during the crusades which eventually freed the land of Estalia from the Arabian invaders.
The battle was a great victory for the Knights of the Old World, made all the remarkable by a strange and prophetic occurrence.
During fierce street fighting around the temple of Myrmidia, the warrior goddess of Estalia, a group of knights found themselves surrounded by the dreaded Black Guard led by Emir Wasr the Cruel.
Just as the Arabians closed in a sudden earth tremor shook the temple, dislodging a huge bronze statue of the goddess which plummeted to the street below crushing the Emir and many of his troops.
The event was to prove the turning point of the battle.
Afterwards, the surviving knights established the Order of the Blazing Sun with Myrmidia as its patron and protector.
PISTOLIERS
Pistoliers are young nobles, knights' sons who are not old or experienced enough to win their spurs or join the Reiksguard.
Many pistoliers will be fighting in battle for the first time.
They ride to war alongside their fathers, and join together with other young nobles to fight as units of pistoliers on the battlefield.
Being rather young and inexperienced they are inclined to be hot-headed and rather wild, bravely dashing into the jaws of danger where an older warrior might bide his time.
The armour and weapons carried by a pistolier are provided by his family.
His allegiance is to his father, family and ultimately to his Count and Emperor.
KISLEV TROOPS
The realm of Kislev lies to the east of the Empire.
For centuries it has been a buttress against the onslaught of Chaos from the wastes to the north.
Thanks to the Empire's support, Kislev has never fallen, although many of her cities have suffered devastation at the hands of the Chaos Hordes.
To this day, Kislev remains a strong friend and ally of the Emperor, and is always willing to send forces to help fight his wars.
Kislev is a land of dark pine forests, snow-clad wilderness and wind-swept steppes.
The inhabitants huddle around huge log fires in timber halls protected by massive stockades.
The ruler of this cold and extensive realm is the sorceress Tzarina Katarin the Great, daughter of the notorious Tzar Boris Goblin Basher whose many battles in the east expanded the Kislev Empire beyond the Worlds Edge Mountains.
The Kislev forces consist of two types of horsemen.
The core of their army is provided by the Winged Lancers.
These nobles wear exotically decorated armour and carry tall lances, and they have distinctive back banners adorned with feathers.
The second type of horsemen are wild horse archers recruited from the nomadic tribes of the Kislev steppes.
These expert riders are skilled bowmen whose usual tactic is to ride around their enemies, pouring volley after volley of arrows into them.
DWARFS
Many Dwarfs live in the Empire and have done so ever since the time of Sigmar himself.
Dwarfs are not recruited into the state regiments, but each local community is ready to send its menfolk to fight on behalf of the Emperor.
In times of need every Dwarf is a warrior.
Dwarfs sometimes wear uniforms appropriate to their province or city state in the same way as men.
However, it is equally likely for Dwarf troops to wear clothes or uniforms they have devised themselves.
As these uniforms are inspired by the fashions of the Empire they are bright and colourful in a manner not normally associated with the rather sombre Dwarfs who live in the Worlds Edge Mountains.
HALFLINGS
The Halflings have lived in rural areas of the Empire for as long as anyone can remember, but it was not until the year 1010 that they were granted the lands around the upper Aver as their permanent home.
This land is known as the Moot, and, like all the lands of the Empire, it provides troops for the Emperor's army.
Halflings are not especially warlike by nature, and their troopers are for the most part country watchmen, game wardens and foresters.
Even so, they are willing fighters and very able bowmen.
Their natural ability to infiltrate woods and move quickly through dense undergrowth means that they can accomplish tasks which would be impossible to Men.
ARTILLERY
The Empire's artillery is the best in the world and its manufacture and maintenance are controlled by the Emperor himself.
The Imperial Gunnery School at Nuln is the biggest cannon foundry in the world, and it is here that the Emperor's gunners receive their training.
Some Counts also maintain their own artillery trains and most large cities have cannons to defend their walls.
ENGINEER TROOPS
The Empire is home to some of the most innovative and technically able minds in the Old World.
To further the development of new weapons a special school has been established in Altdorf known as the Imperial School of Engineers.
Many of the best engineers are Dwarfs who have been expelled from the notoriously hidebound Dwarven Engineers Guild for their radical ideas.
The Engineers are part of the Emperor's personal forces.
Their inventions include many strange machines of war, including the Steam Tank, War Wagon, and Helblaster Volley Gun.
They also provide troops in the form of riders equipped with experimental repeating hand guns.
WIZARDS
After the Great War against Chaos Magnus the Pious lifted the ancient laws against the practice of wizardry and founded the eight Colleges of Magic in Altdorf.
His aim was to provide a core of competent battle wizards so that the Empire would never again have to fight a battle without the aid of wizards.
The chief of all these Colleges and the most important wizard in the Empire is the Supreme Patriarch.
When the Emperor calls for aid the Supreme Patriarch provides the battle wizards needed.
FLAGELLANTS
The Empire is a dark and dangerous place.
There are many who have suffered personal disaster and whose livelihoods have been destroyed by natural catastrophe or invasion.
Although the vast majority are hardened by their loss, others have been driven over the edge of madness.
It is a common sight to see bands of penniless zealots whipping and beating themselves as they travel from village to village, begging scraps of food and preaching their own nightmare vision of doom and despondency.
Although mad, flagellants are not cowards.
They believe that the end of the world is about to come, and their conviction gives them a certain maniacal courage.
When they hear a battle is brewing they flock to the battle site, ready to cast themselves into what they regard as the final hopeless battle between good and evil.
THE ARMY LIST
The Empire army list has been designed so that you can choose an army to a previously fixed points value.
There is no upper limit to the size of an army, but one thousand points is about the smallest size that will allow you to field a battle-worthy force.
Two thousand points is the usual size for a good evening's battle, and three thousand points will give you enough troops for a battle that will take the best part of a day to fight.
Most people prefer to collect their armies in blocks of a thousand or five hundred points, starting with say a thousand point core force and adding five hundred points at a time after that.
This allows you to conveniently plan your purchases and gives you time to paint the models and try them out on the tabletop before deciding what to add next.
It is usual for each side to begin with an equal points value of troops — say two thousand points a side.
This means both players pick an army worth up to the agreed points value.
The Empire player uses the Empire army list, while his opponent uses his own list from the Warhammer Armies book for his army.
The total value of a player's army may be less than the agreed value, and will often be a few points short simply because there is nothing left to spend the odd point on.
The list that follows tells you what proportion of your points you may spend on character models, regiments, war machines and allies.
This ensures that your army and that of your opponent are reasonably balanced, and don't consist entirely of cannons or Lord characters.
CHARACTERS
The points allowance which you are permitted to spend on characters includes the value of their armour and weapons, any magic items they have, and a steed if they are mounted.
If a character rides a monster its points value is included in the points you are allowed to spend on characters and not the points you are permitted for monsters.
The proportion of points permitted for monsters is for monsters without riders.
If a character rides in a chariot then its points cost including any additional crew is added to the character's points value.
The points value which you are permitted to spend on characters includes the points paid for champions of regiments.
Remember that a regiment's champion is part of his unit and cannot leave it.
A character may be equipped with any of the weapons or armour available to the ordinary troops in the list.
The points cost of weaponry and armour is the standard value and the complete list is repeated at the end of this section.
Note that this doesn't mean that a character can carry a cannon, a Helblaster volley gun, or any other very special weapon such as an Engineer's Repeater Hand Gun.
A character can carry appropriate magic items chosen from the magic item cards in Warhammer or Warhammer Battle Magic.
It is our intention to add more magic items at a future date, possibly as part of scenario supplements and also in White Dwarf magazine.
The points value of magic items is included on the cards themselves.
Characters are permitted no more than the number of magic items shown on the chart below.
Note that some magic items are restricted to certain races or types of characters.
Scrolls can only be used by wizards, for example, while a Runefang may only be used by heroes of the Empire (this does include Champions and Lords incidentally — all characters who are not wizards are heroes just as all wizards are wizards even if they are Wizard Lords or Master Wizards).
REGIMENTS
Models are organised into units which we call regiments.
Regiments must be at least five models strong unless indicated otherwise in the army list.
There is no upper limit to the size of a regiment.
The minimum of five models includes its leader, standard bearer, musician and champion if it has them.
All regiments are assumed to include a leader equipped in the same way as his men and with identical characteristics.
He costs the same points as an ordinary trooper.
All regiments may include a standard bearer and/or musician, and these cost double the points value of an ordinary trooper.
Standard bearers and musicians are assumed to be equipped with the same weapons as the rest of the unit and fight just like ordinary troopers (see the Warhammer rulebook for a full description).
Some regiments are permitted magic standards.
These are covered by the Warhammer Battle Magic supplement and are included as magic item cards.
If you take a magic standard then its points value is included with the points value of the regiment.
Units are permitted champions.
Champions are always equipped exactly like the rest of the unit, except that they are permitted one magic item in addition.
A champion may be the unit's leader, but does not have to be — you can have a separate leader and champion model if you wish.
Champions always fight with their regiment and cannot leave it.
The points value of a champion, and of any magic item he carries, comes from the proportion of points allocated to the army's characters and NOT the regiments.
WAR MACHINES
War machines include all the artillery and other machines of war available to the Empire army including Steam Tanks, cannons, mortars, etc.
MONSTERS
Monsters are beasts brought along to fight beside the army.
They include trained creatures from the Imperial zoo, captive monsters goaded into fighting, and monsters which have been magically bound with spells of obedience.
Monsters chosen as mounts for characters are NOT included in the points allocation for monsters, they are included in the points for characters instead.
ALLIES
The Empire army may include a proportion of allies, in this case up to a quarter of its total points value.
Allies are chosen from the Warhammer Armies book or books indicated.
So, for example, your Empire army could include up to a quarter of its points value as Wood Elves chosen from the Wood Elf list, or Dwarfs chosen from the Dwarf list.
There is nothing to prevent you choosing allies from several different lists if you wish.
Including allies is a good way of expanding your miniature collection, and it also allows you to paint something different and still include it in your army.
PRESENTATION OF PROFILES
Profiles are given in the standard format and include all the characteristic values.
They do not take into account movement reductions due to armour, as this can vary depending on how you choose to equip your troops.
Saving throws are not included on the profiles for the same reason, as they may vary depending on what armour you choose to buy.
Cavalry have two profiles, one for the rider and one for the mount.
If the mount is an ordinary horse we have simply given the rider's profile with the Movement characteristic altered to 8.
This saves a bit of space and avoids giving a whole profile where only one characteristic is actually used.
M = Movement W = Wounds
WS = Weapon Skill I = Initiative
BS = Ballistic Skill A = Attacks
S = Strength Ld = Leadership
T = Toughness
LIMITATIONS ON CERTAIN CHARACTERS/UNITS
The army lists presents the player with lists of troop types which can be included in the Empire army.
In most cases there is no limit on the number of individual models, or the number of units, other than that imposed by the points values.
However, some particular types of unit or character are limited.
In some cases you can only include one character of a certain type in your army, or one of a specific unit.
Any such limitations are clearly indicated in the lists.
For example, you may only ever include one General model.
SPECIAL CHARACTERS
The army list itself is intended to broadly represent the Empire army.
Provision has been made to include a general, but we do not specify whether this is the Emperor, an Elector Count, the Reiksmarshall of the Reiksguard, or whoever — any of these individuals can and have taken command of Imperial armies during the history of the Empire.
Similarly, provision has been made to include heroes, but we have not specified that these should be Elector Counts, lesser nobles, military commanders, civic leaders, or whoever.
Heroes could be any one of these or many other heroic individuals — the Emperor Magnus the Pious was merely a student of theology when he began his march against Chaos, for example.
A separate section describing famous warriors from the Empire has been included after the army list.
This includes a selection of contemporary personalities, including the Emperor Karl Franz.
These are, in effect, ready-made heroes or wizards, with their own unique characteristics, magic artefacts, and points values.
You may include these characters in your army if you wish.
The points cost of the special character comes out of your character points allowance in the normal way.
So, for , you can have Karl Franz as your army's general if you wish, or Ludwig Schwarzhelm the Emperor's Champion as your army's Battle Standard Bearer.
ARMOUR
Troops' saving throws are not given on their profile because they vary depending on what armour is being worn.
Saving throws are summarised below.
For example, a Knight of the White Wolf is a cavalryman wearing heavy armour only and riding a barded horse.
His save is therefore 3+ (4+ with a further +1 on account of the barding).
EQUIPMENT LIST
The following is a list of all the usual weapons in the Warhammer game.
It has been included so that you can refer to it for comparative purposes, and so that you can choose equipment for character models without having to refer to the army list entries or the Warhammer rulebook.
A character model may be armed with any weapons available to the troops themselves, subject to the usual restriction regarding weapon use — eg, a halberd requires two arms to use and so prevents its wielder using a shield as well.
In the case of characters, the models must actually carry the weapons ascribed to them.
Note that regimental champions are always assumed to be armed and equipped in exactly the same way as the rank and file members of the regiment.
This list does not include unusual or specialised weapons such as repeater hand guns, Goblin Fanatic ball and chain, etc, and such weapons may not be chosen for a character.
Items marked with an  asterisk (*) are not used by Empire troops and are not therefore available to Empire characters.
They have been included out of a sense of completeness.
EQUIPMENT LIST
HAND-TO-HAND COMBAT WEAPONS
A single sword, axe, mace or other hand weapon Free
An additional sword, axe, etc 1
A double-handed weapon, including double-handed axe, sword, etc 2
Flail 1
Halberd 2
Spear 1
A lance for a mounted warrior 2
MISSILE WEAPONS
Bow 2
Short Bow* 1
Long Bow 3
Crossbow 3
Repeating Crossbow* 4
Javelin* 1
Sling* 1
Hand Gun 3
Pistol 2
ARMOUR
Shield 1
Light Armour 2
Heavy Armour 3
Barding for steed 4
Army Selection
Characters 0–50% Up to half the points value of the army may be spent on characters.
This includes the cost of a monster ridden by a character.
Regiments 25%+ At least a quarter of the total points value of the army must be spent on regiments.
This does not include the cost of champions, who are paid for out of the character allowance.
War Machines 0–25% Up to a quarter of the points value of the army may be spent on war machines.
Monsters 0–25% Up to a quarter of the points value of the army may be spent on monsters.
Note that this does not include monsters ridden by characters, which must be paid for from the character allowance.
Allies 0–25% Up to a quarter of the points value of the army may be spent on allied troops chosen from one or more of the following lists: Bretonnia, Dwarfs, High Elves and Wood Elves.
CHARACTERS
Your Empire army may include up to 50% of its points value as characters chosen from the list below.
You must always include a General, but apart from this you are free to choose as many or as few characters as you wish.
1 GENERAL OF THE EMPIRE 100 points 
The army must include a General to lead it.
He represents a great noble of the Empire, perhaps even the Emperor himself.
EQUIPMENT : Sword.
WEAPONS/ARMOUR : The General may be armed with any combination of weapons/armour allowed to any of the troop types in this list (see Equipment List for points values).
MAY RIDE : The General may ride a Warhorse (+3 points), or a Monster (see the separate Monster List for points).
MAGIC ITEMS : The General is a Lord character and is entitled to up to three magic items chosen from the appropriate cards in Warhammer Battle Magic.
0–1 battle standard 80 points 
If you wish, the army may include a Battle Standard together with its bearer.
When the Emperor takes the field his standard is carried by his own personal Champion.
EQUIPMENT : Sword and Battle Standard.
WEAPONS/ARMOUR : The Battle Standard Bearer may be armed with any combination of weapons/armour allowed to any of the troop types in this list (see Equipment List for points values).
MAY RIDE : The Battle Standard Bearer may ride a Warhorse (+3 points), or a Monster (see the separate Monster List for points).
MAGIC ITEMS : The Battle Standard Bearer is a Champion character and is therefore entitled to up to one magic item chosen from the appropriate cards in Warhammer Battle Magic.
This may be a Magic Standard, effectively turning the army's banner into a Magic Standard.
HEROES 65 points 
The army may include as many Heroes as you wish within the normal limitations of the points available.
Heroes represent men of exceptional prowess and courage.
Many individuals of this sort are to be found amongst the nobility, the Counts of the Empire and their sons, as well as the lesser nobility.
Not all Heroes are nobles by any means, some are ordinary folk whose outstanding abilities and deeds makes them the equal of any other Hero on the battlefield.
EQUIPMENT : Sword.
WEAPONS/ARMOUR : A Hero may be armed with any combination of weapons/armour allowed to any of the troop types in this list (see Equipment List for points values).
MAY RIDE : A Hero may ride a Warhorse (+3 points), or a Monster (see the separate Monster List for points).
MAGIC ITEMS : A Hero character is entitled to up to two magic items chosen from the appropriate cards from Warhammer Battle Magic.
CHAMPIONS 30 points 
Any regiment may include a Champion armed and equipped as the rest of the unit (see the Equipment List for points values).
Champions represent especially powerful or adept warriors.
EQUIPMENT : A Champion is always armed and equipped in the same way as the rank and file members of his regiment (see Equipment List for points values).
MAGIC ITEMS : A Champion character is entitled to a single magic item chosen from the appropriate cards in Warhammer Battle Magic.
Wizards
The army may include as many Battle Wizards as you wish within the usual limitations of points costs.
Battle Wizards may be from any of the eight Colleges of Magic: Light, Gold, Jade, Celestial, Grey, Amethyst, Bright or Amber.
Wizards may be selected from any of the four levels of wizard at the appropriate points cost as shown below.
Wizard 56 points
Wizard Champion 118 points
Master Wizard 190 points
Wizard Lord 287 points
EQUIPMENT : Sword.
WEAPONS/ARMOUR : A Wizard may be armed with any combination of weapons/armour allowed to any of the troop types in this list (see the Equipment List for points values).
However, if Wizards wear armour they are unable to cast spells, so they do not normally do so.
Note that if the Wizard is riding a horse with barding this has no effect on his ability to cast spells.
MAY RIDE : A Wizard may ride a Warhorse (+3 points), or a Monster (see the separate Monster List for points).
MAGIC ITEMS : A Wizard is entitled to magic items chosen from the appropriate cards in Warhammer Battle Magic.
A Wizard may have 1 magic item, a Wizard Champion may have 2 magic items, a Master Wizard may have 3 magic items, and a Wizard Lord may have 4 magic items.
The Empire army is built from a solid core of sturdy warriors.
Your army must include at least 25% of its points value as regiments chosen from the following list, and it may include more if you wish.
In some cases you may only choose a maximum of one unit of a specific type, for example you can only have one regiment of Reiksguard Knights.
There is no limitation on the size of a unit, other than that units must consist of at least five models unless otherwise stated.
0–1 unit of KNIGHTS OF THE WHITE WOLF 37 points per model 
Your army may include one unit of Knights of the White Wolf.
The Knights of the White Wolf are one of the most famous of all the Knightly Orders of the Empire.
Their distinctive weapon is the fearsome double-handed hammer which they wield from horseback.
They fight bareheaded and are exceptionally wild and fearsome.
EQUIPMENT : The Knights of the White Wolf wear heavy armour and ride barded Warhorses.
They are armed with a huge double-handed hammer.
The usual bonuses and restrictions for double-handed weapons apply (see the Warhammer rulebook).
SAVE : 3+.
OPTIONS : The Knights of the White Wolf may carry a Magic Standard.
This may be chosen from the appropriate Magic Item cards and its cost is indicated on the card itself (see Warhammer Battle Magic).
0–1 unit of KNIGHTS PANTHER 39 points per model 
Your army may include one regiment of the Knights Panther.
The Knights Panther is one of the oldest and most respected of the Knightly Orders, tracing its origins back to the times of the Crusades against Araby.
EQUIPMENT : The Knights Panther wear heavy armour and carry a shield, and ride barded Warhorses.
They are armed with a sword and a lance.
SAVE : 2+.
OPTIONS : The Knights Panther may carry a Magic Standard.
This may be chosen from the appropriate Magic Item cards and its cost is indicated on the card itself (see Warhammer Battle Magic).
0–1 unit of REIKSGUARD KNIGHTS 39 points per model 
Your army may include one unit of Reiksguard Knights.
This is one of the most powerful of the Reiksguard regiments.
Its warriors are recruited from all over the Empire and the sons of many wealthy and powerful families can be found amongst its ranks.
The Reiksguard Knights ride mighty Warhorses and wear full armour emblazoned with the device of the Reiksguard.
EQUIPMENT : The Reiksguard Knights wear heavy armour and carry a shield, and ride barded Warhorses.
They are armed with a sword and a lance.
SAVE : 2+.
OPTIONS : The Reikguard Knights may carry a Magic Standard.
This may be chosen from the appropriate Magic Item cards and its cost is indicated on the card itself (see Warhammer Battle Magic).
0–1 unit of KNIGHTS OF THE BLAZING SUN 39 points per model 
Your army may include one regiment of the Knights of the Blazing Sun.
These Knights wear armour of burnished brass and their shields bear the device of the Blazing Sun.
EQUIPMENT : The Knights of the Blazing Sun wear heavy armour and carry a shield, and ride barded Warhorses.
They are armed with a sword and a lance.
SAVE : 2+.
OPTIONS : The Knights of the Blazing Sun may carry a Magic Standard.
This may be chosen from the appropriate Magic Item cards and its cost is indicated on the card itself (see Warhammer Battle Magic).
PISTOLIERS 22 points per model 
Your army may include as many units of Pistoliers as you wish.
Pistoliers are young nobles who have yet to win their spurs and assume their rightful position as Knights of the Empire.
They fight with a brace of pistols.
EQUIPMENT : Pistoliers wear light armour and ride horses.
They are armed with two pistols and a sword.
SAVE 5+.
0–1 unit of outriders 28 points per model 
Your army may include one unit of Outriders from the Engineer's School at Altdorf.
The mounted Engineers are armed with either Repeater Hand Guns or Repeater Pistols, rules for these weapons are described elsewhere in this book.
These are experimental and slightly unreliable weapons, but extremely deadly when they work properly.
EQUIPMENT : The Outriders wear light armour and ride barded horses.
Each model may be armed with either a Repeater Hand Gun or a Repeater Pistol.
Note — the unit may include both types of weapon if you wish.
All Outriders are armed with a sword.
SAVE : 4+.
HALBERDIERS 7 points per model 
Your army may include any number of regiments of Halberdiers.
Like other state troops they are equipped and dressed in the style of their province or city state.
EQUIPMENT : Halberdiers carry a halberd and hand weapon.
SAVE : None.
OPTIONS : Any regiments of Halberdiers may be equipped with light armour at an additional cost of +2 points per model.
Any regiments may be equipped with shields at a cost of +1 point per model.
A Halberdier wearing light armour and carrying a shield will therefore cost 7+2+1 = 10 points.
Remember, a Halberdier may not use a shield while wielding his weapon, but the shield will still benefit him when he is shot at by arrows, for example.
0–1 unit of REIKSGUARD 12 points per model 
Your army may include one unit of Reiksguard.
Reiksguard are recruited from all over the Empire and include the sons of many wealthy and powerful families.
They wear heavy and very ornate armour resplendent with plumes and ribbons.
EQUIPMENT : The Reiksguard wear heavy armour and carry shields and swords.
SAVE : 4+.
SPEARMEN 7 points per model 
Your army may include any number of regiments of Spearmen.
Spearmen are most common amongst the state forces of the northern provinces.
EQUIPMENT : Spearmen carry a spear, hand weapon and shield.
SAVE : None.
OPTIONS : Any regiments of Spearmen may be equipped with light armour at an additional cost of +2 points per model.
GREATSWORDS 7 points per model 
Your army may include any number of regiments of Greatswords.
Greatswords are armed with a huge double-handed sword — or greatsword — which they swing with devastating effect.
EQUIPMENT : Greatswords carry a double-handed sword and a hand weapon.
SAVE : None.
OPTIONS : Any regiments of Greatswords may be equipped with light armour at an additional cost of +2 points per model.
SWORDSMEN 7 points per model 
Your army may include any number of regiments of Swordsmen.
Swordsmen are amongst the most highly trained and proficient of the provincial regiments.
To reflect their extraordinary skill they have a higher weapon skill than most troops.
EQUIPMENT : Sword and shield.
SAVE : 6+.
OPTIONS : Any regiments of Swordsmen may be equipped with light armour at an additional cost of +2 points per model.
HAND GUNNERS 8 points per model 
Your army may include any number of regiments of Hand Gunners.
Hand Gunners are highly effective warriors armed with primitive gunpowder weapons.
They are at their best firing from a static position, as their weapons are cumbersome and time consuming to load and shoot.
EQUIPMENT : Hand Gun and hand weapon.
SAVE : None.
OPTIONS : Any regiments of Hand Gunners may be equipped with light armour at an additional cost of +2 points per model.
ARCHERS 8 points per model 
Your army may include any number of regiments of Archers.
The northern provinces of the Empire are famous for their bowmen and traditionally have a high proportion of these warriors in their armies.
EQUIPMENT : Long bow and hand weapon.
SAVE : None.
OPTIONS : Any regiments of Archers may be equipped with light armour at an additional cost of +2 points per model.
Any regiments may be equipped with shields at a cost of +1 point per model.
SPECIAL : Regiments of Archers are permitted to skirmish as described in the rules for skirmishing in the Warhammer rulebook.
CROSSBOWMEN 8 points per model 
Your army may include any number of regiments of Crossbowmen.
The crossbow is known in the Empire but is not highly favoured.
However, it is a very popular weapon amongst the Tileans, and the state armies of the Empire include many Tileans.
EQUIPMENT : Crossbow and hand weapon.
SAVE : None.
OPTIONS : Any regiments of Crossbowmen may be equipped with light armour at an additional cost of +2 points per model.
Any regiments may be equipped with shields at a cost of +1 point per model.
KISLEV WINGED LANCERS 25 points per model 
The Empire army may include regiments of Kislevite Winged Lancers.
The Kislevites are not part of the Empire but their long standing friendship means that Empire armies often include contingents of the Tzar's army.
The highest ranking Kislevites fight on horseback and carry tall lances, but their most distinctive feature is the tall winged banner which they wear upon their back or attached to their saddle.
EQUIPMENT : The Kislev Winged Lancers wear light armour and carry a shield, and ride Warhorses.
They are armed with a sword and a lance.
SAVE : 4+.
OPTIONS : The Kislev Winged Lancers may carry a Magic Standard.
This may be chosen from the appropriate Magic Item cards and its cost is indicated on the card itself (see Warhammer Battle Magic).
KISLEV HORSE ARCHERS 16 points per model 
The Empire army may include any number of regiments of Kislev Horse Archers.
Kislev Horse Archers are fierce mounted nomads from the plains of Kislev and the wild lands of Farside beyond the Worlds Edge Mountains.
EQUIPMENT : The Kislev Horse Archers carry a shield.
They are armed with bows and hand weapons.
SAVE : 5+.
SPECIAL RULES : Kislev Horse Archers can skirmish as described in the rules for skirmishing troops in the Warhammer rulebook.
0–1 UNIT OF FLAGELLANTS 10 points per model 
Your army may include a single unit of Flagellants.
Flagellants are crazed wanderers obsessed with the doom of the world.
They travel throughout the Empire, joining armies as they march to battle.
Their madness gives them superhuman strength and resilience, and they fight with astounding fury and determination.
EQUIPMENT : Flail.
SAVE : None.
SPECIAL RULES : See the Warhammer rulebook.
DWARFS 10 points per model 
Your army may include any number of regiments of Dwarfs.
The Reiksland shelters a large community of Dwarfs who have lived in the Empire for many generations.
Dwarfs fight in their own regiments.
EQUIPMENT : Hand weapon and light armour.
SAVE : 6+.
OPTIONS : Any regiments of Dwarfs may be equipped with either spears at an additional cost of +1 point per model, or crossbows, at an additional cost of +3 points per model.
Any regiments may be equipped with shields at +1 point per model.
HALFLINGS 3½points per model 
Your army may include regiments of Halflings from the Moot.
Halflings are excellent bowmen and stubborn fighters despite their rather diminutive size.
EQUIPMENT : Hand weapon.
SAVE : None.
OPTIONS : Any regiments of Halflings may be equipped with either bows, at an additional cost of +1 point per model, or spears, at a cost of + 1/2 point per model.
Any regiments may be equipped with light armour at a cost of +1 points per model.
Any regiments may be equipped with shields at a cost of + 1/2 point per model.
OGRES 40 points per model 
Your army may include any number of Ogre mercenary regiments.
Ogre bands are often recruited as mercenaries into the Empire's armies, where their great strength is highly valued.
EQUIPMENT : Hand weapon.
SAVE : None.
OPTIONS : Any regiments of Ogres may be equipped with one of the following: an additional hand weapon at a further +1 point per model, a double-handed weapon at +2 points per model, or a halberd at +2 points per model.
Any regiment may be equipped with light armour at an additional cost of +2 points per model.
WAR MACHINES
The Empire army includes many devices invented or developed by the Imperial Engineers, including such strange machines as the Steam Tank and Helblaster volley gun.
The Empire has many well made cannon and the skills required to operate them.
In this respect the Empire is the most technically advanced human nation of the Warhammer World.
Your army may include up to 25% of its points value as War Machines chosen from the following list.
MORTARS 100 points each 
Your army may include any number of Mortars.
Each Mortar has a crew of three to operate the weapon and defend it if necessary.
Rules for Mortars are described elsewhere in this volume.
EQUIPMENT : The crew are armed with hand weapons.
SAVE : None.
GREAT CANNONS 100 points each 
Your army may include any number of Great Cannons.
Each cannon has three crew to operate the gun and defend it if need be.
EQUIPMENT : The cannon crew are armed with hand weapons.
SAVE : None.
0–8 STEAM TANKS 200 points per model 
Your army may include up to eight Steam Tanks.
Special rules for Steam Tanks are described elsewhere in this volume.
WAR WAGONS 150 points per model 
Your army may include any number of War Wagons.
Special rules for War Wagons are described elsewhere in this volume.
HELBLASTER VOLLEY GUNS 100 points each 
Your army may include any number of Helblaster guns.
Each Helblaster has a crew of three to operate the weapon.
EQUIPMENT : The crew are armed with hand weapons.
SAVE : None.
0–1 HALFLING HOT POT 50 points 
A Hot Pot can be included in the army if the army also includes at least one Halfling regiment.
Special rules for the Hot Pot can be found elsewhere in this volume.
EQUIPMENT : The crew are armed with hand weapons.
SAVE : None.
MONSTERS LIST
Your Empire army may include up to 25% of its points value as Monsters chosen from the list below.
Note that this allowance is for independent monsters which are assumed to be magically bound, trained, or otherwise loyal to your cause.
It does not include Monsters chosen as mounts for characters.
Mounts for characters are chosen from this list, but the points value is added to that of the character himself.
Chimera 250 points 
Cockatrice 150 points 
Dragon
Dragon 450 points
Great Dragon 600 points
Emperor Dragon 750 points
Griffon 150 points 
Hippogriff 145 points 
Hydra 225 points 
Gigantic Spider 50 points 
Manticore 200 points 
Wyvern 180 points 
Giant Scorpion 50 points 
Pegasus 50 points 
Swarms 100 points 
SPECIAL CHARACTERS
The Empire army list has been put together so that you can choose characters to represent virtually any of the Empire's famous personalities.
You could choose the Emperor as your General, but he could equally well be one of the Elector Counts, the Reiksmarshall of the Empire, or even a powerful Burgomeister from one of the City States.
All of these have at some time commanded the Empire's armies.
This section describes some specific individuals from the Empire's history, including a number of Emperor Karl-Franz's contemporaries.
You may wish to include these individuals in your army, which you can easily do by paying the appropriate points cost.
Although the list includes characters who could never have met in reality you can include them in the same army if you wish to do so.
However, you may only have one General, so you will not be able to use certain characters together.
The points values for characters do not include the cost of their magic items.
This allows you the choice of fielding characters without their magic items, for example if you are playing without the Warhammer Battle Magic supplement.
The points values of any specific magic items have been listed with each entry.
THE RUNEFANGS
Note that there are twelve Runefangs, ten of which are held by the Elector Counts and two by the Imperial armoury.
The usual rule regarding magic items is that only one item of a specific type can be included.
However, in the case of the Runefangs, any Elector Count described below may automatically have one, and any other one character in the army may be given a Runefang as part of his normal magic item allowance.
In effect, Elector Counts carry a Runefang as part of their standard armament.
This has still been costed separately should players wish to play without the Warhammer Battle Magic supplement.
THE EMPEROr KARL FRANZ 110 points  +100 Hammer of Sigmar  +75 The Silver Seal 
Your army may be led by Karl Franz.
If you decide to do this, Karl Franz is the general of your army and therefore replaces the general described in the main army list.
The Emperor Karl Franz is said to be the greatest statesman in the Old World.
He is acclaimed as a patron of arts and science, as a military innovator, and as a valiant warrior.
Thanks to his efforts, the Empire has flourished during his reign.
The Imperial Engineers School has grown, the Colleges of Magic have thrived, and the army has marched from victory to victory.
The Emperor takes personal command of his army whenever possible, and has earned himself an impressive record of victories and conquest.
It was Karl Franz who led the charge of the Reiksguard at the battle of Norduin against the Bretonnians, where the Emperor's personal valour finally broke the resistance of the Bretonnian flank guard and drove them from the narrow defile which they had defiantly held throughout the battle.
The Emperor was then able to quickly take advantage of the Bretonnians' vulnerability by leading the Reiksguard behind the main Bretonnian army and charging into its rear.
The Emperor's armour was made for him by Dwarf smiths and incorporates some of the actual armour worn by Magnus the Pious at the battle of Kislev.
It is richly gilded and splendidly adorned with plumes and silken ribbons.
The Emperor is armed with the Hammer of Sigmar, the weapon given to Sigmar by Kurgan Ironbeard the Dwarf King.
This is amongst the most potent magic weapons ever crafted by the Dwarfs of old, in the days when their power was at its height.
In addition, the Emperor wears an enchanted medallion, the Silver Seal, upon a chain around his neck.
The Silver Seal wards away harmful blows, and even countermands magic spells cast against the Emperor.
It was made for Magnus the Pious by the Warrior Mage Fredrik von Tarnus after the Great War against Chaos.
WEAPONS/ARMOUR : The Emperor wears a suit of heavy armour and carries a sword.
He also carries a number of magic weapons and other items as described below.
MAY RIDE : The Emperor may ride an armoured Warhorse (+7 points including armour), or a Monster (see the separate Monster List for points).
Of all the Monsters available to the Emperor his favoured mount is the Griffon Deathclaw (+150 points).
MAGIC ITEMS : The Emperor may carry three magic items in total and must carry the Hammer of Sigmar (+100 points) and the Silver Seal (+75 points).
Magic cards for both of these weapons are included in the Warhammer Battle Magic game.
The game rules for these items are repeated below for convenience.
The Emperor may carry one further magic item which may be chosen from the magic item cards in Warhammer Battle Magic in the normal way.
THE SILVER SEAL
Any missiles shot at a character bearing the Silver Seal suffer a -1 to hit modifier.
Blows in combat also suffer a -1 on the dice roll to hit.
The Silver Seal also protects the bearer against spells.
If a spell is cast against the bearer or against the unit he is with, then the spell is dispelled on the D6 roll of a 4+.
THE HAMMER OF SIGMAR
A character wielding the Hammer of Sigmar rolls to hit normally.
Any hits scored will automatically wound, there is no need to make the usual strength against toughness roll.
Normal armour cannot protect its bearer against the Hammer of Sigmar, and no armour saves are allowed unless magic armour is worn.
MAGNUS THE PIOUS 210 points 
Your army may be led by Magnus the Pious.
Magnus is the general of your army and therefore replaces the general described in the main army list.
Magnus the Pious is one of the most famous historical figures in the Empire and one of its greatest Emperors.
Magnus was a genius with many wild and frightening ideas, and a fanatical belief in the nationhood of the Empire and the divinity of Sigmar.
His family packed him off to the great University of Nuln where they hoped his energies would be dispersed in academic study.
This proved a vain hope, as the young student soon acquired a following of like-minded people.
They travelled around the Reikland, and soon Magnus's rousing speeches earned him a massive following amongst the common folk of the Empire.
Magnus marched northwards from city to city, addressing the people in the market places, and gathering a huge army about him.
The Elector Counts and Burgomeisters recognised in Magnus a leader they were all prepared to follow, and soon the citizen army was swollen by provincial troops and the troops of the Elector Counts.
By the time the army reached Middenheim it was the largest single army in the history of the Empire and Magnus was forced to divide his host in two as no one place could provide enough food and water to support it.
The first army, consisting mostly of Kislevites and fast-moving mounted troops, marched to Praag in the hope of relieving the siege.
They arrived too late to save Praag but did destroy part of the Chaos army's rearguard.
The second army, led by Magnus himself, marched to Kislev hoping to reprovision at the capital before continuing northwards.
They discovered the city already under attack by the Chaos Hordes and attacked immediately.
In the battle that followed the Chaos Hordes were defeated and Magnus returned home in triumph.
The details that follow describe Magnus during the Great War against Chaos, before he was elected Emperor.
WEAPONS/ARMOUR : Magnus wears a suit of heavy armour with shield and carries a sword.
MAY RIDE : Magnus may ride an armoured Warhorse (+7 points including armour).
He may not ride a Monster.
MAGIC ITEMS : Magnus may not carry magic items — until his election as Emperor Magnus the Pious used no magic weapons or other items.
However, he is protected by Sigmar, the patron deity of the Empire, giving him tremendous powers as explained below.
SPECIAL RULES
Leadership
Magnus the Pious is immune to the effects of psychology and need never take a panic, fear or any other psychology test.
He cannot be broken in hand-to-hand combat and needs never take a break test.
Power of Sigmar
Magnus the Pious is protected by the awesome power of Sigmar guarding over him.
This is reflected by three special rules.
1.
Retake Save.
Magnus the Pious may re-roll any failed armour saving throw once.
2.
Dispel.
Any spell directed against Magnus or the unit he is with is dispelled on the D6 roll of a 4, 5 or 6.
3.
Mighty Blow .
In hand-to-hand combat Magnus may strike a single Mighty Blow instead of his usual hand-to-hand attacks.
Roll to hit as normal, if the blow hits then the target sustains a strength 10 hit.
If wounded the target suffers not 1 wound but D3 wounds (ie 1–2 = 1, 3–4 = 2, and 5–6 =3).
LUDWIG SCHWARZHELM 70 points  +50 points if used as Battle Standard  +50 points Sword of Justice 
Your army may include Ludwig Schwarzhelm, the Emperor's Champion.
If your army does not include a Battle Standard then the Emperor's Standard carried by Ludwig Schwarzhelm may be counted as the army's Battle Standard.
Ludwig Schwarzhelm is the Champion of Karl Franz, a towering figure of a man, renowned throughout the Empire for his mighty physique and stern expression.
He is said to have never smiled in his life.
His role is to uphold the Emperor's justice during trials of combat.
Such trials are a judicial right of high ranking noblemen accused of breaking the Emperor's laws.
Ludwig is also the Emperor's bodyguard and his mere presence has so far proven enough to discourage any attempts on the Emperor's life.
On the battlefield Ludwig carries the personal standard of Karl Franz.
He is armed with the Sword of Justice, an ancient weapon passed down from Champion to Champion through the reigns of successive Emperors.
It is studded with ancient Dwarf runes of vengeance and retribution.
Dwarfs are especially skilled at making runes of this kind.
To date Ludwig Schwarzhelm has never been defeated.
WEAPONS/ARMOUR : Ludwig wears a suit of heavy armour.
He carries the Sword of Justice (see below).
MAY RIDE : Ludwig may ride an armoured Warhorse (+7 points, including armour).
MAGIC ITEMS : Ludwig may carry the Sword of Justice.
The magic card for this weapon is included in Warhammer Battle Magic, and is summarised below for your convenience.
He may not carry any other magic item.
Sword of Justice
The Sword of Justice is encrusted with ancient Dwarf Runes which give it the power of unswerving accuracy and deadly retribution.
Should the wielder attack and fail to score a hit, he may immediately re-roll the attack again, giving him a second chance to hit.
In addition, no mortal armour can withstand a blow from the Sword of Justice — no saving throws are therefore permitted.
Note that this only applies to ordinary armour and not to magic armour which saves normally.
GRAND THEOGONIST VOLKMAR 150 points  +80 points Staff of Command  +75 points Jade Griffon  +35 Horn of Command 
Your army may include the Grand Theogonist of Sigmar, the high priest of the Cult of Sigmar and one of the most powerful leaders in the whole Empire.
In the reign of Karl Franz the Grand Theogonist is Volkmar the Grim.
Volkmar is a zealous preacher utterly devoted to the destruction of Chaos, but he is also a mighty warrior who is not afraid to face the peril of battle.
When the Theogonist accompanies the Empire army into battle he rides on the mobile War Altar of Sigmar, a huge chariot which carries the sacred altar surmounted by a huge statue of a griffon.
The griffon statue was fashioned on the orders of Magnus the Pious after his accession, and is the emblem of his dynasty.
The War Altar is a chariot and the rules described in the Warhammer rulebook for chariots apply.
EQUIPMENT : The Grand Theogonist carries no weapons or armour, but has three magic items.
In addition, the War Altar itself acts as a source of magic power.
The Warhorses which pull the War Altar wear armoured barding.
SPECIAL RULES
SPELLS
The War Altar is a source of raw magic that the Grand Theogonist can draw on by using the Staff of Command, enabling him to cast spells.
The Grand Theogonist is dealt two spells at the start of the game in the same way as a level 2 wizard.
He may choose to be dealt cards from any of the colour decks or the High Magic deck.
The Grand Theogonist is not a wizard — his powers are derived from the War Altar itself.
When magic cards are dealt from the Winds of Magic, the Grand Theogonist is dealt an additional D3+1 cards.
These cards should be kept separate from the player's other cards.
They may only be used by the Theogonist, and are the only magic cards he can use.
The Grand Theogonist's powers are dependent upon the War Altar.
If the War Altar is destroyed of if the Theogonist leaves it he is dealt no magic cards, and will not be able to cast spells.
Psychology : The War Altar exudes raw power which banishes all thought of fear or panic.
So long as the War Altar is intact, the Grand Theogonist is immune to the effects of psychology including fear, panic, terror, etc.
In addition, he cannot be broken in combat, so he will not need to take a break test.
Leadership : The Grand Theogonist fights as an independent model, and may not join other units to lead them.
The Theogonist's leadership value is not therefore used, but has been included for comparative purposes.
THE JADE GRIFFON
The Jade Griffon is a huge piece of carved jade that hangs upon the Grand Theogonist's chest like a piece of armour.
It draws magic power from the War Altar and glows with a green inner light.
If the Grand Theogonist suffers harm the Jade Griffon uses the power of the War Altar to instantly heal him.
Unless the Grand Theogonist is killed outright the Jade Griffon will enable him to sustain wounds which would kill an ordinary man.
The effect of the Jade Griffon is worked out at the end of each shooting phase and at the end of each hand-to-hand combat phase.
If the Grand Theogonist has suffered any wounds but has not been killed then all his wounds are instantly healed.
If the Grand Theogonist is killed outright during shooting, hand-to-hand fighting, or at any other time then the Jade Griffon is powerless to save him.
This means that in order to slay the Grand Theogonist the enemy must inflict the full 3 wounds on him before the end of the next shooting or hand-to-hand combat phase.
THE STAFF OF COMMAND
The Staff of Command is the Grand Theogonist's badge of office and also a mighty weapon of destruction.
It draws magical power from the War Altar and passes it into the Grand Theogonist.
This allows him to cast his spells and also gives him incredible strength.
As long as the War Altar is undamaged the Grand Theogonist may add +2 to his strength.
Should the War Altar be damaged the Grand Theogonist adds +1 to his strength.
If the War Altar is destroyed then the Staff of Command is useless and all bonuses are lost.
THE HORN OF SIGISMUND
The Emperor Sigismund was given this huge enchanted horn by the Dwarfs after the battle of Grimgrill Dale.
After the death of Sigismund during the siege of Altdorf the horn passed into the keeping of the Temple of Sigmar.
It has remained in the temple ever since, and is blown three times on the anniversary of the death of Sigismund as a solemn reminder of the dark days when the Empire was ravaged by Orcs and Altdorf was almost destroyed.
When the War Altar goes to battle the Horn of Sigismund is taken as well.
The Horn may be sounded by the Theogonist as the War Altar charges into combat.
When the War Altar charges into combat (and only when it charges) the sounding of the Horn strikes terror into the charged enemy unit.
Terror is caused on the charged unit exactly as described in the Warhammer rulebook.
Note that this only affects the unit being charged, and not any other enemy units within 8″.
THE SUPREME PATRIARCH OF THE COLLEGES OF MAGIC 290 points  +75 points Staff of Volans 
Your army may include the Supreme Patriarch of the Colleges of Magic.
Every seven years representatives of the eight magical colleges in Altdorf meet to decide which of them will reign as the Supreme Patriarch for the next seven years.
This is an important decision, because the Winds of Magic will blow strongly for the college which supplies the Supreme Patriarch while the other colleges will find their magic dimmed.
The competition to determine the dominant College of Magic takes the form of a violent contest  of magic in which gladiator wizards and their followers battle to defeat their rivals.
In years past this contest was unregulated and often resulted in the destruction of large parts of Altdorf and widespread carnage amongst the civilian population.
Today the contest is held within strict bounds and has become one of the most exotic spectacles in the Imperial calendar.
The current Supreme Patriarch is Thyrus Gormann, Bright Wizard and leader of all the wizards in the Empire.
He attends the Imperial court in Altdorf and is one of Karl Franz's oldest and most trusted nobles.
He carries the Staff of the Patriarchs made for the first Supreme Patriarch Volans by the warrior mage Fredrick von Tarnus after the Great War against Chaos.
WEAPONS/ARMOUR : The Supreme Patriarch carries a sword but wears no armour as this would compromise his magic.
He may also a number of magic weapons and other items as described below.
MAY RIDE : The Supreme Patriarch may ride an armoured Warhorse (+7 points including armour), or a Monster (see the separate Monster List for points).
MAGIC SPELLS : Thyrus Gormann is a level 4 Bright Wizard.
He may cast spells in the normal manner as described in Warhammer Battle Magic.
MAGIC ITEMS : The Supreme Patriarch may carry up to four magic items in total and must carry the Staff of Volans (+75 points).
Other items may be chosen from the magic items in Warhammer Battle Magic in the normal manner.
Rules for the Staff of Volans are given below.
THE STAFF OF VOLANS
The Staff of Volans is a potent aid to magic.
Any spell cast by the bearer of the Staff will automatically work — it cannot be dispelled or nullified in any way either by a magic card or by a magic item.
The Staff of Volans has a limited supply of magic energy.
Roll a dice after each spell is cast.
On the roll of a 1 or 2 the staff has run out of energy and will not work for the remainder of the battle.
REIKSMARSHALL CAPTAIN KURT HELBORG OF THE REIKSGUARD 110 points  +30 Runefang 
Your army may include Reiksmarshall Captain Kurt Helborg as a general in the absence of any other suitable candidate, but he does not have to be a general and can be included as an ordinary character model.
Kurt Helborg is the Captain of the Reiksguard Knights and one of the Emperor Karl Franz's most trusted military commanders.
He is reputed to be the finest swordsman in the Empire.
As Captain of the Reiksguard Knights Helborg is leader of the nation's mostly deadly warrior corps.
He is also the Reiksmarshall of the Empire, commander of all the Empire's forces, second only to the Emperor himself.
As such he has often led the army into battle, and is one of the most experienced generals in the Old World.
WEAPONS/ARMOUR : Kurt Helborg wears a suit of heavy armour and carries a sword.
MAY RIDE : Kurt Helborg may ride an armoured Warhorse (+7 points including armour), or a Monster (see the separate Monster List for points).
MAGIC ITEMS : The Reiksmarshall may carry up to three magic items in total.
This includes one of the Runefangs held in the Imperial armoury.
The card for a Runefang is  included in Warhammer Battle Magic, but the rules for it are repeated below for your convenience.
The remaining two items may be chosen from the cards in Warhammer Battle Magic.
RUNEFANG
A character wielding a Runefang rolls to hit and wound as normal but any wounds he inflicts cannot be saved against, even by magic armour.
Undead struck and wounded by a Runefang suffer two wounds.
BORIS TODBRINGER ELECTOR COUNT OF MIDDENLAND 90 points  +30 points Runefang  +25 points Talisman of Ulric 
Your army may include Boris Todbringer, the Elector Count of Middenland.
Boris is one of the most ferocious warriors in the Empire and the province of Middenland is one of the most powerful and independent of the Imperial states.
He lost his right eye fighting against Chaos warbands in the Drakwald forest.
As the Count of Middenland he is a fervent devotee of the Cult of Ulric whose chief temple is situated in Middenheim.
When Karl Franz was elected Emperor after the death of his father, only Boris Todbringer of Middenland opposed him.
Boris lost the vote despite the support of the High Priest of Ulric, but has since proved to be the most loyal and energetic of Karl Franz's Counts.
WEAPONS/ARMOUR : Boris wears a suit of heavy armour and carries a shield.
He rides an armoured Warhorse.
He is armed with one of the ancient Runefangs made for Sigmar by Alaric the Mad.
MAGIC ITEMS : The Elector Count carries two magic items.
One is a Runefang.
Details of this weapon are included in Warhammer Battle Magic and are repeated below for convenience.
The Elector Count also wears the Talisman of Ulric on a chain around his neck.
This is an ancient heirloom of the Counts of Middenland and offers protection against harm.
Rules for the Talisman of Ulric are given below.
RUNEFANG
A character wielding a Runefang rolls to hit and wound as normal but any wounds he inflicts cannot be saved against, even by magic armour.
Undead struck and wounded by a Runefang suffer two wounds.
THE TALISMAN OF ULRIC
A character wearing the Talisman of Ulric automatically recovers wounds he has suffered at the start of his turn.
Only 1 wound may be recovered each turn, and the character may never have more wounds than he began with.
If the character is slain outright the Talisman has no power to regenerate wounds.
ALDEBRAND LUDENHOF ELECTOR COUNT OF HOCHLAND 90 points  +30 points Runefang 
Although Hochland is not an especially large or important province its count is one of the most valiant leaders in the Empire.
Aldebrand is very tall and thin, but immensely strong and fit, making him a match for larger, heavier opponents in combat.
He has an unquenchable enthusiasm for hunting, and especially for hawking.
His palace lies outside the capital of Hergig, surrounded by prime hunting estates.
He is especially proud of his large collection of hunting birds, which occupies a substantial mews and tends to spill out into the palace itself, so that every room has at least one large bird of prey on its perch.
Even in battle the count carries a hawk upon his arm.
WEAPONS/ARMOUR : Aldebrand wears a suit of heavy armour and rides an armoured Warhorse.
He is armed with one of the ancient Runefangs made by Alaric the Mad for Sigmar.
MAGIC ITEMS : The Elector Count carries a single magic item, one of the ancient swords known as Runefangs.
Details of this weapon are included in Warhammer Battle Magic and are repeated below for convenience.
RUNEFANG
A character wielding a Runefang rolls to hit and wound as normal but any wounds he inflicts cannot be saved against, even by magic armour.
Undead struck and wounded by a Runefang suffer two wounds.
SPECIAL RULES
HAWK
The hawk which Aldebrand carries upon his wrist is trained to swoop at his aggressor and attack them with its beak and claws.
This gives 1 extra attack, worked out immediately prior to hand-to-hand combat regardless of initiative levels or which side charged.
The hawk attacks with a strength of 3.
The hawk cannot be slain itself, but is killed if Aldebrand is killed.
VALMIR VON RAUKOV ELECTOR COUNT OF OSTLAND 90 points  +30 points Runefang  +40 points Dragon Bow 
The Elector Counts of Ostland live on the north eastern border of the Empire beyond which lie the wild and dangerous Troll Country and the Northern Wastes.
It has always been a poor region where the constant threat of danger breeds a hardy race of people.
The Elector Count of Ostland is Valmir von Raukov.
Like his father before  him, he has spent a lifetime fighting against Chaos warbands, raiding Norse, and marauding Orcs, not to mention the occasional forays of bandits from Kislev.
Even his own realm is not wholly safe, for the forests and mountains are full of renegades and Beastmen, Trolls, Giants and countless other foes.
Valmir von Raukov is a tough warlord whose constant vigil has protected the northern borders of the Empire for many years.
WEAPONS/ARMOUR : Valmir wears a suit of heavy armour and rides an armoured Warhorse.
He is armed with one of the ancient Runefangs made by Alaric the Mad.
He also carries a magic bow, as described below.
MAGIC ITEMS : The Count of Ostland carries two magic items.
One of these is the Runefang carried by all Elector Counts, and the other is the Dragon Bow of Ostland, a magic bow whose arrows are tipped with dragon horn.
Details of the Runefang are included in Warhammer Battle Magic and are repeated below for convenience.
Rules for the Dragon Bow are also given below.
RUNEFANG
A character wielding a Runefang rolls to hit and wound as normal but any wounds he inflicts cannot be saved against, even by magic armour.
Undead struck and wounded by a Runefang suffer two wounds.
DRAGON BOW
The Dragon Bow of Ostland is  inscribed with mighty runes which confer tremendous strength to its user.
Its arrows are tipped with dragon horn and guided by magic to the heart of their target.
The bow has a range of 36″ and a strength of 5.
The bow may be fired three times in the shooting phase, but it must be fired at the same target (be this a unit of troops, a monster, or whatever).
MARIUS LEITDORF elector COUNT OF AVERLAND 110 points  +30 points Runefang 
Marius Leitdorf is known as the Mad Lord of Averland.
He is sullen and morose, and given to bouts of screaming rage during which no one can reason with him.
At other times he suffers periods of deep depression when he locks himself away and will speak to no-one for weeks.
His intense and unpredictable moods have earned him many enemies throughout the Empire.
He is no longer welcome at the courts of any other Elector Counts nor at Altdorf.
Marius's taste for fine silks, velvet, and exquisitely fashioned clothing is legendary and leads some to class him (quite wrongly) as an ineffective fop.
He is commonly said to be mad, and may indeed be so, but his unreasoning rage is backed up by a keen and artistic mind.
Swordsman, poet, painter, engineer and inventor, he excels in all of these skills and more.
His swordsmanship is unequalled except perhaps by the Reiksmarshall Kurt Helborg — a match that has never been put to the test despite years of enmity between the two.
Marius fights with two blades, the Runefang in one hand and a long-bladed dagger in the other, a mode of warfare he has mastered better than anyone.
WEAPONS/ARMOUR : Marius wears a suit of heavy armour and rides an armoured Warhorse.
He is armed with one of the ancient Runefangs made by Alaric the Mad for Sigmar, and with a long dagger.
This gives him an additional +1 attack in close combat.
MAGIC ITEMS : The Mad Lord of Averland carries one magic item, one of the ancient swords known as the Runefangs.
Details of this weapon are included in Warhammer Battle Magic and are repeated below for convenience.
RUNEFANG
A character wielding a Runefang rolls to hit and wound as normal but any wounds he inflicts cannot be saved against, even by magic armour.
Undead struck and wounded by a Runefang suffer two wounds.
SPECIAL RULES
FRENZY
Marius is an unstable but extremely powerful character who is prone to fits of rage.
He is affected by the rules for frenzy as described in the Warhammer rulebook.
When frenzied he therefore has 6 attacks rather than 3, plus 1 extra attack from his dagger making a total of 7.
TZARINA KATARIN THE ICE QUEEN OF KISLEV 200 points  +100 points Fearfrost 
The Empire army may include the Tzarina if it also includes at least one unit of Kislev troops.
The people of Kislev moved into the Old World from the areas east of the Worlds Edge Mountains and founded the kingdom which lies on the north eastern borders of the Empire.
Its rulers are mighty warrior-sorcerers, practitioners of a brand of magic which is quite unlike that of the Wizards of the Colleges of Magic.
This magic draws its powers from the land, and is concerned with the manipulation of chill, frost, and biting winds.
The Tzarina Katarin is the current ruler of her warlike race, having succeeded to the throne on the death of her father the Tzar Bokha.
She is the most powerful magician ever to wear the crown of Kislev, and her aloof majesty and inscrutable disposition has caused many to refer to her as the Ice Queen of Kislev.
WEAPONS/ARMOUR : The Tzarina carries the magical weapon Fearfrost, and rides a Warhorse.
MAGIC ITEMS : The Tzarina may carry up to three magic items including the magic sword Fearfrost.
Other magic items may be chosen from the cards in Warhammer Battle Magic as usual.
Fearfrost
Fearfrost was forged by the ancient khan-queen Miska of the Gospodars in the ancient days when the tribes of Kislev first journeyed to the west.
Miska led her hordes deep into the Empire itself, defeating two Empire armies and causing considerable destruction before an alliance of the Empire, Bretonnia and Dwarfs finally threw back the Kislev hordes.
Since those times the Tzar of Kislev and the Emperor have forged a common alliance against the threat of Chaos.
The blade Fearfrost is the heirloom of the Tzarinas of Kislev.
Only a Tzarina can wield it and if any man were even to touch the blade he would be instantly frozen to death.
The intense cold radiating from the weapon will slay anyone it cuts.
If the Tzarina scores a successful wound with this weapon the victim automatically suffers a further D6 wounds.
Normal armour is ineffective against the magic of Fearfrost, so only foes wearing magic armour get a saving throw.
MAGIC SPELLS
The Tzarina is a level 3 Wizard (a Master Wizard).
She has three spells dealt to her at the start of the battle in the usual way as described in Warhammer Battle Magic.
The Tzarina does not use the colour magic spells or any of the spell decks in Warhammer Battle Magic.
Instead she has her own Ice Magic spell deck which is reproduced here.
You may wish to photocopy these spells to make up an Ice Magic spell deck.
The winters of Kislev are savage, merciless and cruelly and long.
When the land lies under the grip of the ice an ancient primaeval force stirs in the heart of the nation.
It is a strange magical power, the power of frost and chill, of ice that holds the rivers in its thrall, and cold that snaps branches and tumbles trees to the ground.
In ages past the Khan-queens of the Gospodars learned how to draw upon the icy magic to weave their spells of frozen destruction.
It is a power that seeps out of the earth itself, a distillation of the magical energy that flows over the world and settles into the soil and rocks from where it is driven by the harsh cold of winter.
When the spring returns to the north the power of the Ice Mages of Kislev wanes, and they are at their weakest at mid summer before it grows again with the coming of winter.
Of all the Ice Mages, the greatest is the Ice Queen of Kislev, Tzarina Katarin, daughter of the Tzar Bokha, and bearer of the ancient blade Fearfrost.
She is so suffused with magic that even her flesh is cold and pale, and her limbs are long and lean like icicles.
Her hair glistens with frost, and ice crystals sparkle on her lofty crown.
POWER 1
FREEZE WATER
This spell may be used to freeze over an entire body of water anywhere on the battlefield, for example an entire river, a marsh, or a lake.
A frozen river, marsh, lake etc, may be moved over at normal rate.
Once frozen a body of water remains frozen for the rest of the game — the spell does not remain in play and may be cast again at a different body of water.
A Dispel card, other dispel, or even a drain magic, will not unfreeze water once it has been frozen, but any of the following Bright Magic spells will automatically unfreeze water if they are cast upon it: Piercing Bolts of Burning, the Burning Head, Conflagration of Doom, Fireball, Blast and Flamestorm.
POWER 2
BRIDGE OF ICE
This spell enables the caster to transport a friendly or an enemy unit or a single model up to 18″ across the table in any direction.
Affected troops are swept up upon a heaving bridge of ice and carried rapidly to their new location.
Troops may be moved over intervening models, buildings, terrain and any other obstacles or scenery.
Troops may be moved onto a castle wall, rocky pinnacle or other elevation including a Spiral Stair.
The Bridge of Ice may be used to move friendly troops into hand-to-hand combat, in which case they may fight from the following combat round and count as charging in the first round.
POWER 3
DEATH FROST
This spell may be cast against any one opponent in hand-to-hand combat with the caster.
Parts of the opponent are frozen solid and turn into ice, causing terrible wounds or killing him outright.
To determine the damage caused roll 2D6.
The difference in dice scores indicates the number of S 10 hits inflicted.
If you roll a double then add the dice together to determine the number of S 10 hits.
Work out wounds and saving throws for each hit as normal.
POWER 1 RANGE 18″
HAWKS OF MISKA
This spell may be cast against any unit or single model within 18″.
From out of the air about the target suddenly appear a flock of hawks fashioned from ice.
They wheel about the sky, fading and crystallizing out of the air to the horror of their victims, striking fear into their hearts with their piercing cries.
The unit must take a fear test immediately just as if it had been charged by an enemy that caused fear .
If this test is failed the unit must flee.
If engaged in hand-to-hand fighting the unit will break if it fails the test and may be pursued just as if it had been broken in hand-to-hand combat.
Units not subject to fear cannot be affected by this spell.
POWER 3 RANGE 24″
CHILL BLAST
An icy blast erupts from the caster and strikes the first unit in its path and within its range of 24″.
The target unit is chilled to the bone, causing limbs to snap and weapons to break.
The Chill Blast inflicts 2D6 S 5 hits and no saving throws are allowed for armour.
POWER 1
SHIELD OF COLD
The caster may cast this spell onto himself.
It will surround the caster and any unit they are with with a shield of intense coldness.
Any missile weapon must roll a 4, 5 or 6 on a D6 to penetrate the Shield of Cold.
Roll to penetrate the Shield of Cold, and then roll again for hits with any penetrating shots.
Roll for each shot separately.
The Shield of Cold is automatically dispelled if the wizard or unit he is with enters hand-to-hand combat, but otherwise remains in play for the remainder of the battle or until it is dispelled.
This card may be placed face up at the table edge or with the unit to indicate that it is affected.
The Shield of Cold does not protect against magical attacks of any kind but only against ordinary missile weapons.
It does protect against shots from war machines.
POWER 2 RANGE 18″
ICE SHARDS
Sharp icicles fly out from the caster's hand and strike the first unit or model in their path.
The Ice Shards cause 2D6 S 4 hits on their target.
Armour saving throws apply as normal.
POWER 2 RANGE 18″
SNOW BLIZZARD
A raging snow blizzard envelops a unit within 18″, and the driving ice-laden winds bring the unit to a halt.
The target may do nothing until the beginning of the following magic phase, regardless of which side's turn it is next.
It may not move, shoot missiles or fight in hand-to-hand combat, and no wizard with the unit may cast further spells.
Although a wizard affected by this spell may not cast spells, he may continue to use Dispel cards from the Winds of Magic.
If the target is engaged in hand-to-hand combat the spell will also affect all troops which are fighting against it.
POWER 2
CRYSTAL CLOAK
A swirl of ice and snow enfolds the caster in a cloud of shimmering light.
Any hit scored against the caster by an ordinary weapon is deflected on the D6 roll of a 3 or more.
If hit by a magic weapon, the Crystal Cloak is immediately dispelled but no damage is suffered from that hit and the magic weapon which inflicted the hit will be destroyed on the D6 roll of a 3 or more.
This spell remains effective for the rest of the game, until it is dispelled, or until the caster is slain.
This card may be placed next to the model or face up at the table edge to indicate that it is in play.
POWER 3 RANGE 6D6″
WIND OF COLD
A howling wind of cold shoots 6D6″ from the caster and strikes each target in its path.
The biting winds are laden with icy and freezing rain, making it impossible for the target to fight or move.
Any units or individual models struck by the blast will suffer D6 S 5 hits with no saving throw allowed for armour.