

Prologue
Dawn came up like a warning.
Bob Newman, foreign correspondent, frowned as he drove his Mercedes 280E across the loneliness of Suffolk in February.
Ploughed dark soil, crusted with frost, hemmed in the deserted road on either side.
The weird light of dawn intensified his anxiety as his headlights now provided uncertain illumination.
What was it his girl friend, Sandy Riverton, had said when she called him in the middle of the night?
‘Bob, can we meet urgently?
At the old church near Yoxford where we first met?’
He could have sworn her teeth were chattering with fear.
‘Of course we can.’
Stretched out in bed, he had suppressed a yawn.
‘But why there?
Is something wrong?’
‘I can't explain over the phone.
You will come?
I've something I must tell you, something I should have told you before.
It will help your investigation into INCUBUS.
I must go.
Can you make it there just after dawn?
So no one will see us?’
‘Sandy, what is this all about?
Why that remote place — at that remote hour, for God's sake?’
‘I can't linger.
Do come, Bob.
Please.
I must go now.
I will see you there?’
‘Yes…’
He had woken up.
‘Where are you calling from?’
‘Tell you when we meet.
‘Bye…’
She had rung off before he could say another word.
He  had jumped out of bed, washed, shaved, dressed very quickly.
A correspondent learned to do that, even if he no longer needed to practise his profession — the best-selling book he had written years ago had given blessed financial independence.
There were no villages, no farms in sight as he slowed down, afraid that he might drive past the narrow track leading to the abandoned church and its separate bell tower.
He had the heaters full on: it was a raw morning with a bitter wind blowing from the east, from the distant North Sea.
Not even a hamlet along this stretch of the road, he recalled.
‘Near Yoxford’ was an over-simplification of the position of the old church.
It was in the middle of nowhere.
So why would Sandy choose such a desolate rendezvous — at such a desolate hour?
Because she was frightened, he thought grimly.
The cold bleak light was growing in the cloudless sky.
Over to his left he caught a glimpse of a Georgian mansion huddled a quarter-mile off the main road.
A deep central window was arched at the top.
More Queen Anne than Georgian.
And a curious coincidence — Livingstone Manor was the English country home of Franklin D. Hauser, President and Chief Executive of INCUBUS Inc., the giant American organization Sandy had worked for until recently.
He recalled another phone conversation with Sandy three weeks earlier.
She had resigned from INCUBUS.
No real reason given.
When Newman had pressed her she had become vague.
‘I just felt I was doing the same old thing, week after week, month after month.
Time for a change, I suppose…’
She had left London without seeing Newman, telling him in a letter she was staying at her sister's place in Southwold further up the Suffolk coast.
So why this  mysterious meeting close to Hauser's lair?
Newman spotted the track leading off to the right and swung away from the main road.
This was an area of sloping fields and the track mounted a gradual incline.
The daylight was strong enough now for him to see the tower of the ancient stone church silhouetted against the horizon, perched on a ridge.
The bell tower came into view, a square slim block of stone separated from the church by a dozen yards.
He found his anxiety growing.
He had realized in January how very fond of Sandy he was, that he'd reached the stage where he might well ask her to marry him.
She was so very different from his first wife, foully murdered during the old Cold War years in Estonia on the Baltic.
He increased speed, impatient to reach his destination.
The ton and a half of car rocked, driving over the ice-hardened ruts carved out by farm tractors in kinder weather.
He glanced automatically in his rear-view mirror, catching a glimpse of himself.
In his forties, his hair was fair, he was dean-shaven and with a strong face.
Normally his expression was droll, with a hint of humour about the mouth and eyes.
Bob Newman was a man generally liked by both men and women.
He breathed a sigh of relief as he bumped over the crest.
Sandy's red Jaguar was parked behind a dense hedge, the twigs so close together they formed a visual barrier from a distance.
Parking his Mercedes alongside the Jaguar, he got out.
His hand touched the Jag's radiator.
Anxiety flooded back.
The radiator was cold.
She must have been waiting for some time.
Where?
The only shelter he could see was the church, but it would be like an ice box inside.
Slipping on his gloves, he saw out of the corner of his eye the sun rising above a belt of dark blue.
The sea.
A much smaller flash of light caught his attention.
From the large arched window at Livingstone Manor.
The sun was reflecting off the window.
In which case the reflection should still be there.
It had vanished.
Reaching into his car he hauled out the powerful pair of binoculars he always carried.
Of medium height and build, he crouched behind the car, perched elbows on the roof, focused the binoculars.
The window at Livingstone Manor came up close.
A silhouette showed behind the net curtains, a silhouette aiming a pair of field glasses.
Probably an early-rising servant wondering who could be visiting the church at this hour.
He laid the binoculars back on the passenger seat, turned to face the church.
To reach the ancient Norman edifice with its pointed windows he had to pass through the bell tower, open to the world at both ends.
Beyond, a curving path led uphill between gravestones to the church entrance.
He turned up his coat collar, walked forward.
Both tower and church were sadly in need of repair.
Doubtless at the time of the wool barons the church had a full congregation, but the economic tide had long ago receded from this part of the world.
He walked inside the bell tower.
Afterwards he was haunted by the sound his footsteps had made in the brooding post-dawn silence, the crunch and crackle of his shoes breaking ice.
In one corner of the tower lay the bell which had fallen at some time in the past.
During the great storm, the locals said.
He was walking out of the tower when he glanced up, stopped, froze as he stared at the horror above his head.
Sandy was suspended by a rope attached to an old beam next to the ladder leading to the tower.
The rope was knotted round her neck which hung sideways at a bizarre angle.
Her lifeless eyes stared down at him, her tongue protruded from her mouth.
Her neck was broken.
Her  long gold hair hung down her back over her red windcheater.
Her long legs were clad in denims.
She looked like some grotesque statue in a pagan ritual.
Newman choked, grunted, then forced himself to move.
He climbed the ladder, testing each rung carefully.
Two of the rungs had been replaced by fresh wood.
He stood near the top, alongside her corpse.
Reaching out he gently touched her pallid face.
The skin was cold, felt like wax.
The rope from which she hung was old.
It was exactly like the remnant attached to the bell.
He began talking out aloud, to himself.
‘No.
It's not possible.
This is a mad dream.
I don't believe it.
I'm home in bed at my South Ken flat…
This is a crazy nightmare…’
But he knew it was true.
A part of his trained reporter's mind began to function, to observe.
Could she have committed suicide?
No.
Why?
Because she hated heights — she suffered from vertigo.
He looked down at the yawning drop below.
No!
He hated leaving her there but he descended the ladder because there was nothing else he could do.
The odd thing was his first thought was her husband, Ed, must be told — Ed whom she was on the verge of divorcing.
He must know.
Ed Riverton was a top executive in INCUBUS, the great American banking syndicate which was spreading its tentacles across Europe, investing in just about every type of company which existed.
That was how Newman had met Sandy.
Travelling to Finland, he had interviewed Riverton in Helsinki.
It had been a strange conversation: Riverton was nervous, evasive.
Due to the fact that his marriage had been heading for the rocks?
No, Newman had detected something he couldn't account for.
His mind returned to the dreadful present.
Before he left the bell tower his eyes were drawn upwards.
The view  was hideous.
She was swinging slowly from side to side, like a pendulum.
Had he disturbed her rigid stance by touching her?
Or was it the east wind blowing in through the open bell tower with renewed force?
What the hell did it matter?
He had an awful premonition he would always remember her like this — that he'd never recall her cheerful buoyancy, her glowing smile when she had teased him.
Yes, he'd always have this ghastly image imprinted on his mind — a grossly obscene caricature of the real Sandy.
He stumbled near the exit from the tower, recovered his balance.
His mind was working on two levels.
There was grief and shock, but another part of his brain was functioning — the reporter's.
He forced himself to stare upwards again.
Above the beam round which the rope was tied was a platform where the top of the ladder rested.
Carved in the platform was the hole through which the bell-rope had once hung.
He calculated it was not possible for Sandy, kneeling on that platform, to reach down to the beam, impossible for her to have attached the rope from that perch.
She stood —hung — five feet four inches high.
Too short to have killed herself.
Part One, Profiles of Death
1
‘Why — thank heaven — didn't you resign as you said you would?’
Monica asked Tweed the question while they waited for Newman to arrive.
Tweed, Deputy Director of the SIS, stared out of the window of his first floor office at Park Crescent, London HQ of the Secret Service.
‘Porridge-grey — and damn cold,’ he commented on the weather.
Monica, middle-aged, her grey hair tied in a bun, his personal assistant for many years, leaned forward over her desk and studied Tweed.
Of medium height and build, indeterminate age, he wore horn-rim glasses and was the man you passed in the street without noticing him.
It was an impression which had often served him well.
Clean shaven, his hair was still dark and behind the lenses his eyes were alert and penetrating.
‘You haven't answered my question,’ she prodded him.
‘After seeing the PM you took a long leave and then came back.
So what happened.’
‘She wore me down,’ Tweed admitted.
‘When I did get back she had a very strange and dangerous problem which she dumped in my lap, assured me I was the only man she could trust to handle it.
We talked for two hours and,’ he threw out both hands in a gesture of surrender, ‘at the end of it she, yes, wore me down.’
His manner changed, became brisk.
He walked behind his own desk, settled himself in his ancient swivel chair.
‘I wonder what's worrying Bob Newman?
When he phoned, asked if he  could come and see me, he sounded edgy and shaken.
Not like him.
Wouldn't give me a hint over the phone.’
‘Well, we'll soon know.
He's due any second.
And what is the strange and dangerous problem?’
‘INCUBUS is part of it.
The International Continental Union Bank, US — United States.
I do wish the Americans hadn't this love of trainloads of initial letters to designate an organization.
You've heard of Franklin D. Hauser, President and Chief Executive?
Who hasn't?
They say he's as powerful as the President in Washington.
An exaggeration, of course.
It's the people he's employing who are worrying both Washington and Moscow.
I can't go into details, but it's a curious situation.’
‘Curious?’
Tweed paused.
‘Can't tell you much.
But I've been asked by the PM to co-operate with a special operative of the CIA.
And an unknown member of the KGB.
Now that I call curious.’
He gazed towards the window as the phone rang.
Monica took the call, said to send him up right away, put down the receiver, looked at Tweed.
‘Bob Newman has arrived.
You did want to see him…’
‘Yes.
I'm curious about Bob, too…’
He broke off as Newman entered, closed the door, nodded to Monica and slumped into the chair in front of Tweed's desk.
‘What on earth is wrong, Bob?’
Tweed was startled by Newman's appearance.
Normally he was relaxed and had an easy-going manner.
Now he looked haggard, grim faced.
‘You look as though you haven't slept,’ Tweed remarked.
‘I haven't — not a lot.
I was woken in the middle of the night by a phone call…’
Tersely, he recalled his experiences of the past few hours.
He went on to explain his interview with the police as Monica slipped out to make him some coffee.
‘They had a Scotland Yard man at Southwold Police Station.
From Homicide.
He just happened to be there after solving another case.
All the senior police officers were down with flu — so the Chief Constable asked for his aid.
A Chief Inspector Roy Buchanan.
Very intelligent, very persistent.
In his quiet way he really grilled me about Sandy.’
‘I once met Buchanan,’ Tweed said quietly.
‘I agree with your description.
A highly competent, dogged type…’
‘Dogged is the word.’
Newman paused as though unsure how to phrase his next words, then burst out: ‘Buchanan thinks I murdered Sandy.’
Tweed waited, saying nothing, tapping a pencil as he watched Newman while the reporter drank black coffee from the large mug Monica had brought him.
He drank the steaming liquid in gulps.
‘Buchanan said that to you?’
Tweed asked eventually.
‘Not in so many words.
But he made the point there were no signs that Sandy had struggled for her life, that she must have trusted her murderer.
That thought had occurred to me before I was hauled off to Southwold police station for the interrogation.
I could tell what he was thinking from the way he questioned me.
Flicks at you verbally with a rapier.’
‘Sounds like Buchanan.’
Tweed stared at Newman.
He had shaved, but it was a rough job: a piece of sticking plaster at the side of his face showed where he had cut himself.
‘I see you cut yourself shaving?’
Newman's eyes blazed.
‘Exactly the same question Buchanan asked me.
He even suggested maybe I'd like to show him the cut.
I ripped off the plaster.
I suppose he hopes the pathologist who butchers her will find skin tissue under her nails.
Mine.’
‘Drink some more coffee,’ Tweed advised.
‘I have to make a call to Helsinki,’ Newman snapped.
‘Sandy was divorcing her husband, Ed.
But the least I can do is to call him, let him know.’
‘The phone is all yours.’
Tweed leant back in his chair, glanced at Monica while Newman checked his notebook, dialled a Helsinki number, waited and then stared at Tweed.
‘It would help my concentration if you could stop tapping that blasted pencil.’
Tweed, still unruffled, nodded, placed the pencil on his desk, took out a handkerchief and began polishing his glasses.
Newman gripped the phone tightly, listening to the ringing tone.
Would they never answer the bloody thing?
A girl's voice came on the line, repeated the number in English.
‘I need to speak to Edward Riverton urgently.
I'm calling his home because he told me he was rarely in his office.’
‘Who is this speaking?’
A tremble in the girl's voice.
‘Sorry, this is Bob Newman.
I interviewed Mr Riverton in Helsinki a few weeks ago…’
Newman had a grip on himself now.
His voice was perfectly normal, Tweed noted.
‘Oh, God, Mr Newman,’ the girl exploded.
‘This is Evelyn, his sister-in-law.
You know Sandy, I believe.
She was talking about you on the phone recently.
I've just had terrible news and I can't reach Sandy.
Her phone rings in Southwold but no one answers.’
‘Slow down, Evelyn.’
Newman's tone was soothing, controlled.
‘I remember you well.
Especially that marvellous dinner you cooked.
Gravad lax .
Some of the best salmon I've ever tasted.
Now, tell me the news.’
‘It's unbelievable.
They dragged Ed out of the North Harbour just after daylight twenty-four hours ago.
I was at the Turku office and there was some delay in telling me…
We only get four hours’ daylight in winter…
It's horribly  cold.
The harbour is packed solid with ice…’
She was babbling, on the verge of hysteria, even a nervous breakdown.
Newman spoke slowly.
‘Just take your time telling me.
I'm a good listener.
How did it happen?’
‘The icebreaker Otso was clearing a passage for ships through the ice.
One of the crew spotted Ed's body wedged inside a crevasse.
They saw him just in time before the icebreaker crushed…’
Her voice broke.
Newman waited, heard her take in a deep breath.
‘They took him to the mortuary and called me.’
‘Who is ‘they’, Evelyn?
Give me the facts.’
‘The Protection Police arrived and took him off the Otso.
A man called Mauno Sarin phoned me.
I knew there was something wrong from his voice.
Can I get a drink of water?’
‘I'll hold on.’
Newman looked at Tweed, sitting erect in his chair, while he held the phone to his ear, his other hand over the mouthpiece.
‘There's the devil to pay about this business.
Tell you in a minute…
Yes, Evelyn, I'm still here.
You said you could tell something was wrong from his voice.
That was before he told you the news?’
‘No, afterwards…’
She's gone over the edge, Newman thought.
He cleared his throat.
‘Just tell me what happened next.’
‘I insisted on knowing everything.
Sarin didn't want to tell me, then he said I'd know soon enough, and better from him than over the radio.
Ed didn't slip into the harbour.
For God's sake, Bob — he had been garrotted.’
Her voice rose in pitch.
‘With some kind of wire.
The head was almost severed from the neck.
Oh, God, Bob, how am I going to tell Sandy that?’
‘Take another drink of water, a good big one, then we'll talk some more.’
Newman was ice cold in an emergency.
How could he handle this?
Tell Sandy's sister she was dead, hung by a rope inside an ancient bell tower?
Horror piled on horror.
But something was even more wrong than Sarin had realized.
In the course of about twenty-four hours Ed Riverton had been brutally exterminated in Finland — and his wife had been eliminated with equal brutality in East Anglia, over a thousand miles away.
He swallowed the rest of the coffee, managed to grin at Monica, then Evelyn was back on the line.
‘I know you and Sandy are —’ She broke off.
‘Yes,’ Newman replied in a monotone.
‘I know I'm being a coward about this…should tell Sandy myself…’
Babbling again.
‘But I can't bring myself to do it now.
Bob, could you possibly tell her yourself?’
Newman paused.
Beads of moisture were forming on his forehead.
Tweed was watching him closely, pencil gripped in his hand but motionless.
How the hell can I tell her after what she's just been through, Newman asked himself.
But someone had to.
‘Evelyn, are you sitting down?
With a full glass of water?’
‘A jugful.
Bob, what is it?
I can tell from your tone something else is terribly wrong.
Bob…’
A deep intake of breath he clearly heard over a thousand miles away.
‘Bob,’ she repeated, ‘I've got a grip on myself — and I am sitting down.
Just tell me.’
Calmer now, self-controlled.
Temporarily.
‘I've just had a similar shock, Evelyn.
It's going to be a lot grimmer for you — on top of what you've just told me.
And it is about Sandy.
Like Ed, she's dead.
It happened in the early hours of this morning.‘
‘I see.’
Very controlled, too controlled, her voice dull.
‘How did it happen, Bob?
Car accident?’
‘No.
I said like Ed.’
He paused, she burst out.
‘Oh, my God! -Not garrotted.
Please, not that…’
‘I phrased it badly.
I mean like Ed she had been murdered.
Want some more water?’
‘No!
No!
How did she die?
Tell me, damn you!
I'm flying straight home.
I'll just phone INCUBUS and say I'm leaving them…
I had a job with them —have a job at the moment…
Not in the same department as Ed…’
‘Don't phone INCUBUS,’ he warned.
‘Just catch the first flight home.
You have the phone number of my apartment in South Ken?
Good.
Phone details of your flight number and ETA.
If I'm not there leave a message on the answerphone.
Use a different name.
Identify yourself as Jackie.
OK?’
‘How did Sandy die?
You said she was murdered…’
‘The details can wait till we meet.
Don't forget to phone me that flight data.’
‘Bob, I must go.’
Suddenly there was a note of urgency in her voice.
It alarmed Newman.
‘I've got to get out of this place.
While we were talking I was checking a time-table.
I can just catch a flight if I rush.
Have to pack.
Must go now.’
‘Evelyn…’
Newman slowly put down the receiver.
She had broken the connection.
There had been a note dose to panic in her voice.
As though she had seen something which disturbed her from the window of the apartment.
He remembered — the phone was perched on a window ledge in Riverton's Helsinki pad.
He lit a cigarette, took a long drag.
Tweed waited patiently.
‘It's incredible — and sinister,’ Newman began.
He relayed to Tweed and Monica the gist of his conversation.
Nothing in Tweed's expression betrayed his reaction as Newman concluded.
‘Incredible,’ he repeated.
‘Two murders which took place within about twenty-four hours.
One in Suffolk, one in Finland.
The victims were man and wife.
I know Sandy  was estranged from Ed, was thinking of divorcing him, but…’
‘Were they still on speaking terms?’
Tweed asked.
‘Is there a chance Ed phoned Sandy and told her something important — something so important someone thought it was dangerous that she went on living?’
‘Shouldn't have thought so.’
Newman threw out a hand in a helpless gesture.
‘Not impossible though.
I really don't know.’
He sounded at the end of his tether, all the adrenalin summoned up for his phone call now evaporated.
‘And yet there's a common link,’ Tweed pointed out.
‘All three were working for INCUBUS — or had been until recently.
Ed, Sandy — and Evelyn ,’ he added.
Newman jerked upright, stared at Tweed, the picture of anxiety.
‘So you think I was right?’
‘Right about what?’
‘To warn her not to tell INCUBUS she was leaving them?’
‘There could just be an element of risk involved for her.
Why, I have no idea, but the coincidence is very strange.’
Tweed was doodling on his notepad as he spoke.
He found he had drawn a noose, remembered how Sandy Riverton had died inside the old bell tower, scribbled it out before Newman could see it.
‘What do you propose to do about it?’ he enquired.
‘Step up my investigation into the activities of INCUBUS and its chief, Hauser, in Europe.
Incidentally, Hauser has his British residence in an old Georgian mansion not two miles from that bell tower.’
He stifled a yawn.
‘Checking into that organization may take months.
I've decided to fly to New York — main HQ of INCUBUS, then on to Boston where they have another top secret outfit.
Meantime I'm going back to my apartment to get some much needed kip, then I'll meet Evelyn at  Heathrow.
She might just be the key to what I'm looking for…’
‘Robert Newman is our only lead in our enquiries concerning the murder of Sandra Riverton.’
Chief Inspector Roy Buchanan made the statement to Tweed in the Park Crescent office.
His tone was non-committal, gave no indication as to his own suspicions.
Six feet tall, in his forties, his manner was detached, his grey eyes watchful.
He sat in the armchair recently occupied by Newman, his long legs crossed.
‘What brought you to my doorstep?’
Tweed asked amiably.
Monica watched the two men, fascinated.
Under the surface of an everyday conversation a duel of two astute minds was taking place.
Buchanan had balanced the cup of coffee Monica had provided on his crossed knees.
He drank a little coffee before replying.
Seated in a hard-backed chair, Buchanan's assistant, Sergeant Warden, several years younger than his chief, watched in silence, his dean-shaven face devoid of all expression.
Tweed had earlier asked him to pocket his notebook.
‘You don't take notes here unless I request it,’ he had informed Buchanan in an amiable tone.
‘I had Newman followed here from Southwold,’ Buchanan replied eventually.
‘He said he was going back to his flat in South Kensington.
I suppose it was discretion that led him to omit he was visiting General & Cumbria Assurance.’
A brief smile crossed his face as he repeated the cover name for the SIS engraved on the plate outside the entrance.
And normally, Tweed thought, you'd never have got away with that.
It confirmed the state of shock Newman was in — combined with no sleep.
‘So, now you're here, how can I help you?’
Tweed enquired.
‘The Sandra Riverton murder has a macabre element.’
Buchanan paused, hands inside his trouser pockets, very relaxed.
‘I don't know whether Newman told you — the victim was hung from a rope inside an old bell tower.
It suggests to me either an act of personal revenge or, alternatively, a demonstration to encourage the others, as the French say.’
‘Really?’
Tweed sounded only half interested.
‘And who might be the others?’
‘I wish I knew — always assuming that is the case.’
A second pause.
Tweed began to think the pauses were a Buchanan tactic — to emphasize what he said next.
‘Newman did inform me that Riverton had recently been employed by the INCUBUS organization.
They seem to be buying up half Europe…’
The observation seemed irrelevant, but Tweed doubted whether the man from the Yard ever said anything without a purpose.
He kept silent, forcing Buchanan to continue.
‘An odd coincidence is the fact that Franklin D. Hauser, chief executive of INCUBUS, has his English home in a mansion not two miles from that bell tower.’
‘Probably just a coincidence,’ Tweed remarked, ‘as you suggested.’
‘I paid a call at Livingstone Manor, Hauser's place.
A butler, very English, the old school, told me Hauser was abroad.
He showed great reluctance to reveal his whereabouts.’
‘So you left without finding out?’
Tweed's expression was so innocent Monica put up a hand to hide her smile.
‘No.’
Buchanan finished his coffee, twisted round to hand the cup and saucer to Monica.
‘I enjoyed that coffee.
Thank you.’
He turned back to Tweed.
‘I told him this was a murder investigation, that I'd adopt other  methods to trace his employer.
That remark unsettled Jeeves.
He then remembered Hauser was in Finland.’
‘You didn't tell him that you have been asked to investigate INCUBUS.
Never gave him the slightest hint.’
Monica made her comment to Tweed when Buchanan and Warden had left after a few more minutes' conversation.
Paula Grey, a raven haired girl in her early thirties with strong bone structure, had just entered the office.
She sat at her desk, crossed her shapely legs, rested her hands in her lap and listened.
Tweed's close confidante, she often worked with him in the field.
‘No, Monica, I didn't.’
Tweed clasped his hands behind his neck.
‘That's SIS business.
Buchanan is clever.
He was here on a fishing trip — trying to find out if Newman had told me something that might help his own investigations.’
‘But Bob did just that.
He told us that Ed Riverton, who had a top job with INCUBUS, was dragged out of Helsinki harbour,’ she shuddered, ‘after he had been garrotted.’
‘In case everyone has forgotten, I'm still here,’ Paula interjected.
‘All this sounds a bit grim.
Care to bring me up to date, anyone?’
Tweed swivelled to face her, gave a concise résumé of what had happened, including his own new directive from the PM and Newman's visit.
Paula listened, watching Tweed, memorizing every detail.
‘When do you start this weird co-operation with Washington and Moscow?’ she demanded in her direct manner.
‘This is very much under wraps.’
He threw out his hands in a someday gesture.
‘I don't even know who is coming from the States.
Just one man — the personal representative of the President and operating entirely on  his own.
Same with Moscow.
The Soviet President's personal choice — also operating on his own.
This is the tightest undercover programme ever devised.’
‘And the time factor?’
Paula pressed.
‘Again unknown.
Could be weeks, months away.
I'll be contacted when the time comes.’
Tweed frowned.
‘I find the whole business mysterious.
It has an almost ghost-like character.’
‘But Bob Newman won't stand still,’ Paula commented.
‘Not after the horrific killing of his girl friend.
He'll be investigating on his own account.’
‘Which may prove invaluable to us,’ Tweed pointed out.
‘He is the free agent.
If he feeds me the data he uncovers it might put us ahead in the game before the battle opens.’
‘Would you let me help him?’
Paula suggested.
‘Have to think about that.’
Tweed stood up, began pacing round the office.
‘Let's face it — he may not want help of any sort.
You know how he is — a lone wolf.
That's what made him a successful foreign correspondent.’
‘I might be able to persuade him…’
‘And you might not,’ Tweed warned.
‘He's in a grim mood about the murder of Sandy Riverton…’
‘Which may just be connected with the almost simultaneous murder of her husband in Helsinki,’ Paula insisted.
‘It really is stretching the long arm of coincidence to breaking point — a husband and wife, both recently employed by INCUBUS, both murdered within twenty-four hours of each other.
What is Bob's first move?’
‘To meet Evelyn, the sister, off the plane from Helsinki.
She may just have vital information that will give Bob the lead he's looking for.’
‘I can get in touch with Bob at his flat,’ Paula said, reaching for her phone.
‘No, you can't.’
Tweed's tone was brisk.
‘First, he  needs sleep.
Second, what he's proposing is dangerous.
I've got to think about whether I'm going to let you try to link up with him.’
‘So I twiddle my thumbs, go through more files?’
Tweed smiled drily.
‘No, you don't.
You start building up a dossier on all known facts about the International Continental Union Bank, US.
With special attention to the man who created that colossus — Franklin D. Hauser.’
2
The headquarters of INCUBUS Oy.
in Finland was a new twenty-storey glass block on the western outskirts of Helsinki.
The glass was a deep blue colour, opaque, so the outside world could see nothing of what went on inside the heavily guarded building.
On the top floor Franklin D. Hauser was addressing executives inside the large board room.
Ten Americans and one Englishman sat on either side of a long gleaming wooden table.
Hauser paced slowly back and forth at the far end behind his empty chair as he spoke.
‘I have brought you folks here from all over Scandinavia because some of you are fresh from the States and this little old continent is different from back home.
That doesn't mean you have to start over again.
No, sirree.
We're here to establish INCUBUS solid in Europe and we'll do it the American way…’
He paused to drink ice water.
Swivelled round in his seat to the right of the empty chair, the Englishman, Adam Carver, tall, slim, in his late thirties, watched his chief's performance with concealed amusement.
Hauser, six feet tall and heavily built, in his fifties, wore the uniform of the American executive.
A chalk grey suit, a new starched white shirt, a tie with diagonal stripes, the shirt with a button-down collar.
Even Hauser's face was standard: plump, clean shaven, pink, smooth as a baby's.
Only the ice-blue eyes betrayed the man's ruthless will.
He was, Carver thought, in his most folksy mood.
I could have written the script, he mused, as Hauser continued.
‘But first I'd like to say a few words about myself.
I have an estate in Arizona outside Phoenix with forty acres of land and a nice house.
I have an apartment on Fifth in New York.
I have a mansion and twenty acres in Suffolk, Britain.
Wouldn't you say that was all a man needed?’
But you haven't got a wife any more, Carver observed to himself.
She ran off with a younger film star.
Hauser was talking again after removing his jacket, placing it carefully over the back of his chair.
‘So why do I go on expanding the company instead of putting up my feet and shooting the breeze?’
Hauser stood still, arms folded across his powerful chest.
Sunlight reflected from the snow outside flashed off his rimless pince-nez perched on the bridge of his strong nose.
His executives sat bolt upright in their chairs, gazing at him, anxious to convey the impression they were hanging on his every word.
There was not a man present who had not stepped over bodies of rivals to claw his way to his present position.
One wrong move and all that in-fighting was on the line, would be thrown away.
‘I'll tell you why,’ Hauser continued, beaming his famous smile.
‘I'm doing it for you people so one day you'll all have what I have.
But you'll have to give it all you've got.’
The tone had changed, there was an edge to his voice.
‘If INCUBUS is going to become the biggest organization in Europe, you're going to have to hit it twenty-five hours a day.
You'll have to sleep and dream INCUBUS.
It's going to be a full-time job to drag Europe  into the twenty-first century.
You people are going to do that job.
Now I'm going to talk to you later, meantime you go down to Level Five and stay there until you've come up with a plan to infiltrate Finland.
You'll have to be cunning, devious, smart.
Already I've heard a Finnish businessman say in The Palace restaurant ‘Those Goddamn Yanks are coming.’
He's behind the times.
They're here.
Work out a plan to convert this tiny country into a major base for our operation…’
His tone had been abrasive, challenging.
He took off his pince-nez, perched them higher up his nose, looked down the table.
‘Level Five.
Get to it.
Unless,’ he ended in a deceptively soft tone, ‘there are any questions?’
There were no questions.
The hard-bitten men round the table knew better than to make that mistake.
They had been told .
Carver watched as they gathered up their files, left the room in single file.
Hauser's large hand descended on Carver's shoulder.
‘You stay.
We'll talk.
You can go down later and whip up some action.
Twelve hours in Level Five should concentrate their minds, wouldn't you agree?’
Carver agreed.
Level Five was underground.
No view of the outside world.
A labyrinth of rooms and corridors which had all the welcoming atmosphere of the interrogation centre in the Lubyanka in Moscow.
Hauser hunched his large body in his chair and gazed into the distance.
His parents had named him after Franklin D. Roosevelt and he had carefully built up a similar outwardly benevolent image.
It disarmed his opponents and the image impressed the outside world.
‘I have a dream, Adam…’
He paused.
Echoes of Martin Luther King, Carver thought, but not quite the same meaning to the stirring words.
He waited, sensing his chief was in a reflective mood.
‘I have a dream,’ Hauser repeated, ‘a vision of a world-wide homeland stretching from the Pacific coast of the States to the Urals.
That politico, Gorbachev, is an amateur, a provincial hick who thinks he's made it big.
And he talks of a European home from the Atlantic to the Urals.
Well my vision is bigger than his.
Adam, we're going to take over Europe and the Soviet Union.
Dracon is working on the strategy.’
He glanced at Carver.
‘Frank Galvone is taking over from Ed Riverton.’
Hauser inserted a cigarette into an ivory holder, lit it.
Carver, a good-looking man women fell over to meet, kept silent.
He wasn't reacting to that ploy.
Hauser thought the only way to keep his top men on their toes was to play one off against the other: to hint now and again someone else was after; their job.
Hence the reference to Galvone.
‘A pity Riverton had that nasty accident,’ Hauser continued.
‘We'll all miss Ed.’
‘That Finn, Mauno Sarin, you asked me to handle when he arrived here, said Ed had been garrotted before someone threw him into the harbour,’ Carver commented.
‘So crime is rearing its ugly head in little old Finland.’
Hauser puffed at his cigarette.
‘The penalty of growing affluence.
Once upon a time the only crime in this neck of the woods was domestic.
A jealous husband using an axe on his wife.
Sometimes the wife used the axe.
Times change.
You satisfied this Sarin?’
Hauser asked casually.
‘He's chief of the Protection Police, so it's odd he was the one to come here.
They're political — a small counter-espionage unit.
Forty men, maybe a few more.’
‘But you satisfied him?’
‘I got rid of him.
For the moment.
I had the feeling he could be back.
Don't underestimate him.
Sarin is both cynical and shrewd.’
‘So he comes back, you see him again.
Take him out to dinner, pour champagne down his throat, and later in the  evening mention the little titbit that I'm friends with the Finnish President.
If that doesn't turn the trick, offer him A nice car.
Do it the American way.’
‘That won't work with Sarin.
He's incorruptible.’
‘Adam.’
Hauser laid a hand on Carver's arm.
‘No one is incorruptible.
With some you have to grease the wheels more liberally.
And Evelyn Lennox has resigned, taken a walk.
I had her followed to the airport.
She took a flight for London.
Uno has her address.
Go and see her in a few days.
By then our insurance outfit, Fraternal & Equality, will have visited her, offered her a big fat pension.
Tied to the usual conditions, of course.’
‘Who is going to see her?’
‘Papa Grimwood will head the team.’
‘Then why do I need to see her?’
‘To make sure.’
Hauser tilted his large jaw.
Carver was familiar with the pose: borrowed from Roosevelt.
‘To make sure she's accepted the pension — and the conditions.
Her work was of a sensitive nature.’
He gave another beaming smile.
‘They don't call you The Charmer for nothing, Adam.
You'll have her eating out of your hand.’
‘What is Frank doing these days?’
Carver enquired.
‘Haven't seen him around here for a while.
He used to spend most of his time in Finland.’
‘I'm surprised at you.’
Hauser's tone was mild but his dark thick eyebrows lifted.
‘Asking questions outside your sphere of operations.
And just after you've arrived back.
Frank Galvone is still based with Dracon outside Boston.’
He smiled again.
‘But if you're anxious to see Frank he may be over here soon.
It's time you two learned to get along.
And now, I guess, you'll want to check up with Uno about the Lennox girl.’
He opened the briefcase resting on his trouser leg, extracted a piece of plastic.
‘There's the new combination.
Let me have it back soonest.’
It was dismissal time.
Carver took the plastic rectangle, nodded, left the room and headed for the elevator.
Uno was the master computer located below ground level.
It recorded every detail of past and present employees of INCUBUS.
He was glad Mauno Sarin had no idea of its existence.
And he hoped Papa Grimwood would handle the Lennox girl with finesse — assuming the old villain knew what the word meant.
Evelyn Lennox had checked flights to London.
She found she could just catch a direct Finnair flight if she hurried.
She packed a bag, looked at the phone, checked her watch.
No time to call Newman: she would miss her flight.
In the street outside her Helsinki apartment she hailed a cab.
‘Airport, please.
And could you hurry?
I'm late for my flight.’
She was so absorbed with not missing the plane she didn't notice the pale faced girl with an aquiline nose and a scraped bone look.
The girl started the engine of her Saab and followed the taxi.
She was immediately behind Evelyn when the English girl bought her one-way ticket to London.
Aboard the plane as it climbed and headed out over the Gulf of Finland she sat in a daze.
Earlier she had, despite Newman's warning, made a brief call to INCUBUS headquarters, leaving a message for her boss that she'd left for England.
Unlike her sister, Sandy, Evelyn was tall and had red hair.
She wore a gaberdine suit of dark blue, a white blouse, and her sheepskin was tucked away inside the baggage compartment above her head.
Staring down through the window, she gazed at the icefield which was the frozen Baltic.
Not the best reason for flying home, but oh God, she was sick of the subzero temperatures, the  fact that the sun rose at ten in the morning and set at two in the afternoon.
Endless dark which got to you, created a feeling of permanent depression.
Soon she fell fast asleep, worn out by the news Bob Newman had given her, by the earlier experience of the horrible death of Ed Riverton, by having to visit the mortuary to identify him, by the rush to the airport.
She woke when the machine bumped something.
Staring out of the window she was astounded to realize she had arrived at Heathrow.
She had slept for almost three hours.
As the plane taxied along the runway she sighed with relief.
No ice, no snow.
It might be a sullen grey sky but it would be daylight for hours yet…
‘That's the Lennox girl, Steve,’ said Papa Grimwood, checking the photograph he had obtained from INCUBUS HQ in the West End.
AU British employees' details were on file.
Evelyn was carrying her case to a waiting taxi.
‘I have to collect the car from the multistorey,’ Steve reminded him.
‘So the timing is excellent,’ replied Grimwood.
‘We have her address in Wandsworth.
We'll arrive on her doorstep within fifteen minutes of her getting there.
Splendid timing,’ he repeated, ‘she'll be off balance from her extended flight.
And very receptive to our methods of persuasion.’
Evelyn asked the cab driver to stop at the small supermarket near her house, bought the bare necessities for a drink of tea and something simple to eat.
She had missed the meal served on the plane.
The doorbell rang a few minutes after she had opened the lid of her case and returned downstairs to make herself a cup of tea.
She frowned: no one knew she was back.
Must be someone  selling something.
She opened the door and stared at the grotesque couple.
‘Mizz Evelyn Lennox?’
It was a gnome-like little man who asked the question after removing his trilby.
His face was ruddy and lined and he had a nutcracker nose and chin.
He stooped like a hunch-back.
Difficult to guess his age — between forty and sixty.
Wearing a new sports jacket and grey flannels under his open raincoat.
He had squirrel eyes which darted about and he took a good look at her legs beneath her short skirt.
‘What is it you want?’ she asked, tired from the flight.
‘Fraternal & Equality…’
The gnome's companion showed a printed card, keeping a firm grip on it.
‘We're going to make you safe for life, lady.’
‘This is Steve,’ the gnome introduced.
‘I'm Papa Grimwood, senior representative of the company.
If we could talk to you inside for a few minutes you won't regret it.’
She hesitated.
Steve was six feet tall, heavily built and his clean-shaven pale face showed no expression.
Grimwood was smiling in an oily manner.
Evelyn had vaguely heard of the company, a subsidiary of INCUBUS.
Grimwood edged forward, still smiling.
‘We make arrangements for all ex-employees.
Financial — for life.’
‘Ex-employees of who?’
‘INCUBUS.’
Grimwood lowered his voice and she had the impression he revealed the information reluctantly.
She was too exhausted to resist and showed them into the living room.
They waited until she had sat down and then Grimwood hauled a chair closer to her, seated himself.
Steve chose a chair to her left so she had to twist round to see him.
‘First, we'd appreciate it if you'd sign this document — a small formality,’ Grimwood assured her in his most Uriah Heep tone.
‘Then you'll receive your pension from  Fraternal & Equality.
Five hundred pounds a week in cash — for the rest of your life.’
‘I don't sign documents without my solicitor checking them.’
As she said the words her mind was calculating.
Five hundred a week was twenty-five thousand a year.
Grimwood leaned closer.
His accent was a peculiar mixture of Cockney and American.
Midatlantic.
Maybe he'd spent time in the States.
‘There are conditions, of course,’ Grimwood went on, ignoring her remark.
‘You agree never to discuss your work for your recent employer with anyone.
Never,’ he repeated.
‘With no one.
Not a whisper.’
She drank more tea.
She was damned if she was going to offer refreshment to them.
She put down the cup, crossed her legs, clasped her hands on her knees.
‘And supposing I did talk to someone about my job?’
‘Oh, my dear…’
Grimwood shook his head mournfully.
‘I'm not your ‘dear’,’ she snapped.
‘My profound apologies.
As I was saying, that would certainly not be in your best interests.’
Grimwood shook his head again.
‘Dear me, no.
Your very generous pension would stop at once.’
‘And that would be the least of your problems.’
It was the first time Steve had spoken since they'd entered the house.
His voice had been harsh, menacing.
She swung round to face him.
‘What does that mean?’
Steve spread his huge hands, strangler's hands — the thought flashed in Evelyn's mind.
He stood up, walked towards her, leant his hands on the arms of her chair.
‘Just a few people did make that mistake.
They talked.
It wasn't good for their health.
To take one example, a man was killed in a car accident.
Fraternal & Equality always take a great interest in the health of their clients.’
For a big man he had a curiously quiet voice, sibilant.
He went back to his chair.
‘Are you threatening me?’
Evelyn asked.
She was frightened, but she was furious, and her brain was ticking over now.
These people had turned up with uncanny speed.
There had to be some link with Helsinki.
Again she began to think about the murder of her brother-in-law.
‘Gracious me!’
Grimwood leaned closer.
‘Papa is concerned about what you've said.
Steve was just recalling a little history.
Sign the document now and forget about it.
Think instead of five hundred pounds — in cash — sent to you by special delivery every week.
For the rest of your life…’
He broke off as the doorbell rang.
Evelyn uncrossed her legs, got up slowly, began to walk to the living room door.
Grimwood spoke quickly.
‘Get rid of whoever it is.
This is your only chance for a pension most people would give an arm and a leg for…’
He was talking to himself.
Evelyn was heading down the hall for the front door.
Newman slowed down as he approached 495 Greenway Gardens, Wandsworth.
He thought the name singularly inappropriate: either side was lined with a wall of Victorian terrace villas.
Bay windows on the ground and first floors, postage-stamp sized front gardens behind railings, nothing remotely green in-sight.
He parked a few doors from 495, walked the rest of the way, pushed open the black, freshly painted grille gate, noted the heavy net curtains masking the bay windows, stepped inside the quarry-tiled porch and pressed the bell.
The upper half of the front door was a stained glass window which seemed to emphasize the cloistered atmosphere of the deserted road.
Within ten seconds he saw the  silhouette of someone approaching beyond the glass.
The door was opened and Evelyn stood framed against a long hallway.
Newman grinned and then frowned as a mixture of emotions flashed over her face.
Surprise, fright, overwhelming relief.
She put a finger to her lips and gestured inside.
‘A spot of trouble?’ he enquired in a whisper.
She nodded, reached out a hand to usher him inside.
He was wearing a trench coat, military style with wide lapels, the collar turned up, belted.
He slipped his gloves into his pockets as he followed her over the threshold and she shut the door.
‘Two men.
From the INCUBUS insurance outfit,’ she whispered back.
‘The tall one, Steve, threatened me if I refused to sign a document.’
‘Let's take a look at them,’ he suggested.
She ushered him into the living room, which overlooked the front street and had a large couch in the bay.
Chintz furnishings, walls painted magnolia, decorated with framed pictures of water-colour landscapes.
Newman's trained reporter's eye took all this in in a glance.
He stopped in the centre of the room, staring at the two men.
The crouched gnome-like figure remained seated, gazing at the visitor.
The tall heavy, dark-haired with thick brows too close together, stood up and balanced himself on the balls of his feet.
A man ready for a fight.
Evelyn waved a hand.
‘Bob, these two gentlemen are from Fraternal & Equality, an insurance company.
This is Mr Grimwood — apparently known as Papa.
And this is Steve.
No idea of his other name.
And this is Robert Newman.’
‘Ah!’
Grimwood rose slowly to his feet, smiling his oily smile, extending a hand.
‘Mr Robert Newman, the famous foreign correspondent.
I recognize you from  pictures in the papers and news magazines.
A pleasure to make your acquaintance, sir.’
Newman ignored the extended hand, looked at the man called Steve who had tucked his right hand inside the lapel of his buttoned jacket.
He moved suddenly, took three paces forward.
Steve began to slide out the hand holding something.
Newman raised his own right hand in a diversionary gesture and whipped up his right foot.
It connected savagely with Steve's kneecap.
The tall man screamed with pain, slumping forward, Newman's hand came down, nails jabbing into the back of the half-withdrawn hand.
Steve yelped and Newman grabbed the gun he was holding.
He backed away, looked at Evelyn.
‘A Walther PP., 7.65mm automatic.
Who are these people?’
‘They are from Fraternal & Equality, the insurance subsidiary of INCUBUS.’
‘Really?’
Newman held the automatic in the palm of his hand.
‘A new way of selling insurance?’ he asked the gnome.
‘I must apologize profoundly, sir.’
Grimwood glanced venomously at Steve who was still doubled over, nursing his kneecap.
‘My associate can be impetuous.
I think he feared he was about to be attacked by you…’
‘Answer the bloody question.
Is this a new way of selling insurance?’
‘I was about to explain, sir.
You see, often I carry large sums of cash and need protection.
Especially in these days of violence.
If you read the papers…’
‘Forget the papers.
Evelyn, what happened before I arrived?’
‘They tried to force me to sign that document…’
Grimwood grabbed for the bulky sheaf of printed paper but Newman had hold of it.
‘Tsk!
Tsk!
Don't snatch — it's bad manners.
The last thing an insurance salesman should display.’
‘I'm not a salesman,’ Grimwood bleated.
‘And the only violence so far has been caused by your friend — pardon, your associate — Steve.
I wonder if he has a certificate to carry a weapon?
Maybe the police would be interested in checking that point?
But & t things first.’
He turned to Evelyn.
‘What is this document these two are so anxious you should sign?’
‘That's company property…’
Grimwood had hauled his bulk out of the chair, his manner quite different.
‘I must ask you to hand that back to me.’
‘And I must ask you to shut your gabby mouth.
I was asking my friend here.’
‘It's a big fat pension for life,’ Grimwood persisted.
‘With conditions,’ Evelyn snapped.
‘So I see.’
Newman was skip-reading the second page which, like the first, contained clause after clause.
He read one aloud.
‘If at any time the aforesaid beneficiary divulges to anyone details of her confidential employment with INCUBUS then the aforesaid beneficiary will forfeit any further claim to any pension rights hitherto granted whatsoever …’’
Newman folded the document, put it in his pocket, looked at Grimwood.
‘That's a new one on me.
I don't think you're very nice people.’
‘And,’ Evelyn interjected, pointing at Steve, who had sagged into an armchair, hugging his knee, glaring at Newman, ‘he threatened me.
Talked about it not being good for my health if I refused to sign.
He also told me about another ex-employee who'd had a fatal motor accident…’
‘Steve didn't finish his story,’ Grimwood whined.
‘After the man involved died we paid a large lump sum to his —’
‘I'm sure you did,’ Newman said sarcastically.
His voice changed.
‘Get out!
Both of you.
Now!’
‘My knee…’
Steve began.
‘Give you a helping hand,’ Newman assured him  cheerfully.
‘Open the front door, Evelyn.’
He grabbed hold of Steve by the scruff of the neck, half lifted, half dragged him to the front door.
At the entrance he shoved hard.
Steve sprawled on to the pavement as Grimwood hurried down the hall.
‘We shall complain.
That is an act of violence.’
Newman pulled the Walther automatic out of his pocket, held it on his palm, closed his fingers when Grimwood reached for the weapon.
He nodded towards the doorway.
‘Shove it.
Don't come back.’
3
As Evelyn closed and locked the front door Newman hurried back to the living room.
He stood to one side of the bay window and watched beyond the net curtains.
Grimwood was half supporting Steve who had clambered to his feet, making their way further along Greenway Gardens.
When they had passed the house he stood in the bay and watched their progress.
A large grey Volkswagen van was parked about four houses along the street.
Grimwood stopped by the van door, extracted keys, opened the door and helped Steve inside.
Grimwood slipped behind the wheel, dosed the door, started the engine and slowly moved off.
‘They've gone.’
Newman turned to Evelyn who stood white faced.
She looked even more attractive, her wide mouth a slash of red lipstick, her good bone structure tapering to a pointed determined chin.
Her thick red hair  rested just below her shoulders on the blue gaberdine and her grey eyes stared back at him.
Her expression was grave, so very different from Sandy.
‘I could do with a tot of brandy,’ she said.
‘How about you, Bob?’
‘No.
Hot tea with a little sugar.
You're in a mild state of shock.
No wonder.
And no alcohol.’
‘You're right.
Come into the kitchen with me while I brew up…’
The kitchen was a surprise.
At the back of the house, overlooking a small garden with sour soil and moss-infested lawn, the kitchen was long and galley-like with all the latest equipment.
Well laid out, so far as Newman could see while she made the tea.
He perched on a stool before asking his question.
‘You ignored my warning, didn't you?
You phoned INCUBUS before you left Helsinki.
And you didn't phone me.’
‘I'm usually pretty sensible, but I panicked,’ she admitted.
‘I didn't have time to call you before catching a flight — but I felt I had to call INCUBUS.
I couldn't just walk out on them after three years with the organization.
At least that's how I felt then.
Now I feel they can get stuffed…’
She recalled briefly what had happened after she arrived home.
It was only after they had returned to the living room that she asked the question as she poured tea.
‘How did Sandy die?’
‘Drink some tea.’
She was sitting down on the couch with Newman beside her.
He waited until she had put down her cup and saucer.
‘Sandy's murder was a shocking business.
I'll tell you the details later…’
She gripped his arm to protest but he was firm.
‘I said later .
What was it about your job in Finland which was confidential — to quote from this?’
He pulled the sheaf of papers from his pocket.
Newman knew exactly what he was doing, that he was being ruthless — determined to extract information from her during her state of shock when she might talk more openly, when she was very hostile towards her previous employer after her recent experience.
She poured them more tea and he kept silent, anxious not to disturb her present mood.
Drinking half her cup she put it down, twisted round to face him, her chin resting in her hand, and told him a strange story.
‘As I told you when you came to dinner with Ed and me at his apartment in Helsinki, I'm a trained psychologist — like Sandy.
I worked for what INCUBUS called the Profiles — Psychological Research Division.
P-PRD.
The Americans love initials.
The key word is Profiles .
Let me give you an example.
There was an electronics outfit owned by a Finn in Turku, the second largest city.
On the Baltic coast and the port where ships come in from Sweden.
It was all very hush-hush — that was emphasized from the beginning.’
‘What was significant about the electronics outfit?’
‘INCUBUS's Finnish subsidiary — INCUBUS Oy.
(or Ltd.)— was making a secret bid through another company to take it over.
Most of its export trade is with Russia.
High-tech stuff — they have Swedish high-flyer scientists working for them.
A man called Timo Metsola owned the company outright.
I was told to produce a complete profile of him.’
‘What sort of profile?’
‘The emphasis is on character.’
She gazed into the distance and spoke as though reciting a lesson.
‘The profile's strengths — strong will-power, physical endurance under pressure, reaction to intense pressure.
Then his weaknesses — alcohol, drugs, any physical weakness such as being a diabetic.
Any special fears such as vertigo, fear of drowning, dislike of flying, etc.’
‘This is weird,’ Newman commented.
‘Didn't it strike you as a strange technique?’
‘Gradually, it did.
I eventually became worried and then frightened.
I was told the data was needed for the Medical Division — among a host of other activities INCUBUS owns a number of, pharmaceutical laboratories.
The profiles of outstanding men who'd achieved a lot were supposed to give data for the development of new drugs.
After studying Timo Metsola I began to think that was all eyewash — that the profiles had a more sinister purpose.’
‘Why?’
‘Because I learned by accident INCUBUS was trying to take over his company — and exactly the same thing had happened with another industrialist I'd been asked to draw up a profile for.’
‘How on earth did you obtain this information?
I realize you're a trained psychologist but give me some details.’
‘By trickery and fraud and subversion.
That was when I began to question to myself exactly what I was doing.
Give you an example?
INCUBUS also owns a big business magazine in the States called Leaders of Mankind .
One of its features is a portrait of some top businessman anywhere in the world.
When I first went to see Timo Metsola I had to represent myself as a reporter from that magazine.
I had all the credentials.’
‘When you first went to see him?
You went more than once?’
‘It was a series of interviews.
Even these big men are flattered at the idea of a major profile in Leaders .
I'd been trained by the P-PRD Division.
What approach to use, which questions to ask, what to look for while I was conducting an interview.
While I was talking to Metsola one day he swallowed some medicine.
We had got to  know each other pretty well by then.
He said it was a preparation he had to take for diabetes.
I noted that in the detailed report I handed in later.’
‘Sounds weird, but hardly sinister.’
‘But with the other Finn I interviewed there was something sinister.’
Evelyn was playing with a lace handkerchief as she talked, plucking at it nervously.
‘He was a shipbuilder — yachts.
There's more than one of them in Finland.’
‘Tell me about him,’ Newman coaxed.
‘Let me finish first about Timo.
He had no intention of selling his company to anyone.
Three months after I'd submitted my profile he sold out to INCUBUS.
I built up the same sort of profile about the shipbuilder.
And he didn't want to sell.
But during the course of the interview it came out his brother was anxious to sell — he was addicted to gambling and owed a lot of money.
Also he was the heir.
Can you guess what's coming next?’
‘Never guess,’ Newman replied casually and lit a cigarette.
‘Could I have one, please?
I've given it up but I need one now.’
She looked at him sideways.
‘Light it for me.’
It was the first indication Newman had that she was interested in him.
Watch it, he warned himself.
He lit the cigarette, handed it to her.
She took a deep drag, smiled at him, laid a hand on his arm.
‘That tastes especially good.’
‘What came next?’ he asked brusquely.
‘The yacht builder was killed in a supposed accident.
He'd asked me to go and see him in the evening to continue the interview.
There were lights on in all the windows.’
She shuddered, took another drag.
‘I found him.
They'd had a huge fork lift truck on the roof where they stored materials.
The truck had toppled off the roof just when he was walking underneath it.
The two huge spikes were rammed into his body.
They decided the  brakes had been defective, that the high wind that night had tipped it over.’
‘You believed that?’
‘Yes.
Until his brother took over the firm and promptly sold it to INCUBUS Oy.
And his’ habit of arriving back late in the evening after dinner to do more work was recorded in my preliminary report.
I began to wonder if I was creating profiles for murder.
Sounds crazy?’
‘Depends.
Did you talk to anyone about this?’
‘Yes, to the only man I could trust.
Ed Riverton, Sandy's husband.
He was on the banking side.’
She moved closer to Newman.
‘As you know, I interviewed Ed during my Helsinki trip — about the banking operations.
I got the impression he was being evasive, which roused my curiosity.
That's the nasty thing about reporters.
You told him all you've told me?’
‘Yes.
He didn't know anything about Profiles — Psychological Research Division.
He was intrigued.
Said he was going to investigate it.’
Her lips trembled.
‘A couple of weeks later they dragged him off the ice in North Harbour.‘
‘Sounds as though I was right when I decided to poke into the activities of INCUBUS — and Hauser…’
He stopped talking as he glanced out of the window.
Newman put a finger to his lips to warn her not to speak Standing up, he walked behind the couch into the bay.
The Volkswagen van was back.
Parked in the same place as before.
The cunning sods had pretended to drive off — in case they were being observed — and had then reversed the vehicle into its original position.
There was one difference in its appearance.
A large aerial had appeared, projected from the roof, an aerial similar to those used by Post Office vans detecting people who didn't pay their TV licence.
Newman frowned at Evelyn to make her continue  keeping quiet.
He began a swift and expert search of the room.
A Swiss he had once known had taught him how to locate bugging mechanisms.
He switched on the radio, continued looking.
The bug was attached to the back of the TV set.
He held it in his hand, put it back, twiddled the radio knob from pop music to atmospherics, turned up the volume.
‘They bugged you,’ he whispered.
‘Now we'll feed them some disinformation.
Be ready to play along with what I say.’
He turned the knob back to pop music, turned the volume down to almost nothing, began talking to Evelyn.
‘So you have this aunt in Ambleside you're going to visit?’
‘That's right, Bob.
I just want to get away from my normal surroundings.’
‘Ambleside in the Lake District is a good choice.
Of course it's small — everyone knows everyone else and what's going on.
But that kind of local gossip will ease the tension out of you.
You've decided then to leave today?’
‘I just want to leave London as fast as possible,’ Evelyn replied, playing along.
‘I'll give you a hand with the packing.
Then I'll drive you to the station.
That way I'll make sure we're not followed.
If we are, I'll spot them…’
He turned up the volume loud, turned the knob to atmospherics, walked quickly to the window.
Within two minutes the automatic aerial was retracted and the Volkswagen drove off.
Newman sat down, deliberately choosing the armchair Grimwood had occupied, leaving Evelyn on the couch.
‘What was all that about?’ she asked, the anxiety clear in her voice.
‘They bugged you, as I said.’
He opened his hand.
‘They're making them smaller and smaller.
It's called progress — the advance of science.’
‘When could they have done that?
I opened the door to them.
I was with them all the time…’
‘Not when you answered the door to me,’ he pointed out.
‘I am sure one of them attached this little blighter to your TV set in the short time you were showing me in.
They're a crafty couple.
Professionals.
When they reached their van they drove off a short distance in case I was observing them.
Then they backed the vehicle, elevated the aerial, listened in and tape-recorded our conversation; that would be my guess.
We have to recall what we said, what they now know.’
‘And Ambleside?’
‘To protect you.
They'll be convinced you're off to the Lake District today.
That bit I put in about knowing if we were being followed when I drove you to the station will stop them trying to do just that, will keep them away from here.
And I handed it to them on a plate.
Ambleside.
A small place.
Everyone knows everyone else.
They'll think you'll be easy to find there.
They'll scoot off to the Lake District and search round for days.’
‘It might work.’
She brightened up.
‘It will work.’
‘And they'll be slowed down because they'll have to be discreet.
I kept Steve's Walther — I might report that to the police.
My guess is a quite different couple will be sent to track you down.’
‘They found me here quickly enough,’ she reminded him.
‘I was back here and less than half an hour afterwards they were on my doorstep.’
‘Let's think how they worked that one.’
He frowned.
‘It suggests some high-powered organization.
First, you made the mistake of phoning INCUBUS before you caught your flight from Helsinki…’
‘I'm sorry…’
He dismissed her apology with a curt wave of his hand.
‘Let me go on.
How they recognized you is what puzzles me.
At Heathrow, I mean.
I think they followed you here  from when you left the airport.
What sort of records do they keep at their headquarters for this country in Norwich?’
‘You mean about employees?
Very detailed.
Including photocopies of birth certificates, mortgages — even when they're your own, like mine.
And photographs…’
‘That's it.
Those two had a photo to watch for you coming off the plane — which means you must have been followed to Helsinki Airport.
Nice people.’
‘You said we must think about what they know from bugging us while we were talking after they'd gone.’
‘That's important.
They know you have talked to me about your secret work.
They know I'm investigating the octopus called INCUBUS.
That will make my future investigations a little more difficult, but I can handle that.
Now I know that they know.’
She stood up, carried a hardback chair close to Newman, sat down, placed a hand on his knee.
‘Now.
How did Sandy die?
I need to know.’
‘She was hung up with a rope round her neck.
Suspended from a beam in an old bell tower in Suffolk where we'd planned to meet early in the morning…’
‘Oh, dear God!
Sandy…’
Newman went on talking fast.
‘I was the one who found her.
And that makes me number one suspect for her murder…’
as if he had triggered off a signal the doorbell rang.
They looked at each other.
Newman moved her hand, stood up and pressed his own hand on her shoulder to keep her seated.
He went to answer the door himself, his right hand gripping the Walther automatic.
He had paused in the hall to double-check the magazine was loaded.
Beyond the stained glass window he could make out two male silhouettes.
Both tall.
At least Grimwood & Co. hadn't returned.
He opened the door.
Chief Inspector Roy Buchanan, with Sergeant Warden beside him, stood gazing at him.
Buchanan raised an eyebrow before he spoke.
‘Well, well.
Mr Robert Newman again.
We musn't keep meeting like this.
People will talk.’
4
Adam Carver had spent longer than he'd expected with Uno .
The computer was located inside a vault at Level Five — well away from the windowless conference room.
Due to an appointment with a major client, he had returned late in the afternoon.
earlier, using the password, he had flashed on the screen all the data on Evelyn Lennox.
What had startled him was that she had a sister, Sandra Riverton, who had worked for INCUBUS in Suffolk.
Uno .
The nickname had been coined by Hauser himself and Carver found it childish.
The President of INCUBUS, shrewd and ruthless, had a naive streak.
Carver had tapped keys and up came the data on the Lennox girl.
He stared at it,
Age: Twenty-eight.
Nationality: Brit.
Description…
Occupation: Trained psychologist.
Employed Finland.
Division: P-PRD.
Rating: A1.
Track record: Ultra.
Defects: Related to Sandra Riverton (Sister), employed INCUBUS, Suffolk, Brit.
Zone.
There was a  lot of other stuff he skip-read.
It was the final word which caught his attention.
Cancelled .
Followed by a date three weeks earlier.
Carver pressed more  keys and signed off.
The screen went blank, unlike his mind.
He sat quite still for ten minutes, thinking.
His mind was in a whirl and he was worried.
He then lifted the phone to call Peggy Vanderheld, Hauser's statuesque and hard-bitten personal assistant.
When giving interviews to the press Hauser liked to paint a picture of himself as the company's father figure.
‘Just because I happen to be President of this company I don't play the Great White Chief,’ he was fond of saying.
‘My door is always open to any employee who has a problem.
Night and day I'm available to the folks who work for us.’
It was a load of crap — like his speech that morning to the executives.
His only concern was their future, to help them higher up the ladder?
Bullshit.
Carver was the Senior Vice President, Banking Loans.
A qualified accountant, his official job was to raise funds, find more money.
And there were twelve more Senior Vice Presidents across the far-flung empire of INCUBUS.
Some were more senior than others.
‘Peggy?
Adam here.
Level Five.
I need to see Franklin D. When can he fit me in?’
‘That could be difficult.
He has a tight schedule…’
Damn!
Adam had a date with a promising Finnish brunette for that evening.
He was confident he'd brought her to the stage where he could lay her.
Strike while the iron is hot.
‘He asked me to check data on a recent employee.
I've checked.
He wants me to take action.
There are queries before I can do that.’
‘Which employee?’
Peggy's American voice was a whiplash.
‘Evelyn Lennox.
Just mention that name to him.
Plus I have questions to ask.’
‘Hold it…’
Adam swore again while he waited.
He'd booked a  good table at The Palace.
His date had a Finnish boy friend but he knew he was prising her loose.
With women you had to keep persisting before they sank into your arms.
‘Carver!’
Peggy was back on the line.
‘Can you come now?
Good.
Move the butt.’
The connection was broken.
Arrogant bitch.
They said she carried inside her pretty head more secrets than Uno .
That she was the only woman Hauser trusted.
Had he something on her, Adam wondered as he closed the vault and headed down the corridor walled with stainless steel for the elevator.
Hauser was sitting in his  de luxe , specially designed, black leather swivel chair behind a huge mahogany desk in his private office.
The walls were panelled in mahogany except for the fourth wall behind him.
This was solid glass with a panoramic view over a forest-fringed lake, which was really an arm of the sea.
He took the cigarette holder out of his wide mouth and beamed at his visitor, his Roosevelt smile, warm and toothy.
Carver knew for a fact that Hauser had a collection of Roosevelt film clips, that he studied them to perfect the famous American president's mannerisms.
‘Your timing is perfect,’ Hauser announced.
‘Frank has just arrived.
Straight from the airport.
He's on his way up now.
Isn't that nice.
A while since you two got together.’
He's playing with me again, Carver thought.
Frank Galvone was also a senior vice president.
Information and Planning was his division, whatever that might mean.
And he was the last person Carver needed just now.
The door opened.
No respectful knock.
Frank Galvone walked in, clad in a snow-covered sheepskin which trailed his ankles, the fur thick with snow.
Beyond the window Carver could see a blizzard creaming down, blotting out the sea.
‘Hi!’
Galvone shook snow from the sheepskin, took it  off, dumped it in a chair.
‘Almost as bad as New York here,’ he remarked in his low husky voice.
‘Frank, you've messed up my beautiful carpet,’ Hauser told him mildly and smiled.
Galvone glanced down at the wall-to-wall shag carpet, shrugged.
He pressed a button next to the door.
‘We have peasants to vacuum the place.
Make them work — if you don't want them to spend the day, and your money, sitting with their feet up.’
Peggy Vanderheld, clad in a navy blue form-fitting suit, came into the room.
Galvone gestured at the carpet.
‘Clean up this mess — and fast.
We have a meeting under way.’
She glared at him venomously but went out, came back with the machine, sucked up the snow, left without a word.
Carver spoke quickly, nodding towards Galvone's back as the American stared at the blizzard.
He said this was something private.
‘If it's the Evelyn Lennox problem, go ahead, Adam,’ Hauser encouraged him.
‘After all, we have no secrets from Frank.
By the by, he called in at London on his way from New York.’
‘Just a brief stopover,’ Galvone said, turning round.
Carver nodded.
Why had Frank found it necessary to provide that bit of information?
Galvone was a first generation American with his roots in Italy.
Shorter than Carver — five foot seven — he was heavily built with wide shoulders and stocky legs.
Clean shaven, his hair was black, as were his thick brows.
His face was very bony, cadaverous.
His cheekbones were prominent, his nose was long, his chin was aggressive, skeletal.
Carver had never seen him smile.
His brown eyes were blank.
‘Now,’ Hauser said genially, ‘I have my two top men with me.
I always feel comfortable in your presence.’
Carver said nothing: Hauser was up to his usual tactics  — playing off one man against the other.
He frequently referred to Carver as ‘my potential successor.
In a few years he'll have developed a big enough ass to occupy my chair.’
But then Carver had heard that on other occasions he used the same language about Galvone.
And he suspected Galvone took the rivalry very seriously indeed.
‘OK.’
Hauser settled himself more comfortably in his chair.
‘Adam, tell us about Evelyn Lennox.’
He looked at Galvone.
‘He's going to check her out in London.
Left the company at a moment's notice, flew back there.
We just want to be sure everything is hunky-dory.’
‘Why shouldn't it be?’
Frank asked.
‘Adam will tell us.’
Frank remained standing as Carver was ushered with a wave of the hand to sit down.
‘Evelyn Lennox had a sister, a Sandra Riverton, who also worked for us,’ he began slowly, staring at the floor.
‘Is there a connection between these two?’
‘Leave it there,’ Hauser said amiably.
‘You have to concentrate on the financial side.
All you need to do is to make sure she's happy with her pension.
Get her general reaction to life.
What she's going to do next.
You know the sort of thing.’
‘I'm not sure I do.’
‘You're the Charmer,’ Frank interjected with a sneer.
‘We all know you have the ladies in the palm of your smooth hand.
Wouldn't do to send me.’
He made a sound like a sly chuckle.
‘I might end up knocking her teeth out.’
‘I wouldn't put it past you,’ Carver snapped.
‘Now that's not a nice thing to say to a fellow vice president.
Lost your sense of humour, Adam?
It was a joke.
J-O-K-E — you do know what a joke is?’
Hauser settled himself even more comfortably.
There was nothing he enjoyed more than seeing a couple of his  subordinates at each other 's throats.
Better than a bull fight.
Carver looked at him, caught his fleeting expression, made a great effort to cool it.
He nodded to Frank.
‘OK.
It was a joke.
Fair enough.’
He turned to Hauser.
‘While I was checking the computer I came across a reference to the P-PRD.
That's a division I'd never even heard of before.
What the blazes does it stand for?
What sort of work was Evelyn Lennox engaged on?
And why is it coded with initials?
All the other divisions have their functions spelt out.
Like Frank's.
Information and Planning.’
‘What the hell has that got to do with you?’ demanded Frank.
Carver turned to look at him, showing no particular reaction.
Inwardly he was surprised by the vehemence in Frank's voice.
Vehemence?
Almost vicious fury.
‘If I'm to talk to Evelyn Lennox,’ he said calmly, ‘I need to brief myself in advance with anything she might throw at me.’
‘You've got no goddamned right to go poking around in that computer,’ Frank snarled.
‘Now, boys,’ Hauser intervened, ‘a bit of push and shove is OK, but you're shoving too hard, Frank.
If you can't control your temper you'd better go down to the canteen and help yourself to a drink.
Of mineral water.’
There was a snap in his tone and Carver watched as Frank struggled to compose his features.
His opponent made a throwaway gesture with his hands, gave a sheepish grin which was more a grimace.
‘Sorry, Chief.
Those long flights can get to you.
Jet lag can creep up on you.
Think I'll sit down, rest the body and just listen while Adam tells the tale.’
Jet lag?
From a three-hour flight, at the outside, when he'd only flown from London to Helsinki on the last lap?
Carver was careful not to comment on the thought.
He  looked back at Hauser who started talking rapidly.
‘I take your point, Adam.
Why Sandra Riverton resigned from the company I've no idea.
That kind of detail just doesn't reach me.
I can't afford to get bogged down in the weeds.
But at least you know she did leave.
Maybe a coincidence, maybe the two girls talked on the phone, decided they'd both had enough.
As to Ed Riverton, all we know is what the police told us.
And you have the advantage, Adam, that you talked with this Mauno Sarin.
Now, you're briefed, as you put it.’
‘Not quite.
What sort of work were these girls doing for us?’
‘Women are a damned nuisance and I could do without hiring a single female.
Their job is at home, in bed and then doing the cooking.
But sometimes because they are female they're more suitable for interviewing men susceptible to so-called feminine charm.’
‘You mean they were call girls?’
Adam enquired.
‘Hell, no!’
Hauser pounded his huge fist on the desk and glared.
‘They were secretarial types — like Peggy.
Adam, you've got what you need.
Catch the earliest flight down to London, check up on the Lennox twist.
OK?’
Hauser waited until he was alone with Galvone, stubbed out a cigarette savagely, lit a fresh one.
He took several puffs and Galvone was careful to keep quiet.
It was unusual for Hauser to blow his top.
When he spoke he seemed calmer and under control.
‘You have a job, Frank.’
‘Which is?’
‘Board the same flight Carver takes to London.
Go Economy and make sure he doesn't see you.
Follow him, observe him, report back to me personally.
Travel Section will tell you the flight he's on.’
‘May be difficult to make sure he doesn't spot me.’
‘Difficult?
Disguise yourself.
Fresh clothes.
A ski outfit.
Goggle glasses.
Anything!’
He stared at Galvone.
‘Hell, you've had experience very recently of handling some tricky situations, taking instant decisions, and they came out just the way we wanted them.
That's it.
Tail Carver.’
5
Inside the living room at 495 Greenway Gardens Buchanan sat in the armchair Grimwood had occupied, legs stretched out, crossed at the ankles.
He faced Newman and Evelyn on the couch in the bay.
Sergeant Warden sat in the hard-backed chair, notebook at the ready.
The conversation continued.
‘Would you mind telling me how you heard your sister, Sandra Riverton, had been murdered?’
Buchanan asked Evelyn, his grey eyes watching hers.
‘I phoned her from London,’ Newman said quickly.
‘Which is why she flew back immediately from Helsinki.’
‘I was asking Miss Lennox.’
There was an edge to Buchanan's tone.
‘Perhaps you would be good enough to let her answer for herself.’
‘You do realize she's not obliged to put up with an interrogation?’
Newman rapped back.
‘We could show both of you the door.
Unless you're charging her with something.
That, as I understand it, is the law.’
‘I do know my law,’ the Chief Inspector replied equably.
He rattled some change in his pocket.
‘Do you wish to show me the door, Miss Lennox?’
‘I am rather upset…’
‘She's undergone some pretty awful ordeals,’ Newman persisted.
‘Do you normally question people when they're  in no fit state to think clearly?
I'm sure it would be best if you both went, deferred this interview until a more suitable occasion.’
‘You own this house?
Or part-own it?’
Buchanan asked in the same mild tone.
‘No…’
‘Then kindly let Miss Lennox take whatever decision she may wish without prompting from you.’
‘I really am very upset at the moment,’ Evelyn replied, taking her cue from Newman.
Buchanan swung his gaze to Newman.
‘A moment ago you referred to several ordeals.
What did you mean by that?’
‘For God's sake!
She had just heard in Helsinki her brother-in-law has been hauled out of the frozen harbour.
With his throat garrotted, in case you'd forgotten.
Then she hears her own sister has been murdered under horrible circumstances.
Hence, Chief Inspector, the use of the plural.’
‘I have an excellent memory.
I had not forgotten about Mr Riverton's death.
I hardly would — you told me only a few minutes ago.’
Buchanan was speaking in a monotone.
‘But you made it sound like more than two ordeals.’
He clasped his hands in his lap, and waited, studying Newman's reaction.
‘I can't help what it sounds like to your tortuous mind.
I was referring to both murders.
Period.’
‘Which is a weird coincidence — since both crimes appear to have been committed within about twenty-four hours of each other.’
He look at Evelyn.
‘And you said your sister had a similar job to yourself.
What was the nature of these jobs?’
‘Oh, we were just secretaries.
Chief Inspector, I'm flaked out now.
Could you leave this for a few days until I'm fresher?’
‘Of course.’
Buchanan stood up, putting on his coat as  Warden stood at the same time.
‘I'll try and phone you before we come next time.
Please don't bother — we can find our own way out.’
At the door he turned and spoke to Newman.
‘As for you, I would remind you I am conducting a murder investigation.’
Newman smiled grimly.
‘And I'm hardly likely to forget that.
Especially after the grilling you gave me at Southwold.’
The hint of a smile appeared at the corners of Buchanan's mouth, a cynical smile.
‘And you appear to have calmed down very quickly, Mr Newman.’
On this parting shot he left.
Newman followed them as they closed the door.
He locked it.
‘What did that mean?’
Evelyn asked as he came back into the room.
‘That he's a very shrewd and dangerous opponent.
I'd pretended to lose my temper and he spotted it.’
‘Why didn't you tell them about that ghastly couple — Grimwood and Steve?
I gathered you weren't going to tell him, so I kept quiet too.’
‘Which was smart of you.
It would just have confused the issue.’
He looked at her.
‘That's not quite honest — I want to follow up that investigation myself.
I would have told him if I'd thought there was a cat's chance in hell he'd have provided a guard for you — a constable on your doorstep.’
‘And he wouldn't have done that?’
‘Definitely not, on the evidence of what happened.
No one physically attacked you, thank God.
These days the Met.
are always moaning they're short of staff.
Too busy joy-riding in their nice shiny patrol cars to hoof it on the beat.’
‘Bob.’
She was standing close to him, he caught a whiff of expensive perfume.
‘Couldn't you stay with me for a few days in case those men come back.’
She paused.
‘You could sleep in the spare bedroom.’
And how long would you expect me to stay there?
Newman was thinking.
It simply wasn't on.
His mind was full of Sandy, of the memory of her hanging like a rag doll.
The idea of risking bedding her own sister was repugnant.
He shook his head.
‘That's not a good idea, Evelyn.
I want to devote all my time to finding out who murdered Sandy.
The longer I wait, the colder the trail will get.
Buchanan could have told you that.
Do you know a good locksmith?’
She nodded without enthusiasm.
‘Then get the locks changed on that front door.
Deadlocks.
Chubb or Banham.
If I call you on the phone I'll ring twice, put down the receiver, do the same thing again.
When the phone rings a third time answer it.
That guarantees it will be me.
Otherwise don't pick it up, no matter how long it rings.’
‘Why would they call me?’
‘They probably won't.
But they just might to make certain you're not here — that you have left for the Lake District.’
‘All right, you're going to be busy.
So am I. There are the details of Sandy's funeral to be attended to.
No, don't offer to help — I can manage on my own.
I'm the only family she had left.
Will you be attending?’
He refused to be roused by her anger, suspecting she was furious he'd turned down her invitation to stay.
As he put on his coat he smiled.
‘If there is any way I can help all you have to do is to call me.
And here is my card.
Don't forget, Evelyn, I was very fond of Sandy.
I was on the verge of asking her to marry me.
‘Perhaps in that way she had a lucky escape.’
For the second time he ignored an insult.
She was flaked out, as she'd said.
Too much horror in too short a space of time.
‘Think it over,’ he urged her.
‘But above all, be careful.’
‘Now I have another problem,’ Tweed announced as he took off his Burberry in his office.
‘Since the INCUBUS investigation looks like taking some time to get off the ground I can at least devote my attention to this new one.’
Paula Grey and Monica exchanged glances.
It was evening and Tweed seemed excited.
He had just returned from a fresh session with the PM at Downing Street.
He settled himself behind his desk, wearing his heaviest grey suit.
Outside it was a raw bitter February night.
‘Why is the INCUBUS problem going to take time to get to grips with?’
Paula asked.
‘Because it involves a lot of research — maybe months.
I have people working on it already but it's a world-wide organization and the structure is complex.
Maybe deliberately so, but that's only an educated guess.’
‘So what is this new problem?’
‘Europe, as you know, is like a boiling cauldron.
Frontiers which have held for over forty years are no longer sacred.
The Communist apparatus is collapsing everywhere, thanks to Gorbachev.
But this leaves some very dangerous and experienced experts without a job.
Can you guess?’
‘You often say guessing isn't good enough in our work.’
‘True.’
Tweed smiled at the gentle rebuke, then became grave.
‘The experts I'm talking about are the ex-members of various secret services and police forces.
Suddenly — overnight — they're not wanted.
Worse, from their point of view, some of the top-flight agents arc wanted — so they can stand trial.
Are you with me now?’
‘Yes.’
Paula looked rueful.
‘You're playing a favourite trick…’
‘Teasing,’ Monica interjected.
‘Tantalizing us while you lead up to something.’
‘A number of the most efficient Communist agents — therefore the most sought after to settle accounts with — have disappeared without trace.’
‘Disappeared?’
Paula was startled.
‘Couldn't they have been secretly shot?’
‘No, they've escaped.
From several Balkan countries in turmoil.
And from what used to be the iron state of East Germany.
Western agents — including our own — have verified they have simply vanished.
It's worrying the PM and the more reports I study the more my anxiety grows.
It has all the hallmarks of a master plan.’
‘What on earth could they achieve?
They're discredited and have nowhere to go,’ Paula protested.
‘Can we be sure of that?
Supposing they are being formed into a new secret police — with the aim of destroying glasnost and perestroika ?
They would be a formidable group — men and women trained in the skills and methods of STASI, the old East German secret police, the Romanian Securitate , etc.
Europe is in a state of turbulence in the East.
Fertile soil for professional activists.’
‘Have you any names — specific individuals?’
Paula pressed.
‘I can give you one which will send shivers up your spine — Ion Manescu.
And a Romanian woman in London swears she saw him in the street as he dived into a taxi.
A few days ago.’
In Lapland the Lear Executive jet began its radar-guided descent to Rovaniemi airfield in the dark.
North of the Arctic Circle, it was always dark in February.
Endless night.
There were eleven men and one woman inside the cabin.
None of the passengers had spoken a word to each other since taking off from Helsinki.
As the jet continued its descent they began to muffle themselves in fur against the subzero temperature on the snow- and ice-covered ground.
Fur hats with ear muffs, heavy fur coats, fur-lined boots.
The thin-faced man with a Slavic face in the seat nearest the exit door at the front already wore specially made fur boots of a curious design with pointed toes.
He ran a hand over his smooth face beneath his hooked nose.
Ion Manescu felt naked without the curved moustache he had shaved off.
He was the first passenger ready to disembark as the jet landed, slowed to a halt.
He peered out of the window at the moonlit landscape.
Scrubby bushes festooned with ice crystals which gleamed.
A barren prospect: more like a moonscape, but the airfield was many kilometres away from the town of Rovaniemi, an airstrip in the wilderness.
The steward opened the exit door when the plane was stationary and dropped the retractable stair ladder.
Opposite Manescu a German, Helmut Ziegler, ex-STASI chief in Leipzig, rose to leave the aircraft.
Manescu put out a hand to halt him.
‘After me, if you please,’ he said in German.
‘Better that we establish priorities of rank from the start.’
He stood, his bulk barring the progress of the German, who glared.
Then, in the light reflected from the snow, he saw Manescu's dark eyes gazing back at him.
A veteran of the STASI, he shivered — partly from the icy air flooding inside the machine, but partly from Manescu's expression.
‘Please,’ Manescu continued and descended the ladder.
The file of other passengers followed him across the iron-hard snow, to where a queue of strange vehicles waited for them, engines ticking over.
Each vehicle had two enormous thick tyres at the front, two more at the back.
In the weird glow of Arctic moonlight they looked like a cross between powerful motor bikes and beach buggies.
The maker's name was inscribed along the chassis: Suzuki.
Within two minutes all the passengers were aboard their allotted transport and the cavalcade of machines, engines purring and sputtering sparks, moved off.
It headed away from the distant airport building, a single-storey edifice, away from the main road to Rovaniemi, heading east cross-country into the wilderness.
Manescu adjusted his snow goggles as white flakes the size of cats' tails began to drift down.
He was satisfied.
He had asserted his authority.
Always you must begin as you mean to go on.
6
Adam Carver walked out of London Airport and joined the taxi queue.
He had travelled Business Class from Helsinki.
As he stood in the drizzling rain he welcomed it: the contrast in temperature was huge compared with Helsinki.
Here the weather had turned mild.
As he waited several women looked at him.
One said to her friend in a whisper:
‘He's a handsome bastard.
I wouldn't mind at all.’
‘You're wicked,’ her companion responded and giggled, gazing at Carver.
A late arrival came out between the automatic doors, stared at the queue, walked back inside to join the uniformed chauffeur who had been waiting and holding a card.
Mr Shade .
The chauffeur was carrying the passenger's bag but his client had insisted on carrying his executive case himself.
‘The car is in the short-term car park.
I'll take you to it, sir.’
‘Then move.
He's in the cab queue.
My guess is you've got five minutes,’ snapped Frank Galvone.
He had travelled aboard the same flight from Helsinki but in Economy Class, not an experience the Vice President of Information and Planning had enjoyed.
He wore a leather beret to conceal his black hair, tinted wrap-around glasses and a coat turned up at the collar which masked the lower half of his face.
Information and Planning, he was thinking as he walked up the ramp, shoulders stooped to further alter his appearance.
Inside the Dracon think-tank building near Boston off what used to be known as Space Highway, the Division was known to the favoured elite who worked there — academics and strategic researchers — as Information and Action.
That was where the master plan was being perfected.
‘That guy just getting into a cab,’ he said five minutes later as the chauffeur drove out of the car park.
‘Follow him, don't lose him.
But your first priority is don't get found out.’
Which is one hell of an instruction, Charlie Bone, the chauffeur, thought.
Typically American.
He was careful not to argue the point as he followed Carver's taxi through the tunnel.
Charlie was a cockney by birth but he'd spent time in New York.
And Charlie was probably the most highly paid chauffeur in London.
Paid to keep his mouth shut.
He had developed a terrible memory for who he drove and where he drove them to.
He needed the big money.
Charlie had a liking for the girls: high-class Sloane Rangers.
And diamonds were a man's best friend when it came to making it with the opposite sex.
Behind the closed glass screen of the limousine, separating driver from passenger, Galvone opened his executive case.
Disguised as toilet equipment all the apparatus was there — the listening device and several sophisticated miniaturized bugs.
Before Carver had left Helsinki Galvone had secreted a tiny bug inside Carver's case.
‘495 Greenway Gardens, here we come,’ he said to himself.
Evelyn was feeling very lonely when the doorbell rang.
She was also wary.
She opened the front door on the chain and her eyes widened.
Half expecting to see the hideous little creep, Grimwood, with his partner, Steve, the smartly dressed good-looking man standing there was a surprise.
‘Yes?’ she said.
‘My name's Adam Carver.
Here's my card.’
He passed his embossed visiting card through the gap.
‘I remember passing you in the corridor at the INCUBI:IS building in Helsinki.
You were wearing a blue gaberdine suit and a white blouse with a pussy bow at the neck.’
Evelyn rather liked that.
She liked his appearance, his manner.
And he was a senior vice president.
But she was still wary.
‘You've come to persuade me to accept the pension, haven't you?’
‘No.
Look at the card again.
I'm on the banking side.
I heard you'd left and I had business over here.’
He smiled.
‘I expect you'll think it was a colossal cheek, but I called the Norwich HQ to get your address.’
‘Are you alone?’
She peered through the gap.
Carver opened his unbuttoned raincoat and smiled again.
It was a pleasant smile.
‘Look, no one here but me.
No one hidden inside my mac.’
She returned his smile, took off the chain, asked him to come inside.
Leading him into the living room, she indicated the armchair for him to sit in.
Carver nodded, walked to the window.
‘This is a spacious bay,’ he said from the far side of the couch.
‘Pity it stares out at a row of other houses.’
‘That's London.’
Carver stood holding his executive case.
He had paid off the taxi, had given the driver a generous extra to drop his suitcase at the Hilton in Park Lane.
He frowned as he gazed down the road to where a black limo was parked.
‘Could we talk in your kitchen?’ he suggested, turning back to her.
‘Somewhere we can have running water while we chat?’
Her reaction was as though he'd hit her in the face, then she recovered, left the room and walked into the kitchen at the end of the hall.
Turning on a tap, she confronted him.
‘Not again, for God's sake.’
He said nothing, perched his executive case on a working surface, opened it, searched it swiftly.
He found the bug behind the rear lining, held it up, placed it in the sink, reduced the water pressure to a steady flow and eased the bug underneath it.
‘There's a limousine parked down the road,’ he told her.
‘I think there's a certain individual inside with listening apparatus.
If it's who I think it is I'd like to go out there and knock his teeth down his throat.
That thing under the tap is a bug…’
‘I know.
I've used them myself…’
She stopped speaking and cursed her impetuosity.
Carver lifted an eyebrow, said, ‘I see.
I wondered how you caught on so quickly to the trick of running water which will blot out all our conversation.
And that bug must have been inserted in my case before I left Helsinki — without my knowledge.’
‘Would you like some coffee and then we could talk?’
That was her desperate need: to have someone she could talk to.
Carver said he'd love a cup and carefully chose a stool to perch on well away from the chairs round the table.
In that way he wouldn't be too close to her.
He was experiencing a mixture of emotions.
Fury at the trick played on him.
But above all ironic amusement at  how things had worked out.
Because he'd found — and shown her — the bug, he'd gained Evelyn's confidence in nothing flat.
In the rear seat of the limousine Galvone was fiddling with his listening apparatus.
All he could get was atmospherics, a gushing sound like running water.
He swore foully to himself, then wondered.
Was it possible?
The Charmer had a great reputation with women, something he secretly envied.
But he'd only been inside the place a few minutes.
Was it possible Carver was already screwing Evelyn in the bathroom?
Maybe later he'd get the information he was after during pillow talk.
It was the way Galvone's mind worked.
‘…so,’ Evelyn continued, ‘while these two creeps, Grimwood and his pal Steve were here, Bob Newman, the foreign correspondent, arrived.
To cut a long story short, he threw them out of the house.
Then they came back later in their Volkswagen — which is when Bob found the bug they'd attached to the back of the TV set.’
‘And you say this Steve character had a gun?’
Carver asked.
He was still perched on the stool while Evelyn sat on the far side of the kitchen table.
Don't crowd her, he reminded himself.
‘Yes, a Walther something or other.
Bob took it away from him and kept it.
Later Bob left.’
She drank more coffee, put her cup down on the table, looked Carver in the eye.
‘I took his advice,’ she lied.
‘As soon as he'd gone that was when I called the police.
They have someone watching this house.
Will you excuse me a moment?’
She went back down the hall into the living room, walked into the bay, pulled back one of the net curtains.
To her right, four houses down the street, a black limousine was parked.
She dropped the curtain, returned to the kitchen and sat in her chair.
‘I have to signal the police at regular intervals that I'm OK,’ she continued lying.
Evelyn liked Carver, but he was INCUBUS.
After her recent experience she was taking no chances.
His next question made her glad she had bluffed him.
‘What about that pension document?
Did you sign it?
Did you agree to accept their terms?’
‘Not bloody likely.
You think I should accept?’ she asked, gazing at him innocently.
‘I can't advise you on a thing like that.
You must make up your own mind.
It's your life.’
She drank more coffee to conceal her expression.
Had that been another threat.
Subtly phrased, but still a threat?
She looked straight at him again.
‘Just why have you come to see me, Mr Carver?’
‘Adam.
I thought we'd agreed that.’
He put down his own cup, stood up.
‘I came because I liked what I saw when you passed me in the corridor back in Helsinki.
Would you have dinner with me?
Maybe tonight?’
‘Not tonight, Adam.
Let me think about it.’
‘I'll have to be going.
I'm staying at the Hilton.
Maybe I'll call you from there.’
He took out a notebook, wrote something on it, tore off the top sheet, put it on the table.
‘That's the hotel number.
Just in case for some reason you want to call me…’
She phoned for a taxi which arrived in a few minutes.
At the door he saw out of the corner of his eye the black limousine was still there.
Once the cab had left Wandsworth behind it ran into heavy traffic.
Carver, his executive case on his knees, the bug inside it, thought over what he'd learned from Evelyn Lennox.
The gun bothered him.
Since joining INCUBUS it was the first time he'd come across men who carried guns — outside the States.
And he still didn't know any details of Evelyn's job with INCUBUS.
She had evaded every probing question on that subject.
As the traffic ground to a halt he glanced round and then behind him.
Two vehicles back the black limo was in sight.
Impossible to see who the passenger in the rear seat was.
Eventually the traffic moved on, crossing the Thames bridge.
When Carver alighted outside the Hilton in Park Lane the limo drove past at speed.
Again he found it impossible to identify the passenger.
7
In Lapland the cavalcade of snow buggies bumped and rocked their way through the night over rough terrain.
In the moonlight Ion Manescu, sitting in the lead vehicle, peered through his snow goggles at the rolling wilderness.
The ground they travelled over was studded with boulders buried in snow-covered moss.
In places vehicles which had preceded them along the track had exposed the sterile moss.
Moving in a north-easterly direction towards the Soviet border, they were approaching the shore of an ice-bound lake.
Manescu checked his watch.
1 a.m.
He glanced at the bearded driver of his vehicle.
‘How much further?’ he asked in English.
‘We are there.‘
The bleak landscape would have depressed most  people, but Manescu was used to the winters in Romania.
As the driver spoke they crested a low ridge.
Below Manescu saw a complex of concrete buildings and a circular tower block surrounded by a high wire fence.
Double gates opened automatically and the cavalcade moved inside the perimeter.
Driving slowly, Manescu's vehicle entered a huge cavernous opening where a steel door had risen, again automatically.
Inside the cavern fluorescent lights threw a weird glow as the vehicle descended a ramp deep into the earth.
The underground complex had been built in summer, the construction teams working in three shifts round the dock.
Manescu had noticed a network of aerials, wires and dishes mounted on the roof.
They reminded him of a Distant Early Warning System.
‘What is this place officially?’ he asked as the buggy turned a corner into a vast garage.
Manescu estimated they must by now be three levels below the surface of the earth.
‘The most advanced Meteorological Institute in the world.
And an Observatory.
Here they study climatic changes — and the heavens.’
‘And that is its only purpose?’
Manescu was puzzled.
‘What other purpose could it have?’
The snow buggy pulled up alongside a closed elevator door.
The driver switched off his engine as another buggy entered the garage.
‘This is where you get off,’ the driver continued.
‘Don't forget your bag.
Go to the elevator and press the button marked minus two.
I don't know which section is housed at that level…’
Manescu was met by a uniformed guard when the doors opened.
The guard, who bore no insignia identifying the Institute, escorted Manescu to a large cell-like room with  no window.
The moment the elevator doors had opened at garage level a wave of welcome warmth had met the Romanian.
His room was equally well heated.
Fifteen minutes later he was escorted by the same guard to a huge theatre-like room on the same floor.
Rows of hard-backed tip-up seats occupied the room which sloped towards a high platform.
To one side was a large white screen, to the other a wall of milky glass.
‘You sit in the front row,’ the guard informed Manescu as other members who had travelled in the cavalcade began to filter into the large room.
No one was offered a seat in the front row except Manescu.
The room was dimly lit by indirect illumination.
The guards distributed glasses of mineral water to the occupants of the seats and withdrew.
A minute later a picture was flashed on the screen.
Manescu stared.
It showed Eastern Europe like a smashed jigsaw, all frontiers zigzagged.
Then a distorted voice began speaking, his silhouette vaguely seen behind the milky glass.
Something wrong with the glass — like a mirror in an amusement hall which contorted the viewer — made it impossible to guess his real appearance.
‘All of you seated here tonight are engaged in a great crusade,’ the voice began.
Manescu thought he detected the twang of an American accent.
Which told him nothing.
Half of the people in Europe spoke English with that accent.
The voice continued.
‘A crusade to bring back order, stability and discipline to the world.
Eastern Europe — the Balkan states, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, Bulgaria and Romania — is in a state of chaos and turmoil and turbulence.
That political amateur, Gorbachev, talks of a European homeland from the Atlantic to the Urals.
Our vision is much greater.
The chance is there to create a Western homeland from the Pacific coast of the United States to the Urals.
But that homeland must be  controlled and organized from New York…’
The hypnotic voice paused.
Behind the opaque glass screen Franklin D. Hauser mopped his sweating forehead.
The heating was turned up high to dull his audience's senses, to make them more receptive to what he was saying.
‘Every individual here tonight has a key part to play in this great plan.
You have special skills and experience which will help us to achieve our objective.
Others will follow you to this training ground, but you will form the leadership.
We are creating the most effective secret police the world has ever seen.
You will be allocated certain countries to operate inside.
And you will be paid huge sums to complete this work.
Those of you who wish will one day be provided with new identities and luxurious homes to live in.
Inside the United States…’
The voice paused again.
Manescu leaned forward, tried to get some impression of the shape behind the glass.
Impossible.
He was impressed by what he'd heard so far, but how was all this going to come about?
As though there had been thought transference, the voice continued.
‘How is all this to be achieved?
By money.
Billions of dollars are at our disposal.
The broken states I have named are in a condition of near ruin.
Secretly we shall buy controlling interests in their strategic industries.
This means we must control the governments of these states.
By bribery — all men are corruptible — and by removing permanently any so-called idealists who stand in our way.
You have had experience in that form of action.
Now I come to the main task of all.’
The voice vibrated with power and confidence.
The unknown man was a first-rate orator — Manescu recognized that.
He sensed a wave of excitement among the people behind him as the audience kept silent, hanging on every word.
‘The major task is to take over Russia,’ the voice  thundered.
‘A difficult task, you think?
No!
Gorbachev has no idea of what he is doing, of the forces he has unleashed — forces we will harness and control.
He has announced that private enterprise will be allowed to flourish.
We will provide that enterprise.
The American way.
Corruption has been the way of life for years with certain powerful people.
If necessary, to win our campaign we will rekindle that familiar flame.
We already have agents inside the Soviet Union reporting back to us.
That empire is crumbling.
We must create a fresh one to take its place, as a counter to one billion Chinese, and we shall control the new Russian state.
We may well create an independent Ukraine — the movement exists, the UTS, based in Munich, Germany.
With the huge funds we shall place at its disposal the next problem Gorbachev will face is the collapse of his empire — and we will pick up the pieces…’
A fresh pause.
Manescu had the impression the apparition behind the opaque glass wall was drinking from an absurdly shaped vessel.
And behind him he had heard gasps as the voice outlined the plan for Russia.
‘But,’ the eerie voice continued, ‘to ensure the success of this plan I must be sure all of you are fit to carry it out.
Which is why you are here.
Buried beneath the Arctic snows, you will be subjected to a series of ordeals, tests.
This will show whether you have the stamina and brains to perform your tasks.
Do not expect a comfortable time.
But remember…’
The voice dropped.
‘Moscow is the ultimate objective, and the rewards of those who lead this gigantic campaign will be enormous.
Good-night…’
Someone started clapping.
Manescu wondered whether it was one of the guards, but if so it wasn't necessary.
Behind him there was a crescendo of applause, and before it could stop the guards were ushering the members of that sinister audience to their rooms.
Escorted to-his own room, Manescu looked at the  guard and pointed to the changes which had taken place in his absence.
Two litre bottles of mineral water had been placed on a small wooden table with a hard-backed chair.
Also on the table was a large notebook and several biro pens.
‘What are those for?’
‘From now on,’ the guard informed him, ‘you will be confined to this room and no one will enter it for forty-eight hours.
You have toilet facilities, a bed to sleep on.
The light will be left on for the whole time.
The notepad is for you to write down any ideas which might aid the crusade the Conductor outlined.’
‘The Conductor?’
‘The man who delivered the speech.’
The guard paused by the door.
‘This will be kept locked.
No food will be provided.
And please give me your wristwatch.’
‘Why?’ asked Manescu, guessing the answer as he unfastened the watch and handed it over.
‘So you will have no way of knowing how much time has passed, whether it is night or day, even which day it is.
The other visitors are living under the same conditions.’
Without another word the guard dosed the steel door with a clang and Manescu heard the key turn in the lock, The ex-Director of the Romanian Securitate smiled to himself as he recalled a passage from the speech.
This will show whether you have the stamina and the brains …
In another cell-like room further along the corridor Irina Serov, once the only woman colonel in the Soviet KGB, now jobless since being thrown out in a Gorbachev purge, slid a comb tucked inside her tights into her hand and worked on her hair.
The guard allocated to her had removed all her make-up kit from her handbag, a subtle attempt at demoralization.
She stood five feet six tall in her high-heeled shoes, her long hair was dark, and she was the kind of thirty-five-year-old woman men turned to look at when she passed them in the street.
She had long shapely legs and had been known in Moscow by her nickname, ‘The Smooch’.
During her tour of duty in England she had killed two men without any risk of being apprehended.
She wrenched the cap off one of the two mineral bottles, took a brief sip.
The water must be made to last.
She could go two days without sleep and was amused by the test she was undergoing.
She sat at the table, picked up one of the pens, and began work.
At the top of the first sheet she wrote the subject of her first notes.
Intimidation .
Muffled in furs, Franklin D. Hauser left the complex in a snow buggy which drove him to a helipad a kilometre away.
He had no desire to linger any longer in this white Arctic hell.
A construction company controlled by Hauser had built the Institute complex.
The finance had been provided by one of his banks in co-operation with French and German organizations to give the place an international reputation.
But neither of his partners had the remotest idea of the existence of Levels Two and Three.
With a sense of relief he climbed aboard the waiting Sikorsky, equipped with skis, which would fly him back to Helsinki.
He peered out of the window as the machine rose into the now-moonless night.
‘Well,’ he said to himself, ‘I've started the action.
Now I must keep the momentum of the operation going.’
8
Newman timed it so he would arrive back at Greenway Gardens after dark.
It was eight in the evening when Evelyn opened the door on the chain, then let him inside.
He carried a small bag and she misunderstood the purpose of his visit as they sat in the curtained living room.
‘You've decided to stay with me?’
‘No.
I've decided to get you out of here.
I thought about what you told me — your job with the Profiles Division, and what happened later to those two Finn manufacturers.
On top of that, the couple of thugs who came here to force you to sign the insurance document, which I've read end to end…’
‘And there's been another visitor since you left.’
He listened carefully while she recalled the arrival of Adam Carver and her conversation with him.
She showed Newman the visiting card she'd kept.
He glanced at it, looked at her.
‘That does it.
The final straw.
Why should they send a senior vice president to check out what must be, if you'll pardon the description, a minor cog in such a huge enterprise?
The hard men came first, then the softly spoken and sympathetic type.
Oldest ploy in the world.
And you told him you hadn't signed the agreement.’
‘Was that a mistake?’ she asked anxiously.
‘I'm beginning to feel under siege.’
‘Doesn't make any difference.
The first two knew that.
I think this Adam Carver will try to charm you into signing.
If you refuse again, what next?
There have already been two murders.’
‘Now you're frightening me.’
Which was Newman's deliberate intent.
Instead he pressed harder while she was in a fraught mood.
‘Since I left you I managed to trace another ex-employee of INCUBUS.
Don't ask me how.
Lives in another part of London.
I visited him and he dosed up like a clam.
Wouldn't even give me a hint about what his job had been.
He was edgy.
Wanted to get rid of me fast.’
‘Why do you think he was like that?’
‘He'd obviously signed the document, agreed to receive a big fat pension — and keep his mouth shut.
He was frightened when I mentioned Fraternity & Equality Insurance, showed me the door.
Something pretty devilish is going on.
Which is why you're packing a bag, leaving here tonight.’
‘Where for?’
‘Didn't you say Sandy had a place at Southwold in Suffolk?
I never actually visited her there.
We used to meet a lot here in town, go out for a meal.’
‘The cottage isn't in Southwold,’ she said slowly.
Newman could tell she was thinking over his suggestion.
‘Sandy always said Southwold,’ she continued.
‘More people know where that is.
But the cottage is at a place called Walberswick.
She had a Southwold phone number.
Who's ever heard of Walberswick?’
‘I have.
It has a main stem simply called The Street.
And nice houses, if I remember rightly.
Plus two or three hotels.
Very near the coast.
You drive to the end of The Street, bear left and drive to the car park.
Over to the right is rough dune land, a big area before you top a ridge of shingle.
And Bingo!
The sea.’
Evelyn smiled, something she rarely did in Newman's experience of her, brief though it might be.
‘I can see you know Walberswick…’
‘It's well off the beaten track,’ he continued.
‘I'll drive you up there tonight.
You have a key to her cottage?’
‘Yes.
You think I'll be safer there?’
‘Sure of it.
Get packing…’
At ten o'clock at night The Street was a deserted tree-lined tunnel illuminated by the headlights of Newman's Mercedes 280E.
There were lights in some of the beautiful houses on either side but all of them were upstairs.
People went to bed early in Walberswick.
‘Slow down,’ said Evelyn, seated beside him.
‘We're close to the cottage.’
‘We'll come back to it.
I want to call in at one of those hotels to check something.
Here's a nice looking place.
Leave the heaters on.
Back in a minute…’
Before she could reply he had jumped out of the car to walk up the drive to the hotel.
The wind hit him the moment he left the vehicle, a ferocious gust off the nearby sea which nearly lifted him off his feet.
A storm was brewing up.
‘Can you give me a double room for a couple of nights?’ he asked the ancient receptionist.
‘I'm on my own but I like space.
My case is at a friend's house down The Street.
I will pay you in advance,’ he ended, hauling out his wallet.
He signed the register with a false name and address.
P. Ashbourne, 17 Lever Road, Bournemouth .
The precaution probably wasn't necessary, but on the off-chance that more thugs from INCUBUS came sniffing round, they wouldn't know he was in the area.
They had shown very thorough organization so far.
‘What was all that about?’
Evelyn asked as he got behind the wheel.
‘Had a private phone call to make,’ he lied.
‘Back to the cottage.’
‘It's called Rose Bower.
Drive slowly.
You can park in the drive, or even go on round the back.’
The cottage was an attractive picture postcard by the  light of the moon shining between scudding clouds.
Thatched roof, two storeys, the second had more mullion windows hunched inside the thatch.
He drove round the back, switched off the engine, reached for the key she was holding.
‘I'll go in first,’ he said casually.
On his way up the paved path between walls of rose bushes he picked up a piece of old iron pipe with his gloved hand.
There was always a weapon available if you used your eyes.
He unlocked the old heavily studded front door, pushed it open.
Evelyn reached over his shoulder, switched on a light, and gasped.
‘Wait here,’ Newman ordered.
Beyond the doorway you walked straight into the main sitting room.
It was a scene of havoc.
Drawers had been pulled out of military chests, left on the floor.
Chintz-covered cushions had been ripped open, left lying on the floor, stuffing scattered.
A chintz-covered settee had been upended, the lining torn open.
‘Oh, my God!’
Evelyn whispered.
‘They've been here, too.’
‘Stay just inside the door while I explore…’
He went swiftly through the house, still holding the piece of piping.
The break-in had not surprised him too much.
Beyond the sitting room, a large area with an old brick fireplace set back in a spacious alcove, piles of cut logs flanking it, a narrow passage led to the kitchen and a small study.
Both rooms had received the same brutal searching treatment.
He returned to the passage, ran lightly up the narrow twisting staircase, checked three bedrooms, the bathroom and the toilet.
Nothing had been overlooked.
He ran downstairs and Evelyn had collapsed into an armchair.
‘The bastards!’ she said between her teeth.
‘Wrecking Sandy's old home.’
She looked up.
‘You didn't find anyone?’
‘Lord, no.
They're long gone.
Must have happened some time after Buchanan and his sidekick came here.
They found the key in her handbag in the Jag.’
‘But there's no sign of forced entry.
Or is the back door…?’
‘Firmly closed and locked.
These jokers will be experts with skeleton keys.
You wait here.
I'm just taking my case to that hotel.
I booked a room while I was there.’
‘But you could stay here…’
‘I could,’ he agreed.
‘But this is Sandy's house.
She once lived here.
I'd sooner not, if you don't mind.
Back in a minute.
I'm helping you to clear up.
Don't argue.
Bolt the front door after me till I get back…’
As he dumped his case in the pleasant bedroom, lifted the lid and left it at that, he reflected.
He hadn't strictly told Evelyn the truth.
He had seen the outside of Rose Bower.
Sandy had been redecorating the place, had forbidden him to enter.
‘Until it's all finished and ready for you,’ she had said with her glowing smile.
The moment he'd entered Rose Bower the smell of fresh paint had assailed his nostrils.
He had almost broken down.
No, he could never spend a night in that cottage.
Quite apart from the problem that Evelyn seemed to like him.
When he returned she had cleared a space in the kitchen, had coffee ready.
They drank it amid the ruins, not saying anything.
Newman put down his large mug.
‘It's freezing in here.
First thing, I'll get that fire going in the sitting room.
I'd sleep there tonight, if I were you.’
He insisted on staying until the cottage was as shipshape as could be managed.
At least there was little evidence remaining of the break-in.
He said good-night to Evelyn quickly and that he'd be back after breakfast in the morning.
‘We could go and explore Minsmere,’ she suggested.
‘That's a Royal Society for the Protection of Birds Nature Reserve.
The migrant widgeons should still be there.
I doubt if they've flown north yet in this weather.’
‘Good idea.
And again, good-night…’
‘Before you go, Bob.’
She ran to the door.
‘What do you think they could have been looking for — the people who ransacked her cottage?’
‘No idea,’ he lied.
The receptionist at the hotel had given him a key to the front door and his mind was a chaotic mixture of emotions and thoughts as he walked past it towards the shore.
He was well wrapped up against the weather.
Clad in a heavy military-style trench coat, turned up at the collar, he had a waterproof hat rammed down over his forehead.
The storm was increasing in fury as he turned left towards the car park, beyond any houses, then made his way to the east on to the scrubby dunes.
He had walked along this track with Sandy, arm in arm, and as the wind beat in his face he recalled the weather had been similar.
A five minute rough walk in the moonlight took him to the top of the shingle ridge.
As he crested it he flinched.
Surf from giant waves crashing a few feet away splashed his face.
Braced against the storm as it howled, he promised himself something.
‘I'll burn the bastards who did that to Sandy.’
Newman had very little sleep that night.
He had lied to Evelyn when he'd denied any idea of what the ransackers were looking for.
He was convinced he was holding what they sought in his hand.
A red clothbound diary written in her handwriting.
He had known where to look for it when he'd left the bell tower after finding her corpse.
Going over to her parked Jaguar, he had opened the driver's door, bent down and felt under the seat.
The diary was attached to the underside with sellotape.
He'd torn it free, pocketed it, had not mentioned its existence to Buchanan.
Suppressing evidence in a murder investigation, they called it.
To hell with them.
He was conducting his own  investigation.
And, as Tweed had predicted to Paula in a similar context, he expected it would take him months to unravel the affairs of the world-wide octopus, INCUBUS.
He read again some of her notes.
January 12.
Bennington, Swindon.
Machine tools.
James Archer, Managing Director, sole owner of company.
Profile completed, submitted to Division, January 31.
Takeover bid, February 20.
Note: Archer has daughter, Julia.
April 5.
Manningham Electronics, Thames Valley.
Miniaturized microchips.
Chairman: Gavin Manningham.
Profile completed, submitted May 2.
Takeover bid, May 28.
Note: Manningham has a mistress …
There were similar entries for six other companies, all in strategic industries, including two small private banks.
Newman yawned.
God, he was flaked out.
He checked the time — 3 a.m.
Undressing quickly, he cleaned his teeth and flopped into bed.
The last thing he did before he fell fast asleep was to slip Sandy's diary inside his pillow.
Another day, another storm.
Tweed stood behind the heavy net curtains masking the windows of his Park Crescent office, watching the trees in distant Regent's Park shuffle and shudder under the wind's onslaught.
‘I've collated quite a lot of information from the researchers,’ Paula commented sitting at her desk.
‘I'm getting there, too,’ Monica said, arranging a series of coded fax messages from Europe.
‘So what does it amount to?’
Tweed asked, returning to his swivel chair behind his own desk.
‘You were right,’ Paula continued.
‘It does look as though some top Communist agents in the security services in various East European countries-have vanished into thin air.
We can't be sure, of course.
It's pure chaos out there, but one man has, I'm sure, got away.’
‘Which one?’
‘Ion Manescu, evil genius behind the Securitate.’
‘I'd already decided we have to check on him closely.
On the spot.
Subject to your report, which you've just given.
Guy Dalby is due here any moment.
Flying in from Vienna.
By now he knows his sector.’
Despite the arrival of glasnost , Tweed had kept in place his extensive network across Western Europe.
The situation was too fluid, the future too uncertain for any relaxation yet.
After the tragic murder of Harry Masterson in The Greek Key crisis, Tweed had shuffled some of his four sector chiefs.
Erich Lindemann, German, was still controlling the Scandinavian sector with a forward penetration zone — Northern Russia.
Harvey Wilson, promoted swiftly from field agent, had replaced Paula's deceased husband as controller for Germany, Holland and Belgium.
Penetration zone: Poland and Czechoslovakia.
Reg Finch, another swift promotion, forty years old and very decisive, had taken-over Dalby's old sector in the Mediterranean covering France, Spain, Italy, Turkey and Switzerland.
Penetration zone: Libya and the Middle East.
There was a knock on the door, Tweed called out come in, and Guy Dalby entered.
Based in Vienna, he was controller of the ultrasensitive Balkan sector — covering Austria, Yugoslavia and Greece.
He also had the most tricky penetration zone: Hungary, Romania, Bulgaria and the Ukraine.
‘Spot of bother?’ he enquired jauntily as Tweed indicated he should sit in the chair beside his desk.
‘Message had a mildly urgent ring.’
Dalby, dressed in a conventional grey suit, whipped a cow-lick of dark hair over his forehead.
Of medium height and build, he had an air of self-confidence which irked Paula, although she recognized his first-rate brain.
‘Ion Manescu,’ said Tweed, coming straight to the point.
‘You'll have heard of him?’
‘Heard of him?’
Dalby laughed, a hollow laugh.
‘He was one of the top men we tried to keep a close eye on — when we could.
He's a past master at keeping his whereabouts secret, laying false trails.
A dangerous, ruthless and cruel character.
Personification of evil.
He was close to Ceausescu — and at the same time kept Moscow informed.
Ceausescu didn't know that, but we did.
If he'd been born an American he'd have been high up in the CIA — and still informing Moscow…’
‘You mean he's pro-Russian?’
Tweed interjected.
‘Lordy, no!’
Dalby was amused again.
‘Manescu's only allegiance is to himself.
He kept in with the Soviets in case Moscow ever prevailed in Bucharest — plus the extra money he undoubtedly obtained.’
‘Where is he now?’
Tweed asked quietly.
‘He's performed another of his well-known vanishing tricks.’
Dalby made a conjuror's gesture.
‘Now you see him, now you don't.
Rumour hath it he escaped the country when the revolution revolved.
Or he may secretly be under guard in Dracula's castle.
Perfect place for him.’
Tweed had taken to doodling.
On his pad he drew a fearsome vampire face with fangs, then looked up.
‘I need to know for certain whether the Romanians do have him.
Alternatively, has he escaped; and if so, his destination.’
‘You don't want much, do you?
I send in a couple of men?’
‘I want you to go yourself.
I've arranged with a friend who owes me a favour that I'll supply the supervisor for medical equipment being flown to Bucharest.
You'll be that supervisor.’
He handed Dalby a slip of folded paper.
‘Name and phone number.
The consignment leaves tonight from Stansted.’
‘Who does he think I am?’
‘I was just going to tell you.
Usual cover.
Special  Branch.
Checking a new drugs route — in connection with an IRA group.
Just hint at it.’
‘Don't think I'd say it outright, do you?
I'd better move.
Report back to you when I get back to Vienna.
If I do.’
He stood up, waved at Monica, winked at Paula and was gone.
‘That man is too clever by half,’ Paula commented.
‘I don't think he knows he's not my favourite person.’
‘He knows,’ Tweed told her, ‘which is why he winked.
To wind you up.’
‘Isn't it taking a big chance, sending a man like Dalby inside Romania?
With all the information locked inside his head?’
‘It would have been unthinkable not so long ago,’ Tweed agreed.
‘But they'll welcome him with open arms, bringing them medical aid.
He'll make sure they do.
And on top of everything else he's a brilliant linguist.
Now, all we can do is wait for his report and get on with more work.’
‘If you say so,’ Paula said dubiously.
The trouble was, Tweed was thinking, Paula had a blind spot where Dalby was concerned.
Under that flippant attitude he liked to show at Park Crescent was a mind like quicksilver.
Also, among other languages, he spoke Romanian — although Tweed doubted he'd let anyone in Bucharest know that.
‘The one advantage of that appalling business of the cottage being broken into,’ Newman told Evelyn as they drove away from Minsmere Nature Reserve, ‘is they're unlikely even to think of looking for you there.’
‘Are you sure?’ she asked nervously.
‘I can't be absolutely sure,’ he admitted.
‘But look at it from their point of view.
Rose Bower belonged to Sandy — with their obsession for recording details about  employees they would know that.
They've been there to search for something — whatever — they thought she had.
Either they found it or they didn't.
But they'll have crossed that place off their list.’
‘I have enjoyed today,’ she said wistfully.
They had spent the time wandering round the Reserve, watching the widgeon ducks and other wildfowl paddling in the lagoon close to the sea.
The sky had been an azure dome, the air fresh and unpolluted.
They had eaten a packed lunch prepared by Evelyn.
Newman had kept the conversation general, fending Evelyn off when she tried to bring it on a more personal basis.
He had decided to drive back to London to check the companies register in the City.
‘Do you have to go so soon?’
Evelyn pleaded as the car rocked over a series of ramps.
‘You'll be safe as long as you stay in the Walberswick area.
If you want a change, there's a nice pub at Dunwich.
You turn right when we hit the road at the end of this track to Minsmere — instead of left, as we shall, to get you back to Walberswick.
But don't go near Southwold,’ he warned.
Some bizarre quirk led Newman to take a route back to London past the bell tower where Sandy had died.
The Coroner's inquest had been held in Southwold the previous day and he had attended with Evelyn.
Chief Inspector Buchanan had given evidence tersely, in a dry tone.
Investigations were continuing.
He had no lead as yet.
The outcome was as expected.
‘Murder by person or persons unknown…’
As he said the words the Coroner stared at Newman, who stared back.
As soon as it was over Newman had driven Evelyn away immediately.
It was night when he turned down the A1120, drove  through Yoxford and continued along the winding country road.
There was no other traffic and he kept his headlights  undimmed .
Sweeping over the ploughed fields the beams showed a blanket of frost forming.
The night was cold, the air bitter.
It suited his mood.
He was approaching the track leading to the bell tower, a dark grim silhouette in the moonlight, when he saw a great glow of light to his right in the distance.
Livingstone Manor, the English country residence of Franklin D. Hauser.
As he came closer he saw the old Georgian mansion was illuminated with lights in all the windows.
Downstairs the windows were masked by curtains but upstairs the curtains were drawn back.
He slowed down.
His eyes narrowed as he saw the outline of a helicopter by the side of the mansion.
Newman had spent three days at the hotel in Walberswick — mainly to attend the inquest but also to soothe Evelyn as far as he could.
On the day of the discovery of Sandy's body he remembered Buchanan had called at Livingstone Manor, had been told Hauser was in Finland.
He also recalled there was a heliport near Beccles to the north.
Was Hauser now in residence?
He could have flown by private jet to an East Anglian airfield, been driven from there to the heliport, boarded the chopper and flown to the manor.
It was just a chance.
He pulled up in front of the high iron grille gates barring the entrance to a drive, saw in his headlights a speakphone set into one of the brick pillars.
‘Robert Newman here,’ he announced after pressing the button.
‘To see Mr Hauser, but only if he's free…’
9
Franklin D. Hauser sat in a large Regency chair, wearing evening dress, in the large living room at the front of the house.
The windows overlooked the long drive to distant entrance gates.
The parkland was laid out with a smooth lawn.
Bordering the lawn was a wall of trees with a huge oak at one corner.
‘So, tell me,’ he said, addressing Adam Carver, ‘how did you get on with the Evelyn Lennox twist?’
‘I lost her,’ Carver told him bluntly, standing by a spacious fireplace with a drink in his hand.
Half a tree trunk surrounded with logs crackled and flamed, warming his backside as he stood with one hand lifting the flap of his jacket.
‘My, my, that was careless of you.
Losing the girl you'd been sent to interview,’ sneered Frank Galvone, standing closer to Hauser.
‘Now, Frank,’ Hauser admonished him amiably.
‘Let Adam finish his story.
I'm sure he has more to tell than that.’
‘I talked to her at her place in Greenway Gardens,’ Carver continued, ignoring Frank.
‘In a few words, she did not agree to sign the insurance document.
And she told me some character called Steve produced a gun when Newman, the foreign correspondent, interrupted their tete-a-tete .
I didn't know this company hired men with guns.’
‘You're Banking,’ Frank said quickly.
‘Stick with that.’
‘Does that mean we employ men with Walthers?’
Carver asked, staring at Hauser.
‘Of course not.’
Hauser was amused at the suggestion.
‘I  should add that Frank was talking about America.
Security guards at certain plants may well be armed.
That's common practice in the States…’
He stopped speaking as someone knocked at the door.
Galvone called out, ‘Come on in,’ and the butler appeared with a folded sheet of paper on a silver salver.
He held out the salver to Galvone who took the sheet, unfolded it, read the few words on the paper and handed it to Hauser.
He dismissed the butler with a jerk of his head.
‘Talk of the devil,’ he said.
‘Newman is outside the gate, asking to see you.
I'll tell him to move his ass.’
‘Wait a minute.’
Hauser's tone was abrupt.
He opened a blue folder resting in his lap, glanced through the typed sheets.
‘Grimwood reports Newman did arrive and spoilt their act just as they'd got Lennox to agree to sign.
And Adam has just confirmed his statement.
Always meet the opposition and hear what it has to say.
Forewarned is forearmed, as the Brits say.
Adam, would you be so kind as to tell Winterton to admit Mr Newman?
Thank you.’
Galvone waited until Carver had left the room.
‘I think you're making a mistake.
You rarely agree to see a newspaper man.’
‘Frank, you're an impetuous man.
You'll never occupy this chair until you learn to control that impetuosity.
You really must study my methods more closely.’
‘I know I get it wrong sometimes.’
It cost Galvone a lot to say that but he knew he'd blundered.
‘But I do get it right most of the time.
I think I'll freshen up my drink.’
He poured himself a double Scotch from the antique drinks cabinet.
Hauser leaned over, opened a drawer in a desk and slid the Grimwood folder inside.
Then, settling himself back in his chair, he lit a cigarette.
Galvone hurried to place a crystal ash tray on a small table beside him.
Newman walked into the room followed by Carver.
He carried his trench coat over his arm.
He'd declined the butler's offer to take his coat: he might want to leave in a  hurry.
He smiled as he advanced across the room.
‘Very good of you to see me, Mr Hauser.
Normally I ask for an appointment, but I happened to be passing and saw the lights — and the chopper.
I guessed you might just be back from Finland.’
He saw a flicker in the ice-blue eyes behind the pince-nez.
Glancing at Galvone he saw something different.
The dark eyes were glowing with hostility and the man's whole body had tensed.
Hit them the moment you arrive was a favourite tactic of Newman's.
Hauser recovered first.
‘And very pleasant to meet at last the famous foreign correspondent.
I read your international bestseller,Kruger: The Computer That Failed .
Must have made you a fortune.’
‘It did,’ Newman agreed.
‘Gave me financial independence.
But I do a piece now and again.
When the subject interests me.’
‘I'm forgetting my manners…’
Hauser introduced Carver and Galvone.
‘Both senior vice presidents.
’ He smiled.
‘One day one of them will take over from me.
The question is, which one?’
‘Well, I think that's your decision.’
‘Frank, get Mr Newman a drink.
What's your poison?
Then you can tell me what you want.’
Newman thanked him, shook his head, sat in the chair Hauser ushered him to with a wave of his large hand.
‘I am hoping you'll agree to an interview for Der Spiegel .
At your convenience,’ he added blandly.
‘I can afford to give you fifteen minutes now.
Then I have guests arriving for dinner.
Shoot.’
Newman took out his notebook, glanced at Galvone and Carver.
‘I always interview a subject on his — or her — own.
It's the only way it works.’
Hauser beamed.
‘Adam, Frank, maybe you could find something to occupy your time elsewhere.
Preferably something profitable for the company.’
Galvone stepped forward, laid a hand on Newman's shoulder.
He was surprised at the hard muscle he felt under his strong grip.
‘Before we go I'd better check this guy for a piece — or a tape recorder.‘
‘The uniformed guard in the hall did just that.’
Newman looked up at Galvone.
‘Frank, kindly remove your hand or I may remove it myself.
Painfully.’
‘Try it, smart ass…’
‘Your impetuosity is showing again,’ Hauser remarked.
‘Do I have to remind you Mr Newman is a guest?
An honoured guest?’
As he spoke he pressed a concealed button in the arm of his chair.
The door at the end of the room opened swiftly and the butler appeared.
Hauser called out as though asking for the tea to be served.
‘Winterton, could you confirm the guard gave Mr Newman the normal check before he came in here?’
‘Oh, yes.
He did, sir.’
‘Thank you, Winterton.
That will be all.’
Hauser looked at Newman.
‘My apologies.
But success in this world seems to breed envy which, in its turn, can breed hostility.
A sad state of affairs, but it is so.
Security has to be total or useless.’
Galvone had removed his hand and stepped away several paces.
He glared at Newman and then left the room with Carver.
Newman stiffened his back against me chair and smiled.
‘About your security.
The guard on the gate at the entrance to the drive should really have checked me.
If an intruder eliminated him with a weapon and managed to get inside this place you'd be in trouble.’
‘Thank you.
What do you wish to ask me?’
‘Why are you extending your activities to Europe and what are your plans?’
‘Very modest.
Mr Newman.
A small investment — for INCUBUS — in certain companies to give us a toehold inside me Common Market.
A sideline, you might say.’
‘Really?
Bennington Machine Tools in Swindon.
A key firm in a key industry.
Manningham Electronics in the Thames valley.
A company with the most advanced products in western Europe.’
‘Really, Mr Newman,’ Hauser waved his cigarette, but again Newman had detected that brief flicker behind the pince-nez.
‘I'm Chief Executive and President of a large international organization.
I never get buried in the weeds.
I concern myself with general policy.
You expect me to know all the details of what is happening in a legion of divisions?’
‘You have a reputation for being a master of detail.
The companies I mentioned are important acquisitions.’
‘The names mean nothing to me.
You'd  have to consult Adam Carver — or Frank Galvone.’
‘One of whom may — or may not — succeed you some day?’
Hauser threw back his large head and chuckled.
‘You are so observant.
You noticed my little ploy.
Keeps them on their toes.’
‘You said your investment in Europe is modest.
What about Timo Metsola's electronics outfit in Finland — where you've just flown back from?
It seems to me you're spreading your net very wide.’
‘Again the name means nothing to me.’
Hauser's mood had changed.
He stubbed out his half-smoked cigarette savagely in the ash tray.
‘You'll have to be careful with this article, Mr Newman.
Careful you get all your facts right.
I operate in the American way.
I'd sue you, strip you bare without a second thought.’
‘What is your general strategy in the new fluid situation in Europe?’
Newman pressed on.
‘To provide more employment where I can.
I regard INCUBUS as a brotherhood of man.
My only role in life is to help my fellow men and women, regardless of race or creed.
You may quote me.’
‘And regardless of the business methods you use?’
Hauser pressed the button in his chair.
‘This interview is becoming tedious, is terminated.
I had expected better of you.’
His manner was aggressive, his tone harsh.
‘Have a care in future.
Better perhaps that you retire, enjoy the fortune you made from your book.’
He stared across the room as Winterton entered.
‘Please show Mr Newman out — he is leaving immediately.’
‘And thank you for the interview.’
Newman smiled as he stood up, pocketing his notebook and pen.
He walked rapidly across the gleaming parquet floor, slipping on his trench coat as he left.
In response to the two presses of the chair button Galvone hurried in to the living room.
He knew from the expression on Hauser's face something was wrong.
And tobacco ash was spilt down the front of his evening shirt.
Galvone pulled out the display handkerchief from his top pocket.
‘Excuse me, Chief,’ he fawned and used the handkerchief to flick away the ash.
‘Something wrong?’
‘Robert Newman has just left.
He'll be walking down the drive now.
He's investigating us, Frank.
And he's getting close.
I don't like that.
I don't like that at all.’
‘So I'd better deal with the problem immediately?’
‘That's up to you, Frank.’
He turned a steely gaze on his subordinate.
‘I don't wish to get meshed in the weeds — use your discretion.’
‘He's driving a Merc. 280E.
The guard biked down the drive and checked it out…’
Galvone was half-running from the room as he threw the words over his shoulder, closed me door, ran down me hall and into the night.
Just outside the grille gates — which had opened automatically at his approach and then closed behind him — Newman was lying on his back under his car.
He aimed his pencil flash, checking me underneath of the chassis.
It seemed unlikely they would have placed a bomb so close to Livingstone Manor, but it was better to be sure than dead.
He hauled himself over the gravel clear of the chassis, stood up, opened the front passenger door, pulled the lever which unlocked the hood.
With the hood open he made a swift examination of the engine.
Nothing there either.
He took off his trench coat, shivered in the cold, shook the dirt off the coat, put it on again and slipped behind the wheel.
Despite the bitter night he lowered his window before starting the motor.
He was driving away from me grounds of Hauser's estate when he heard a different engine sound.
The sound of the helicopter's rotors starting up.
He pressed his foot down, sped along the country road which was free of other traffic.
He drove with his headlights undipped to see the endless curves in good time.
Bare hedges like barbed wire showed in the beams.
The chug-chug of the chopper was growing louder, coming up fast behind him.
A minute later he saw it flying past well over to his right at a height of about two hundred feet.
It flew on, red and green lights flashing, then it descended, disappeared.
Newman frowned as he recalled a snatch of conversation with Buchanan during a break in his interrogation at Southwold on the day Sandy's body was discovered.
Hauser's name had cropped up and Buchanan had shrugged as he put down his mug of foul-tasting coffee.
‘I sometimes think these super-rich men like to show they have made it.
Hauser not only has a twenty-acre estate at Livingstone Manor.
A constable in Yoxford told me he also owns two hundred acres of farmland to the west of his country retreat…’
And now, Newman thought, I'm driving west of that estate.
So maybe it was somewhere on mat land me chopper has put down.
He had been driving at high speed when me helicopter flew past him.
And they probably know I'm travelling in this car.
He reduced speed considerably, dipped his headlights, began to crawl round the bends, his right foot poised over the accelerator.
He travelled like this for some distance, meeting no other traffic.
The moonlight shone off the frost settling on me fields and a wave of mist like sea surf was beginning to rise on either side of the road.
He turned yet another corner and saw in the distance a rare copse of evergreen trees close to the road.
He stopped, switched off the engine and listened.
Had he imagined it?
He could have sworn he'd caught me sound of another engine, a weird noise — a clanking, groaning ratchety sound.
The silence of a cold windless night was all he heard now.
He switched on the engine and drove on.
He had increased his speed to between forty and fifty miles an hour.
Suddenly he wanted to get well clear of the area.
He was approaching the copse of trees, a dark island by the side of the road.
Because of the chopper's flight he was watching closely and he blinked as his eyes located movement.
Something huge emerging from behind the copse, heading for the road.
And, much louder, a blasting roar, the sinister clanking sound repeated.
He was ten yards from the copse when the origin of the roar appeared.
An enormous tractor with giant wheels was driving across his path.
He had a split second to decide.
He rammed his foot down, the Merc. responded, shot forward like a torpedo.
The yellow monster was almost on top of him, two great lights like enormous eyes now switched on.
Newman kept his foot down.
To his right the tractor loomed over him, the agent of destruction.
Newman's Mercedes skimmed past the revolving  wheels with inches to spare.
In his rear view mirror he saw the solid yellow wall blocking the whole road.
He sped on…
Behind the wheel of the tractor Frank Galvone swore foully.
He had misjudged the speed of his target by no more than a fraction.
Cursing again, he began reversing the machine back up the farm track towards the hollow where the helicopter and its pilot waited.
Newman, with the murder of Sandy foremost in his mind, having passed the fatal bell tower within the past two hours, was shaken by the encounter.
His normal reaction would have been to swing the car in a U-turn to return and tackle the driver of the tractor.
But he had no idea how strong his back-up might be.
And he was no longer armed — he had hurled the Walther taken from Steve into the sea at Walberswick, followed by the magazine he'd first extracted.
Five minutes later he saw the lights of a village pub.
The Nag's Head.
He parked his car among a dozen others, out of sight of the road, and walked inside.
An old pub with beamed ceilings, smoke-blackened, and a log fire crackling and spitting inside a deep alcove.
The place was crowded.
Mostly locals.
Agricultural workers, their trousers fastened to their ankles with bits of string or bicycle clips.
He leaned on the stained wooden bar.
The landlord was a short round-headed red-faced man.
‘Good evening, sir.
What can I serve you?’
‘A Scotch.
And some water, please.’
The landlord placed the glass in front of Newman, pushed a jug of water along the bar, studying him.
‘Stranger to these parts?’
‘Yes.’
Newman paid for the drink.
‘I've just interviewed a man called Franklin D. Hauser.’
He diluted the  Scotch, sipped at his glass.
‘I hear he's not too popular round here.‘
He was aware of sudden hush among the men on either side of him.
A heavily built man in a corduroy jacket edged closer to him on his left.
His elbow nudged against Newman's side.
‘You just finishin' that drink and then pushin' off, Mister?’
‘What's that ‘e said?’
Another voice, this time on his right.
A six foot two giant with black hair and eyebrows joined over the bridge of his large nose.
‘You tellin' Jed you don't like Mr ‘Auser?’
‘I may have another drink, I may not,’ Newman replied, looking at Corduroy Jacket.
‘Best make it one and then shove it as Dan said.’
The giant, Dan, lifted Newman's glass and held it close to his mouth.
He grinned, showing bad teeth.
‘Drink up now, there's a good boy.’
‘Put that glass down carefully,’ Newman said quietly.
‘And I should warn you I'm ex-SAS.
If I have to defend myself I'll try very hard not to kill you — but with my training.
And I didn't say I disliked Hauser.
I said I heard he wasn't popular.
That was in Yoxford.
I wondered why.’
‘Yoxford!’
Corduroy Jacket laughed sarcastically.
‘What do them yokels know.’
He spoke across Newman to the giant.
‘I'd put that glass down very carefully if I were you.
We mistook the gentleman's attitude.’
The glass was placed gently back on the counter in front of Newman.
He drank a little more and then asked his question.
‘I gather Hauser is well-liked around here.
I'm not surprised,’ he lied, ‘but will someone tell me why he's liked so much?’
‘Generous with his money.’
The landlord intervened, relieved there wasn't going to be any trouble.
‘Give you  an example.
We had trees down in a storm.
Cottages damaged.
No insurance.
Who comes along and says he'll pay for everything to be put to rights?
Mr Franklin D. Hauser.’
‘Very generous, as you say.’
‘That's not all,’ broke in Corduroy Jacket.
‘Anyone who gets behind payments with the mortgage round ‘ere, all ‘e ‘as to do is tell the Manor.
Mr ‘Auser helps out.
You travel round these parts, you'll find folk ‘ave nothing but good to say about Mr ‘Auser.’
He leaned closer and Newman detected evidence of many pints of beer on his breath.
‘And they'd go a long way to ‘elp ‘im if ever ‘e ‘ad a problem.’
‘Well I'm glad you told me.’
Newman swallowed the rest of his drink.
‘Obviously I was badly misinformed in Yoxford.
I must be off now.’
As he drove through the night, heading back to London, Newman was anxious to get clear of Hauser's ‘province’.
The American was clever, he'd give him that.
Posing as a philanthropist, he had distributed  largesse on a big scale to the locals.
This provided him with an army of allies — and potential spies — surrounding a wide area of the Livingstone Manor estate.
Newman wondered whether he employed the same method in other parts of the world.
It also occurred to him that this precaution eliminated the likelihood of ever finding a witness who had seen Sandy arriving in her Jaguar at the bell tower close to dawn.
The word had probably been passed around already: see no evil, hear no evil.
Which led to a fresh thought.
Assuming Sandy had been murdered because of her connection until recently with INCUBUS, the murderer could be one of Hauser's close associates.
Hauser had  struck him as a man who moved with great caution.
No hired killers for a one-time job.
Too risky.
My God! he thought.
I could have been in the same room with the murderer back at Livingstone Manor.
Newman had noticed Adam Carver seemed the athletic type, very fit and strong.
On the other hand there was Mr Frank Galvone.
His first impression of Galvone had been of a mobster, but Newman had met other reasonably honest Americans holding high positions who had made the same initial impression.
The fact that both men had been at Livingstone Manor intrigued him.
What was it they said about a murderer returning to the scene of his crime?
All these disconnected thoughts were roaming through his mind as he drove through the middle of the night close to his flat in South Ken.
Hardly any other traffic about at 1 a.m.
He was so close to his flat in Beresforde Road that he had reduced his speed to a crawl, searching for a parking place.
The huge articulated truck with a separate cab for the driver appeared out of nowhere, moving at high speed, lights undimmed and aiming straight for him.
He attempted evading action but it was too late.
The monster slammed into the rear of his car.
Despite the fact he was wearing his seat belt he was hurled forward.
His skull cracked down on the steering wheel.
Forcing his head up he found everything was blurred.
He had braked automatically, which was probably a mistake.
Through the shimmer he saw the huge octopus eyes of the juggernaut grow dimmer.
The vehicle was backing away.
It turned a corner and vanished.
Then he blacked out.
10
81 °F;.
27 °C;.
The heatwave which had started in May was continuing to roast London in June.
Tweed was clad in shirt sleeves and a pair of lightweight slacks as he stared out of his office window.
It was mid-morning and tourists were trudging under the blazing sun towards Regent's Park.
Monica was sweltering despite the fan revolving on her desk.
All it seemed to do was circulate the warm turgid air.
Tweed turned quickly as the door opened and Paula arrived.
He sensed she was excited.
‘Bob's jogging in Hyde Park.
Isn't it wonderful?
He discharged himself from the hospital.
When he's had a bath at his flat he's coming here.’
‘A drink to celebrate,’ Tweed said.
‘Champagne.’
‘Not until he's arrived,’ Paula replied.
She sank into the chair behind her own desk.
‘Three ribs broken and concussion.
Now he's as strong as an ox.
He's been through a lot.’
‘It wasn't the ribs that worried me,’ Tweed replied, sitting in his swivel chair.
‘He was fit, I was sure he would mend.
But the concussion was a dicey business.’
‘That's what the doctor kept telling us,’ Paula recalled.
‘And he was very insistent Bob had to stay under his care until the headaches went away.
They were murder for him, I could tell.’
‘It was that truck driver who was intent on murder,’ Monica interjected grimly.
‘And, of course, what do the police do?
They find the truck abandoned a mile away, that it had been stolen.
No sign of the driver.’
The phone rang and Paula grabbed hers first.
She spoke briefly, put it down and grinned.
‘Bob is here.
On his way up.’
Newman came in with a faraway look.
Paula was immediately concerned.
She jumped up and ran forward, guided him to the armchair.
‘The headache's come back?’ she said.
‘Nope.’
He grinned at her.
‘Sorry if I was in a brown study.
I feel fine.
I was remembering some of the facts I built up from the data you brought me.
I used the phone a lot while I was in that private room.
In Sandy's notebook — the one I'd found in her Jaguar that morning at the bell tower — there was a reference to Dracon.
I know what it is now.
INCUBUS has a think-tank called Dracon based outside Boston.
All the ideas come from there.
And Ed Riverton was the vice president running it.
He gave me a hint when I interviewed him in Helsinki not long before he also was murdered.’
‘So why do you believe he was killed in that fashion?’
Tweed enquired.
‘Because he got worried about what they were planning — all those cranky academics Hauser employs.
The trouble is I've no idea of what they were planning.’
‘Doesn't get us much further then,’ Tweed observed.
‘We do have a lot of data on that banking colossus.
Collected while you were on holiday…’
‘Some holiday, thank you very much…’
‘Did you know it's the biggest bank in the United States?’
Tweed persisted.
‘Bigger even than the Bank of America.
It has enormous resources, and controlling interests in key outfits all over the Western world.’
‘Power.’
Newman paused to drink from the mug of coffee Paula had made.
Champagne could come later.
‘Power,’ he repeated.
‘That's the driving force behind Hauser.
The acquisition of more power than anyone else in the world.
I've been contacting some reporter pals.
Building up a jigsaw.
Oh, by the way, Chief Inspector Buchanan is on his way here.
Hope you don't mind?’
‘Why should I mind?
But I'd have thought you might,’ Tweed commented.
‘He's been here twice since you were carted off to hospital.
You still seem to be his prime suspect.’
‘So, when you're in a corner, take the bull by the horns — in this case the bull being Roy Buchanan.
Questions I want to ask him.
With your assistance- and Mauno Sarin's.
He's still chief of Protection Police in Helsinki, I hope?’
‘He is, but I don't see…’
‘You will.’
The phone rang, was answered this time by Monica.
Paula was watching Newman: he looked remarkably fit.
And he exuded an aura of physical energy and driving power.
All the old bounce was back.
Monica cupped her hand over the phone.
‘You've got your chance now.
Buchanan is downstairs.’
She looked at Tweed.
‘All right to let him come up?’
‘Wheel him in…’
Chief Inspector Buchanan walked in wearing the same grey suit followed by the wooden-faced Sergeant Warden.
He glanced at the assembled company as though surprised to see so many people.
Tweed ushered his guests to chairs, then sat back, leaving the field clear for Newman.
‘Chief Inspector, have you got any further with your investigation of the murder of Sandy Riverton?’
‘I usually ask the questions.’
Buchanan sounded amused.
‘As you've raised the point, no.
In one way I wouldn't expect to find any witnesses — since what happened took place close to dawn.
In another, I would.
It's a farming community — agricultural workers rise early.’
‘But you tried?’
Newman persisted.
‘Yes, and met a wall of silence.’
‘Which doesn't surprise me…’
Newman recalled briefly his experience at The Nag's Head a few hours before he ended up in hospital.
‘Interesting.’
Buchanan paused.
‘But that doesn't give me any direct link with Hauser, who probably has nothing to do with the crime.’
Another pause.
‘Except for the murder of Edward Riverton, her husband — which Tweed has informed me about while you were in hospital.’
Of all those seated in the office only Buchanan seemed impervious to the heat.
He crossed his long legs, the picture of relaxation as he studied Newman, his grey eyes half closed.
Warden was enjoying himself in the background: it was a new experience to see someone else tackling Buchanan rather than the other way round.
‘That took place in Helsinki,’ Newman pointed out.
‘A long way from Suffolk.’
‘True.
But when you've handled a number of homicide cases you learn to recognize a pattern.
There are similarities between the two murders which, incidentally, I gather took place twenty-four hours apart.’
‘What similarities?’
Buchanan settled himself more comfortably.
‘Sandra Riverton was killed at a remote place at a remote hour.
Mr Tweed knows Finland and tells me Edward Riverton's body was dumped into the icebound harbour in the dark.
At a time when no one would be venturing out.
The methods also suggest a similar technique, although I may be stretching a point.’
‘Stretch it for me,’ Newman urged.
‘Sandra Riverton was killed by a rope round her neck .
Edward Riverton was killed by garrotting his neck .
A vulnerable part of the human anatomy.
And a certain way of murdering someone.’
‘I still don't see where you're going.’
‘I think you do.’
A grim smile.
‘I said earlier the crimes were committed twenty-four hours apart.
That time element intrigues me.
Time for the same man to complete his work in Finland, then catch a plane to London and hire a car to take him to Suffolk.
Also, I have found Mr Hauser  has a Lear jet which flies him across the world plus a Sikorsky helicopter which I saw taking off from the grounds of Livingstone Manor.
And there is a heliport south-east of Beccles, just north of the area.’
You have been a busy bee, Newman was thinking.
But why are you telling me all this?
The answer to his unspoken question came as Buchanan continued.
‘Mr Newman, were you thinking of flying to Finland during the near future by any chance?’
‘No, I wasn't.
Why do you ask?’
‘Just letting my mind wander.’
He glanced at Tweed who was saying to himself, That's a laugh.
You never let your mind wander in your life.
‘Just a thought,’ Buchanan added.
‘But there was something behind the thought,’ Newman insisted.
‘Well, it might be interesting if someone like you were to nose around INCUBUS headquarters in Helsinki, ask some questions.
Of course, you'd have to track down the right person.’
‘Ask what questions?’
‘Again, I think you know.
Was a member of their staff in Helsinki during the night of Edward Riverton's murder?
And was that same person absent the following day?
That is, the same day Riverton was dragged out of the harbour.
Someone who flew to Britain, so they were over here at the time of the Sandra Riverton crime.’
‘You don't want much, do you?’
‘Just a suggestion.
Now, if that's all I'd better leave.
At the moment I'm up to my neck in the Camden Town murder.’
He stood up, refusing Tweed's offer of coffee.
At the door he looked back at Newman.
‘If you found someone such as I have just described it would let you off the hook.’
‘So I'm still your number one suspect?’
‘Let's just say, Mr Newman, that in so many murder enquiries the culprit turns out to be the person who discovered the body.
Goodbye, Mr Tweed…’
On that note he left the room, descended the staircase, handed the identification form to the guard, went outside with Warden to his unmarked parked car.
Warden asked the question as he settled himself behind the wheel.
‘So you still think it could be Newman?’
‘I have an open mind until further evidence comes to light.
I certainly left Newman with that impression.’
‘What was all that Finland business about, Chief?’
Buchanan smiled drily.
‘If Newman is innocent he'll want to clear himself.
I asked the Assistant Commissioner to let me go to Helsinki and he refused.
Said I must concentrate on the Camden Town case.
So maybe Newman can go in my place, do the job for me.’
‘You think he can cope?’
‘He's ideal for the role.
A very experienced foreign correspondent, he'll be highly skilled in interrogating people.
It was his profession for so many years — not unlike my own.’
You sly bugger, Warden thought.
He was careful not to voice the thought aloud.
‘Back to the Yard,’ ordered Buchanan.
‘So where does dragging Buchanan here leave you?’
Tweed asked.
‘It tells me I'm still his chief suspect.
That was what I was really after.
But he gave me more than I'd expected.’
‘Which particular aspect?’
‘The Finland business,’ Paula interjected.
‘Bob is going to fly to Finland.
I can tell from his expression.
And,’ she continued firmly, ‘I'd like to go with him.
Women sometimes see things men miss.
Don't forget I've done the bulk of the research on INCUBUS.’
‘I'll think about it,’ Tweed told her.
‘It could be dangerous.’
‘We've had this conversation before,’ she flared up.
‘And it was dangerous when we were in Germany.
And on a previous operation it was damned dangerous in Rotterdam.
So I'm not to be coddled like a twelve-year-old, thank you very much.
‘Or,’ she played her trump card, ‘have you become old-fashioned?
Women can't do a man's job?’
‘I said I'll think about it,’ Tweed responded, refusing to rise to the bait.
‘And we don't know whether Bob is going to Finland yet.’
‘I think it's my next port of call,’ Newman replied.
‘But first I'd like all the dope Paula has dug up on INCUBUS…’
He stopped as the phone rang again, Monica answered it, and again cupped her hand over the phone.
‘It's an American.
A Mr Ward Dexter.
He says you're expecting him, that you were informed he would be coming a few months ago.
He's waiting for you at Brown's Hotel.’
‘Tell him I'll be there within an hour.’
Tweed paced the room, wiping moisture off his forehead as Monica relayed-the message.
The heat was becoming torrid and under his armpits his shirt was pasted to his body.
He was also recalling that Guy Dalby, sector chief for the Balkans, had earlier reported from Vienna.
In Bucharest Dalby had been told by a totally reliable source that Ion Manescu, brutal Securitate chief, was alive.
‘He escaped to God knows where,’ Dalby had stressed.
‘But he was very much alive when he vanished…’
‘Mr Dexter will be waiting for you,’ Monica said.
‘The tempo is beginning to accelerate,’ Tweed commented as he slipped on his linen jacket.
‘That sounds like the secret aide sent personally by the US President.
Now I'll find out what is really worrying Washington.
A separate problem from yours,’ he said to Newman.
11
Tweed caught a cab, told the driver to drop him at the Piccadilly entrance to the Burlington Arcade.
He strolled up the long arcade, pausing frequently to peer in shop windows at the expensive goodies.
He also glanced back the way he had come.
Emerging from the top of the arcade, he turned left and slipped inside Brown's Hotel in Albemarle Street.
He walked swiftly to the reception counter midway down a long hall leading to Dover Street.
A good hotel to stay at: apart from the excellence of its discreet service it had two exits.
Mr Ward Dexter was in Room 144.
Tweed took the elevator the receptionist guided him to, stepped out, walked along the deserted corridor.
He rapped three times on the door of Room 144, it was opened a few inches.
A man with dark hair and thick eyebrows opened it a few inches.
‘Mr Dex —’
Tweed stared as the man opened the door wide.
He would be in his early fifties, was tall and well built with a craggy face.
Beneath the strong nose was a dark moustache, thin and slicked down, which gave him a Latin look.
It was the ice-blue eyes which told Tweed he was right.
‘Come in,’ the man said impatiently.
The door closed behind Tweed as he scanned the luxuriously furnished double room which overlooked Albemarle Street.
He walked to the window and gazed down through the net curtains.
Of all the people he had expected from Washington ‘Dexter’ was the last person.
He turned round to gaze at Cord Dillon, Deputy Director of the CIA.
‘A rough diamond,’ Paula called him.
‘The manners of a bull elephant,’ was Monica's elegant description.
‘You've grown a moustache, I see,’ Tweed remarked.
‘And what have you done with your hair, for Pete's sake.’
‘You recognized me quickly?’
Dillon asked aggressively.
‘No, I didn't.
What have you done to yourself?’
‘Grown myself a moustache, used hair colourant on it — as I did on my hair.
If you didn't check me out who else will?’
Tweed sat down.
The Cord Dillon he had known had a shock of thick brown hair and was clean shaven.
The sunken cheeks which emphasized his cheekbones, the thin tight-lipped mouth were the same but they merged with the Latin appearance — further highlighted by the cut of his lightweight suit.
‘What are you wearing?’
Tweed asked as Dillon poured glasses of Perrier water.
‘Thanks, it's a thirsty day.’
‘The suit came from Italy.
Let's cut the cackle.
I'm on my own.
When I say that I mean I'm operating without back-up.
Even the Director has no idea I'm here.’
‘Who does know then?’
‘The President.’
Dillon padded heavily across the room to sink into a chair next to Tweed.
Even his walk was changed: normally he'd moved like a man with springs in his feet.
‘Who else?’
Tweed asked.
‘No one.
Just the President.
I'm not joking.’
‘Why this incredible degree of secrecy?’
‘I want to stay alive…’
Tweed was stunned.
He was talking to one of the toughest, cleverest Americans he had ever encountered.
He had never expected to hear Cord Dillon make such a statement.
Dillon gave no sign of being frightened, but Tweed sensed he was like a coiled spring.
‘Could you elaborate on that a little?’ he suggested.
‘Sure.
But first — so you know I'm bona fide , as the Uzbeks say — read this document.’
Tweed was relieved the American had not lost his rare sense of humour.
He took out of a thick envelope a sheet of thick paper.
The top of the sheet was embossed with the great seal of The President.
The authorization was brief and addressed to Tweed.
He ran his eyes down the typed message.
A passage attracted his attention.
Cord Dillon is travelling as my personal representative with instructions to report back to mc about this subject directly and without reference to any intermediaries however highly placed.
Below was the signature of The President.
Tweed refolded the sheet, slipped it back inside the envelope and handed it to Dillon.
‘Why did you say ‘I want to say alive’?’
‘Because INCUBUS has penetrated the US government at all levels.
It has infiltrated the CIA and the FBI.
Hauser is a billionaire several times over.
We've only rumours to go on but the sums he's paid out are astronomical.’
‘Bribes?’
‘Yes.
He's established a power structure inside the Washington power structure.
The President feels himself in a state of siege.
We can no longer trust anyone.
They might belong to INCUBUS.’
‘So why have you come here?’
Tweed demanded.
‘Because it's in Europe we think we can bring him down with all his works.
Franklin D. Hauser.
We suspect he's operating illegally.
We need absolute proof of that.
Rumours say he's co-operating with some strange bedfellows.
But who they are we don't know.
Goddamnit, Tweed, we don't know a bloody thing!’
‘Then we'd better start to find out exactly what he is up to.
Especially in Finland.’
‘Why would he choose Finland?’
‘The perfect neutral base, would be my educated guess.
It's a long way north — apparently out of the mainstream of the chaos which is afflicting Eastern Europe.
We need a plan of action — to find out what Hauser is doing.
He's built a big HQ in Helsinki, has another building in Turku, the second city.
And he spends a lot of time in Finland.’
‘So we go there, start something, blow his operation wide open.’
Typical of Dillon's tendency to use bull-at-a-gate methods.
Not always.
Dillon was clever, experienced.
But he was under stress — because he was working on his own.
Normally he directed a large team.
Maybe it also high-lighted the difference between the British and the American temperament, Tweed reflected.
‘I'd go easy, Cord,’ he warned.
‘Keep under cover.
I can't come yet — but Bob Newman is possibly making the trip there.
If he agrees, the two of you could travel in harness.’
‘The foreign correspondent?
We don't get on.
And he's a lone wolf character.’
‘What cover are you travelling under?’
Dillon grinned, drank more water.
He was calming down under the influence of Tweed's self-controlled personality, his off-hand way of talking.
‘Officially I'm attached to the Washington Post .
As a roving foreign correspondent…’
‘And if someone checks back?’
Tweed asked quickly.
‘You've said only the President knows…’
‘The paper's editor will back me up.
He thinks I'm investigating the world drug trade.
Which covers my ass.’
‘Then it would be ideal for you to travel with Newman.
He certainly doesn't dislike you,’ Tweed continued, shading the truth.
‘But only if he agrees.
Wait here a few days, then Newman will contact you, again providing he agrees.
If not, I'll contact you myself.’
‘I can't sit on my rear for long, hanging round this ancient hotel.
It's quite a place, I'll give it that.
Service is  very good.
Must have been built m Georgian times.’
‘Not quite.’
Tweed suppressed a smile.
‘But Agatha Christie used to stay here.’
‘You're not going to tell Newman what I've told you?’
Dillon demanded.
‘I'll have to.
Look, Bob Newman has worked with me as you well know.
He's fully vetted.’
‘OK.’
Dillon sounded dubious.
‘Don't forget I'm staying here as Ward Dexter.
And you won't be saying anything to that ponce of a boss you've got, Howard?’
‘Howard isn't included in the magic circle on this one.
Sit tight…’
Otmoor, north of Oxford, is a bleak lonely wasteland of sour fields with few trees.
Newman drove along the narrow road he'd turned on to off the B4027 at no more than thirty miles an hour.
Beside him sat Paula, checking her map and acting as navigator.
In the rear sat a restless Cord Dillon.
‘We're crawling on our bellies,’ the American complained.
‘You do know where this Archer guy lives now?’
‘Yes, we have a general idea, Mr Dillon,’ Paula replied tartly.
‘Keep a lookout for Begonia Cottage.’
‘Begonia!
Sounds like a spaghetti joint,’ Dillon growled.
‘You really think this trip is worth it?’
‘If I didn't we wouldn't be here,’ Newman told him.
‘And it gets you out of London…’
‘But we were tagged.
That silver Chevrolet was following us.
Make no mistake about that, brother.’
‘And I spotted it the moment we drove off from my flat,’ Newman rapped back.
‘I told you about my holiday in hospital.
That episode shows the opposition knows where I live.
I spotted it and lost it at that last roundabout.
Whoever was tailing us will never find their way  inside Otmoor.
And if they do we'll see them coming miles away.’
Which was true, Dillon admitted to himself as he glanced out of the rear window once more.
The road — little more than a track with deep ditches on either side — was elevated above the surrounding countryside.
No other vehicle was in sight as far as the eye could see.
‘Newman,’ he persisted, ‘you're sure you've got this right — about Bennington Machine Tools being taken over against this Archer's wish by INCUBUS?’
‘I'm sure.’
Newman left it at that.
He hadn't thought it necessary to recall for Dillon's benefit the tragic death of Sandy, the notebook he'd found secreted under the seat of her Jaguar parked close to the bell tower.
The notebook which recorded her interviews with Archer of Bennington, Swindon, and Manningham Electronics in the Thames valley.
Newman slowed down, stopped outside a cottage set well back from the road so Paula could read the name.
He had his window down.
The heat was overpowering, the sun glared out of a dear blue sky, the inside of the car was like an oven.
He wiped his forehead, his hands.
‘Holly Place,’ Paula said, reading the name board.
‘The wrong place.’
‘Let's get a hustle on, I'm baking,’ snapped Dillon.
‘We all are, Mr Dillon,’ Paula said amiably as Newman drove on.
In the distance was a large L-shaped residence, also well back off the road.
It had a newly thatched roof and was enclosed inside a privet hedge.
Newman slowed again and saw the name himself.
Begonia Cottage.
All the research he had done, using the phone while in hospital, had paid off.
Providing the owner was at home.
Then he saw the mullion windows were open.
James Archer was a tall man in his sixties, white-haired and dean shaven.
He wore horn-rim glasses and had an air of authority.
He had reluctantly agreed to let Newman and Paula into his home after some persuasion.
They sat in armchairs in a low-beamed room at the front while Archer perched in a rocking chair.
Paula glanced up and saw cobwebs in the corners, a whole network.
If there was a woman in the house she was sloppy, and that didn't seem to go with Archer.
‘So, you're the foreign correspondent, Mr Newman.
What can I do for you?’
Archer enquired, rocking gently.
‘Over two years ago you sold your company, Bennington Machine Tools, to Columbia High Multi-Machines Inc. — a subsidiary of INCUBUS Inc.’
‘I see you've done your homework,’ Archer replied after a slight pause.
‘May I ask why you sold out?’
‘I decided to retire, enjoy life a little more.
Columbia offered me the market price.’
‘And yet, when I got in touch with some of your business friends in Swindon they all expressed great surprise.
They said you'd told them you'd never sell, no matter how much was offered.’
‘You have done your homework.’
The rocking stopped, the chair was suddenly still, as motionless as the man who sat inside it.
‘How is your daughter, Julia, these days?’
Archer froze.
A shot in the dark but it had struck a target.
He stood up slowly, asked if they would like coffee, made his way out of the room when they accepted the offer.
Paula stood up, whispered to Newman that she would be back and followed Archer.
Newman stood up, stared out of the window.
He could just see his Mercedes with Dillon seated in the back.
It had been decided three people might overwhelm the man they were calling on.
Paula found Archer in a small kitchen at the rear of the  cottage.
He stood with his back to her, watching a percolator.
She was wearing a brightly flowered summer dress, high necked and with short sleeves.
She leaned on the working surface and peered at him.
There were tears in his eyes.
‘Mr Newman hasn't come here to upset you,’ she said gently.
‘What has he come here for then?’
‘He's investigating INCUBUS.
He thinks there's something very wrong with that mammoth organization, with the methods it uses.
He wants to expose it before the whole world, but he needs your help.’
She left it at that, opened a cupboard, found coffee cups, a jug, milk and sugar, and laid a tray.
He dabbed at his eyes, blew his nose, then emptied the percolator's contents into the jug.
‘No, I'll carry the tray,’ Paula insisted.
‘It's your dress,’ he said.
‘My wife had a dress very like it.
She'd have been wearing it on a day like this.’
‘And now your wife…’
Paula began as they entered the living room and she placed the tray on the table, then began to fill the cups.
‘She's dead.’
Archer sat in a hard-backed chair, very erect.
‘The stress of the enforced take-over was responsible.
I'm certain of that.’
‘Enforced?’
Newman enquired as he picked up a cup.
‘You were very direct.
You seem honest.
I've nothing more to be frightened of losing.
My wife, as I told you, is no longer with us.
And my daughter, Julia, is thousands of miles away, in another country which I won't name.
She's married someone in that country so her surname is changed.
She's safe.’
‘What happened about that takeover?’
Newman asked quietly.
‘And I saw you glance at my car.
That man sitting inside is from the Washington Post .
He also is investigating INCUBUS, as I am.’
‘I'll tell you the whole horror story.
You were right — I had no intention of selling.
I told that to the American who came to my office and made the offer.
A small brute with dark hair and a face like a gangster.
A Mr Moroti.
An hour later — after I'd rejected the offer — I get a phone call…’
He lifted his cup and swallowed more coffee.
Paula refilled the cup as he continued, his voice stronger.
‘I get a phone call,’ he repeated, ‘from someone else.
An Englishman with a smooth voice.
He says they met Julia when she left her secretarial college in Swindon.
That she is in good health at the moment, but health is a precarious commodity…’
Archer's expression was grim, his mouth closed tight briefly as it came flooding back to him.
‘I can remember his exact words.
He went on to say all that was necessary to solve the small domestic problem was to be sensible.
Just to accept the business deal.’
‘You could have contacted the police,’ Newman suggested.
‘I was warned against that.
The Englishman said all my telephones were tapped with a sophisticated device, that I was being watched.
They gave me two days to decide — two days of hell.’
‘So no one knows about this until now?‘
‘No.’
Archer snapped his fingers.
‘I forgot something very important.
A week before Moroti called a girl arrived at my office after making an appointment.
She said she was from the American magazine,Leaders of Mankind .
Wanted to do an article on how I'd built the company from nothing.
I know it must sound like an ego trip, but I thought the publicity might help the company with more export orders…’
‘Could you describe this girl?’
Newman asked.
‘Yes.
Very attractive.
In her mid-twenties, I'd guess.
She was small, -no more than five foot five tall, I'd guess.
She had the most beautiful blonde hair.
It draped over her back.’
Newman felt sick.
He had just described Sandy.
‘Go on, please,’ he said.
‘She asked mc a lot of personal questions as well as about my business.
My family.
I mentioned I had a daughter, Julia.
It was only later I suspected this was how they'd obtained their detailed information about me.
My routine, where I lived, the fact that Julia was taking this secretarial course.’
‘So you never went to the police.
You discussed the situation with your wife?’
‘We stayed up all night.
It was a diabolical dilemma.
Should we risk the police?
Amelia — my wife — was against it.
The point was what they offered valued the company at its market worth.
The bastards had done their research.’
‘So you sold out to them — and kept quiet.’
‘Yes, wouldn't you?’
‘Probably.
Julia was unharmed when she was returned?’
‘Yes.
But very frightened.
And they'd told her that if she ever talked about her experience I was liable to have a very nasty accident, probably fatal.’
‘I see.’
Newman looked at Paula.
‘I think we ought to leave Mr Archer in peace.
Unless you have something to ask.’
He looked at Archer.
‘I don't intend to mention your name — at least not until we've destroyed INCUBUS.’
Archer jumped up.
‘Destroy the bloody bastards root and branch!’
He looked at Paula.
‘I apologize for my language.’
‘I'd have used something stronger,’ Paula told him.
12
Peggy Vanderheld stood quivering with fury, silhouetted against the picture window in Hauser's Helsinki office.
Behind her the sea glittered as the sun reflected off the waves.
‘I'm sure you take my point,’ Hauser continued from behind his desk.
‘Trust is the first quality I require in those who work close to me.’
‘How was I to know the goddamn file was that confidential?’ she raged.
‘You told me to take the Riverton file down to the vault.
I noticed the serial number wasn't right.
So,’ she drew herself up to her full height, her tight black dress clasping her full figure as though the material was pasted to her, ‘so,’she repeated, ‘I opened it to check the photograph and saw it was Ed Riverton's.
That was when you walked in.’
‘And what else did you check?’ he enquired, his voice soft.
‘The biography, maybe?’
‘I never saw the goddamn biography.
I only saw the first page which, in case you've forgotten the system, shows the subject's photograph, age, length of time spent in the employ of the company, when he — or she — joined us, when he — or she — left us.
Unless, of course, they're still with us.’
He ignored the sarcasm, rolled his shirt sleeves higher up his strong, thick arms.
Christ, it was hot.
He was studying her as he performed this action.
He was inclined to believe her: her anger was a natural reaction to his accusation that she had been prying into data which was not her concern.
‘It's the heat,’ he said eventually and gave her his big smile.
‘You know I never could stand humid heat.
Who  would imagine we'd get this kinda heatwave this far north?’
‘You can ask someone else to take the file to the vault.’
‘I'm asking you to take it for me — because you always have my full confidence as my personal assistant.
And I think the time has come to consider extra reward financially for your loyalty.
Thank you, Peggy.’
He watched her leave the room.
She would be in a glow of appreciation.
Hauser prided himself on his ability to manipulate human beings.
He sat thinking about her.
Maybe she had held her position for long enough.
It was his policy never to keep staff below executive level too long — it eliminated the danger of their learning too much.
I'll put the skids-under her, he decided.
Soon…
In the elevator Peggy Vanderheld was steaming, and not only with the heat.
She knew the signs.
He's getting ready to fire me, she thought.
So how can I kick the bastard in the balls first?
‘Frank, our plans for penetrating Europe and Russia are well under way.
I think it's time we increased surveillance on all arrivals into Finland.’
Galvone nodded to Hauser and walked across to the picture window.
Heat shimmered in a boiling haze over the sea.
He wore a short-sleeved shirt and pale cinnamon slacks.
His large feet were shod in trainers.
Hauser noticed again that Frank was very physical, could hardly keep still for more than a few minutes.
‘We already keep watch on all the air and sea ports,’ he reminded his boss.
‘And I study the lists of known visitors.‘
‘That's the point, Frank.
We need to be on the look-out for unknown visitors.
Use our travel company's film unit.
We have reached a sensitive stage in the operation.
So get pictures taken of everyone coming in.
Then study the films they take.’
‘Consider it done.’
Galvone sat in a chair, wriggled his feet.
‘How are things going in the Soviet Union?
A hard nut to crack.
They're suspicious of foreigners.’
‘It's already cracked.’
Hauser was in an expansive mood.
‘We have Angel in place, so we don't have to use foreigners, as you called them.’
‘Angel?
Sounds like a woman.
You don't trust women.’
Hauser smiled, waved his cigarette holder.
‘Angel is a man, a member of the Politburo in Moscow.’
Frank whistled.
‘That must have taken some delicate handling, to get a man at the very top in that secret society.’
‘More open now, Frank.
This is the era of glasnost .
And some men at the top in little old Moscow are not sure how it is going to work out in the end.
So dollars, especially in a bank account outside Russia, is mighty appealing.
Gives a kinda insurance policy for the future.’
‘Can I ask who this Angel is?’
‘You just did.’
Hauser puffed at his cigarette.
‘And that was a mistake, Frank.
Not like you to poke your big nose into areas that don't concern you.
Your area of operation is Europe.
I'm dealing personally with Russia.
My, my, I am surprised.’
‘Sorry, Chief,’ Galvone said hastily.
‘It just slipped out.
I was so stunned you'd managed to pull off such a coup — but I shouldn't have been surprised, remembering how you built up the company from nothing.’
‘Which I did…’
A dreamy look came over Hauser's large face.
He was going back to La Jolla, the small town in California about ten miles north of San Diego on the Pacific coast.
The place where he was born.
The place where he had founded a small bank.
And slowly he had extended his grip.
The huge leap forward had taken place in the eighties when he had used junk bonds to enlarge his empire at a fantastic pace — until suddenly it was realized in the States  that Hauser controlled the largest private financial institution in the republic.
Hauser, who worked by instinct, unloaded his mountain of junk bonds in the late eighties — and converted it into a mountain of money.
He bought politicians at the lowest level — and the highest.
Several state governors were tucked away safely in his pocket.
In the corridors of Congress the name ‘Hauser’ was whispered behind closed doors.
What would be his next move, they all wondered.
And everyone tried to climb on the bandwagon.
INCUBUS was the next decade.
INCUBUS was power.
But power presided over by a benevolent father figure whose only motive was to do his best for humanity.
He had said so.
Himself…
‘Ion Manescu has perfected the new East Expansion Division,’ Galvone reported.
‘He has sent representatives to Budapest, Bucharest, Prague, Warsaw, Sofia and Berlin.
They're already establishing commercial cells in those areas.’
‘Reprentatives, commercial cells.’
Hauser chuckled.
‘I like the terminology — considering their real purpose.’
You would, Galvone thought.
You invented the terms yourself.
Hauser had a passion for intrigue, for disguising sinister moves by using commercial jargon.
‘They all passed the special training course at Kemijärvi,’ Galvone continued.
‘With special emphasis on tough strong-arm methods.’
‘The American way,’ Hauser commented approvingly.
‘If you're going to compete you remember the game is winners and losers.
We're winners.
What can stop us — stop us establishing control from the Pacific coast to the Urals — especially with the help of Angel?’
‘What can stop us?’
Galvone repeated.
‘I'll set up the film units on all access points to Finland.’
On Otmoor Archer followed his guests down the garden path to the front gate.
Newman sensed he had something he wanted to say and wasn't sure how to put it as he opened the gate for Paula.
Over Otmoor a dirty mist like marsh gas was rising above the depressing fields.
The sun was squeezing the last moisture out of the deserted landscape.
A heavy silence filled the air and Newman suddenly realized he had heard no birds sing since they entered the area.
‘My daughter, Julia,’ Archer began, his hand on the gate.
‘What about her?’
Paula encouraged him with a smile.
‘I don't communicate with her.
Not by letter or over the phone.’
‘I'm sorry to hear that.
Don't you get on?’
‘Oh, yes, the relationship is very good.
She's bright — she was at Bristol University before she went to the secretarial college.
She's a graduate.’
‘So what's the problem?’
‘Fear.
As long as they don't know where she is they can't touch me.
They wanted me to stand by as a consultant.
I refused.
That was after I'd sold out and sent Julia to…overseas.
You won't try and find her, will you, Mr Newman?’
‘You have my word.
Under no circumstances.
And your own name, your company, will also not be mentioned until I've stopped Hauser in his tracks, destroyed him.’
‘You really think you can do that?’
‘I'm going to have a damned good try.’
It was Paula who had helped Newman with his research during his stay in hospital, who had traced Gavin Manningham, ex-owner of Manningham Electronics in the Thames valley area.
She had travelled to Maidenhead to his old address and the new occupants of his small mansion had no idea where he had gone.
Paula had persisted with the wife and had obtained the address of the housekeeper who had looked after Manningham's home.
She had invited the housekeeper, a Mrs Parsons, to have dinner at a nearby  de luxe hotel.
She had soon realized Mrs Parsons had a liking for gin and tonics.
After six drinks the housekeeper confided in Paula, gave her the new address.
‘Sacked me without even a bonus,’ she complained.
‘And that after six years’ faithful service.
I saw his fancy woman by chance one day.
Crossing the bridge on to Riverboat Island, she was.
Wearing a very expensive new outfit.
Not short of a pound when it came to putting clothes on her back, I can tell you…’
Newman had left Otmoor and was now driving back towards London, guided by Paula to Riverboat Island in the Thames.
A weird island, they found as they walked the last half mile — after leaving the Mercedes in a car park with Dillon seated in the rear.
‘I don't know why I came,’ he snapped just before they left.
‘Why can't I come and see this guy for myself?’
‘Because I spoke to him on the phone and he sounds a tough customer.
Not the type to talk if too many of us arrive like a delegation.
He may not talk at all…’
In this assumption Newman was wrong.
They crossed a wide roadbridge over a backwater of the Thames, the only way of reaching the place.
Boats were moored to the main bank, mostly small powerboats with a few dinghies.
The Lodge, as Manningham's new home was called, was a large bungalow which had obviously been built within the past couple of years.
Manningham, a burly fifty-year-old with an aggressive manner and a paunch, met them as they descended the far side of the bridge.
He was carrying an iron bar and his welcome was far from warm.
‘You're Newman.
I recognize you.
What the hell is all this about?’
Newman decided the gentle handling of James Archer wouldn't work with this type.
The direct approach was called for.
‘It's about INCUBUS, the way they grabbed your firm.
I am researching a series of articles for Der Spiegel .
That's the leading German news magazine…’
‘I know.
What's the angle?’
‘I'm building up an exposé on the methods they use, how they victimize people all over the world.
How did they pull it off with you?’
‘Come in and I'll show you.’
He had been studying Paula's figure.
‘Who is your friend?’
‘My assistant, Paula.’
‘That's a new name for the relationship.
Follow me.
Don't touch the wire fence — it's electrified.’
‘Is that legal?’
‘I didn't bother to ask.
There are warning notices as you can see…’
The interior of The Lodge was like a show house, flashily furnished, expense no object.
The living room overlooked a landing stage with a small power cruiser moored.
The room had black leather armchairs and couches scattered on a wall-to-wall pink carpet.
Silver cups — golfing trophies — crammed the mantelpiece over a huge arched brick fireplace.
Framed photographs of Manningham swinging a club decorated the lime green walls.
Their host saw Paula gazing at the carpet.
‘Phoebe chose that.
Great isn't it?
Anyone want a drink?’
They both refused and Manningham poured-himself a large Scotch as Paula sank carefully into a vast armchair which enclosed her.
Manningham perched on a black leather stool by a well-stocked bar with a large mirror behind it.
He opened the conversation with a clenched fist gesture.
‘They're gangsters.
Damn Yankee gangsters.
Phoebe is up in town, buying more clothes, spending my money, so this is a good time to tell you…’
It was the same story as Archer had told but the sinister technique had varied.
A Mr Vicenzo, an American, had met Manningham at his office.
The description again matched that of Frank Galvone.
Vicenzo had offered the market price for Manningham Electronics.
Manningham had said he wasn't for sale, but he might consider double the figure offered.
‘Who was he representing?’
Newman interjected the question quickly.
Manningham was in full flood, downing his drink and pouring himself a fresh one.
The answer was Columbia High Multi-Machines Inc.
It was the same outfit Archer had told Newman that made the bid for Bennington.
Newman's detailed researches in hospital had come up with the fact that this company was a subsidiary of INCUBUS.
Vicenzo had gone away.
A few days later an Englishman had spoken to him on the phone, saying an envelope of pictures Manningham might find interesting were on the way by express registered post.
That it would make life a lot happier for Manningham if he closed the deal at the price offered.
‘I kept some of the photos that came in that envelope.
They wanted them all back when I agreed to sell — at their price — but I said I'd spilt coffee on some of them and thrown them away.
You have to understand I'm getting a divorce from my wife.
We were separated at the time — the woman in the photographs is Phoebe.
Two taken outside a flat I'd rented for her.’
Newman examined the five prints, handed them to Paula and lit a cigarette when Manningham told him to go ahead.
The prints showed the same woman.
Leaving a shop, outside a block of flats.
One close-up taken with a  zoom lens.
The ugly factor about each print was someone had fashioned a rubber stamp showing the crosshairs of a sniperscope rifle.
In each case the rubber stamp had been positioned on the prints so it was aimed at Phoebe's back, the centre of her chest.
On the close-up the crosshairs stamped her blonde-framed face.
A high-class tart, Paula thought.
A brazen expression.
She must have spent half an hour making herself up.
Paula spent two minutes putting on her face first thing.
But clearly Manningham was in love with the girl.
She handed him the pictures.
‘They scared me.
I admit it,’ Manningham told them.
‘I was frantic that they'd found out about the flat, where she lived.
And then those hideous photographs.’
He finished his drink.
‘Before this Vicenzo came to see you did, by chance, you have any unusual interviews with an American flavour?’
Manningham stared.
‘My God!
That girl…’
Again it was a repeat performance.
The girl who had interviewed him for Leaders of Mankind .
And the description he gave of the girl was a perfect portrait of Sandy.
The same formula all over.
They left Riverboat Island a few minutes later, walked over the wide bridge in silence.
Paula was the first to speak.
‘It's hideous,’ she said.
‘The technique they use.
And Manningham dare not call the police because they convinced him his every move was being monitored.
Which makes it even more diabolical because he's a tough nut.’
‘Oh, it's diabolical,’ Newman agreed grimly.
‘But first we must dig deeper, get much closer to INCUBUS.
And the answer probably lies in Finland.’
‘Helsinki next stop?’
‘I think so.
But I've decided to press Tweed to let you come with me.
You handled Archer well — and two men  and a woman travelling together attract less attention.’
‘We're going to let Cord Dillon come with us then?’
‘Yes.
We may need back-up — Dillon isn't a man I like but in a tight corner he's formidable.’
‘So we all fly direct to Helsinki?’
‘Not direct,’ Newman said as they approached the car park.
‘We go in by a roundabout route.
Via Sweden.
Someone may just be waiting for us to arrive.’
The following day Tweed announced his decision to Monica as they sat alone in his office.
He was feeling the heat and kept mopping his forehead and hands.
‘I'm going to send Marler to Finland to nose around and see if he can find out where the missing men have vanished to.
Men like Ziegler of the STASI and Manescu of the Securitate .‘
‘Why Finland?’
‘Because I'm getting reports from Europe that a new underground route has been established.
It runs from the Balkans and Central Europe to Travemünde, the German port on the Baltic.’
‘Where would they go from there?’
Monica asked and looked at the wall map of the continent.
‘They could catch the ferry to Helsinki.
That way they would disappear without trace.
In the present state of chaos no one is checking the passengers on that ferry crossing.’
‘Shouldn't Newman know about this?’
‘Definitely not.
We are running two separate investigations.
One into INCUBUS and all its activities.
That problem is being tackled by Newman, Paula and Dillon.
Marler will be searching for these vanishing men…’
There was a knock on the door.
‘Come in.’
Marler was in his early thirties, slim in build, wore an expensively cut sports jacket.
Fair-haired, he was clean  shaven and had a strong face.
Only five feet seven tall, he spoke in a high pitched drawl, a public school accent he often emphasized abroad.
Foreigners viewed him as the typical Englishman, a bit of a dandy.
It put them off their guard.
They would have felt more cautious if they'd known one of his qualifications was that he was the most deadly marksman in Western Europe with a rifle.
‘Mornin' to you.’
He perched his backside on the edge of Paula's desk, swung his legs.
‘I was up till three ack emma memorizing those files you gave me.
I've returned all of them to Central Registry.
I concentrated on Ziegler and Ion Manescu.
He was a big wheel in Bucharest Securitate , Mr Manescu.
And I got the Engine Room boys in the basement to give me three photocopies of our Romanian friend.’
‘Why three?’ asked Tweed.
‘You'll have to be careful who you mention his name to.
He's dangerous.’
‘Don't I know it?
His track record is a shade beastly — but effective.’
He took an envelope from his breast pocket, extracted three photos, laid them on the desk.
‘One is the only original picture ever taken of him, the second shows him with a beard as well as his moustache, the third clean shaven.
Archie downstairs is quite an artist.’
Monica and Tweed studied the three prints.
Monica let out a cat-like hiss.
‘It's incredible.
He's unrecognizable in the treated pics.
‘Bound to have changed his appearance, would be my guess,’ Marler commented and lit a king-size cigarette.
‘When I do see him I'll know him — but he won't know me.’
‘You should be armed,’ Tweed decided.
‘Manescu is a killer.
The file records he's strangled people with his bare hands in the old days in Bucharest.
With the security at airports that creates a problem.
Doubtless you'll solve it.’
‘Consider it solved.’
Marler waved an airy hand.
‘Is your contact who reported seeing Manescu board the Travemünde ferry for Helsinki reliable?
‘Very.’
‘You told me about Newman and the tragic death of his girl friend.
When was Manescu spotted by that Romanian woman in London?’
‘Two days before Sandy Riverton was murdered in Suffolk.’
‘Interesting.
The file said Manescu spent a year at the Romanian Embassy in London once, that he speaks excellent English.
Probably just a coincidence — Manescu's presence in London at that time.’
‘The same thought had occurred to me.’
Tweed hesitated.
‘I haven't told Bob Newman that.
He's working on something else.
I don't want his mind distracted.
He took the death of Sandy very hard.’
‘We don't always see eye to eye,’ Marler reflected, blowing smoke circles, ‘Newman and I. But he's had a tough time, I'll give him that.’
‘When can you leave for Helsinki?’
‘I've stacked up with Finmarks.
I have an open ticket for where I'm flying to first.’
‘Where's that?’
Monica asked.
‘Hamburg in north Germany.’
‘That's a funny way to reach Finland.’
‘I have my reasons, my dear…’
13
The Sikorsky which had flown Hauser from Helsinki to the isolated rendezvous in the Finnish woods stood inside the clearing, its rotors motionless.
Hauser walked with Galvone towards the man who stood quite still in the shade of a stand of dense fir trees.
Hauser wore dark glasses, a wide-brimmed straw hat pulled well down over his face.
He was carefully not displaying his cigarette holder and wore a floppy khaki drill jacket and baggy trousers of the same material.
He was not easy to recognize as Franklin D. Hauser.
‘This is Ion Manescu,’ Galvone introduced.
‘What are my instructions?’
Manescu demanded, studying the large man in dark glasses.
‘It has been decided to increase the area of surveillance, to widen the ring of protection and observation.
We want you to send people to Sweden, to Stockholm.
Watch for any arrivals boarding the large ferry ships for Finland.’
‘That can be organized within two days,’ Manescu replied briskly.
‘And I have just the person with me who will be invaluable.
Irina Serov.’
‘With him?’ whispered Hauser.
‘He was supposed to meet us by himself.
Ask him where this Irina is now.’
Galvone put the question in English.
Manescu waved a long slim-fingered hand behind him.
‘She is waiting out of sight in the woods.
We flew together from Kemijärvi.
And we now have fifty agents of different nationalities, all highly trained in the skills taught at the special place.’
‘And,’ Galvone continued, ‘are those agents allocated to treat liberal elements holding positions of influence yet on their way?’
‘They are in place already,’ Manescu replied, choosing his words carefully.
His lean bony sun-tanned face was relaxed, concealing his high degree of alertness.
Instinct told him he was passing some kind of test.
He had been careful to answer questions tersely, adding no extra information.
But had mention of Kemijärvi been a mistake?
‘Ask him when the agents in place will start the anti-liberal operation?’
Hauser whispered again.
Galvone put the question to Manescu who stood confidently, hands on his hips, staring at Galvone, never giving a glance in Hauser's direction.
He wore a blue check T-shirt, light-coloured slacks.
He looked for all the world like a Finn on holiday, which-was his intention.
‘Today,’ Manescu responded, and closed his lips in a tight line which was little more than a gash in the brown hawk-like face.
Hauser turned away, walked slowly back to the waiting Sikorsky.
Instead of proceeding at his normal brisk trot, he lumbered up the step-ladder and heaved himself ponderously inside the machine's cabin.
There had been too many films taken, shown on TV, of Franklin D. Hauser departing by Lear jet in the States for yet another destination.
At all costs Hauser wished to distance himself from the coming Manescu operation in various ex-Communist European states.
When Galvone leapt aboard and seated himself beside his chief Hauser made his unsettling comment before they started up the rotors.
‘I'm impressed, Frank.
Very impressed with Manescu.
He did make one slip, of course— referring to Kemijärvi.
But any man is permitted one slip.
You think he was telling the truth when the said the anti-liberal operation starts today?’
‘It's a sure thing.’
Being an American, Hauser referred to all Socialists as liberals.
And they wanted to preserve the nationalized industries.
You couldn't do business with — take over — an organization unless it was private enterprise.
Hauser took off his glasses, substituted the pince-nez.
‘So, when the bombs start to go off the Western press will put it down to hard-liner elements still yearning for the days before Gorbachev arrived.
And I really was impressed with Manescu, Frank.
Maybe one day we'll be able to bring him out of the closet, give him a new identity, promote him to a senior vice president.’
‘Why not?’ said Frank without enthusiasm, and gave the pilot the order to take off.
‘Any idea who the man in the straw hat was?’
Manescu asked Irina Serov as he met her as she dropped to the ground from the branch of a tall fir.
‘Franklin D. Hauser,’ she answered promptly and flourished the monocular glass she had used to study the man in the hat close up.
‘I saw him once when I was with the Washington Embassy.’
‘You're certain?’
Manescu grasped her firmly by the arm as he asked his question.
Her other hand whipped up like a snake, grasped Manescu by the throat.
‘You're hurting me.
I don't like that.’
Manescu released her and rubbed his throat.
She had a grip like an iron clamp.
Irina Serov was an ex-colonel in the KGB — the only woman ever to reach that exalted rank.
She had fallen foul of the Gorbachev reforms when a new KGB chief was appointed to clean up their act.
One night she had boarded a small fishing vessel moored at a small port near Yalta.
With her pistol at his head, the skipper had sailed across the Black Sea to the Turkish coast.
As ordered, he had anchored at night off the port of  Sinop.
Irina had promptly shot him, weighted his body, dumped it overboard.
From Sinop she had made her way to Bucharest via Istanbul when Ceausescu was still in power.
Here she had first met Ion Manescu who had taken her under his wing — she was an invaluable conduit as to what was going on in Moscow and sympathetic to the Romanian régime.
When Manescu fled Romania after the collapse of Ceausescu and his evil system he had taken Irina with him.
Now he stood facing her inside a remote Finnish forest while she gazed back with eyes like the Arctic ice.
Thirty-five years old, she stood only five feet five and had let her dark hair grow long to change her appearance.
She had a natural Slavic beauty, a good figure outlined by her tight high-necked dark green blouse — to merge with the forest — and more than one man had fallen prey to her and regretted it, if he had lived to do so.
Her eyes had a greenish tinge and her full mouth was compressed with fury.
‘We have to go to Sweden,’ he said quietly.
‘To check on any strangers coming here by that route.
Especially we watch for strangers who are hostile — or might be.’
‘Then it's a good job I spent time with the Soviet Embassy in Stockholm before they sent me to Washington.
When do we leave?’
He was relieved by her reply.
He might have been rather less relieved if he could have read her mind.
Irina Serov was disillusioned: she cared no longer for Communism, for Capitalism, for any bloody ‘ism’.
She had one goal in life: to accumulate a huge fortune in dollars, to leave Europe forever and to spend the rest of her life in luxury in America.
The realization that she was working for Hauser was opening new horizons for her, but she'd not had time to work out how she could exploit the knowledge.
‘For Stockholm?’
Manescu replied.
‘Tomorrow.’
In Prague Ladislav Sacher, Minister for Trade and Industry, left Hradcany Castle and walked to his Skoda car parked by the kerb.
In his sixties, he had a mane of white hair and a kindly expression.
His face was lined after years of ‘attention’ from the STB, the Czech secret police which had now, thank God, been disbanded.
Sacher was a dedicated socialist who was devoting his considerable influence to blocking the attempts of private firms from the West to establish a dominating position.
Especially he was against the Americans with what he called in speeches, ‘their Mafia-style methods in business…’
Having spent years in prison under the old régime, years that had taken their toll and made him look well over seventy, he got up every morning now, threw open the windows of his apartment, and breathed in ‘the good clean air of freedom’.
He carried a stick to aid his ailing right leg which had been broken deliberately by the STB while he was in prison.
These days he felt happier than he had at any time in his life.
A new era had dawned.
A woman walking along the pavement smiled.
‘Good morning, Father.’
‘Thank you.
It really is a wonderful day.’
They all called him ‘Father’ and he drank in the glowing warmth of the heatwave which comforted his tortured bones.
The sun shone out of a clear azure sky.
It was good to be alive.
He unlocked his car door, opened it, slid with difficulty behind the wheel, closed the door.
A dozen yards away a burly young man, wearing a pale blue shirt, denim trousers and with his goggles adjusted, perched on his moped leant against the kerb.
A canvas satchel looped round his neck sagged against his chest.
Sacher turned the ignition key, began to drive slowly away.
The man on the moped threw back the flap of his  satchel, glanced round, fingered the radio transmitter which would send the signal.
He pressed the switch.
The bomb attached beneath the chassis of the Skoda detonated as the signal triggered it off.
Sacher's car was lifted into the air by the violence of the explosion, its sides were torn off.
Its occupant, the man they called ‘Father’, was blown into a messy pulp, the corpse unrecognizable, the flesh embedded with pieces of metal.
The man on the moped was already speeding away in the opposite direction.
He had no idea that the bomb — with its sophisticated detonating system and the compact radio transmitter — had been smuggled to him by a devious route, via Finland and Germany.
Nor that the brain behind the outrage was Ion Manescu.
All he was concerned with was the generous fee in Czech crowns now buried under the floorboards of his tiny cottage in the High Tatra mountains.
In Bucharest the sun was not shining.
A heavy overcast like a poison gas cloud was stationary over the battered city.
The heat was there but in the evening it was humid and sweaty.
Stefan Campeanu, forty years old and a leader of the Peasants' Party, made his way home on foot to his apartment by his usual route, at his normal time.
A man of routine, Campeanu had not realized this could be a dangerous habit.
It made it easy for an enemy to monitor his movements.
Campeanu was opposed to the National Salvation Front government.
Desperate to cling to power, it had agreed to accept help from the US.
Campeanu was outspoken in his criticism of the idea that dollars channelled through private corporations should be accepted.
‘There are Stalinists at the top of the Front,’ he had openly accused.
‘We must take no outside help.
We must  rebuild our shattered homeland ourselves.
No to the dollar…’
There were still old parts of Bucharest surviving despite the bulldozers of Ceausescu which had torn down the old to build huge concrete cubes.
Campeanu walked with his head down, deep in thought as he plunged into a dark narrow back street which was little more than an alley.
His feet followed his well-trodden path home.
Half-way along the twisting alley he had to squeeze past a primitive scaffolding — constructed with wooden posts and three storeys high and heavy beams for planks.
The structure was held together with ropes binding the beams to the vertical posts.
Darkness was falling rapidly as Campeanu eased his way past the narrow gap.
He heard the first ominous creak, looked up.
The clumsy structure — the ropes deliberately loosened — was toppling.
Campeanu, an athletic man, began to hurry.
Then he heard a shout.
Ahead of him a shadowy figure stood a dozen yards away, both arms raised, the hands holding what looked like a gun.
Campeanu stopped hurrying, a fatal pause.
The scaffolding tumbled down, burying him under a grotesque criss-cross of beams and posts.
Silence descended on the alley.
When the press photographers took pictures the following morning their pictures of chaos were somehow symbolic of the chaos which was growing worse in Romania.
Two days later Tweed read the Daily Mail spread out across his desk.
The pictures told the stories.
One showed the small boat capsized in the Danube in Hungary outside Budapest.
Two leading liberals had drowned.
There were rumours the small boat had been hit by a much larger vessel.
The second picture showed what remained of the wrecked car in Prague, the car which had belonged to Ladislav  Sacher.
The headline screamed: ‘STB ATROCITY’
The third picture, the last in the double spread, showed the weird spiked mess of scaffolding in the Bucharest alley.
It looked like a modern sculpture.
The headline was equally sensational.
‘LEADING BUCHAREST LIBERAL DIES IN ACCIDENT?’
‘It's started,’ he said to Monica who had read the paper earlier.
‘The strange thing is all four men were killed within hours of each other,’ she commented.
‘That is the point.
One accident.
Two could be coincidence.
But three — and the Czech liberal was killed by a bomb — is too much.
It's part of a plan.’
‘You mean terrorists?’
‘No.
Who ever heard of any fanatical terrorist outfit being able to organize three assassinations in three different countries within the same twenty-four hours?’
‘Then…’
‘It's not terrorists in the normally accepted sense of the breed,’ Tweed said grimly.
‘This is terror used as a weapon, an instrument of policy.’
‘Can you explain that a bit more?’
‘It is terror used pour encourager la autres , as the French say.
To encourage the others — the other liberal and democratic elements in Eastern Europe to keep their heads down.
It's cold-blooded murder carefully orchestrated.’
‘But who is behind it?’
‘I've no idea.
Yet.
No proof, anyway.
We have to start moving faster.
And it suggests the driving force — or someone working for him — has a good knowledge of Central and Eastern Europe.’
‘Can you back that up — except as a theory?’
Tweed stood up, began pacing round his office, staring at the wall map of Europe.
‘Take the Bucharest tragedy.
The man who planned all  these assassinations knows the right people inside Romania to do his murderous bidding.
A scaffolding collapses on this important politician, Campeanu.
You'd need someone with a good deal of local knowledge to pull that off.’
‘And the killing of Ladislav Sacher in Prague?’
‘Again, someone has to know who to hire to do the job — and probably how to smuggle the bomb into the country.
The same applies to the so called accident to two Hungarians who were drowned in the Danube.
Both were vocal in their belief that Hungary must pull itself up by its own bootstraps.
And to stage that collision someone had contact with the skipper of a larger vessel plying the river.’
‘You're reaching,’ Monica commented.
‘Three in three countries is too much,’ he repeated.
‘But I haven't worked out yet the full implications of the conspiracy.
I also think that we may have to send Harry Butler and Pete Nield as back-up for Newman and Paula later.’
‘When are they leaving for Finland?’
‘Very soon.
But first Bob wants to talk to Evelyn Lennox before they go.
He has some obsession she hasn't told him the whole truth.’
‘And Marler?’
‘Already on his way to Hamburg.’
Hauser also was reading the reports but his newspaper was the Herald Tribune .
Galvone stood beside him as his chief pushed the newspaper aside.
‘Well, they haven't linked up the three incidents.
Just a wringing of the hands over the ferment which is developing in Europe.’
He lit a cigarette, clenched the holder and sat back with an expression of great satisfaction.
‘I didn't think anyone in the West would catch on to our ball game.’
‘To scare the shit out of the creeps opposing our offers to modernize their industries.’
‘More than that, Frank.
Something far more subtle.
This campaign Manescu is managing so well has another important purpose — to make the Brits, the Frogs, etc., nervous about investing in those countries.
That way we kill off the competition while we scoop the pool ourselves.
Then it will be too late.
And talking about timing, we have to create a situation so I can fire Peggy Vanderheld.’
‘I reckon, Chief, that intimidation of the competition is a brilliant strategy.’
Galvone let the fulsome admiration show in his tone.
‘You really have worked this one out and we will scoop the pool.’
Hauser patted him on the arm.
‘Nothing to it, Frank.
It's just the American way.’
14
‘Walberswick is a beautiful village,’ Paula said as Newman drove slowly down The Street under the arched trees.
‘More like a hamlet, actually — but with some wonderful houses and all different and old.
I assume Evelyn knows that we are coming?’
It was late evening, close to twilight, but the heat of the day made the atmosphere baking, the air very still.
Newman nodded as they passed one dwelling.
‘That's Rose Bower.
And Evelyn knows I am coming but I forgot to mention you'd be with me.’
‘Oh, yes?’
She eyed him with a roguish smile.
‘Do I gather from that that my presence may not be entirely welcome?’
‘All I want you to do is to give me your impression of her later.
Now I'm letting you have a look at the sea before we call on her.
We're a few minutes early…’
He turned left when they had passed the hotels, parked the car in the space reserved for vehicles and they climbed out, stretched, stood looking at the view.
The wide belt of dune-land with its hummocks and scrubby grass growing out of the sand was deserted at that hour.
A weird isolated structure like a huge cabin reared up close to the harbour entrance.
Two storeys high, the walls made of wood, it had a tiled roof and one half had been refurbished.
A gull screeched in the distance, dived over the lake-calm deep purple of the North Sea stretching away to a hard straight line, the horizon.
In the distance to the north the duster of toy-like buildings which was Southwold stood a mile away beyond the harbour.
‘Evelyn told me she often comes for a walk among the dunes,’ Newman remarked.
‘When she wants a change she drives south to Minsmere Nature Reserve, a very lonely spot at night.’
He checked his watch.
‘Time to call on her.
While we are there could you excuse yourself, leave me alone with her for a short while.
I want to ask her an embarrassing question.’
Paula looked at him wickedly as she settled herself in the front passenger seat.
She smoothed her raven black hair with a slim hand.
‘I think I can guess what that question might be.
And I'm sure she's attractive.’
‘You're an imp,’ he told her as he turned the ignition key.
‘And yes, she is attractive.
To some men I'd imagine…’
His friendship with Paula had grown steadily.
A friendship without complications.
As he drove back up The Street he frowned.
A man on a motor cycle, a big Honda, had turned round at their approach, parked by the roadside close to Evelyn's cottage.
Newman only caught a  glimpse of the man in a dark leather jacket but he looked remarkably like Steve, the thug who had accompanied Papa Grimwood on their visit to Greenway Gardens, Wandsworth.
There was a vr-o-o-m of engine sound which murdered the silence.
The motor cyclist sped off away from Walberswick, was soon a speck which vanished round a bend.
Evelyn, wearing a flowered summer dress belted at her slim waist and clinging tightly to her good figure, led the way into the low-beamed sitting room.
It was neat as a new pin and showed no signs of the going-over it had suffered when Newman was last there.
Tugging at her mane of red-gold hair she turned on her heel and looked Paula up and down.
Her quick scan took in the pale blue T-shirt, short sleeved, the short pleated skirt, the long shapely legs.
‘So you're Bob's…assistant ?’ she said with too much inflection.
‘His research assistant,’ Paula replied with a warm smile, a shade too warm.
Evelyn came close to Newman, dipped her head sideways.
He felt compelled to bend forwards and kiss her on the proffered cheek.
Which was, of course, for Paula's benefit.
‘Lovely to see you, Bob,’ Evelyn said again.
‘Drinks for anyone?’
They both refused and sat down as Evelyn became the welcoming host.
Newman was careful to avoid the couch, to sit in an armchair.
Evelyn sat in a Regency chair, carefully crossed her legs, displaying briefly a glimpse of thigh clad in black tights decorated with butterflies.
‘Has anything happened to alarm you?’
Newman enquired.
‘Any strangers in the village?
Any motor cyclists visiting the place regularly?’
‘No to the first question.
No to the second.
No to the last one.
The bike gangs never come here.
Only one very quiet pub and no shop windows to smash in after they've got drunk.
Southwold is different.
But there was a motor bike went by a few minutes ago.
I didn't see the rider.’
‘So you feel safe here?
No contact with Helsinki since you arrived?’
‘Yes, I feel safe.’
A brief hesitation.
‘And no contact with Helsinki.
Not that I'd expect it.’
‘Has anyone been fired recently from INCUBUS Oy.?
Someone who might harbour a grudge against the company?’
‘Not while I was there,’ she said, answering now at her normal pace.
‘Who employed there would know most about Hauser's day-to-day work, the orders he gives?’
‘Well, there's Adam Carver, a VP in charge of banking.
Then Frank Galvone often turns up, another VP.
Information and Planning is his division, whatever that might be.
But if you're thinking of someone who would talk to you, forget both men.
Hauser must pay them big money.’
‘Anyone else?’
‘Not really.’
She puckered her shaped eyebrows.
‘There is Peggy Vanderheld.
A typical New York career woman.
But she's about forty and has been with the company ages.’
‘What position does she hold?’
‘Hauser's PA.
He trusts her.
That is, as far as he trusts any woman.
His wife left him — and I don't blame her — but apparently since then he's gone off women.’
Paula stood up.
‘Miss Lennox, do you mind if I pop out and have a look at your front garden before it's too dark?
I love wild roses and your path is clustered with them.’
‘Take as long as you like.
Leave the door with the lock on the latch so you can get back again…’
Newman waited until they were alone.
Evelyn pulled  her chair closer to him.
Her wide mouth, emphasized with her scarlet lipstick, parted in a glowing smile.
She reached out, took his right hand.
‘I feel even safer now you're here.’
He hit her with his direct question.
‘Evelyn, were you Ed Riverton's mistress?’
She snatched her hand away.
‘What makes you say a bloody awful thing like that?’
He counted on his fingers.
‘One, when I was having dinner with you and Ed in Helsinki at his apartment I sensed a certain intimacy between the two of you.
Two, when I called Ed's Helsinki apartment to tell him about Sandy you took the call, you were there again — in his apartment.
Three, you went all out to persuade me to call Sandy to break the news about Ed's murder.
More naturally one sister would have gritted her teeth and done the job herself.
You do have grit.
But if you'd been playing about with your sister's husband you might feel inhibited.
Enough?’
‘You expect me to admit it?’
‘You just did.
I don't care about your private life.
But I'm trying to track down the man who brutally murdered Sandy, your sister.
Did Ed Riverton ever tell you anything confidential about INCUBUS?
About his job?
What was his job, for God's sake?’
‘He was very close-mouthed…’
‘Come off it, Evelyn.
Pillow talk.
That's when men let their back hair down.
And when I interviewed Ed he was on edge, very nervy.
He'd need someone as a safety valve — you fit the bill.’
She played with her lace handkerchief, just as she had done at Greenway Gardens.
Newman lit a cigarette, blew smoke rings, watched them float up, collapse against a heavy wooden beam.
He kept silent.
‘He was in charge of Dracon,’ she began.
‘That's the think-tank for INCUBUS, based outside Boston.
He told  me he used to catch the train from Penn Station, New York, get off it at a station called Back Bay where a car would be waiting for him.
He'd be driven to Dracon which is a complex of well-guarded buildings off what they used to call Space Highway…’
‘Yes, I've heard of it.
What went on at Dracon?’
‘Ed said they were a lot of kooks.
Academics from the Ivy League universities, planners who were ex-generals lured from the Pentagon for huge salaries, economists.
I remember a name.
A Professor Hiram Goldstein.
He'd written a book.‘
Now we're getting somewhere, Newman thought.
‘I read the book,’ he said.
‘The one by Goldstein.
No More Space .
But what did these freaks do ?’
‘They were producing plans for expansion, Ed said.
He didn't like the plan Hauser chose.
He didn't say why, didn't give me any idea of the plan.
But Goldstein had a lot to do with it.
Ed told me he'd had a lot of bitter arguments about this plan with Hauser.’
‘When did he tell you this?
About the arguments?’
‘A week before they…’
She choked.
‘Before they dragged him out of the harbour.
Not a human being any more.
Just a mulch of flesh frozen solid as a rock.’
‘That doesn't sound like your phraseology.
Who used those very graphic words?’
‘A Finn called Mauno Sarin.
Some kind of detective.
He called on me at the apartment a few hours before I left for the airport.
I told him nothing.
There was nothing I had to tell him.
But I was frightened.
It was one reason why I caught the first flight home.
I never want to have anything more to do with INCUBUS.
There's something sinister going on up there in Finland.’
It was very dark as Newman drove along the road away from Walberswick on their way back to London.
Paula sat  by his side, checking the map spread on her lap with a pencil flash.
‘What did you think of Evelyn?’ he asked.
‘Do you want me to be nice or honest?’
‘Honest.’
‘You'll think me catty, but you asked for it.
She's a man-hunter.
It's second nature to her to check that she's still attractive to men with every one of them she meets.
And she wants you.
Maybe permanently.
Or hadn't you realized it?’
‘She wants a protector.
And yes, I think she's decided I fit the role.
But after seeing that motor cyclist, she may need a protector.
So if you spot a public phone box tell me.
Anything else about the seductive Evelyn?’
‘She's a liar.
Does that sound catty, too?’
‘Just tell me why you said that.’
‘When you asked her whether anyone from Helsinki had got in touch with her, that's when she lied.
I was watching her.
She hesitated before she answered that one.
Perhaps only another woman would have noticed.’
‘I noticed.
The problem is if we can ever trap Hauser in a situation that's illegal we'll need every witness we can get.
Evelyn could be one of those witnesses.’
‘Well,’ Paula teased him, ‘you could always keep in touch — she's quite a flirt.’
Adam Carver returned on foot to Rose Bower for the second time that evening.
On his first excursion he'd seen a Mercedes parked outside so he'd turned back, returned to his hotel room further down The Street.
Evelyn peered through the newly installed spyhole after turning on the porch light, unfastened the two fresh locks and gave her visitor a radiant smile.
She invited him in, pulled at her hair, relocked the door and followed him into the living room.
‘I've had a visitor since you were here this afternoon,’ she informed him.
‘The handsome and beguiling Bob Newman.
Care for another drink?’
‘A double Scotch would go down nicely — providing you'll join me.’
Carver gazed with open admiration at her figure.
‘And I see you've dressed yourself up for me.
You look-terrific.
Sexy.’
‘Really?’
She was pleased as she poured the drinks.
Carver was a good-looking bastard, had nice manners, and she liked his warm smile, his smooth ways.
Deliberately she'd omitted the fact that Paula had accompanied Newman.
He asked the question as she handed him his drink.
‘Newman, the foreign correspondent?
I see.
And what did he want coming to this back of beyond?’
‘I got the impression he came to see me.’
They clinked their glasses.
‘We're just good friends, Adam.’
How unsubtle can you get, he thought, but he grinned, drank half the Scotch, placed his glass on the paper mat Evelyn had provided.
They were sitting close together on the couch.
He put an arm round her waist, pulled her close, kissed her full on the mouth.
She went limp, kept her eyes closed, her hand round his neck.
He wiped lipstick off his mouth with a handkerchief, reminded himself to lose it.
Evelyn had an expression like that cat which has swallowed the cream.
‘How did you find me out here in this back of beyond?’ she asked.
‘When you didn't call me back from your place in Wandsworth I checked with headquarters in Norwich — to find out where your sister had lived,’ he said casually.
‘I thought it was worth a try, so I drove up here, booked myself in at a hotel down the road.
Hey presto!
I'm on your doorstep this afternoon.’
‘You don't give up easily, do you?’
‘Not where a girl like you is concerned.’
Can't lay it on  too thick, flattery with a trowel, he thought.
‘Did Newman ask questions about your sister?’
‘No!’
She was annoyed.
‘I told you, he came to see me.’
‘Understandable.
Exactly what I've done myself.
Is it just as nice upstairs?’
She gave him a sideways look.
‘You can come and see, if you like.’
Paula spotted a phone box near a crossroads.
Newman called Tweed, explained the position quickly and Tweed agreed to send Harry Butler to Walberswick within the hour.
Newman gave Tweed the name of the hotel he'd stayed at during his earlier visit, said yes, he was phoning from a call box when Tweed posed the question.
‘Should he be armed?’
Tweed asked quickly.
‘Yes,’ Newman advised.
He'd remembered the Walther Steve had brandished in Evelyn's Wandsworth house.
Driving on, he told Paula that Harry Butler was on the way, that he'd given a brief description of Evelyn so Butler would recognize her, plus her address.
They travelled the rest of the way into London in silence.
Newman dropped off Paula at her flat in Putney, then drove back to his own place.
As he entered Beresforde Road at three in the morning his eyes were everywhere, remembering the juggernaut which had put him in hospital.
Which is why he spotted the stationary police car.
It was parked beyond his flat on the opposite side of the road.
Two men in the front in uniform and their radio aerial extended.
He went inside the building and was not too surprised when the bell rang as he was making coffee.
He went into his narrow lobby, picked up the phone, pressed the button which operated the visual screen.
Chief Inspector Buchanan was standing outside the closed front door.