

Introduction
Barbara Kahan
The propositions that this book addresses are that research is an important ingredient in the formation and implementation of effective policies and good practice in child care; and that those who work in the child care services can not only incorporate research into their general experience, knowledge and skill but also contribute to it through their own careful observation and recording.
The writers include in their definition of research academically based studies, operational research, careful analysis of regular and accurate working records, and the process of evaluation which reviews practical day-to-day transactions in order to sharpen individual and collective knowledge and skills, and raise standards of service relevance and sensitivity to need.
Put more succinctly, this book is an attempt to make child care research ‘user friendly’ to those who work with children and young people, and those who plan and resource services for them.
It is hoped that a wide range of other readers in allied services and occupations may also find something of interest in it.
Although ‘the growing relevance of social work research to daily practice’ may be one of the ‘most significant of the changes to face social workers and agencies in recent years’(David Jones, General Secretary, British Association of Social Workers) it is still regrettably true that knowledge and use of research findings in policy and practice are relatively uncommon, and rarely a regular part of routine thinking and planning.
The Seebohm Committee, responsible for the broad shape of modern social services departments, declared in 1968 that they attached great importance to research:
The personal social services are large-scale experiments in ways of helping those in need.
It is both wasteful and irresponsible to set experiments in motion and omit to record and analyse what happens.
It makes no sense in terms of administrative efficiency and, however little intended, it indicates a careless attitude towards human welfare.
(para. 455)
The report also says:
Research depends upon basic data being readily available, but at the moment there is inadequate provision for the systematic collection and sharing of information.
Although central government departments bear a considerable responsibility for this failure, the ability of local authorities to perform this vital function depends in part upon how they are organized.
It is important therefore that any reorganization should better facilitate this task.
(para. 97)
When social services departments were first established a number, perhaps a majority, incorporated some research capacity into their structure and in some departments this capacity has survived the many reorganizations, changes of policy and fluctuations of resources which have  taken place since 1970.
Yet by 1984, when the House of Commons Social Services Committee reported its investigation on Children in Care , they commented: Since their report was published more attention has been paid to dissemination, particularly by the Department of Health (formerly DHSS) but, as some of the writers of this book will show, there is considerable unevenness in knowledge about children in care, and in the research which is carried out to provide more knowledge.
The Committee identified some of the gaps in research as related to inadequate statistical information, particularly in central government.
They urged that there was a ‘need for accurate and complete information in an area of social policy all too liable to be affected by partial research, individual cases and anecdotal evidence' (para. 255).
There is a lack of systematic research into children in care, and an even more noticeable absence of a coordinated approach to dissemination of research once completed.
Some aspects have been profoundly and even repetitively studied; others apparently neglected.
(para. 258)
Some chapters in this book will support the strength of the Committee's criticism and their recommendation that the Department of Health (then DHSS) should, in consultation with outside interests, re-establish fuller collection of relevant statistical information (Recommendation 73).
In spite of the Department's ‘determination to ensure that new research projects should include suggestions as to the best means of dissemination' (para. 261) the  Committee believed, from their evidence, that ‘many social workers go about their complex tasks unaware of research findings which might influence and assist their decisions’.
As Roy Parker had said in 1980:
Theory and practice are often treated as exclusive categories.
Despite pleas for a better blend, the penetration of practice by well-grounded theory still seems to be a painfully slow process.
The time lag is substantial and conventional wisdom is hard to dislodge…
Yet we actually know a good deal about the characteristics of good care…
It is unnecessary to feel our way forward in ignorance on all fronts…
There is a broad knowledge base from which a high quality service can be created.
This book is a contribution to the dissemination process and in attempting to make research ‘user friendly’ the style and language used are directed to non-academic readers primarily, it being well established that the language and presentation of academic research reports do not encourage wide readership.
The book is also an attempt to link together and blend theory, policy and practice in the belief that well-informed policy and practice are likely not only to be more sensitive to the realities of clients' lives and needs, but also more cost effective in the long term.
The plan of the book is related to its overall purpose of demystifying  research, making it more accessible and more a part of everyday work and decision making.
It begins with a discussion by Roger Bullock of what research is, what its uses can be, some of the essential ingredients of research methods of investigation and some of the pitfalls which must be avoided if reliable results are to be achieved.
He also demonstrates that research need not be remote, academic and unrelated to everyday work, but can be very close to the recording and analysis which practitioners are carrying out in case after case throughout their jobs.
It can even help them with their jobs, in the difficult choices and decisions which have to be made, in thinking more clearly about the task as a whole, and in achieving a higher quality of life for their clients.
In times of severe economic stringency, it is more than ever essential that painful strategic choices should be based on sound information about the need for and effectiveness of services.
(DHSS, 1977)
The next writer,Erica De'Ath , begins to open up the field in which child care needs arise, families and children, and the many changing patterns of family life which characterize the latter half of the twentieth century.
She discusses marriage trends and how these have affected where the children live and who cares for them, the ethnic diversity of British life, and different cultural attitudes towards bringing up children.
She also asks the questions what is a good parent?
And what supports do some families need in carrying out their parental roles?
The writer then explores what research can tell us about the impact of national policies on families, the impact of community attitudes, children's experiences of divorce and step-families and some of the traumas children suffer in the course of family life, sometimes so great that they are driven to run away and then incur other serious problems for which inadequate provision is made in the community as a whole.
Traditional views of family life are seen to be unsupported by research findings, but research can assist the identification and development of policies and good practice which can help children at risk and in need to become good parents in their turn.
From examination of family life and some of the needs of children at home, the next writer,Nigel Parton , moves to the tragic issue of child abuse, a form of adult behaviour which makes some children's home life a nightmare and which social workers find is one of the most difficult problems they have to address.
This chapter continues the discussion of the relationships between research, policy and practice, demonstrating that political interests and values may pervade these relationships and that approaches to and uses of research in this field may need to be rethought.
The stance taken is that child protection work must be relocated within the heart of good practice with children and families.
Nigel Parton concludes a carefully argued and wide-ranging chapter by drawing attention to the importance of prevention and treatment.
Further discussion is shown to be necessary in recognizing that ‘child abuse is centrally concerned with debates about the way we bring up children and is hence centrally concerned with child care’.
It is logical then to proceed with Jean Packman 's research into the way decisions are made when children and young people, home life being  temporarily or long term unable or unsuitable to sustain them, for whatever reason, are received into care — or, in spite of referrals and requests, not received.
What are the differences, if any, between those received into care and those left at home?
She describes the context of the child care service, the preventive services and what happens when they are not enough to maintain children at home.
Parents' views are explored and this will be of value in the implementation of the new Children Act 1989 which will require greater attention to parents' views.
The dilemmas of decision making for families and social workers are then related to the legal routes into care, some of which are shown to be misused in practice.
The importance of parents' participation in decision making is supported by the research, and the distinctions between those who go into social services, health or education resources, are revealed a shaving little to do with the children's own needs.
Jean Packman concludes by showing that new policy embodied in future legislation owes something to child care research studies in recent years.
Having looked at research and related policy and practice of child care in the community and what happens before a child is received into care, the next chapters then deal with a range of issues which are related to what happens when children and young people are in care.
When a child or young person is received into care a placement with a carer or carers has to be made.
Peter Marsh looks at research links with policy and practice in substitute care and the difficult relationship which can, and often does, exist between researcher and practitioner.
Although recognizing the problems each has with the other, he discusses, like Roger Bullock, how research can help with the task of enquiry, ‘a central task in social work and social care’.
The careful thinking, the logic and the process of the thinking which are necessary for research, he suggests, have similarities with the work required for good practice; and research itself should be seen, not just as a product but also a process.
Both process and product can contribute to policy and practice.
Like other writers he points to the way in which political direction colours practice, and recognizes too that there may be conflicts within research itself, as there are amongst practitioners.
Yet an alliance between research and practice is essential to the development of good services.
Using particularly Roy Parker's early study (1966) of foster home breakdowns, Peter Marsh examines the way in which practice can be assisted by the ‘new view’ taken in this study (still a classic example of the alliance ‘between research and practice’at its best).
He demonstrates the kind of questions which practitioners might usefully ask if they use a ‘research-minded’ approach and supports his argument with more recent research.
Taking Jane Rowe's Children Who Wait study (1973) he then compares it with another American study (Goldstein et al .,
1973) in the same year.
Both these studies highlight issues that needed urgent attention from policy and practice.
The latter part of his chapter he devotes to ways of ‘reducing the  distinction between researcher and practitioner/manager’ showing how refinement of questions and greater care in examining data in everyday, work can lead to more careful and thoughtful consideration of practice and policy.
An example of practitioner as researcher, in the field of adoption, demonstrates how a practitioner can enrich her practice and make a contribution to knowledge at the same time.
He concludes with a brief discussion of the ‘alliance for the future’ between research and practice and the need for a constructive dialogue (this book being one example) from which each will benefit.
Substitute care while a child or young person is away from home, must continue to provide for the child's overall development.
In this the child's health and education are of major importance.
The health of children in care was found by the House of Commons Social Services Committee under the chairmanship of Renée Short, MP, to be receiving minimal attention.
The evidence they read and heard made them strongly critical of the way in which local authorities and health services failed to carry out their important responsibilities in this respect.
In the research following the Committee's Report (House of Commons, 1984) were two papers produced by Dr Frank Bamford and Dr Stephen Wolkind at the request of the Economic and Social Research Council.
It had been hoped that Dr Bamford and Dr Wolkind would contribute a chapter for this book but time constraints made this impossible.
They gave permission, however, for Barbara Kahan to make extensive use of their material, in the chapter on ‘The physical and mental health of children in care’.
The chapter indicates how, in spite of the fact that medical reports are a statutory requirement for children entering care, no systematic collation of information takes place, and little is known about the children's physical health.
In addition medical examinations and records are often grossly inadequate.
More is known, by comparison, about the mental health of children in care — but it is still too little and too fragmented.
Both doctors make a plea for more systematic data collection, and pose many important questions which are vital to the general development and wellbeing of many children in care.
They believe that the routine records and investigations of doctors, social workers and others concerned with the children could contribute significantly to greater knowledge and therefore to better services.
There is reason to believe that young children admitted to care have greater medical needs than their peers who are not in care; and that a greater proportion are handicapped.
These differences require definition.
More careful examination and recording might also help to define the incidence of child abuse.
More needs to be known about what becomes of the babies of very young mothers in care themselves.
Parents need to be more involved in medical history-taking and information about their own illnesses leading to their children's admission to care might provide valuable material for improved policy and practice.
The health of children and young people is too important to neglect and  adequate research, assisted by standardization of records, could contribute to significant improvements.
The education of children in care was also severely criticized by the House of Commons Social Services Committee and, recommending further research into this area of practice, they said:
We consider that a child in care has a right to at least as good an education as any other child.
In view of the disadvantage which being in care all too often represents, that may sometimes mean making a special effort to ensure the quality of education given to children in care.
Sonia Jackson , who contributes this chapter, was one of those who gave written evidence to the Committee.
In this book she reviews, first the paucity of research or literature on the subject, and then the various ways in which their education, or lack of it, affects the lives of children in care, not only in their childhood, but influencing their life chances as adults.
The expectations and priorities of social workers are seen to be very low in relation to the children's education; changes of placement lead to changes of school and this is seldom taken into account in placement decisions.
Little is known about the effect of different care settings on the children's education though the fact that many foster parents and residential staff have had limited educational opportunities themselves may influence them in the importance they attach to the children's success in school.
A number of children are admitted to care each year for education related problems, but again little is known about what happens to them afterwards.
Consumers' experiences suggest, as do government inspection reports, that much remains to be done in providing adequately, or even suitably, for these children.
The chapter concludes with a discussion of whether educational failure for children in care is inevitable or whether their prospects could be improved.
Available research suggests that changes in attitudes and practice could significantly improve their prospects.
It demonstrates that there is a case for arguing that the child care system should no longer reinforce inequities but become a means of redressing them, and like improved health should see education as a proper means of laying foundations for the children's futures.
The chapters on substitute care, health and education relate to all children and young people in care.
The next three chapters address special issues which affect only a proportion.
These are the care of children from ethnic minorities, children with disabilities and young offenders.
Bandana Ahmad , in her chapter, concentrates on the need to demythologize research on black children, young people and their families.
She argues that, in Britain, most research has been carried out so far by white researchers whose approaches have been eurocentric.
She also postulates that there is a tendency to group ethnic minority children in studies of ‘problem’ topics, such as emotional disturbance, educational retardation, runaway girls and one-parent families.
The majority of the  black population, she points out, are ‘ordinary citizens’.
Further problems highlighted by the chapter are the failure to recognize ethnic diversity and differences (Asian is used to describe people from' India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, for example); over-simplification of correlations and exclusion of environmental and societal influences (e.g. attributing a black child's intellectual and emotional impairment to parenting rather than to school and/or other family and community).
Distinctions are not made between poor working class, middle class and rich as they are in research on white people.
She suggests that the faulty research approach tends to lead to similarly faulty interventionist initiatives.
Against this background she discusses the emergence of alternative theorization of research initiated by black sociologists, academics and professionals in the USA.
She suggests that as yet the British social work field has neither wholeheartedly accepted the credibility of the black perspective nor realized the benefits of alternative black expertise which would enhance black child care research.
Social services tend to be perceived as ‘enforcement agencies’, cultural myths and distortions are sustained, and both clients and services suffer.
Having looked briefly at a number of issues — under-fives, black children in care, adoption and fostering, and young offenders — and highlighted problems such as the disproportionate custody decisions concerning young black people, she challenges the current position on policy and practice.
‘Too often both policy makers and practitioners get trapped in a vicious circle’ which involves research as well.
As with children and young people from ethnic minorities it is not known with any certainty how many children in care have disabilities.
Philippa Russell draws attention, however, to the higher-than-average need for supportive services which families with a handicapped child have.
This maybe, in many instances, because the stress engendered by handicap is additional to many other social stresses such as restrictions on social and family life, poor physical health and marital or economic difficulties.
In addition many parents find current educational procedures difficult to understand and are uncertain how to express their views.
If the family of a disabled child is one of an ethnic group, research has shown that parents are likely to feel even more unhappy about the education of their child than other parents of disabled children.
They are seen to suffer from some of the myths and lack of understanding which Bandana Ahmad's chapter explores.
Philippa Russell explores the range of respite services needed and some of the practical problems described in studies of service provision.
Research is still patchy in this field, and particularly research into the lives of disabled children living in residential accommodation.
She links the growing concern about lack of residential accommodation due to social services policies of closure with the growing number of disabled children attending residential schools, primarily for residential care rather than for  education.
Provision of 52-week accommodation but not necessarily the additional focus on care, or a series of different short-term holiday placements, can lead to fragmentation of the children's lives and inadequate preparation for the adult world.
As yet research is not available, nor has substantive work been done on the relative merits of different approaches to providing residential care for children with disabilities.
Fostering for disabled children can be a satisfactory alternative, but studies in Britain and the USA demonstrate the need for very careful and supportive work if it is to succeed.
As might be expected young disabled people entering the adult world of employment, housing and social life face even greater problems than their peer group.
Philippa Russell's chapter reviews a wide spectrum of ideas and work, but it is clear that disability is an area in which much more research is needed and that policy and practice should both be reviewed in the light of such research as it becomes available.
The Children Act 1989 bringing disabled children into the same system as children in care, will provide an opportunity for a much needed impetus to research and to development in policies and practice concerning disabled children.
The chapter by Henri Giller moves into the politically sensitive field of juvenile offending in which research is only one of a large number of influences on policy, many of them conflicting.
In this field politicians, central government departments, special advisers, academics, royal commissions, local government, lobby and pressure groups, the media and public opinion are all involved.
Public order is an election rallying cry and fear of crime can influence practice as well as policy.
In the sphere of juvenile justice, policy making is further complicated by more than one government department being involved and a wide range of statutory and voluntary services as well as the police and the penal system.
Delinquency can be seen, depending on perceptions of society and its organization, as the result of poverty, deprivation and inequity, or as a personal iniquity to be identified, punished and discouraged as firmly as possible.
Henri Giller traces changes in the relationships between researchers and policy makers in England and Wales over 25 years, and examines some of the main threads of research in this field.
He then discusses briefly some recent interactions between them, including diversion from courts, adversarial proceedings in juvenile courts, determinate sentencing, and sentences proportionate to offences in juvenile courts.
He concludes by suggesting that the relationship between research, policy and practice concerning offenders is often not either an equal nor an easy one and that it is not characterized by consistency.
He believes that of the three, research, policy and practice, it is practice which has the greatest potential to achieve change, both positively and negatively, and that the researcher is dependent upon the practitioner, even where the policy maker defines the research brief.
The joint participation of all three parties in the triangular relationship has, in the past, been rare.
Ideally each  should be able to offer something to the others, but for this to happen an agenda has to be clarified and values made explicit.
In the arena of juvenile offending there is too often a lack of a shared agenda and a myriad of value systems.
Some of the most vulnerable young people in care are those who are still away from home during their later adolescence.
The fact that they are still in care at 16, 17 and 18 years old is likely to be evidence of no viable alternatives.
How do they fare at the hands of those who provide the services both in these later years and in the years after going out of care?
Mike Stein 's chapter reviews what his research revealed and the policies and practice currently focused on this vulnerable group of young people.
It is a disturbing picture.
He quotes how, once again, the House of Commons Social Services Committee was concerned at the lack of services available and the lack of care shown by agencies.
Whether the full extent of their concern, i.e. that local authorities should have a legal obligation to assist these young people, will become part of the Children Act 1989 is, at the time of writing, not known.
What is known is that nearly 8000 young people leave care each year at 18 and many others at 16 and 17, and are not provided with any semblance of the help and support which a good parent would give not only to these age groups but often to many young people of 19, 20 or even older.
Mike Stein demonstrates that this is another area of child care in which there has been no large-scale research, but the numbers of small studies available show that the ‘crude stereotype’ of care leavers being 18-year olds without families, who have spent their lives in large institutions, must be abandoned.
They are a cross-section from all types of care, and very far from being a homogeneous group amenable to standard service responses.
They have experienced considerable movement and disruption in care, and have inadequate knowledge of their past, too little suitable preparation for leaving care, and little or no reliable help and support once they have left.
Loneliness, depression, unemployment, lack of any contacts with the immediate past, homelessness, poverty and social isolation feature significantly in their lives.
Implications of the research for policy and practice are discussed and comparisons made with our nearest continental neighbours, France, and with what could be expected in normal families.
Some of the findings of this research are based on evidence from the young people themselves.
The next chapter by Ruth Gardner is devoted to consumers' views and their involvement in decision making about services, policy and practice.
The concept of clients' involvement and taking their views into account in service provision is still relatively recent.
The Children Act 1989 is likely to require much more account to be taken of the children's views and those of their parents and other interested parties, but it is a process which is still seen as difficult, and is less frequently carried out than is desirable.
Ruth Gardner reviews the arguments for inclusion of service users'  views, and then surveys some national and local research studies which reflect consumer views.
Subsequently legal changes and current policy developments are examined and finally some examples of successful involvement of children and parents in key decision making are presented.
DHSS (now Department of Health) funded research studies, National Children's Bureau, Children's Society and the National Association of Young People in Care, Black and in Care, Voice for the Child in Care, all feature in this context.
Some of the other writers in this book, and a number of other researchers are also seen to contribute to knowledge in this area.
Famous legal cases, Gillick vs.
W. Norfolk, Graham Gaskin at the European Commission of Human Rights and the work of Guardians ad litem , in addition, enlarge the perception of the importance of clients' views and involvement in decision making.
The chapter concludes by discussing policy in social work agencies in the light of research findings, legal requirements and developing opinion.
Ruth Gardner suggests that the crux of a relationship between child and responsible adult is centred on decision making, control, letting go, risk taking and ensuring that advice and support are reliably available.
Most important of all is the message, confirmed by the Cleveland inquiry into child abuse, that the child or young person is ‘entitled to be taken seriously’.
The pattern of the book, therefore, moves from examining the research process, through the areas of family life, child abuse, how decisions to remove children from families are made, substitute parenting after they leave home, their health and education in care, special issues affecting children in ethnic minorities, handicapped children and young offenders, what happens to those leaving care, and the consumers' perceptions and involvement.
The services involved, whether for children at home or in care, have to be resourced by public funding, from central and local government or from voluntary sources.
The University of Kent Personal Social Services Research Unit has been carrying out research on outcomes and costs for a number of years.
Martin Knapp , the deputy director, and Eileen Robertson , in the penultimate chapter of this book, examine the costs of child care services and their implications for research and policy.
They demonstrate how the integration of cost and effectiveness insights within ‘value for money’ and ‘efficiency’reviews has revealed how poor are the costs data ‘lovingly tended by local authority accountants over many years’and how limiting are the so-called effectiveness data.
Linking together a series of public initiatives involving the District Audit Service, the government's Financial Management Initiative, the work of the Select Committee on Social Services, the Audit Commission and the Social Services Inspectorate, they examine the impact of the three Es, ‘economy, efficiency and effectiveness’ in the provision of public services.
Suggesting the need for a fourth E, equity or distributive justice, as a policy criterion they proceed to discuss current child care policies with their tendency to polarize choices, e.g.  residential versus foster care, based on the belief that preferred child welfare grounds coincide ‘by happy coincidence’ with cheapness of fostering.
In the ‘new cost awareness’ in child care organizations, Martin Knapp suggests that fundamental flaws in the costs data, obvious to anyone who cares to take more than a ‘cursory glance’are too often overlooked, ‘presumably on the assumption either that they do not matter, or that nobody else, including elected members and auditors will notice’.
He shows that the cost information which underpins today's policy and practice decisions is of poor quality, and employed in ways which can easily produce the wrong conclusions and encourage inappropriate action.
Some of the warnings in Roger Bullock's chapter about faulty use of information are demonstrated in the points made by Martin Knapp about the use of cost information to come to flawed conclusions.
He then discusses the flaws under the headings of completeness, disaggregation, like with like comparisons and outcomes.
Presentations of costs of residential and fostering care and intermediate treatment which ignore these important considerations can result in unjustified conclusions about cost effectiveness.
Demonstrating from a wide range of examples how appropriate costing presentations should be made, he argues that because of the complexity of child care needs and services, costs information is needed, but that because this information can have a significant influence on policy and practice it must be ‘sensibly defined and appropriately measured’.
It can then be a useful instead of a ‘dangerously misleading tool’.
The concluding chapter by Roy Parker takes an overview of child care research, identifying and developing a number of themes which have echoes elsewhere in the book.
His own seminal research work is referred to by other writers, and his experience in studies of the history of child care, policy trends, practice and organizational issues enables him to take both abroad and a detailed view of this complex field of human need and the research carried out within it.
He points out that we need to distinguish between the contribution that research can make to policy and that which it can make to social work practice.
He argues that we need more practice-orientated research, but indicates some of the obstacles that need to be surmounted if that is to happen.
He also considers the problems that are created as a result of the fragmented nature of much research and the rather narrowly defined categories and classifications which research in child care is in danger of having to use; categories that are essentially administrative and legal constructions.
Then there are the difficulties that both practitioners and policy makers face in utilizing research which is often focused on one particular field or issue when in reality, they have to make choices between different options.
When one of these is better researched than the other such judgements may be distorted.
Those who could use the results of research also face the problem of deciding how much confidence they can place in a study.
Professor Parker shows that this is not always a matter of  dispassionate assessment but may turn on whether the research is seen to be delivering ‘good’ news or ‘bad’news.
Finally, he looks at the availability of the basic data which are accessible to researchers in child care; to the kind of housekeeping information that should be kept by organizations and which if it is, makes it unnecessary for researchers to start from scratch every time.
In examining the sources of information that researchers can exploit he also emphasizes the importance of treating, in a serious fashion, what children and the adults around them have to tell us.
Roy Parker closes the book by reiterating the case for research: stressing that its ultimate purpose must be to help us to improve the quality of life of children generally and of some of the most disadvantaged in particular.
The importance of the relationships between research and practice was the focus of a joint CCETSW and Personal Social Services Council working party in 1980.
One of its conclusions was that:
An essential attribute of any profession is that its members are active in creating and extending its knowledge, the theoretical bases for its practice and the means by which it is evaluated.
(CCETSW and PSSC, 1980)
Whilst this chapter was in preparation, a further CCETSW publication,Research by Social Workers — Capitalizing on Experience (1989) was published.
Discussing how practitioners can not only be involved in research, but may conduct research studies themselves, with many potential pay-offs for workers, managers, agencies and the field, the writers suggest: The importance of the integral relationship between research and practice was also the subject of discussion by Lord Rothschild, head of the Central Policy Review Staff whose paper ‘The organisation and management of Government research and development’(1971) did much to lay the foundations of the structure of research in the public sector.
Suggesting that ‘the end product of basic research is an increase in knowledge’ in applied research he suggested it was first a product, e.g. an antibiotic, an artificial hand, a drought-resistant variety of wheat; then a process, e.g. for the manufacture of an antibiotic, or for removing nitrogen oxides from exhaust gas; then a method of operation, e.g. to prevent collisions in the English Channel, to speed up the delivery of letters,or to give advice, sometimes in the discharge of a statutory obligation (the emphasis is mine).
Although much of the research Lord Rothschild was discussing was in more material areas than human behaviour, he recognized the inadequacy of science and technology without much closer integration with the social  sciences, so that new knowledge can be used ‘in harmony with the economic and human needs of the situation’.
Many skills already in the social worker's repertoire can be drawn upon and applied to the design and conduct of research on practice issues.
Parallels exist between both research and practice as activities.
Both are problem solving activities.
In each case one begins with a problem, seeks to understand it as fully as possible, works out purposes, devises a plan of action, carries it out, and reviews what has happened in order to judge its implications for future action.
Social workers, teachers who work with children and young people in schools, staff in courts, community centres, housing, social security and health services, are amongst those whose tasks can help to use new knowledge ‘in harmony with economic and human needs’.
They are people whose lives are full of activity and demands for immediate responses; they often have little time for reflection and study.
This book has been written with the objective both of making knowledge gained by research more easily accessible, and of demonstrating how in the course of providing services practitioners can use the knowledge and add to it by their own skill and commitment.
If this book assists those who read it to become more ‘research minded’ it will have achieved its objective.
We need a more active approach to the promotion of new knowledge provided by research…to carry out large numbers of research projects and then put them on shelves and in pigeon holes is appallingly wasteful, as is also the vast amount of information available in hundreds of central and local government reports published each year and then forgotten, and never collated or analysed within an overall framework of reference.
Even negative research results can be valuable and at the very least they could help us to ask some of the right questions.
(Barbara Kahan ‘The implications for the personal social services’, unpublished seminar given at the National Institute for Social Work, 1975)
References
Social research
Roger Bullock
Introduction
What is research?
Is it any use?
What are people supposed to do with it?
These are the most common questions I get asked as a social researcher.
As discussions ensue, I am frequently surprised by the rigidity of my enquirers' attitudes.
Research is viewed as something abstract and intellectual, distanced from day-to-day work and of interest only to clever people, with little to offer to those who plan, manage and deliver personal social services.
Neither does it inform complex and stressful child care decisions.
Such a dismissive attitude, which fails to see research as part of a professional task, seems to me unhelpful because whenever we make a decision, it is based on assumptions and values.
Sometimes these are clearly stated but more often than not they are implicit in attitudes and actions.
It seems self-evident that decisions involving the lives of children should be well informed.
So in this chapter I hope to show how research can contribute to social work policy and practice and how all who seek high professional standards can benefit from research, whether their own or that of others.
If we think of the ways in which the term research is used, a variety of activities spring to mind.
People ‘do research’ into their ancestors, perhaps plotting family trees and collating information from register offices and parish records.
We also talk of ‘doing research’ when we investigate the history of a place we intend to visit, looking up information in travel guides and brochures, finding out how best to get there, what to avoid and how to get value for money.
Gathering and assessing information is an integral part of any research.
Indeed, we would take it as a compliment if our presentation of an argument were described as ‘well researched’.
But research implies something fresh about the material we obtain.
Those studying for a PhD degree are expected to generate new knowledge.
More is expected than a scrutiny of existing evidence.
Original information has to be gathered and the links between various factors explored in a novel way.
We hear, for example, of someone ‘doing research’ into child abuse or, on a grander scale, of a three-year research project into the causes and effects of deprivation or addiction.
But even then we can still be confused about research, as other terms suggest similar activities.
For example, how does research differ from monitoring and evaluation?
To clarify matters, let us go back a step and ask some basic questions.
Social research 
What is research?
A straightforward answer to this question is that the function of research is to explain how and why things happen.
This may seem simple but, as I shall try to show, it involves a series of steps, each of which poses difficult problems.
For example, we may try to explain an observed phenomenon well known to social workers, such as why children enter care.
At a general level the answer is easy; it is because their families are unable to look after them, control them or because they cause them to be ‘at risk’.
But this conclusion is not particularly illuminating as it merely says that children come into local authority care when no one else can care for them, a repetitive statement we call a tautology .
Also, since some children in care are placed at home on trial, this explanation is blatantly false.
To answer the question fully, we need a more considered discussion.
This would need to look at why we have a welfare service of ‘being in care’, how this has developed historically, what routes are taken by children coming into care and the circumstances surrounding their entry.
We may eventually need to relate these factors to one another or to other events in a child's life, such as educational progress, length of stay in care or destination on exit.
To do this effectively we may need to construct typologies and identify patterns that improve our understanding of the problem.
For example, we might find that the experiences of children in care differ according to the circumstances surrounding their entry, so that grossly abused children may stay longer and occasionally be adopted, while offenders might return to their parents after a relatively short spell in a residential establishment.
Good research, therefore, should consider not only the cause of the events that concern us but also their nature and consequences .
Let us look at this problem of the nature of phenomena in more detail as it explains some of the difficulties faced by social researchers.
We have just argued that an important feature of research is its concern with the nature of the event under scrutiny.
Often, this is more complex than it first appears.
For example, let us consider how we would set about studying levels of violence in residential establishments for children.
Our inquiry would have to begin by defining violence, an exercise which may appear straightforward.
If we were asked to offer a definition, we would probably suggest something along the lines of ‘the use of physical force against an unwilling party’.
But if we think more carefully about this definition, it becomes clouded by ambiguity.
Obviously, an unexpected and unprovoked physical attack, such as a street mugging, presents no problems; it is clearly an act of violence.
But what about self-defence or the shaking and pushing that accompanies the control of an unruly mob?
What of heroic exploits during armed service or the caning of school children?
Violence can also be verbal and emotional and, some would argue, is intrinsic to the wider power and economic structures of society and world economics.
We have, therefore to consider these other aspects of violent  acts.
These include the context of the events and people's perceptions and interpretations of violent behaviour, as the same behaviour in different situations will be perceived very differently.
The exploits of football hooligans would probably be praised if they were part of resistance to an invading army.
Given the complications, we have to strive for a definition of violence which incorporates all these aspects.
We may conclude that violence is such a wide term that we need a typology, each item of which may have its own consequences and causes and so be best dealt with by different interventions.
For instance, we may need to negotiate with political agitators but offer treatment to the dangerous psychopath.
Thus violence, like many other social phenomena, is seen in different ways by different people and is therefore to some extent socially constructed.
Researchers themselves are bound to adopt one social construction of the phenomena they are investigating rather than another and however objective their methodology, the chosen perspective cannot be completely neutral, nor can social research be entirely value free.
Questioning the nature of the issue under study is an important part of research as it clarifies initial concepts and examines the definitions employed.
It is a feature that distinguishes research from monitoring, where we take categories and definitions as ‘given’ and do not worry too much about the nature of the phenomena being recorded.
For example, the Home Office monitors violent crime by looking at numbers and trends in patterns over time and produces annual figures for offences and convictions, but in so doing avoids the problems of definition that bedevil the researcher.
When modifications are made to the categories employed in the monitoring, large statistical changes can follow.
For instance, much violence in the family now involves the police and so gets recorded as violent crime.
However, we cannot be certain whether the subsequent rise in recorded incidents stems from the way the public refers domestic violence to the police or from a real increase in domestic strife.
Simple comparisons of statistical trends, while useful in some instances, can be misleading if the categories are ambiguous or if the contexts in which they occur differ.
For example, local authority child care statistics state the number of children in care placed ‘home on trial’.
We can look at these and easily see not only an increase nationally over time but also big differences between local authorities.
However, research by Farmer and Parker (1988) has shown that this placement is used for two quite distinct groups of children in care.
These are abused young children going back to a parent and troubled adolescents returning home from residential care.
These two groups of children have quite different characteristics, care histories, prognoses and needs for social work support.
A change in policy for either group, whether tightening up criteria for returning abused children home or by developing community alternatives to residential care for difficult adolescents will affect the ‘home on trial’ figures.
Thus, when we see an increase in the numbers, it is difficult to know what it means, Social research  other than the obvious fact that more children live at home while legally in care.
Let me emphasize that there is nothing wrong in comparing local authority figures for numbers of children placed ‘home on trial’.
This maybe an interesting and illuminating exercise.
Similarly, there is nothing intrinsically right about Farmer and Parker's typology of children affected; it merely seems to be a revealing distinction.
What we need to remember is that a crude comparison of local authority figures is of limited value and our understanding of trends and contrasts would be improved if we took account of Farmer and Parker's findings.
A study of the nature of the phenomena under investigation is, therefore, an important first step in any research study.
The development of definitions and typologies helps clarify the issue under investigation and indicates its component parts, some of which, as we have seen, may be in contrast to each other.
It is important to remember that the definitions and typologies we employ can only be judged by their usefulness.
To say that they are right or wrong is virtually meaningless.
The special features of social phenomena and human behaviour
For many phenomena in the natural world, definitions and typologies are relatively simple.
For example, the moon is and will continue to be the earth's satellite.
Its boundaries are easily defined.
Similarly, a metre equals 39. 38 inches and can actually be seen in a Paris museum.
We could devise alternative definitions of these phenomena but they are not likely to be any more helpful  than those we have.
When we deal with social phenomena, however, things are more complicated as they have an additional dimension not found among inanimate objects, namely the meaning of behaviour.
Human beings experience emotions, control their actions and, as we saw with violence, define social situations.
So, for example, the behaviour of people who fall in love, such as kissing in public , is tolerated rather than drawing censure as it might in other circumstances.
Any definition of behaviour has to incorporate the context of behaviour and its meaning for the participants.
Returning to the problem of violence in residential care, we have seen that violence has to be defined by someone and that each person, whether instigator, recipient or third party, may have a different perspective.
Similarly, a sexual proposition in a bus queue is likely to be seen as a degrading assault while at a party it may be viewed as less violating.
Yet as an observer we may be alarmed or jealous if the recipient is the object of our own affection.
The definition eventually agreed for The Dartington  Unit's study of violence in residential care was ‘the use of force in a social situation in a way that those in power define as illegitimate’, a perspective which sought to incorporate all the dimensions we have discussed.
It was certainly much wider than the definition required by the local authority for an official notification of a violent incident or by the police for pressing charges of actual bodily harm.
This discussion illustrates the limitations of a static model of human behaviour in social research.
Disciplines that use such models, such as demography and statistics, can provide great depth of argument but their scope is inevitably limited.
The need to understand the meaning of behaviour also makes it difficult to predict how individuals will behave.
For example, the relative positions of the moon and earth result from gravity and we can calculate exactly where each will be in 50 years time.
Human beings, in contrast, interact with one another not only because of gravity but because of dependence, love, envy, hate, etc.
They can also choose to behave differently at any time.
Thus, we cannot predict social events with absolute certainty and have to couch our forecasts in terms of probabilities, provided other factors do not change, which of course they can.
We can, however, take action to prevent or avoid a predicted catastrophe and much of social skills training and health education are designed to do precisely this.
If I am warned that my weight makes it highly likely that I will suffer health problems in hot climates, the probability of my being ill is reduced if I do either one of two things — lose weight and/or avoid the tropics, Thus, I have some choice about my life.
The complexities of factors affecting social behaviour
But how much choice do I actually have?
I am male which means I cannot have children, I am somewhat reserved by nature so I am unlikely to be the life and soul of anyone's party, and my chances of becoming King are very slim.
So, although we have an element of choice over our actions, these are circumscribed by virtue of biology, features of our personality and by the social and cultural context into which we are born.
Historical and economic factors also limit our options.
This balance between an individual's freedom of choice, or ‘free will’ as it is often described, and the influences of forces external to each individual, called determinism, has been the basis of much philosophical and theological debate.
Although the details of these arguments need not concern us, the issue is relevant to understanding social research.
We have to incorporate elements of individual choice in our theories but recognize that much is determined by a range of other factors, biological, psychological and social.
What is more, these factors interact with one another and different combinations and sequences will determine what eventually happens.
Let us again consider as an example children coming into local authority care.
Such children are affected by all the factors described.
There is a gender factor associated with certain reasons for admission, such as delinquency or moral danger, and the likelihood of certain outcomes, such as adoption.
The children, like all others, grow up and pass through childhood into adolescence.
Certain life experiences may also influence their personality, for example, children in care often have poor self-esteem and difficulties in making relationships.
Their family backgrounds are also usually socially disadvantaged and being in care can be stigmatizing and isolating.
Thus, a young person who has stayed long in care is affected by a multitude of factors.
But, even if we are able to measure them, we then have the further problem of how we can distinguish their significance from the effects of normal maturation.
After all, it is said that children grow out of crime and naturally move to independence from their families.
A problem in social research is that we cannot easily isolate factors.
Thus, the main research methods of natural science, the laboratory experiment and the controlled trial, cannot be used except in very special circumstances and even then serious ethical issues may arise.
For example, we could, as an experiment, allocate similar child care cases randomly to different interventions to see whether one is more effective than the other.
But is this fair on clients who are vulnerable and in need?
Similarly, we could follow up people 20 years on to assess the results of our child care work, but even if we could successfully trace them, is it right to contact them after all that time when their spouses and children may not know of their earlier histories?
I hope from this discussion that you can see that social research is a complicated and difficult exercise because:
social phenomena have meaning for the participants and may be perceived differently depending on their context
we are the product of historical, biological, psychological, economic and social factors which interact, cluster and impinge on our lives sequentially
it is hard to distinguish the effects of much of what we do from other processes, such as the natural maturation of children
it is difficult to measure precisely the influence of factors by isolating them in experiments and, even if we could, there may be ethical problems which prevent us from doing so
we cannot predict outcomes with absolute certainty since individuals can take remedial action in the light of our forecasts.
We talk, therefore, of probabilities or outcomes provided circumstances do not change.
All these issues influence the nature of social research.
It has to incorporate a wide range of factors and develop methods of investigation other than laboratory experiments.
These problems have been tackled in different ways and with different degrees of success, as I shall later try to explain.
But first, bearing all these matters in mind, let us return to consider the activities that come under the heading of social research.
Types of social research
Social research covers a range of activities each of which is different in its time and resource implications as well as in its functions.
They can be divided into three groups:
1
Theoretical research which fashions concepts and perspectives — this is usually part of an academic discipline or sub-discipline.
2
Large-scale empirical work which is intended to provide new information based on reliable data.
This reviews situations, provides evidence on hypotheses and surveys client and other groups.
Usually it requires external funding to meet costs of staff and data processing.
3
Evaluations of particular situations, client needs or professional practice.
These studies are short term and can be extremely useful if they are placed in the context of wider knowledge.
On their own, however, they are difficult to interpret.
They rely on an enormous amount of research capital; that is, the expertise and knowledge built up by research workers or teams and on the body of knowledge generated by others who have undertaken previous studies.
This distinction between these three types of research is somewhat artificial because all are closely interlinked.
In order to be good, type two (the large-scale empirical approach) has to be guided by theoretical perspectives produced by type one, otherwise it can become ‘mindless fact gathering’ with little structure, purpose or links between the parts.
On the other hand, the first type relies on the information provided by the second which polishes, refines and leads to a redefinition of the problem.
Type three, the short-term survey, can only be interpreted if we are aware of developments in types one and two.
One of the problems is that this last type of research tends to be attractive to local authorities and central government departments who face pressing problems, and there is a danger that such studies can become too influential on policy when little else is available.
Conclusions are often drawn from small samples and single case studies and findings can rapidly cross boundaries.
A good example concerns the assumption that residential care is ineffective.
Conclusions about the lack of success with young offenders have been transferred to quite different groups such as the elderly or mentally handicapped as well as to children and young people in care generally.
If research is a varied activity, so are the methods we use to undertake such studies, as I shall now explain.
Types of research methods
I have explained why it is difficult to use laboratory experiments and controlled trials in social research except in the cases of narrowly focused psychological studies.
We have, therefore, to use other methods, the following four of which are the most frequently employed.
First, it is possible to gather information relevant to the issues understudy from records and documents .
This may consist of files on clients, historical papers, minutes, prospectuses, handbooks, codes of practice, etc.
These provide a ready source of material on areas such as clients' backgrounds, professional standards and good practices.
However, such documents have usually been compiled for purposes other than research and the investigators have to glean from them what appears relevant to their study.
Thus there is the problem of selectivity and inconsistency in the data.
For example, if the deprivation experienced by the mother of a child in care is not mentioned in a case file, can we assume that it is absent?
Such an assumption is dubious; several research studies have found that, when interviewed, parents of children in care often reveal their own experiences of abuse, although this was not known previously.
Secondly, there is the method of participant observation by the researcher.
This may involve sharing in the experience of those under study and trying to put oneself in their position.
This is an excellent method of understanding the contexts of situations and its meaning for those involved, even though one can never truly be a participant observer.
There is also the problem that the researcher's observations can be subjective and are difficult to record in a systematic way.
Thirdly, we can seek information from participants by means of questionnaires , that is a printed form completed by respondents and returned to the researcher, or by an interview .
The advantage of the former is that standardized information can be gathered from a large population, although there is always the problem of those who do not respond and how far the characteristics and opinions of such people match the general population.
Interviews, in contrast, are labour intensive but allow for elaboration on issues, so charting people's perceptions, evaluations and responses.
Naturally, there are numerous possible designs for these, such as the use of open or closed questions, whether interviews are done singly or in groups, in the respondent's home or work environment, or in some other setting.
Lastly, we can employ standardized tests, scales and measures , such as those that assess intelligence, commitment or stress.
Often, these have  been successfully used in other research and this allows us to compare our own work with that of others.
Indicators based on available information may also be used, such as attendance registers, punishment logs and so on.
It may be possible to apply all of these to groups who contrast in some way, so facilitating a comparative analysis.
Thus, the matching of cases and the use of ‘control’ groups are common procedures.
Each of these methods has its own strengths and weaknesses and no single approach is perfect.
The choice of methods for a particular study will depend on the nature of the task and the resources available.
For a study of clients' perspectives with fairly limited time and money, group interviews can be very productive, as in the National Children's Bureau's ‘Who Cares?’ study (Page and Clark, 1977) in which young people in care spoke at length about their experiences.
On the other hand, a study of how well deprived children fare as parents 20 or 30 years later would require not only individual interviews but careful measures of parental competence.
This combination has been employed by Quinton and Rutter (1988) in their studies of the inter-generational transmission of deprivation.
In contrast, Roy Parker (1988) has successfully gathered information about the assisted emigration of children in care to the colonies in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries from records held in the offices of governments, shipping companies and voluntary agencies.
It is clear, therefore, that no single research method suits all kinds of study and a combination will probably be necessary.
It also adds to the objectivity of research if information gathered from several independent sources points to the same conclusion.
If in a residential school staff tell me in  interviews that the children are happy and well behaved but records show high levels of absconding and excessive punishment, I would be suspicious about the validity of the interview material.
It may be that children can be happy and well behaved but also abscond and be frequently punished, but I would need to resolve this apparent contradiction.
It is useful, therefore, to incorporate as many cross-checks as possible into the methods adopted for a study and to be aware of the limitations of material gleaned from a single source.
Research models
Once we have considered the nature of the phenomena under investigation, worked out definitions and devised appropriate research methods, we have to select a research model which answers the questions investigated by the research.
Several approaches can be employed.
First we can examine outcomes in comparison with some baseline and ask, ‘What was the situation then and what is it now?
Is the client better for our actions?
‘This is a relatively straightforward procedure, provided suitable research instruments can be fashioned.
Similarly, we may contrast the ‘before and  after’ situations of alternative interventions to see whether one is more effective than the other.
The effects of an intervention can be clarified if we compare the experiences of different groups, such as recipients and non-recipients of services.
Contrasts are sharpened further when the latter group is selected to act as a ‘control’ for the former.
To do this, members of the two groups are ‘matched’ for potentially influential factors such as age, social class or gender.
The exploration of clients' adaptations provides a good example of this before and after' approach.
Despite the problems of understanding the meaning of actions from our observations, this perspective is particularly relevant when behavioural change is sought and discussions of this kind abound in the literature of treatment and therapy.
As before, the problems of interpreting outcomes outweigh the difficulties of assessment and some of the criteria used in research have been criticized for their cultural and class bias.
Indeed, adaptation often seems to be compared with some assumed saintly lifestyle and, as social services clients are often closely scrutinized, their short-comings are manifest.
While some behaviour, such as violence against the defenceless or excessive exploitation of the weak is generally regarded as unacceptable, there are many grey areas.
We may need to look, therefore, at adaptation in various ways, not only adjustment to general social norms but also to deviant and unorthodox sub-cultures as well as to self-aspirations and family wishes.
A quite different method of evaluation is to construct a process model which seeks to relate input to output.
This is useful in understanding the working of social and other service systems and is particularly helpful in understanding the place of services within a child's care career.
But again there is the problem of knowing to what extent inputs are associated with outcomes and how relevant are any statistical associations found.
For example, we know that for those leaving care, a stable home contributes to their viability in the community, yet the factors contributing to survival skills are quite different from those which determine where a client goes to live, even though either can produce the same outcome of homelessness.
A third perspective is to consider consumer views on services and here the achievements of our approaches vis-à-vis expectations and agreements can be charted and gaps in perceptions highlighted.
We can never be sure how far clients' perspectives are related to other behaviours or how far they are overwhelmed by the structural constraints which they may face.
Nevertheless, such studies help us fashion a better service and there maybe many other benefits, such as better relationships between professionals and clients.
A fourth and less myopic perspective is one which deals with the functions of a service for the wider welfare system or for society as a whole.
While we know that putting young offenders in penal settings is likely to lead to poor results in terms of behaviour modification, it has the function of being a punitive symbol and keeping awkward clients out of circulation.
However, we should always ask whether the functions identified could be  better served by alternative methods, as has happened with the development of intermediate treatment for adolescent offenders.
Similarly, we may find that a service is important symbolically or bolsters the social work profession.
Functional justifications for a social service are always attractive but it must be remembered that they are only provisional.
Lastly, we can also consider services in terms of their continuity .
This is rarely done but consistency in outcome is important for dealing with social casualties who may need services at any time.
When a longitudinal view is taken, however, we often find great discontinuities amongst children in care as they experience a series of unrelated interventions and moves which can often be isolating and stigmatizing.
For example, we may do great things while they are in care, achieving personal growth and forming relationships, but this is vitiated as adolescents face, at the age of 18, the constraints of joblessness, social isolation and poor accommodation.
Thus, we see that several research models can be employed, depending on the nature of the questions to be answered.
How can we judge a piece of research?
One of the problems facing practitioners is judging the quality of a piece of research.
Sometimes, dubious studies achieve publicity or may be attractive for other, perhaps political or novelty, reasons.
To help judge the quality of research, I would suggest the following questions are asked:
Does the study group or written material on which the research is based represent those for whom the findings are said to apply?
Particular attention should be paid to any bias in the selected samples, levels of response and limiting characteristics, such as age groups, length of time involved with services, etc.
It is particularly important to check that findings are not generalized beyond the group studied.
For example, Fanshel and Shinn's large study (1978) of children in care in New York State excluded those entering care over the age of 11, offenders and those whose stay in care was less than 90 days.
Thus, although their findings are often applied by others to all children in care, only one in eight of children entering care in England and Wales meet the criteria for inclusion in their study.
Are the methods appropriate to the study?
Is there bias in the questions asked, or not asked?
Is the wording of questionnaires ambiguous or likely to encourage particular replies?
Are findings achieved by one research method checked by results obtained using others?
Naturally, in a research report, the author cannot provide all the data; on the other hand, the reader must be satisfied that all material has been considered and that the conclusions represent a comprehensive analysis of all the evidence.
Social research 
Does the evidence say what the conclusions claim?
Social researchers wish to establish clear findings from their work but it is natural for them to want to stretch or overplay the evidence.
Tests of statistical significance control the validity of some conclusions from numerative evidence but I still remember reading a draft report which said, ‘A huge majority of 51%’!
Even if the evidence appears satisfactory, are there explanations other than those offered by the researcher?
This is a particularly important part of a research exercise, for results often take the form of associations, that is, establishing factors that go together.
But, unless we look deeper into the causal links, these can be misleading.
For example, the amount of damage done in a fire correlates with the number of fire engines that attend.
However, two possible explanations fit this evidence: one that the size of the fire determines both factors or, more absurdly, that it is the fire engines that do the damage.
Needless to say, the research literature is full of argument and counter-argument about the explanations of agreed associations between factors.
By asking these questions, practitioners can judge the validity and applicability of research and incorporate the findings into that part of their professional knowledge which is informed.
How practitioners can improve their use and understanding of research
I have tried to explain why social research takes the form it does and the difficulties faced by those undertaking it.
I have also suggested that although research is a key component of professional practice, it takes many forms, and the various types of research I have described feed professional knowledge in many ways.
The relationship between research, policy and practice is not smooth and its past history with regard to social services for children has not always been happy.
I have also stressed that research is a powerful tool but like all sharp instruments can do harm as well as good if not properly used.
What, then, can practitioners do to improve the situation?
One response is to turn away and say that research is difficult and irrelevant and so rely on practical experience and rules of thumb.
Clients may be fortunate that practitioners' preferences match those suggested by research, but often this is palpably not the case.
It seems irresponsible and morally indefensible to intervene in clients' lives if you are uncertain about what can be achieved and the best methods of doing so.
It also makes professionals vulnerable.
Yet, it is only by research that answers will be provided.
So an avoidance strategy is dangerous all round.
Secondly, it would help if practitioners could understand the different  contributions of various types of research.
No one expects a practitioner to have time for much theoretical musing or for large empirical studies.
Yet the third type of research I described, the quick investigation, is possible as part of a regular monitoring of clients' situations and the quality of services.
A careful analysis of clients' backgrounds, their experiences when involved with social services and longer-term situations would sharpen the focus of practice and can be easily undertaken.
Much relevant information has to be collected for administrative reasons and the same forms used for record-keeping could be adapted to provide regular research results.
For example, if a local authority finds that most of its children in residential care are over the age of 14, this has enormous implications for provision, for the style of residence and for issues of control and staffing.
Similarly, if it is found that 45 per cent of boys admitted to a regional observation and assessment centre have already been in prison or custody, there is little point in promoting the value of a punitive stance to their behaviour.
If it is shown that young people who leave care and have been trained to live independently move quickly into group living situations, what does this tell us about provision for older adolescents?
A careful monitoring of clients' background characteristics, experiences and longer-term situations is possible and should be part of every professional's brief.
There could also be more dialogue between practitioners, their managers and their professional associations about issues that might benefit from research.
Because there is little tradition of using research, social workers find it difficult to suggest areas for investigation and most of the running is, therefore, made by central government.
Because social workers face considerable stress and often feel depressed and beleaguered, such suggestions for research as they make often reflect current problems rather than long-term issues.
I well remember asking a conference of 150 heads of residential schools for children with emotional and behavioural difficulties (EBD) for research suggestions.
There was silence until one proposed ‘absconding’.
Despite all the responsibilities and experience of these delegates, it is sad that they could only view research as relative to one problem, admittedly an important one, rather than to key issues of the service.
After a while the chairman added, ‘Surely we do more than deal with absconding?
’ Then a wider range of ideas emerged and all kinds of fruitful areas for study, such as admission procedures, leaving arrangements, staff needs, links between home and school, etc., were proposed.
There is a need to create a positive view of research and to get tired and defensive staff to look beyond their immediate responsibilities and worries.
Social research 
How researchers can improve liaison with practitioners
Researchers also have an important role to play in this process.
They should strive to present findings in a way that can be understood by practitioners without sacrificing the truth of their assertions, and should pay attention to the dissemination and development of findings.
Inbuilt grant resources for dissemination need to be sought, time must be allowed for lay versions of research to be written as well as academically respectable reports, and there should be greater opportunities for co-operation with policy makers and practitioners in discussions concerning implications of research.
Unfortunately, there are problems within the research community with regard to the commissioning of projects, the academic status of applied research and the training and support of staff, so researchers have to get their own house in order.
In the child care field, however, there have been recent initiatives which have improved the situation.
The DHSS publication,Social Work Decisions in Child Care (1985), summarizes nine research projects and offers exercises for practitioners to test their work against research knowledge.
In 1987, the Social Services Inspectorate ran a series of regional seminars to disseminate this information.
Another important development is the Child Care Open Learning Project, part of the Gatsby Project, which has led to the availability of the Open University Courses ‘Caring for Children and Young People’(P653) and ‘Working with Children and Young People’(K254) both of which are making a wide range of knowledge and research available to many practitioners and others.
What is in it for practitioners?
When all is said and done, we are left with the question, what use is research to practitioners?
Is not social work the application of skills picked up in the ‘University of Life’ and do we not all know what deprived infants and troublesome adolescents need?
Would that life were that simple!
It is true that as human beings we may be able to empathize with social work clients who are short of money or bereaved as we probably have been in these situations ourselves.
But common understandings are not sufficient for effective remedial action.
The identification of clients' presenting problems and the selection of suitable remedies require greater knowledge than this, the foundation of which must be research.
Research links with practice in several ways.
First, it can clarify concepts and issues and so help with the assessment and understanding of clients' problems.
For example, anti-social behaviour which is opportunistic and situational, as is much juvenile delinquency, may require quite different strategies from that which suggests an individual pathology, such as the  arson or sex attack committed by a ‘loner’.
Secondly, research can link present and future states in a way that maybe difficult to comprehend when we are deeply involved at a particular time.
Just as a doctor links smoking at 20 with chest disease at 50, research can indicate to social workers the long-term outcomes of current actions.
Some of these may seem common sense when pointed out but this is not always the case.
For example, when selecting a foster home, it often seems a good idea to social workers to choose parents with children of similar age to those being placed, but several research projects have shown that this greatly increases the risk of placement breakdown.
With abused children the immediate and undisputed need is for protection but, in achieving this, we may cut them off from cherished family and community links, an isolation that may prove damaging.
The five-year-old we sought to protect may become the lonely 18-year-old hanging himself in prison.
On the other hand, he may not ; and only research can tell us, particularly if we want to know about outcomes for numbers of people.
If these contributions of research are correct, research should help practitioners to target ends, fashion approaches and link ends and means more effectively.
This may sound somewhat grand but it has very down-to-earth aspects, such as indicating what is possible and realistic and what tasks are long and short term.
For instance, if children are not out of care within six weeks after reception into care, research tells us that they have a 60 per cent chance of still being in care after two years, a finding that has clear implications for the resources and inter-agency co-operation needed for many social work clients.
When research goes further and links ends and means, it can help us gauge the significance of factors that seem relevant to a situation.
Indeed, one important function of research is to indicate what is not relevant, a particularly important contribution in view of commonly held views on matters such as the causes of delinquency-is it ‘latch-key’ children or television violence?— and prevailing stereotypes about single parents and ethnic minorities.
When the research knowledge is sufficiently conclusive, we can use findings to construct checklists, scales and indicators which can ensure that practitioners consider all factors pertinent to a situation and alert us to danger signs.
For example, as educational research has found, the child who cannot read at eight is unlikely ever to learn, and that eight is the latest age at which a child can function in school as an illiterate.
Social workers responsible for eight-year-olds should see non-reading at this age as a danger sign and a precursor of learning and behaviour problems.
Many other examples could be given on such issues as the placements of children in care, behaviour problems and the family links experienced by children.
There is little excuse for allowing these situations to drift; and it is in preventing such situations that professional practice based on research parts company from common sense and rules of thumb or the use of ‘hunches’.
All of this should also help social workers to distinguish the important  from the trivial.
This is not always easy when dealing with so many aspects of a client's life.
I recently read an assessment report which stated, ‘Her mother seems to have disappeared and hasn't been heard of for six months.
’ This point was thrown away in almost cavalier fashion within along description of the girl's mercurial behaviour.
Although her reluctance to wear a tooth brace and her dislike of school are important at one level, they pale into insignificance compared with the long-term consequences of losing contact with her sole relative.
Child care research should help practitioners distinguish what is grave and enduring from the less serious and transient.
Finally, it must be emphasized that social workers need confidence in handling research as evaluative studies will reveal disappointments as well as achievements.
Some established approaches may prove less effective than hoped and this can damage morale.
But, as I said earlier, to shy away from research on these grounds seems unwise.
It opens the door to those who seek to attack or curtail social work activity and, after all, knowledge is ‘power’ as much for one's enemy as for oneself.
It is also an irresponsible stance, for our obligations are to clients, in this case children, and I have tried to show why research must be an integral part in generating excellence in the services we seek.
References
Families and Children
Erica De'Ath
Marriage and family life in the 1980s
It is still widely held that the traditional or conventional nuclear family is the only suitable environment in which children can grow up and that any deviation from this norm puts children at a considerable disadvantage.
Yet research into contemporary demography and statistics soon demonstrates that in recent years there have been dramatic changes in trends and patterns of marriage, divorce and cohabitation.
Not only are expectations of family life changing, but since families also operate as groups or systems within a wider environment some families are more vulnerable to social change than others.
Families are influenced by many factors besides how well individual members get on with each other.
Education, social welfare and health systems; legal, political and economic systems; and, particularly, communications systems all influence our actions and choices, our values, attitudes and beliefs.
These are some of the issues to be explored in this chapter.
First a quick look at current marriage trends.
Compared with 100 years ago marriage is now an almost universal experience i.e. 92 per cent of women and 86 per cent of men marry (Rimmer, 1981).
But there are other more recent changes.
Compared with 25 years ago people marry later.
In 1961 28 per cent of first-time marriages involved teenage brides (women under 20 years) whereas there were only 14 per cent in 1986.
The average age at marriage in 1986 was 26.3 years for bachelors and 24.1 for spinsters (Central Statistical Office, 1988).
This trend is partly accounted for by the steady increase in cohabitation.
The annual General Household Survey has only included questions on cohabitation since 1979 and estimates suggest that the proportion of women aged 18 to 49 years cohabiting has doubled from 3 per cent in 1979 to 6 per cent in 1987.
Figures for 1987 indicate that 27 per cent of divorced women, 17 per cent of single women, 15 per cent of separated women and 11 per cent of widowed women were cohabiting (OPCS, 1988).
For those who have already been married, there had been pre-marital cohabitation by 62 per cent of women remarrying aged under 25 years, and 74 per cent remarrying between 25 and 34 years.
A sample by OPCS of over 1000 couples divorced in 1979 showed that about one-third of both divorced husbands and divorced wives had remarried within two and a half years (Central Statistical Office, 1988).
Other research has indicated that five years after divorce half of all custodial parents have remarried (Leete and Anthony, 1979).
Not only are more people marrying but they are marrying more often.
One in three marriages in 1986 was a remarriage for one or both partners.
Divorce has increased by almost 600 per cent in 20 years.
One in three marriages is now likely to end in divorce and 60 per cent will involve children under 16.
Each year approximately 160000 children see their parents separate, and lone-parent families have increased, from 8 per cent in 1971 to 14 per cent in 1987 (OPCS, 1988).
Where are the children?
Four out of five of the 11. 6 million children aged under 16 in Britain in 1986 were living with both their natural parents (OPCS, 1988).
This figure declined slightly for older children, a growing proportion of whom lived with a natural parent and a step-parent.
The Child Health and Education Study (CHES)(Osborne et al .,
1984) of 13135 children born in 1970, found that one in ten five-year-olds were not living with both natural parents.
Half were in lone-parent families, a quarter in step-families and a quarter had been adopted or were living with grandparents or foster parents.
These figures are higher than in previous studies.
The National Child Development Study of 17 000 children born in 1958 found only just over 5 per cent of 16-year-olds living with a natural parent and an adoptive step-parent or parent's cohabitee (Ferri, 1984); the Family Formation Survey in 1976 found 7 per cent of all children under 16 (928 000) were living with a step-parent (Dunnell, 1979).
These findings suggest an increasing trend towards family disruption during childhood.
In 1984 custody of approximately 170 000 children was considered by courts (Law Commission, 1986) and in 1985 the parents of 50265 under-fives were seeking divorce, an increase of 14 per cent(OPCS, 1986a).
It has been estimated that if present rates of divorce and fertility continue, one in 22 under-fives will have divorced parents, and one in five 16-year-olds.
A minority of children will be involved in two or more divorces and therefore have a growing number of step-relatives and half-siblings.
We know that in any one year approximately 160 000 children experience the divorce of their parents (Central Statistical Office, 1988).
We also know that at any one time there are approximately one million lone-parent households caring for 1.
5 million children.
A quarter of these parents will be widowed mothers or lone fathers.
The vast majority will be separated and divorced mothers.
Some will be single mothers.
Some will remain lone parents, some may have one or more cohabitees over a period of years; many will remarry after a period of cohabitation and become a step-family.
We have no statistics to tell us how many children are involved, how long they spend in any one of these stages of transition, nor do we know what effect these experiences have on them or on their relationships with natural or step-parents.
There is also an increasing trend towards greater variety in family formations.
In 1986 21 per cent(158000) of 755000 live births in the  United Kingdom were registered outside of marriage; 66 per cent of these were jointly registered by cohabiting parents who had chosen not to marry (Central Statistical Office, 1988).
Adoption has decreased dramatically during 20 years as a reflection of changes in legislation and public attitudes.
However, even among adopters, family patterns vary according to the status of child or parent.
Examples are an orphaned marital child adopted by a couple neither of whom were its natural parents; a marital child adopted by a couple one of whom was the natural parent; a non-marital child adopted by a couple one of whom was the natural parent; or adopted by a couple neither of whom was the natural parent.
More efficient contraception, easier access to abortion and more unmarried women choosing to keep their babies has reduced the numbers available for adoption.
At the same time step-parent adoptions have been discouraged and have almost halved since the Children Act 1975.
In 1986 just under 9000 adoptions were registered in Great Britain compared with a peak of 25 000 in 1968.
The proportion of children aged 10 or over at adoption, however, has increased considerably since 1976 (from 20 per cent to 28 per cent) while the proportion of infants adopted under two years of age has decreased slightly (from 26 to 25 percent)(Central Statistical Office, 1988).
Ethnic diversity of families
The total population of Britain in 1986 was 54. 25 million, 51. 1 million white and 2. 4 million ethnic minorities (0 7 million not stated).
About 4 per cent of the UK population were born outside the UK.
But country of birth does not equate with ethnic origin and a significant proportion of all minority groups (43 per cent) are now born in the United Kingdom.
Ethnic minority groups account for 5 per cent of the population, Indians, Pakistani, Bangladeshi and West Indians accounting for just 1 per cent each of the population overall (Central Statistical Office, 1988).
Many families do not identify with the global ethnic terms sometimes used.
For example, it is inaccurate to refer to Punjabis, Tamils, Pakistanis and Bangladeshis simply as Asians since their cultural differences are as great as their similarities (Sillitoe, 1979).
In looking at ethnic minority families and children in Britain one factor which is immediately obvious is the difference in age structures between some ethnic minority groups and the white population.
Thus about 48 percent of the Pakistani/Bangladeshi group are aged 0–15 compared to 20 percent in the white population, and at the other end of the age spectrum only 2 per cent are aged over 60 compared to 21 per cent among the white population (Central Statistical Office, 1988).
These differences also imply differences in family size, with a higher percentage of some minority groups having four or more births.
In some ethnic minority families as a  result, women are likely to have more children to look after than white families and less older relatives around them to help.
It is now acknowledged that the educational, health and social welfare systems are often not adequate or appropriate for the needs of most ethnic families.
Attempts have been made to try and address this problem in relation to the needs of all children and families.
Thus the Committee of Inquiry into the Education of Children from Ethnic Minority Groups (DES, 1985) states that existing provision for under-fives ‘is generally inadequate to meet the needs of the population as a whole, and may be particularly ill-suited to the needs of West Indian families’.
The Health Education Council project on providing effective health care in a multi-racial society provides a useful checklist for assessing local services.
It emphasizes that black and ethnic minority children and their families may need particular support from the health service as they are likely to share child rearing problems such as lack of play space, damp and over-crowded housing with other socially disadvantaged groups.
In addition it affirms ‘most developmental tests and assessments are culture specific…many parents may have approaches, practices and priorities in childrearing which are different from those of the child health practitioner, but which are nonetheless equally valid’(HEC and National Extension College, 1984).
Ethnic diversity is multi-racial, multi-cultural and multi-dimensional.
Many children are brought up in two cultures: the culture of their parents and that of the host community.
There are differences in family size and family structure, in numbers of children and extended kinship systems.
In many areas there are relative concentrations of ethnic groups, Irish, Orthodox Jews, East Europeans, West Indians, Italians, Greeks, Indians, or Pakistanis/Bangladeshis.
The challenge for adults arriving in this country and establishing a new life and family is different from that of the children born and brought up here.
Research cannot tell us how to work with people whose cultural norms and traditions are different from our own.
It can, however, help to identify aspects of family life where clashes of values or attitudes may raise difficulties — whether in child care practices or gender issues, arranged marriages or disagreements between parents and adolescents.
It can also identify where personal, institutional or structural racism exists and recommend ways in which such issues can be tackled and monitored, for example, through positive discrimination policies and anti-racist child care practice.
Bringing up a family
Britain does not have an explicit family policy.
Many arguments have been put forward for a family perspective or policy statements to counter the apparently poor ‘fit’ between much existing social policy and significant  social change (Henwood and Wicks, 1988).
Three areas in particular are relevant to the relationship between family life and the wider society: the changing role of women, patterns of work and unemployment, and the role of the welfare state.
Space only allows brief reference to these issues here.
We have mixed expectations in Britain about the responsibilities of family life and parenting.
On the one hand, bringing up children is seen as a purely private matter.
The Review of Child Care Law stated an acceptance that the state should not intervene between parent and child simply because it could provide something better than the parents but only if parents were falling so far below an acceptable standard that their children were suffering harm as a result (DHSS, 1985).
However, there is a danger that parents who cannot raise their children appropriately, or find a job, or provide sufficient income to support their family, or whose children engage in delinquent activities, are seen as having some form of personal failing or character weakness.
They may be seen as lacking basic training which can be rectified by the intervention of psychiatrists, psychologists, social workers, probation workers or other similar welfare professionals.
A national survey of parent education and support found that all too often parents were seen as falling into one of two camps: either they were coping adequately and were considered to need no assistance, or they fell below an accepted level of ‘good parenting’ and became the focus of immediate state intervention (Pugh and De'Ath, 1984).
On the other hand, there is clear evidence that social and economic conditions are critical to the well being of children (Graham, 1988).
Indeed research from the National Child Development Study clearly identifies public matters where the state could intervene to prevent harm to children: In the 1970s there was concern about the ‘cycle of deprivation’(Joseph, 1972) and the war against poverty (Jordan, 1974).
The promotion of preparation for parenthood provided the focus for two DHSS seminars at which Sir Keith Joseph stated that ‘there is little argument that the way families function is vital to the health of our society’(DHSS, 1974).
The combination of poor housing, low incomes, uncertain health, insecure employment (coupled often, no doubt, with limited knowledge of parenting skills) offers a prescription for low-achieving, poorly behaved, disenchanted or alienated young people.
It represents a ‘prescription for anti-welfare’ for children.
(Wedge, 1984)
The concept of the ‘good parent’ is an extension of the ‘good-enough mothering’first identified by Winnicott (1960).
Although early writers such as Bowlby (1951, 1972) and Winnicott emphasized the mother-child relationship rather than parent-child, both called for support to ordinary families as a starting point to improved standards of child raising.
In the aftermath of the Maria Colwell tragedy a report by the Central Council for Education and Training in Social Work took this concept as its title and stated that ‘good enough parenting involves, among other things, a capacity to provide continuity of love and care which is realistic in its  expectations of both parent and child and deals with ‘real’ conflicts of interests and not those whose origins lie only in the parents' past' (CCETSW, 1978).
More recently Bettelheim has stated that ‘to be a good enough parent one must be able to feel secure in one's parenthood, and one's relation to one's child’(Bettelheim, 1988).
Support for families
So what do parents require if they are to function effectively as a family?
How should they set about their task?
What can be offered to help them provide the expected level of care and to feel more secure in their parenting role?
Most parents manage to raise their children successfully with a little help and advice from friends and family and occasionally relevant professionals.
What is becoming increasingly clear is that parents need practical support (adequate housing, income, employment, educational, health and social welfare services), psychological and emotional support (interpersonal within the family and the community) and a network of supportive services.
Eminent speakers at the 1974 DHSS seminars identified the need for skills in interpersonal relationships, communication, coping with stress, shaping behaviour and for certain‘permitting circumstances’ or necessary life opportunities and facilities (Rutter, 1974).
They made recommendations on how to provide support systems for families in relation to work, school, the neighbourhood and the home (Bronfenbrenner, 1974).
More recently Rutter et al .
(1983) have suggested that parenting and parenting resources need to be considered in terms of other variables: time available for parenting, parent's own emotional state, presence of life stresses and problems, existence of satisfactions and achievements apart from parenting, and the availability of adequate social supports and housing conditions.
These other variables are particularly relevant in the light of the estimated 60 per cent of working women with dependent children in 1987 (OPCS, 1988).
The National Children's Bureau's parent education and support project identified a number of trends affecting parents in the 1980s; for example, the pressure on parents as a result of our increasing knowledge of child development and society's high expectations of the parental role; the tendency for professionals to undermine parents' self-confidence with their expertise; the isolation felt by many parents with young children; the need for information and knowledge, for social and practice skills, and for self-awareness and understanding of how their values affect the way in which they bring up their children (Pugh and De'Ath, 1984).
Differing values and influences over generations of childrearing in the English speaking world have included concepts of religious morality, medical morality, natural development and natural needs, individualism and the  ‘fun’ morality, added to which there is now the parental dilemma of whether to be friend or authority (Newson and Newson, 1974).
Over the last 20 years there has been a move away from looking at children and adults in isolation towards looking at the needs of both, in terms of the family.
However, most of the research on families is based on clinical samples of families with problems rather than research on ‘normal’ families.
In Britain two examples of cohort studies provide descriptive accounts of patterns of infant care in urban communities.
For the 1000 families in Newcastle (Spence et al .,
1954) it was the overcrowded or inadequate buildings that caused the greatest strain on family life.
For the 709 Nottingham mothers also it was the differences in living conditions that affected the attitudes and methods of infant care and particular aspects of child rearing (Newson and Newson, 1963).
Close proximity of neighbours and thin council-house walls affected the general irritability of mothers and how long the baby was left to cry, while the lack of washing machines inhibited toleration of toilet training and wet bed clothes.
In Britain support for families has focused less on parent education and teaching parenting skills and more on a range of informal support services (De'Ath, 1982, 1983).
Under this general umbrella of family support is a wealth of informal groups, intervention schemes, home visiting, crisis telephone lines, and individual befriending in the context of family, neighbourhood or community centres, playgroups and drop-in centres (Pugh and De'Ath, 1984; De'Ath, 1985).
Such self-help and community support, a ‘family centred’ approach, is not new.
Early examples include university settlements in 1913, the Peckham Health Centre with its family club which opened in London in 1926, Parents and Child Centre in Birmingham in 1934, Pacifist Service Units in 1940 which became Family Service Units in 1948 and Family Advice Centres in 1965.
Such community-based approaches, and family centres in particular, have developed rapidly during the 1970s and 1980s (Henderson, 1988; De'Ath, 1988a).
Perhaps, the greatest shift in offering support to families has come through awareness of the need to work in partnership with parents and for specialist and intervention services to work more within community and across agency settings.
Learning from research
Does research have any effective impact on everyday family life in Britain?
As already noted there have been calls for national statements to encourage central and local government to develop sensitive and appropriate family and child care policies, and good child care service and practice.
Research, particularly in the context of family and children, demonstrates seven key factors which inhibit or discourage effective links between research, policy and practice.
1 Separation of private troubles and public issues
There has been a tendency generally, but particularly in the years since 1979, to disregard what are seen as private troubles (family poverty, poor marital relationships, isolation) and to consider primarily public issues, e.g. dependency of lone parents on welfare benefits, reception of children into care because of homelessness or family breakdown and juvenile crime.
The impact of poverty and disadvantage on children and families has been amply recorded in reports such as Born to Fail ?
(Wedge and Prosser, 1973) and Children in Adversity (Wedge and Essen, 1982), but it has not been matched in current social security, housing, day care, education or other welfare policies.
2 Unwillingness to accept collective responsibility
Research has also clearly demonstrated that some children and families are more vulnerable than others but that such disadvantage can be alleviated if society's policies are designed to do so.
American Head-Start programmes have demonstrated the value of early educational activities with parents and children (Berrueta-Clement et al .,
1984), the National Child Development Study follow-up of truants shows they are more likely to marry early, have larger families and to experience separation or divorce (Hibbett and Fogelman, 1988; Hibbett et al .,
in press).
Studies of take-up of welfare benefits indicate that universal child benefit is more successful in reaching impoverished families than targeted means-tested benefits (Brown, 1988), yet policies frequently do not reflect such knowledge.
3 Delay between identification of issue and changing practice
We are slow to analyse research in terms of the impact any particular findings may have for a wider field of social analysis, education, training and delivery of services.
For example, in 1960 a survey of women at home with young children noted, ‘Clearly the nature of women's roles is changing, and the situation at present is one of conflict and stress’(Gavron, 1966).
Three key issues were identified: a reanalysis of education for girls; a reanalysis of women's roles and capacities as workers; and the reintegration of the mother with young children into society.
It was over a decade later that the link between ‘personal troubles’ and ‘public issues of social structure’of clinical depression and women's daily experience was demonstrated (Brown and Harris, 1978).
A decade later we are only just beginning to find ways of alleviating some experiences related to such stress (Pound and Mills, 1985) and seriously addressing the role of social support as a protection from depression (Koziarski et al .,
1986; Hodgson et al .,
1987).
Childcare for  working mothers remains a personal issue and Britain is the only member of the EEC which has not endorsed the directive on parental leave.
4 Failure to appreciate the extent of social change
Sometimes research itself takes too narrow a view of social changes, and their impact on family relationships.
Eekelaar (1971), for example, concentrating primarily on the needs of one-parent families and viewing step-families as just another form of nuclear family, confidently asserts that ‘whether a marriage has been terminated by death or divorce, the social and personal disruption is best healed by successful remarriage’.
Such a view ignores the combined impact of adversarial divorce courts, lack of support for separating couples going through loss and change, lack of awareness of different roles and responsibilities of step-parents, lack of recognition of step-families in legal or welfare systems, and the negative image of step-families, all of which have contributed to the difficulties of remarriage and a rising re-divorce rate.
5 Lack of co-ordinated analysis of issues and impact
Research tends to focus on discrete areas of work, agency settings or a particular age range or group of children.
Services also tend to take this segmented approach rather than offering an integrated package of support services to families.
Parents often complain that they can only get help or support when they have identified themselves as having a specific problem, and it is not unusual for some families to have several different workers trying to offer support and advice on specific problems which, in reality, are part of a whole situation.
Equally, we often fail to take a life-cycle approach in recognizing the importance of key areas of research to the development of family services.
There is now a considerable body of knowledge on developmental stages of childhood, the family life cycle, on crisis events such as a new baby, onset of adolescence, loss and separation, marriage, moving house and the effects of divorce on children.
As increasing numbers of families experience several of these events at the same time, and out of sequence of the normal family life cycle, we should be reviewing practice, services, support networks and training to accommodate such changes.
For example, what are the support needs of a step-family where the step-mother has recently given up work, had a new baby, where there are two sets of step-children in pre-puberty and puberty who have just changed house and schools, where one set of children have a good relationship with the non-custodial parent and the others do not?
6 Inability to adapt services to meet consumer needs
Several studies demonstrate that the kind of help people want, or the  priority they attach to particular needs, does not coincide with what they are offered (Mayer and Timms, 1970; Lerner, 1972; Merrington and Corden, 1981).
This can also result in investment of considerable social work resources and therapeutic effort with inconclusive outcomes (Mattinson and Sinclair, 1979; Sainsbury et al .,
1982).
Families in poverty, families who have a disabled child, lone parents or step-families, families whose children have been taken into care, all are particularly vulnerable to them is match between needs and services.
As one mother described it, ‘Nobody had neglected or ignored her.
Unfortunately, however, they had offered counselling when practical advice was what was needed’(Russell, 1978).
7 Impact of prevailing values and beliefs
Whatever research might indicate, the power of existing values and beliefs about current issues is often stronger than the empirical evidence.
Notable examples are custodial sentences for young offenders (Juvenile Crime Advisory Committee, 1987), attitudes towards day care for babies and young children (Lindon and Lindon, 1988) and perceptions of the greater risks of health and social problems in teenage motherhood (Melhuish and Phoenix, 1987).
Working with individual children and individual families
Children in the same family
Family life is never static and no two children in a family are the same.
In addition to their genetic differences they will each have a different nurturing experience within their family, for example being the first born and only child is different from being the second or third child of parents already used to dealing with small babies and the noise, bustle and demands of older siblings.
The richness and complexity of research in this area of family life and child development has been well illustrated by the longitudinal television series ‘Citizen 2000’.
Each year the 20 selected children born in 1982 were captured on film as their families developed, chronicling the arrival of brothers and sisters, moving home, starting at playgroup, being cared for by granny, a nanny, an au pair or childminder.
The families represent across-section of cultures, religions, classes, incomes, working parents, occupations and locations, from the wealthy manor house to the high-rise tower block, the inner-city to the isolated farm.
The fact that the majority of families now only have two children may add additional value and intensity to the sibling relationship.
The impact of family disruption may also have significant effects.
As many as one in five  motherless children in the NCDS sample of lone-parent families had brothers or sisters living away from home (Ferri, 1976).
Not only had the children suffered the loss of a parent but the family was further fragmented by the absence of one or more children as a direct or indirect result of the marital breakdown.
In her research into the effects of divorce on children, Mitchell (1985) found that some siblings had been divided between the two parents, though some were reunited after the divorce.
Wallerstein and Kelly (1980) found that ‘only’ children had greater exposure to parental conflicts and pressure during the divorcing period than children with brothers and sisters although many children did not consider their siblings helpful.
In the absence of much research on ordinary families awareness of the role and importance of siblings inevitably comes from situations where families are brought to clinical or public scrutiny.
Berridge (1985) found that the separation of siblings when children come into care was strongly linked with unsettled care experience.
There is now a growing body of information (but little research) on the effects of step-family formation on the role and status of a child, which can change from special roles of oldest or youngest, of only boy or only girl, through integration with step-siblings and half-siblings.
Children in a lone-parent family
The proportion of lone-parent families has remained fairly steady at 14 percent for the last five years (OPCS, 1988).
Some people dispute the use of the phrase ‘one-parent’ on the grounds that children have two parents but are being raised by a ‘lone’parent.
Lone-parent families are not a homogeneous group and it is difficult to obtain reliable estimates of the numbers of families and children involved.
Although the GHS asks about cohabitation, it classifies information on legal marital status without including information about cohabitation or remarriage.
Parents are classified as either married or lone.
It is reported that most cohabiting lone parents describe themselves as married and are therefore classified as such (OPCS, 1985).
At any one time there are approximately 1.
5 million children in lone-parent households but this is only a single snapshot count and the number of children currently estimated to be in step-families (between 1 and 1.
5 million) indicates that a far higher proportion of children spend part of their childhood in a lone-parent family than such a figure indicates, and that some children may spend repeated periods of time in a lone parent family, or in a newly constituted family.
There are differences in lone-parent families.
Lone fathers tend to be older than lone mothers; there are more West Indian and less Asian families headed by a lone parent; they are more likely to have lower incomes and to live in local authority housing than two-parent families.
There are also strong geographical variations with a particularly heavy concentration in certain inner-city areas, for example Inner London and Newcastle.
This has obvious implications for services at a local level and provision needs to be related to regional trends and census figures.
The term ‘schoolgirl mother’ strictly refers to those under the age of 16 at the time of conception.
However, many 16-year-olds who give birth or have a termination are still of compulsory school age for up to six months after their birthday and their pregnancy occurs while they are still schoolgirls.
In 1982 there were 5585 live births to mothers aged 16 and under; for those under 16 the figure was 1281.
For individual schools a pregnant teenager is still a relatively rare occurrence and one in which it is difficult to cater for all the physical, medical, social, residential and educational needs of the prospective mother and baby.
Local education authorities vary enormously in their policies towards the education of pregnant girls and schoolgirl mothers.
Home tuition may be requested, and some areas have established special education units, for example Bristol, Sheffield and Liverpool.
Mothers under the age of 16, and their families, often experience considerable financial hardship as they are not eligible for most state benefits.
Teenage pregnancy is not a new phenomenon but it remains controversial and attracts disproportionate and misleading media attention.
For example, statements that young girls deliberately or increasingly conceive in order to secure local authority accommodation have yet to be substantiated.
In fact, teenagers in the UK are less likely to become pregnant and less likely to become mothers than they were 15 years ago and far less likely to do so than teenagers in the United States.
But teenage pregnancy is still associated with a variety of physical problems for the mother, low birth weight of the child and high rates of foetal, perinatal and maternal mortality, as well as psycho-social risks such as non-accidental injury (Bury, 1984).
Many of these ill effects, however, are related to low socio-economic status, unemployment, poor housing and social environment, low educational achievements, lack of support and stable relationships, inexperience, isolation, depression and poor levels of attendance at antenatal and other clinics, rather than to age per se (Wells, 1983).
Early mothering is associated not only with poor housing but also with frequent moves and insecure tenure (Butler et al .,
1981).
Unmarried teenage mothers are more likely nowadays to keep their children than to place them for adoption.
In a national sample of 533, only four teenage mothers had their babies adopted in 1979 (Simms and Smith, 1982).
Many professional and voluntary workers in the health, education, social and youth services express concern that young girls are choosing parenthood as an alternative to unemployment or tedious unskilled jobs (Johnson, 1980).
A study of 79 London mothers aged 16–19 in late pregnancy confirmed that they are still usually of working class status with few or no qualifications and little chance of career-type employment.
However, this did not suggest that they became pregnant by default or  because they had nothing else to do, rather motherhood was a central focus of their lives (Phoenix, 1987).
Single mothers and teenage pregnancies have often been presented as a pressing social problem.
In 1985 in England and Wales there were 797000 conceptions of which 15 per cent were to women under 20 years old.
A quarter of these conceptions or pregnancies were inside marriage but the others should not necessarily be regarded as an indication of increasing single parenthood since 59 per cent of these ‘illegitimate births’ were jointly registered indicating the child was part of a stable, though non-marital, relationship (Central Statistical Office, 1988).
The majority of lone parents become so as the result of separation, divorce or death.
There are various factors which may affect the emotional and intellectual development of their children.
First, there is the actual death or separation leading to the formation of the majority of such families.
For most children this is, inevitably, a stressful period in their life; for some it will be sudden and unexpected, for others a sad and sometimes long drawn-out experience.
Children will react differently according to their age, their personality, the relationship they have (or had) with both their parents, the presence or absence of brothers and sisters, aunts and uncles, grandparents or other significant people in their life (Mitchell, 1985; Wallerstein and Kelly, 1980).
Reactions to stress to some extent depend on a child's age.
Pre-school children are likely to show management problems in feeding and sleeping, temper tantrums, irritability and misery; middle school children may exhibit aggressive behaviour, truancy, lying, stealing or overtly emotional problems such as depression, anxiety, fearfulness or withdrawal.
Adolescents may show a combination of middle school age and more adult type behaviour with depressive reactions and anxiety states (Graham et al .,
1985).
Recent figures indicate that 20 per cent of the 100000 households accepted as homeless by local authorities in 1986 had recently experienced the breakdown of the relationship between the partners (FPSC, 1988).
The National Child Development Study report on disadvantaged children identified children from one-parent families with low incomes and poor housing as less likely to be successful at school than other children (Wedge and Prosser, 1973).
The problems of poverty are further exacerbated by many parents having to work full time and needing substitute or day care, holiday and after-school provision, all of which are in short supply and costly.
The CHES report confirmed that at age five there were differences in behaviour, in cognitive abilities and vocabulary between children of lone parents compared with those who had two parents.
Much of this (though not all) could be attributed to the poorer socio-economic circumstances, loss of a parent, family isolation and curtailed parent-child interaction (Osborn et al .,
1984).
The impact of divorce upon children
Divorce is now a fact of life and needs to be seen as a process, not a single event, dissolving a marriage.
Bohannen (1971) describes six stations of divorce which may be happening simultaneously or in succession and which continue until some resolution is found.
This process includes:
the emotional divorce: the phase when the marriage is deteriorating
the legal divorce: when the divorce is granted
the economic divorce: dealing with money and property
the co-parental divorce: arrangements for child care, custody and access
the community divorce: relationships with friends, neighbours and colleagues
the psychic divorce: coming to terms with the marital breakup and regaining individual autonomy.
For many thousands of children experiencing actual separation and the consequences of divorce of their parents, it is likely to be a continuous process of change and adjustment and of considerable anxiety as their parents try to resolve the different stages identified above.
It has been argued by some that children suffer when their parents' marriage ends, and by others that a child removed from embittered parental conflict will be happier.
Family conflict and family tension certainly affect children's mental health (Rutter, 1981) and in assessing the impact of the loss of a parent through death and divorce it was the distortion of family relationships not the disruption of the bond with the parent in divorce that was critical (Rutter, 1981).
This appears to hold true both before and after divorce.
Lund (1984) looked at three groups of six- to nine-year-old children post-divorce: those with no contact with the non-custodial parent, those with access but whose parents were in conflict, and those whose parents worked harmoniously together.
The last group were reported by teachers and mothers to have the fewest emotional problems and highest self-esteem of the three groups.
Research seems to indicate that how parents manage the divorce process is the critical factor for children rather than the divorce per se .
However, children rarely seem to be informed about the possibility of separation or divorce.
Parents seem to believe either that the less said the better or that the reasons are obvious and do not need explaining.
Research studies with children clearly contradict both these points of view (Mitchell, 1985; McCredie and Horrox, 1985; Walczak and Burns, 1984; Wallerstein and Kelly, 1980).
Children want and need information in order to make some sense of their parents' behaviour, to avoid distorted and unnecessary fears and fantasies, and to come to terms with the change in circumstances.
It should be expected that children will be upset by such dramatic changes in their lives and this needs to be acknowledged and supported.
It is rare for children to welcome their parents' separation even though they welcome an end to any violence, arguments, shouting or unpleasantness.
Many children, particularly younger ones, develop anxieties about the possible loss or disappearance of their remaining parent and may show clinging behaviour or fear of being left alone.
The majority of children feel great sadness and, for some, this is expressed as anger, bitterness and resentment towards the remaining parent.
In others it may lead to depression.
Parents have reported problems which might have been caused by the separation or earlier conflict: truancy, clinging, withdrawn behaviour, bed-wetting, aggressiveness, nightmares and poor work at school (Mitchell, 1985).
The majority of children whose parents separate and divorce are of school age and a significant amount of their time will therefore be spent at school.
Teachers can play an important role in helping them to adjust, but since practical and financial arrangements often cause difficulties for parents, teachers need to be sensitive in offering help so that it does not seem intrusive.
The proposed post-divorce reform of a jointly agreed statement of parenting arrangements for children is welcome in principle, but many parents will require access to conciliation to enable them to concentrate on their children's needs.
Wallerstein and Kelly (1980) have described a ‘diminished capacity to parent’ during the divorce period, when parents who feel humiliated, depressed or angry are unable to cope with the distress, anxieties or needs of their children.
Clulow and Vincent(1987) describe the role of the Divorce Court Welfare Service as a ‘no-man's land between the interests of parents and children, between the conflicting parents themselves, and ultimately between the interests of the State and the individual; the meshing of private complaint and public response’.
Marriage breakdown and divorce is still portrayed as a private matter, the result of personal inadequacy or moral failure, yet the Finer Report(1974) emphasized that children were often helpless victims of marital strife and envisaged conciliation services being developed in the context of a major reform of family law and creation of family courts.
The report made 230 recommendations for action which would radically improve or reduce legal, financial, housing, employment and other problems facing Britain's one-parent families.
Research indicates that support for families, especially those identified as vulnerable, should have high priority in social policy and public spending.
Matrimonial legal aid cost £61 million in 1983–84 but little money was available for independent conciliation services or to help couples to consider the options available to them and to separate, if necessary, without severe conflict and distress.
In 1982–83 nearly 800 children in England and Wales were made the subject of care orders as a result of divorce or other family proceedings and the cumulative number of children in care as a result of such orders was more than 7000, costing approximately £400 million a year (Family Courts Campaign, 1986).
The links between research, policy and practice are very clear and could be cost-effective (!) but to date most of the resources for dealing with the aftermath of marital breakdown have been allocated to the judicial system.
More financial support for family life and access to preventive services would help to reduce marital distress.
The creation of family courts and a unified system of family law, ending the adversarial system, with its inconsistencies and confusion, conciliation services to help clarify arrangements in the best interests of children and encourage joint parental responsibilities, would all reduce the distress inherent in the divorce process.
Interdisciplinary training for all those working with families lawyers, conciliators, probation and court welfare services, as well as health, education and social services, would create a network of support for children, parents and families.
Such changes would also encourage a more positive and better negotiated start for many step-families which often fail as a result of unresolved divorce issues.
Children in step-families
Step-families have always existed but the increasing rate of divorce and remarriage mean that there are now more of them and that more are formed following parental divorce than parental death.
A step-family is created when two adults form a new household in which one or both brings a child or children from a previous relationship.
Such families may be preceded by single parenthood, separation, divorce or bereavement, and may arise through cohabitation, marriage or remarriage.
It has been estimated that there are 26 possible permutations of step-family formation.
Step-children may be full-time or part-time members of the household.
Step-family relationships cut across all generations and many adults who are step-parents may also become step-children as many of the older generation remarry.
This may lead to an increasingly varied and complex network of ‘family’ relationships.
There is little research or information on remarriage in Britain.
A longitudinal sample of 1084 couples who divorced in 1979 found that one-third of both husbands (34 per cent) and wives (33 per cent ) had remarried within two and a half years, and that those with children were just as likely to remarry as those with no children (Haskey, 1987; Bhrolcain, 1988).
Although basic information on those remarrying can be obtained from marriage records there are no details of the children involved or duration of the previous marriage (Haskey, 1987).
Exact numbers of step-families are unknown, but it is estimated that there are between 1 and 1.
5 million.
In 1982, 7 per cent of all children (809 000) were living with their natural mother and a step-father (OPCS, 1982).
Over one-third of single mothers with dependent children were cohabiting in 1985, and many divorced and separated women, some of whom will have children, constitute a significant number of additional step-families, in fact, if not in law (Central Statistical Office, 1988).
Within five years, half of all  non-custodial parents (usually fathers) have remarried, creating some full-time and some part-time step-families where children visit or stay overnight for short periods (Leete and Anthony, 1979).
Little research exists on the difficult task of raising another person's child in this situation or on the distinctive features and potential problems of step-parenting as opposed to adoption or fostering.
The first investigation of a large representative sample of step-children confirmed that the documented economic and social problems created by divorce were considerably alleviated by remarriage, especially where this provided a step-mother (Ferri, 1984).
The development of children, including educational attainment, social and emotional behaviour, and aspirations for the future, differed little from those of two-parent families.
However, in a minority of cases involving boys with step-fathers, there were developmental difficulties.
This study suggested that such problems may lie in the confusion surrounding roles and relationships of step-parents and children and the lack of clear and realistic expectations for step-families.
While society continues to idealize the two-parent family and regard it as the norm, there is a danger that remarriage will be seen as the solution to the individual and social problems associated with widowhood, marital separation and single parenthood.
Not only is there a lack of research evidence to support this view, but it has been argued that many children do better remaining in a single-parent family than in having to make further adjustments to a third form of family life — the step-family (Richards and Dyson, 1982).
Step-parent adoptions of marital children increased from approximately 3000 in 1965 to over 9000 in 1975, almost all accounted for by post-divorce applications.
The Children Act 1975 sought to discourage such step-parent adoptions and a research project was established to monitor the changes.
Adoption was intended to create new family relationships not change those which already existed and joint custody was introduced as an alternative and to give some legal recognition to step-parents.
The research (Masson et al .,
1983) looked at 1255 step-families applying to adopt from the step-family population of 6150 in 1980, and identified a major problem of variable treatment by courts of step-families seeking adoption.
In some courts applications were successful in 96 per cent of cases; in other courts only 9 per cent were successful.
Information on step-families has come primarily from researchers following up the impact of divorce, practitioners working with divorced parents and step-families, and most recently from step-parents themselves.
Mitchell (1985) found that five years after divorce in four-fifths of the 71 families in the study the children had one parent with a new partner and at least one-third had two parents with new partners.
Of the 30 per cent of custodial parents who had remarried, one-third of the remarriages had already broken down.
Ferri (1984) concluded that difficult parent-child relationships and sibling conflict were more common in step-families.
McCredie and Horrox (1985) illustrated how children, who had lost one  parent through divorce and adjusted to a lone-parent family, expressed anxiety and often outright resistance to any further changes, particularly remarriage of their parent/s.
Practitioners working with step-children and step-families emphasize the importance of understanding the particular needs of step-families and not treating them as if they were two-parent families.
An early guide from America (Visher and Visher, 1979) outlined the myths and realities of step-family life, while in Britain, Brown (1982) looked at the implications for social work, and Roys (1984) focused on working with adolescents where there are problems.
Essentially such guidelines highlight the need to enhance communication, to accept ambiguity and differences in step families and the value of history taking.
It is important for practitioners to remain flexible, sometimes widening the focus to include extended current or previous family members, to avoid triangulation or colluding with anyone family member, and to avoid judging which includes the assumption that problems are all related to being a step-family.
An American clinical study (Anderson and White, 1986) also suggests that problems in step families are more likely to relate to parenting issues between adults and children than to the parents' marital relationship.
Burgoyne and Clark(1984) describe the ‘conscious parenthood’ of step-parents as a rational rather than an emotional effort to be a ‘good parent’compared with childrearing as a central and spontaneous activity for natural parents.
Parents and step-parents are increasingly writing about step-family life in an attempt both to warn parents and inform practitioners.
Maddox (1980) describes how love and anger, ghosts and grandparents, home and food, jealousy and authority can make it difficult to live with other people's children.
Hodder (1985) provides an extremely practical guide to all you need to know before and after becoming a step-family!
Inglis (1986) explores myths, ghosts, roles, priorities and feelings, and De'Ath (1988c) identifies the differences, difficulties and divided loyalties in step-families.
Step-family life is multi-dimensional and multi-faceted, making it a complex arena for parents and children to live in, or practitioners to work in.
Children who run away
Leaving home should be a normal part of young adult development, but running away or leaving prematurely is an indication that life at home is no longer acceptable or bearable.
Children usually exhibit symptoms or signals long before they run away: they may lie, steal, truant, experiment with drugs or alcohol, create conflict, throw tantrums, be angry or depressed; finally they run away.
Based on a national postal survey to chief constables in 1986, it is estimated that 75–80 000 young people are reported as missing each year in Britain (De'Ath, 1987).
Various terms are used to describe children and young people who are no longer at home, frequently incorrectly and often as though they were interchangeable (De'Ath, 1986).
The most common are:
missing children — those who disappear; some may have been kidnapped or abducted, some will have run away
runaways — those who leave their normal residence without permission
absconders — absent from an address where they should be residing under various legal provisions (foster/children's home, hospital)
homeless — no fixed abode or permanent accommodation rootless
drifters — seeking jobs in cities or coastal towns, moving from place to place, in squats, on beaches or the streets.
Running away from home is not a new phenomenon.
In 1975 a television documentary ‘Johnny Go Home’ about runaway children, estimated 2000 per night on the streets of London, and caused an uproar in the press, public and parliament (Deakin and Willis, 1976).
Another study looked at the consequences of family conflict and a ‘new wave of teenage girls breaking away’(Willans, 1976).
A DHSS report highlighted the dangers facing runaways and homeless youngsters (DHSS, 1976).
Despite all this, very little attention has been given to the issue in Great Britain as compared with other countries.
In America, the 1974 Runaway Youth Act and the 1977 Runaway and Homeless Youth Program provided funds for community-based short-term shelters, food and clothing, and a national runaway switchboard.
In this country, a debate on runaway children in the House of Commons records ‘There is no comprehensive policy or practice covering runaway children’(Hansard , 1986).
Interest in runaways, street children and child prostitution has heightened during the 1980s.
An International Commission on unprotected children on city streets called it a growing urban tragedy needing concrete action not just concern (Agnelli, 1986).
A study of child prostitution in Britain, America and West Germany reports that ‘every runaway child who goes into full-time child prostitution has a history of continual and profound family conflict’(Sereny, 1984).
Three key dimensions are recognized as specific to runaways: age; absence of permission to leave or covert or forcible ejection; length of time since leaving.
In the United Kingdom there are no clear definitions, discrete criteria, national statistics, nor comprehensive policy or practice by central or local government for runaway children.
The Children's Society, a national voluntary child care organization providing the only safe houses for runaways and the only comprehensive research on this issue in England (De'Ath and Newman, 1987; Newman, forthcoming), has suggested the following as a basic operational definition for further work in this area: Such a definition would combine two currently separate categories of young people (runaways and absconders) and could provide the basis for  the collection of national statistics to estimate the prevalence of runaway behaviour.
An interim report from the safe house research, based on 532, young people (737 admissions) for the period June 1985 to May 1987, shows that the majority of young people ran from home (347, 65 per cent), a third from local authority care (179, 34 per cent ) and a few from boarding schools (6, 1 per cent ).
Eighteen per cent of these young people had been sexually abused at some time and 4 per cent of the females cited this as the main reason for running (Newman, forthcoming).
A runaway is a young person, aged under 17 years or in local authority care, who has either left home (or residential care) of their own accord but without agreement or is forced to leave, and is missing for one or more nights.
Children and young people run away for many and varied reasons.
Some are seeking independence and freedom from family or institutional repression; some are escaping from problems or abuse whether at home, within the family, or at school; some are running back to the family and away from care authorities.
The image of the runaway as adventurer or ‘funseeker’ heading for the bright lights of the city for a couple of days or weeks is not realistic.
Rather, the reasons given by the young people followed a consistent pattern of circumstances.
running from home: most frequently given reasons were — lack of understanding within the family, problems arising from separation, divorce or remarriage of parents, breakdown in communication, trying to trace absent natural parent, rows and arguments often ending with the youngster being thrown out, violence at home often accompanied by drunkenness, other physical or sexual abuse, and bullying at school.
running from care: over half the 179 youngsters who had run from care were persistent absconders and had already run away at least five times before going to the safe house.
They said they were unhappy in their placement, had been in care for too long, nothing appeared to begetting sorted out, they were being bullied, they wanted more independence, problems with foster or adoptive families, feeling stigmatized in care, feeling unable to cope with independent or semi-independent living (De'Ath and Newman, 1987).
Working with youngsters who have run away is not easy.
Many have survived days, weeks or even months lacking regular food or safe accommodation, often by begging or shoplifting and sleeping in squats, derelict buildings, on the streets or under bridges in cardboard boxes.
Loneliness and the absence of advice, guidance and support often lead to them striking up friendships with others in the same situation which can offer peer-group support or may increase risks of involvement in prostitution, drugs or solvent abuse.
Gaining the trust of such youngsters is one of the most important elements of the work, listening to them, exploring the circumstances leading to running away, giving them time to disclose painful incidents from their past, involving them openly in all aspects of planning and negotiating a mutually agreeable solution for their future with parents or guardians (De'Ath and Newman, 1987; Adams and Adams, 1987; De'Ath, 1987).
On the basis of current trends, the impact of divorce and remarriage on  young people will no doubt not only continue but is likely to increase.
The changes in social security legislation will make it more difficult for young people estranged from their parents or who have suffered physical or sexual abuse to receive financial or practical help.
As a recent Barnardo's report on the plight of the young homeless states ‘those young people who run away have been failed both by their families and by the society in which they live’(O'Mahony, 1988).
From this examination of some of the many patterns of family life which exist in Britain in the 1980s it can be seen that traditional views of the family are unsupported by research findings.
It also demonstrates that the findings of research support a coherent policy to identify family needs at times of stress and develop services and good practice to match them as far as possible.
Children are deeply affected by their family life and to help parents provide them with a satisfactory experience and model is likely to be an investment in the future when they will become parents in their turn.
References
Child abuse
Nigel Parton
This chapter has three central aims in its discussion of child abuse research.
The first is simply to provide a framework for analysing, together with some criteria for assessing, what we currently ‘know’ about child abuse.
However, rather than attempt a comprehensive summary or distillation of ‘research findings’ it will concentrate its efforts on identifying the main issues and questions that research has addressed, together with some of its main conclusions.
It will then attempt to analyse critically the current state of knowledge about child abuse or — more to the point — what we don't ‘know’.
Secondly, I will try to demonstrate that the relationship between research, policy and practice is far from straightforward.
For rather than research coming up with unequivocal findings which can then influence and be integrated in a professional and neutral way into policy and practice I will try to demonstrate how political interests and values, in all their guises, influence and pervade the relationship in a variety of ways.
Nor is this influence obvious or straightforward, for a major reason why different research comes up with different findings and has different implications for policy and practice is that those findings are subject to different underlying assumptions and have different ideological agendas.
Thirdly, I will conclude that the way we approach and use research perhaps needs to be rethought.
What will become apparent is that practitioners are unlikely to find answers to the tensions and problems of child abuse and child protection work in any clear-cut way in the research.
In fact the nature and direction of child abuse research may itself be a not insignificant part of the problem of deciding what to do.
I will argue that in seeing child abuse and child abuse research as distinct from child care and child care research more generally, practitioners and policy makers are, at best, forgetting and, at worst , refusing to recognize what we already ‘know’ about good practice with children and families.
A central part of my argument, then, is that a major step can be made simply by relocating the issue of child abuse into the mainstream of child care research, policy and practice.
In recognizing that child abuse and child care are not discrete areas we should start from the premise that the understanding and skills developed in relation to child care should inform our approach to child abuse.
Research, public inquiries and practice
The issue of child abuse, or child protection as it is often now described (Parton and Parton, 1989), perhaps more than any other area of child care policy and practice has brought the activities of a variety of health and welfare professionals into considerable public, political and media focus in recent years.
During the last 20 years well over 30 public inquiries have put the practice and decision making of social workers in particular under the microscope (DHSS, 1982; Hallett, 1989).
In many respects the issue has provided the main vehicle for articulating a series of debates about how the state, via its social workers, responds to the needs of children more generally and intervenes in the private sphere of the family in particular(Parton, 1985; Frost, 1989).
In the late 1980s it has seemed that social workers and their agencies have been caught in a political crossfire between being criticized on the one hand for allowing some children to suffer unnecessarily, sometimes to the point of death, at the hands of their parent(s) or guardian(s), and on the other hand of intervening unwarrantably into other families and removing their children inappropriately.
Put another way, it has seemed that the primary concern addressed in the Beckford (London Borough of Brent, 1985), Carlile (London Borough of Greenwich, 1987) and Henry (London Borough of Lambeth, 1987) reports was that social workers did too little too late, while the primary concern addressed in the Cleveland report (Secretary of State for Social Services, 1988) was that social workers did too much too soon.
Much of this public criticism directed at practitioners, often reinforced and fuelled by the reports themselves, is that these tragedies and scandals have arisen because practitioners ‘failed’, in part, because they lacked the knowledge about child abuse which a thorough grounding in the research and its findings would have given them.
It is assumed that research has established what the nature of child abuse is, who the actual and potential perpetrators and victims are and hence what are the associated factors which put children at ‘high risk’.
It is assumed that child abuse is preventable and predictable via a judicious reading of the research findings.
If only social workers and other professionals familiarized themselves with these research findings and integrated them into their everyday practice both tragedies and unwarrantable interventions could be avoided or kept to an absolute minimum.
This lack of knowledge is seen to reflect both unprofessionalism in practice and poor training prior to practice.
Such an assumption is perhaps made most explicit in the Beckford Report when it comments on the apparent failure of the area officer in the case to recognize the apparently obvious indications that he was dealing with a ‘high risk’ child abuse case when chairing the initial case conference: Clearly it is of concern if health and welfare professionals are unfamiliar with the relevant research and it is one of the aims of this chapter to contribute to that understanding.
However, the report fails to convey any sense of the complexity and lacunae of research findings and of the difficulties that await those who avail themselves uncritically of them.
Apart from the difficulty of distilling research findings without distortion for the benefit of practitioners, there are critical methodological loopholes and inconsistencies in the research itself.
As I hope to demonstrate, while a familiarity with research findings may provide important new insights they cannot substitute for sound professional judgement nor can they solve some of the inherent tensions and ethical dilemmas inherent in this area of work.
To assume that the messages from research for the practitioner are clear and straightforward is naive.
If practitioners can become aware of and able to understand and transcend these complicated messages from research, however, not only may they become more confident in reflecting on their knowledge when making such judgements, they may also become more confident in discussing these complexities and difficulties with both other professionals and the wider public, thus enhancing social understanding of the day-to-day realities of work in this area.
He now appreciates that the combination of a physically abused child's abnormally low weight, under-stimulation and the general lack of competent parenting are the indicia of predictive child abuse.
His failure to appreciate that at the time is no more than a commentary on the absence of knowledge  about child abuse generally among social workers .
The yawning gap in that knowledge should now be filled by the publicity given to this case during the public hearings and, we trust, by the publication of our report,(London Borough of Brent, 1985, p.83)(My emphasis.)
Similarly the role of research needs to be rethought.
Up until now researchers have taken on the guise of distant experts who hand down their findings, leaving practitioners with the task of making sense of and using them.
I will argue that a major readjustment needs to be made whereby the researcher takes on a more participative role working with and alongside practitioners and clients.
I will argue that the best way of seeing research is as an aid to increasing enlightenment and not as providing the answers.
Practitioners and clients are the best experts on their problems so researchers need to make a greater effort to learn from and listen to practice.
The primary role for researchers should be to work alongside practitioners and help them understand not only what clients are saying but help them think through the nature and impact of their interventions.
It is crucial that researchers aim to be more participative in the way they frame research questions and their methodologies and at the same time be more sympathetic to the subject(s) they are researching.
Underlying models and central conceptual frameworks
Since the early 1970s a variety of child abuse inquiries and DHSS circulars have emphasized that the establishment of child abuse registers, case  conferences and increased inter-professional co-ordination will enhance the central aims of attempting to predict, prevent and identify the children who may be in actual or potential danger of child abuse.
The emphasis on the need for medical and social assessment (DHSS, 1988) is an attempt to improve our abilities to identify the ‘high risk’ case or family (Parton and Parton, 1989).
Such an approach is based on what I have called elsewhere (Parton, 1985) a disease model of child abuse, but which may be more appropriately conceptualized as a public health model (Giovannoni, 1982; Greenland, 1987).
Such a model has been influential in the way we think about and respond to a variety of social problems but has been particularly significant in framing research, policy and practice in child abuse.
As the Beckford Report commented, quoting the work of the late Henry Kempe, it is assumed that ‘child abuse is a disease whose carrier is the parent and whose victim is the child’(London Borough of Brent, 1985, p.88).
Elsewhere reports have referred to the ‘pathogenesis of the disorder’(London Borough of Brent, 1985, p.87) or ‘the psychopathology of the Carlile family’(London Borough of Greenwich, 1987, p.106) and have made frequent reference to the seminal article by the late Henry Kempe and his colleagues (Kempe et al .,
1962) that child abuse is a ‘syndrome’.
What are the basic elements of this model which are embedded in its essential concepts and ideas?
As Giovannoni (1982) has demonstrated, the model was developed in the late nineteenth century when public health developed a methodology and a terminology for mounting programmes and interventions to control and eliminate acute infectious diseases (Armstrong, 1983).
Such an approach assumes that the disease is attributable to a particular virus or bacteria which can be clearly demonstrated and which hence constitutes the essential cause of the disease.
Not only can its causal links be shown but its habits, strengths and weaknesses can be determined so that ultimately disease may be tackled.
Other facts about the disease can be established with regard to its point of onset, duration, symptoms, impact on other parts of the body and ultimate outcomes, ranging from minor discomforts to death.
Having established this knowledge a system of ideas has been formulated for intervening and hence preventing the disease or problem.
Most crucially it means identifying the population which is at ‘risk’ of being exposed to the noxious or infectious agent via proximity or because of certain characteristics which make them more vulnerable.
When applied to child abuse, then, it is assumed that if we can identify the characteristics associated with actual or potential abuse we will be able to identify and hence predict and prevent the problem.
The crucial role for the researcher thus becomes one of establishing the factors or characteristics associated with actual or potential cases of child abuse.
Ideally the model suggests three stages whereby the disease can be prevented.
Primary prevention refers to attempts to eliminate the noxious  or infectious agent at its source, either through changes to its habitat or immunization which makes the body invulnerable to it.
In effect it aims to stop the disease from ever occurring.
Secondary prevention attempts to curtail the spread of the disease and interrupt its course.
It aims to detect problems, perhaps by screening, as early as possible and then to treat or cure them.
Finally, tertiary prevention aims to reduce the duration and severity of the disease which is established.
It aims to minimize its impact and subsequently treat and cure it.
When it then comes to assessing the efficacy of preventive interventions, the goals of the model are not only clear but open to evaluation.
There are two key measures:(1) the incidence rate (the number of new cases over a given period, usually a year) and (2) the prevalence rate (the number of cases/persons affected in the population at a particular moment in time ).
The effectiveness of prevention can thus be assessed by measuring the incidence or the prevalence.
If primary prevention is successful the number of new cases (the incidence) should reduce, while if secondary or tertiary prevention is successful then the prevalence rate should reduce.
How far does the phenomenon of child abuse approximate to this model?
Is there agreement amongst researchers about the nature of child abuse and how it can be defined?
What are the characteristics or factors that have been associated with child abuse whereby it can be identified?
How far can it be predicted, prevented and treated?
Definitional clarity, incidence and prevalence
Clearly an unambiguous definition of what constitutes child abuse is fundamental for the efficacy and utility of the model described above.
However, the definition of what constitutes abuse varies amongst professional groups; across cultural, ethnic and religious groups; and by geographical location (Giovannoni and Beccera, 1979; Gelles, 1982; Starr, 1982; Valentine et al .,
1984).
There is no standardized definition of child abuse that has been developed by researchers and accepted by welfare professionals.
More particularly, the definitional boundaries of the problem have broadened.
The ‘battered child syndrome’ first discovered by Henry Kempe in 1962 referred to a clinical condition in young children, invariably under three, who had received serious physical abuse, usually from a parent, and was identified by the association of subdural haematoma (a pooling of blood around the skull) together with evidence of broken or healing long bones (Kempe et al .,
1962).
By 1976, however, Henry Kempe and hi, colleagues had abandoned the concept of the ‘battered child syndrome’ in favour of a more all-inclusive term, ‘child abuse and neglect’, which referred to ‘the permanent adverse effects on the developmental process and the child's emotional well-being’(Helfer and Kempe, 1976, Introduction).
As Robert Dingwall (1989) has argued, the definition of the problem has undergone considerable ‘diagnostic inflation’ and the growth of research' reflects the transformation of the original concerns to embrace virtually any problem which may have an adverse impact on a child and can possibly be attributed to some act of commission or omission by an adult'.
He quotes a number of examples in illustration, which include the administration of cannabis by teenage babysitters (Schwartz et al .,
1986), the keeping of household pets where a child has asthma (Franklin and Kahn, 1987) child labour in Nigeria (Asogwa, 1986) and the mistaken diagnoses of abuse seen in themselves as a form of abuse (Kirschner and Stein, 1985).
What this broadening and wide variation demonstrates is that over the past 30 years the issue of child abuse has become symbolically and politically very powerful (Parton, 1985; Nelson, 1986) in arguments about the welfare state and the family.
As a consequence, ‘Scientific research is not a neutral activity: child abuse was launched as a public issue out of a variety of private interests and its subsequent development has continued to reflect those and other interests’(Dingwall, 1989).
This lack of definition is the most telling indicator that research in the area of child abuse is at a very rudimentary level.
Clearly without a standardized definition research findings can be misleading and invariably confusing because they are referring to very different phenomena.
Nowhere is this more in evidence than in the area of sexual abuse.
The Cleveland Inquiry (Secretary of State for Social Services, 1988) noted that: ‘It has been impossible from the evidence provided to the Inquiry to arrive at any consensus or to obtain any reliable figures of the general prevalence of sexual abuse of children in the country or in Clevelend’(p.4) and later comments that: ‘We are strongly of the opinion that great caution should be exercised at the present time in accepting percentages as to the prevalence and incidence of sexual abuse.
We received from published articles and oral evidence figures of 5%, 10% and upwards.
Such figures depend on what is meant by sexual abuse’(p.5).
These comments were in part reflecting a recent review of eight research studies on the frequency of childhood sexual abuse in the UK, published in Health Trends (Markowe, 1988).
The prevalence of sexual abuse in the studies varies from 3 per cent(BBC, 1986) to 90 per cent (BBC, 1987).
A major reason why there was such variation was that the studies used quite different case definitions of sexual abuse, many of which included a number of elements.
For example, the often quoted MORI survey (Baker and Duncan, 1985) considered: The interviews with a nationally representative sample of adults about their childhood yielded a figure of 10 per cent who reported being sexually  abused.
Of these, 51 per cent of the experiences reported as abusive involved no physical contact, 44 per cent involved physical contact but not sexual intercourse and 5 per cent reported full sexual intercourse.
What we should note from this is that the 10 per cent prevalence figure, which received considerable publicity during the Cleveland scandal and subsequently, includes a wide range of abuse apart from sexual intercourse.
A number of commentators have argued that these and other abuses are just as significant in terms of the experience of and damage perpetrated upon the victim (Macleod and Saraga, 1988).
What is important, however, is that when statistics on incidence and prevalence enter the public and professional domains we should be clear exactly what behaviour is being referred to and what is included in the operational definition of abuse.
A child (anyone under 16 years) is sexually abused when another person, who is sexually mature, involves the child in any activity which the other person expects to lead to their sexual arousal.
This might involve intercourse, touching, exposure of the sexual organs, showing pornographic material or talking about sexual things in an erotic way.
(p.458)
The primary point I am demonstrating here, however, is that the wide variation reported in research concerning the incidence and prevalence of childhood sexual abuse in part reflects the very different definitions of the problem used (Wyatt and Peters, 1986).
No definition is inherently and necessarily ‘correct’, it depends on the reasons and purposes for which it is being used.
The Health Trends review also noted that:
Figures for the frequency of CSA [child sexual abuse]are often quoted out of the context of the study from which they are derived.
This can be very misleading, either because the study was inherently faulty — in design, performance or analysis — or because, though a valid study, the results were not suitable for generalization.
(Markowe, 1988, p.2)
La Fontaine (1988, p.3) has also shown that while the British surveys she reviewed all used sample designs of the whole population ‘they suffered from serious limitations [and]…there is evidence that the methods of obtaining information influence the reporting rate’.
She feels they might underestimate the prevalence and notes that in the American study by Russell (1986), which was particularly careful in choosing and training interviewers, the prevalence rate uncovered, for intrafamilial and extrafamilial sexual abuse was 58 per cent when non-contact abuse was included and 38 per cent when it was excluded.
While these issues of definition, incidence and prevalence are sharply demonstrated in relation to recent research and debate about sexual abuse, they pervade the whole area of child abuse.
As a consequence they pose real problems to the policy maker, practitioner and manager, who are expected to respond to a problem the magnitude and significance of which are open to wide and sometimes conflicting interpretations.
Brian Roycroft, President of the Association of Directors of Social Services in 1988, in answer to the question ‘What is the incidence of child abuse and child sexual abuse?’ in his evidence to the Cleveland Inquiry, reported that: He went on to say, however, that his association undertook a survey in July 1987 of 100 local authorities and found an increase in child abuse registrations of 22 per cent for the country over the previous year, with the most significant increases in child sexual abuse.
He also demonstrated an increase in the number of related referrals and investigations.
Similar changes have been noted by the NSPCC (Creighton, 1987).
However, both organizations consider these increases are more likely to reflect growing public awareness and improved detection rather than‘an actual increase in the incidence of abuse’(Association of Directors of Social Services, 1987, p.6).
They are of most use in monitoring the investigative and administrative workloads of the different agencies together with giving some insight into the agencies' changing priorities and interventions with children and families.
We don't know!
There are no firm statistics available at either national or local level to determine the incidence of child abuse.
Such statistics as are kept by some national organizations are suspect and local agencies keep  statistics only to satisfy their own particular needs.
(Association of Directors of Social Services, 1987, p.5)
Factors associated with child abuse
However, this issue of the way the definition of abuse is operationalized for research is not simply of significance for debates about incidence and prevalence, it also crucially impinges on the characteristics and factors associated with abuse.
These in turn have implications for attempts to predict and prevent the problem and particularly which families and sections of the population are seen as ‘high risk’.
Central to the concept of prevention in the public health model is the idea of cause.
In the case of acute infectious diseases, attempts are made to isolate a single identifiable organism.
How has such an approach been operationalized in child abuse research and how appropriate is it?
Essentially the approach has been to try and identify the factors or characteristics that are associated with cases or situations of abuse, to assume that these are qualitatively different from the rest of the population and finally to hypothesize that these factors or characteristics in some way relate to the basic cause(s) of the problem.
As a consequence these factors or characteristics should direct attempts to identify and predict, and hence prevent.
The first difficulty is, as we have seen, that the term ‘child abuse’ covers a range of behaviours and problems, so that a search for a single or even a cluster of ‘causes’is likely to be in vain.
The vast majority of research in the 1960s in America and the 1970s in Britain was based on relatively small-scale, retrospective clinical studies of cases that had come to the attention of health and welfare professionals.
Essentially, the cases and their history were studied to establish what factors or characteristics they had in common.
They suffered from two fundamental problems.
First, they used variable and often vague definitions of abuse, so that in many cases it was not clear that they were  dealing with established cases of abuse.
Invariably the cases studied had been referred for a variety of concerns and worries about the children but there was no unequivocal evidence that the children were abused according to any definition.
Secondly, such studies rarely used any matched control groups.
As a consequence we have no evidence to suggest that the factors identified as associated with abuse were in any way specific to this group (Spinetta and Rigler, 1972).
They may simply have reflected the population from which they were drawn.
In 1978 Allan concluded her survey of such research by writing: As a result different research came up with different findings so that the policy maker and practitioner ended up with long lists of poorly defined and sometimes contradictory characteristics.
The quality of research in the area of child abuse still leaves much to be desired.
There has been little attempt to review previous research with a view to formulating and testing specific hypotheses…frequently studies seem to start and finish with relatively untested common sense assumptions.
Much of our existing knowledge has been gathered from descriptive studies which lack controls and proper sampling procedures.
This has enabled authors to make claims and counter claims about the importance of different variables in the absence of any sustained efforts to discover which are directly and which are  artefactually related to abuse.
(Allan, 1978, p.59)
More recently studies have attempted to refine their research methodologies so that reviews of this research are much clearer about what we can claim to know and not know about abuse and in particular that it is a much more complex problem than was first thought.
However, much of this literature and research is American.
Recent British exceptions are Birchall(1989) and Dingwall (1989).
It is now suggested that it is much more appropriate to see child abuse as a result of multiple interacting factors, including the parents' and children's psychological traits, the family's place in the larger social and economic structure, and the balance of external supports and stresses, both interpersonal and material.
The role of the different health and welfare professionals is also now seen as crucial in this process.
Not only will the balance of factors vary depending on the severity and type of abuse being analysed, but there appears to be no uniformity in the associations found between sets of factors/characteristics and different types of abuse.
It is also now recognized that even where there may be some correlation between certain factors and certain forms of abuse, it is inappropriate to assume that the one causes the other; both may be linked to a third but underlying set of structures and mechanisms.
For example, early marriage has been noted as being associated with particular forms of abuse and neglect.
Yet early marriage itself reflects particular class and gender divisions in society which in themselves limit people's, particularly women's, life chances.
As a result both abuse and early marriage may be associated with factors which are not readily observable.
Similarly, the fact that mothers may be associated with certain  types of abuse may reflect the position of women within the family and the wider society more generally (Parton, C., 1989).
So while we may now know something about who is more likely to abuse and who is more likely to be a victim, we do not know why, when, how often and with what degree of certainty, abuse will take place, nor what the consequences will be for the child.
When looking at the factors associated with abuse it is, however, important to differentiate ‘what we know’ about physical abuse and neglect from sexual abuse.
In some respects all families are at risk since being a child and being a parent is never easy.
As far as physical abuse and neglect is concerned, a variety of factors may put a family at risk.
Cohn summarizes these factors as follows: However, parallel research specifically concerned with sexual abuse has identified risk factors which, while similar in some respects, also include important differences.
David Finkelhor (Finkelhor, 1986; Finkelhor and Baron, 1986) has reviewed a variety of American surveys of adults in order to assess the information provided about the relative risk of people from different backgrounds experiencing sexual abuse during childhood.
Significantly the surveys were consistent in failing to find differences in rates according to social class or race.
This is an important difference as physical abuse and neglect do seem to be associated with social, material and environmental stress and hence seem to be related to social class.
Larger families, families with closely spaced children, families with young children, and single-parent families are at greater risk.
Also vulnerable are families under great stress, which may result from financial difficulties, marital discord, social isolation, or poor health.
Parents' child management and social skills, as well as their self-esteem, help to define who is at risk.
Certain characteristics or traits of the child, including low birth-weight, prematurity, illness in infancy, and impediments to attachment and bonding may also be factors.
(Cohn, 1983a, p.171)
However, in Finkelhor's review, several factors emerged as being consistently associated with higher risk of sexual abuse: when a child lives without one of the biological parents; when the mother is unavailable to the child either as a result of employment outside the home or disability and illness; when a child reports that the parents' marriage is unhappy or conflictual; when the child reports having a poor relationship with the parents or being subject to extremely punitive discipline or child abuse; when the child reports having a step-father.
While girls are at higher risk than boys, increasingly research is suggesting more boys experience sexual abuse than was at first thought.
Pre-adolescents appear to be more at risk than either younger or older children.
Girls with few friends in childhood report more abuse, though this may be an effect of abuse and not a risk factor.
Perpetrators are almost exclusively male, though a few women are reported, particularly in retrospective studies.
La Fontaine (1988) has identified similar factors in the pattern of sexual abuse in British surveys.
An important element that emerges is that discussions and explanations  of physical abuse and neglect may be seen most productively as a problem relating to parenting, which in turn needs to be located in an understanding of social class and the gendered divisions of child care, while sexual abuse, to a much greater extent, needs to be understood in relation to male power and masculine socialization.
Identification and prediction: in search of the holy grail
In the light of this current state of knowledge of the various factors associated with abuse, how far is it, in fact, possible to predict abuse?
As I will suggest, there are certain fundamental problems.
For while the associated risk factors may help in informing the more general preventive strategies and decisions about resource allocation, because child abuse is such a complex problem we have not developed sufficient understanding for successful prediction.
At the moment we are unable to predict with accuracy who will or will not abuse.
In particular such attempts at prediction are bedevilled by what Dingwall (1989) calls firstly the ‘definitional fallacy’ and secondly ‘the statistical fallacy’.
First, the definitional fallacy.
Essentially this relates to the on the failure by researchers, and for that matter policy makers and practitioners, to operationalize a clear and widely agreed definition of what constitutes abuse.
As suggested this arises in major part because the term has proved symbolically powerful in drawing attention to a series of adult-child issues and phenomena and legitimating them as a social problem.
However, the way the problem has been constructed and made the subject of public, political and research concern is influenced by a whole variety of different values and political interests (Parton, N., 1985, 1989).
Essentially child abuse is a moral category which is open to wide and differing interpretations.
Research has invariably failed to recognize this and as a consequence failed to approach its task in an explicitly neutral and scientific way, i.e. to account for the nature and incidence of particular forms of adult/child interactions and their consequences.
It is a subsequent and primarily political/moral question as to which of these should then constitute child abuse.
Perhaps ironically, more general social scientific studies of children, child care and family life have rarely been drawn upon to inform and clarify what we know as a basis for discussions of child abuse.
For example, during the 1970s the Department of Health and Social Security and the Social Science Research Council funded a number of studies concerned with the nature, causes and outcomes of deprivation and disadvantage in families.
This initiative arose out of the then Secretary of State Sir Keith Joseph's interest in the ‘cycle of deprivation’(for a comprehensive review see  Brown and Madge, 1982).
From these studies an attempt was then made to identify ‘families in difficulty’.
What is apparent is that the risk factors identified run parallel to and are in many respects very similar to those already noted in relation to child abuse.
While Madge does not claim this guide is infallible nor that the list is complete, she does argue that these items in ‘an alphabet of risk’ both singly and cumulatively help to establish the probability that individual families will be under stress.
It is claimed as a major contribution to identifying and predicting ‘families in difficulty’.
Clearly, however, the moral, legal, policy and practice connotations of ‘families in difficulty’ are qualitatively different from those of child abuse.
The question that this begs is simply then, what are predictive studies claiming to predict?
It clearly has crucial implications for the way research studies are understood, perceived and used.
Whether problems stem from personal shortcomings, from the structure of society or from some combination of these two broad influences, the focus must be on the family and on signs that something is likely to be ‘wrong’.
Certain areas of family functioning are particularly useful for predictions of this kind.
These features of family life — which it should be re-emphasized are indicators of, rather than the reasons for, problems — include the age and maturity of the parents, burdens carried by a family, consistency and change in the lives of children, dynamics and support within the family, and the experiences and characteristics of individual family members.
(Madge, 1983, p.201)
The statistical fallacy, while related, draws attention to another problem.
In recent years there has been considerable interest in assessing the general feasibility of predicting future violence and dangerousness in individuals and families (see Parton and Parton, 1989; Parton and Small, 1989).
However, it is now recognized that research on such prediction falls down in terms of both its reliability and its validity.
Whatever method of screening is used, prediction rates rise no higher than two wrong judgements for every right judgement.
Empirical support for the prediction of future violence is very small.
This arises from the statistical problems of ‘false negatives’ and ‘false positives’.
If the rate of violence amongst families in the population is relatively low, and we have noted that the incidence of sexual abuse maybe around 10 per cent while the incidence of serious physical abuse may be 3–4 per cent(Straus et al .,
1980)(see note 1 on page 75), and the accuracy of the prediction technique is relatively weak, there is considerable potential for wrongly identifying some who will never abuse (false positive) and missing others who will abuse (false negative).
If the criterion to predict abuse is 80 per cent accurate (and no device available has such a high level of accuracy) and if the rate of abuse in the population is 10 in a 100, then if 1000 people/families are screened, 80 out of the 100 will be correctly identified while 20 will be missed (false negative).
However, we will also incorrectly identify 20 per cent, or 200 of the original 1000  screened.
Thus for every 80 correctly predicted we will have 20 false negatives and 200 false positives.
Research carried out in Bradford during 1979 provides a useful illustration (Lealman et al .,
1983).
A checklist of predictors was applied to the maternity notes of all non-Asian women who had delivered a child under consultant care when they were discharged from the maternity unit.
Of the 2802 maternity case-notes screened, 511 families (18 per cent) were predicted as being ‘at risk’.
Subsequently two-thirds of all the recognized abuse in their population was found to occur in the 18 per cent predicted high risk group-19 out of the total of 28 recognized cases.
The net result is that while only nine cases were missed (false negative), 492 were included in the original high risk group but did not subsequently abuse (false positive).
These problems of prediction related to the definitional fallacy and the statistical fallacy are very evident in the Beckford Report, which was so critical of social workers' lack of knowledge and use of predictive research.
While the report argues that it is crucial that social workers identify ‘high risk’, the report comments that ‘We do not define ‘high risk’, mainly because we think that it is not susceptible of definition' (London Borough of Brent, 1985, p.288).
The report also draws upon research presented to it by Professor Cyril Greenland (reported in full in Greenland, 1987) and comments as follows: Thus not only are we not given a definition but we are not given any clue as to which of all the cases that come to social worker's notice are not high risk.
By definition they are all high risk and there is thus no significance to the issue of false positives.
The Beckford Report completely fails to address the problems arising from both the definitional and the statistical fallacies.
The proportion of ‘high risk’ cases out of all proved cases of persistent child abuse will be small, and the task of identifying may not be easy.
But the attempt to isolate such cases from the majority of child abuse cases must always be made.
To the question, can ‘high risk’ situations be identified in advance, Professor Greenland told us that he could give an answer, ‘a cautious yes — in some cases’.
He went on to say that it seemed prudent to classify all non-accidental injuries to young children as ‘high risk’ cases, since 80% of all children unlawfully killed by their parents had been previously abused.
(p.288)
In contrast, however, the Cleveland Report is particularly sensitive to such issues in relation to sexual abuse and spends considerable time trying to weigh the often conflicting evidence it received on identification and assessment, particularly in terms of the reflex anal dilatation test.
It is particularly concerned that assessments should not falsely accuse parents and families on the basis of unproven diagnostic and predictive techniques.
For example: ‘We are satisfied from the evidence that the consensus is that the sign of anal dilatation is abnormal and suspicious and requires further  investigation.
It is not in itself evidence of anal abuse .’
(p.193, my emphasis.)
And more generally: Finally, in commenting on the nature of the social work procedures and practice adopted following the medical diagnosis of sexual abuse, the report explicitly comments that: ‘it requires cautious measured intervention which will allow the risks of a false positive finding to be balanced against those of a false negative ’(p.85, my emphasis).
It was accepted that anal abuse may cause a range of signs, from surface skin damage, fissures, defects of anal verge, to severe lacerations, but that in our present state of knowledge, none of these in themselves, or in various clusters, establish with reasonable certainty that anal abuse has occurred .
We are, or may be, open to alternative explanations.
(p.189, my emphasis.)
The report here identifies a crucial issue.
We do not have the predictive tools to identify correctly all actual and potential cases of abuse — nor are we likely to have them.
What, therefore, is the balance to be struck between missing some (false negative) and falsely accusing others (false positive)?
For efforts to keep false negatives to a minimum will increase the likelihood of false positives, while attempts to reduce false positives will increase the likelihood of tragedies in false negatives.
While research can clarify such issues, how they are resolved is essentially a political and ethical question — in the same way as how child abuse is itself defined is essentially a political and ethical question.
What do we know about prevention?
Being at risk of abuse, then, does not lead to a simple intervention strategy.
While it is now widely accepted that an effective solution should rely in major part on a co-ordinated interagency and interprofessional effort (DHSS, 1988), the possibilities range from those that provide immediate relief (tertiary prevention) to long-term strategies designed to change attitudes, values, behaviour and circumstances (primary prevention).
The relative merits of different preventive measures depend both on political considerations about what is acceptable to society and on technical considerations about the effectiveness of different approaches.
Gough, Taylor and Boddy (1987), Boddy (1986) and Cohn (1983a) have reviewed available research on this technical question of the efficacy of different preventive programmes.
Such prevention includes: educational approaches concerned mainly with child sexual abuse; programmes targeted at adults and the community which focus on developing appropriate child care and thus lessening the possibility of neglect, emotional abuse, and potential loss of parental control resulting in over-chastisement; services using volunteers and parent aides rather than professionally  trained staff; antenatal and postnatal services; and finally other programmes aimed at children older than infants.
The studies reviewed by Gough, Taylor and Boddy (1987) varied from demonstration projects to narrow experimental designs, with many studies falling in between and containing aspects of both models.
They conclude: They also suggest, following Gelles and Cornell (1985), that child abuse is not a manifestation of something qualitatively different, or resulting from the fundamentally abnormal, but that parents and families are simply experiencing the same problems as others but to a greater degree .
They thus suggest that the services offered to non-routine families with problems in child care generally may be highly pertinent to child abuse prevention.
However, the various limitations of both models results in there being few clear conclusions from the research.
It is not that the interventions were no good.
The studies did provide evidence that the services could have useful effects on families that might be expected to reduce the risk of child abuse.
The problem is that the research does not allow us to distinguish the relative usefulness of the different interventions or their component parts.
(p.134)
Such a conclusion is very similar to that outlined by Cohn (1983a).
She argues that while the research provides clues about the types of preventive programmes that may be of help we also know what a complex problem child abuse is: The implication seems clear.
To have the best chance of preventing the more serious family and child care problems, what we might call child abuse, the best chance of success is to improve and develop universal, non-stigmatizing services which are integrated into the mainstream of social provision for all children.
Families have many needs and those needs change at different stages of the family life cycle.
It is doubtful that any one of the described prevention programs — in isolation — will effectively prevent abuse.
And, it is doubtful that any of the described prevention programs, unless well-integrated into the fabric, the values, and the mores of a given community, and indeed neighbourhood, will effectively prevent abuse.
In order for most families to benefit from the types of prevention activities described, they probably need to be made available to all families on a voluntary basis, and they probably need to be relatively non-obtrusive and in essence, common.
(Cohn, 1983a, p.181)
What do we know about treatment?
Perhaps the final element of the public health model which we need to consider is what evidence there is available concerning tertiary prevention or treatment, i.e. the efficacy of interventions specifically designed to reduce the likelihood of further abuse once child abuse has occurred.
What do we know about the relative effectiveness of different treatment  strategies to improve the functioning of individuals and families once abuse has been perpetrated?
Soon after the discovery of the ‘battered baby syndrome’ in the 1960s there seemed considerable optimism amongst health and welfare professionals that such efforts would be effective.
What has the evidence of the last 25 years to tell us?
Since 1974 the US federal government has funded four major multi-year evaluation studies to determine the relative effectiveness of different approaches to the treatment of child abuse and neglect (Cohn, 1983b; Cohn and Daro, 1987).
A total of 89 different demonstration treatment programmes were studied, and data on 3253 families experiencing difficulties with abuse and neglect were gathered.
In addition to descriptive data, which provides greater clarity on how to differentiate among families experiencing a variety of types of abuse when providing the treatment, the studies also provide a better understanding of how to deliver such services to both the adults and the children who have suffered.
The studies document treatments which improve clients' functioning, notably lay counselling and group services, including Parents Anonymous, group therapy and parent education classes, and suggest greater success with clients experiencing difficulty with sexual abuse than other forms of abuse.
On balance the findings suggest that successful treatment requires a comprehensive package of services which address both the interpersonal and concrete needs of all family members.
However, the studies also indicate a note of caution: Cohn and Daro conclude by suggesting that perhaps putting all resources into intervention after the fact does not make sense and that intervention should take place at a much earlier preventive stage.
Having said this, however, we have noted earlier the difficulties inherent in trying to mount preventive strategies.
Treatment efforts in general are not very successful.
Child abuse and neglect continue despite early, thoughtful, and often costly intervention.
Treatment programs have been relatively ineffective in initially halting abusive and neglectful behaviour or in reducing the future likelihood of maltreatment in the most severe cases of physical abuse, chronic neglect and emotional maltreatment.
One-third or more of the parents served by these intensive demonstration efforts maltreated their children while in treatment, and over one-half of the families served continued to be judged by staff as likely to mistreat their children following termination.
Whether one views this level of success as notable or disappointing is largely a function of personal perspective and professional choice.
(Cohn and Daro, 1987, p.440)
More specifically, certain studies have attempted to evaluate treatment strategies that are concerned with sexual abuse.
Again, however, both the development of such services and evaluations of their effectiveness are far more advanced in America.
Such studies have recommended the development of multi-model interventions that incorporate individual, dyadic or group, and family components (Dixen and Jenkins, 1981; Summit, 1985).
Where applicable, the incorporation of offender treatment and court  intervention services has also been encouraged (Forseth and Brown, 1981; Woodcraft, 1988).
However, the absence of empirical evidence regarding the outcome and effectiveness of treatment (Mrazek, 1983) together with various methodological limitations in the design and analysis of selected programmes should again not be overlooked (Conte, 1984; Finkelhor, 1986).
Kolko (1987) notes that: ‘Many programs do not incorporate standardized instruments to assess those variables purported to change following treatment, and only rarely include needed control or comparison groups and statistical analyses to evaluate program impact’(p.313).
With the exception of a few large-scale programmes (Giaretto, 1982; Sgroi, 1982) and a single case study (Kolko, 1986), little is known about the suggested success of specific approaches.
At present no controlled group study has been reported with child victims and their families and, even when attempts have been made to evaluate interventions, findings suggest that the treatment of abusive parents has only been marginally effective.
However, it has also been suggested (Kolko, 1987) that such programmes are severely limited by the lack of funding and the restricted availability of therapeutic services.
Such a situation is even more evident in Britain.
Conclusions: the relationship between child abuse and child care in research, policy and practice
From what I have suggested so far we should not be surprised that a recent authoritative and comprehensive review of child abuse research commented that: As we have seen, research itself, like policy and practice, has increasingly become surrounded by controversy over questions of definition and the most appropriate form that approaches and interventions should take.
As a consequence the research review identifies as a central issue for investigation: ‘the variety of human interactions in which children are harmed in some way (physical, emotional, sexual), the manner in which these investigations are perceived, and the behaviour which such interactions elicit in both professional and lay people’(Graham et al .,
1985, p.1218).
Despite the considerable volumes of research conducted in the field of child abuse in the last 20 years, there are still large gaps in our knowledge concerning the phenomenon.
In particular, disagreement exists as to how child abuse is best defined, and practitioners are confused concerning the best ways of preventing non-accidental injury and dealing with it once it is identified.
(Graham et al .,
1985, p.1216)
Increasingly it has been recognized that there is a need to focus explicitly on the nature and form that child abuse or child protection interventions  take in everyday practice, and in the process to try and identify models of good practice which can then be developed in the future.
At present, however, there is only limited British research available on such issues and much looks at only parts of the process.
Parker, Casburn and Turnbull (1981) have looked at court decision making and Lawson(1980) at social services departments.
The most comprehensive research has been that carried out by Dingwall, Eekelaar and Murray (1983), based on participant observation in social services departments, NHS child health services and casualty departments, and juvenile courts.
They concluded that while different professionals and agencies use quite different definitions of the problem, on the whole the system operates according to a ‘rule of optimism’ whereby, wherever possible, the most favourable interpretation of family, particularly parental, circumstances is made and hence situations of actual and potential abuse are kept to a minimum.
The location of the fieldwork meant that little comment could be made in relation to differences which might arise from work in an inner-city area with a significant ethnic minority population.
Perhaps most crucially, particularly in the light of the Cleveland Inquiry (Secretary of State for Social Services, 1988), the research was only concerned with analysing and understanding the experiences of the professionals — it was not concerned with the parallel issues related to the parents and children.
Recently, however, two small-scale studies have been completed which take on board the perceptions and experiences of parents who have been on the receiving end of child protection interventions.
Celia Brown's(1986) study was carried out in two districts of Avon County; 23 parents were interviewed and a further two completed questionnaires.
The interviews were carried out some time after the abuse had been established, so that while all had been on the child abuse register only half were still on the register when interviewed.
The cases had either been closed or the closure was in sight when the interviews took place.
The research was therefore concerned with parents' retrospective impressions and reflections, and not put alongside similar commentaries from social workers or children.
Even so, some important findings were forthcoming.
For example, the major criticism which parents made of social workers concerned their poor communications, lack of openness and honesty, failure to value parents' strengths and to treat them as equals, and a failure to involve parents in decisions.
Some parents found social work visits made them fearful and anxious and their self-esteem was reduced.
Some related findings are evident in Corby's work (1987a; also 1987b and Corby and Mills, 1986).
This study took place between 1981 and 1985 in a large northern, metropolitan social services department.
Most of the data came from observing 55 case conferences, interviews with the social workers in 25 of the cases together with an analysis of case records.
Interviews also took place with parents in 10 of the 25 cases selected for follow-up.The study looked at cases during the first six months after the initial case conference.
Not surprisingly, all the parents found the experience of being investigated traumatic and distressing.
While a few felt that the social workers, were helpful and supportive an equal number considered them to be patronizing and authoritarian.
Nearly all felt their experience at the hospitals, to which they were initially referred, to be stigmatizing and degrading.
The small number who had contact with the police experienced considerable distress.
The most worrying aspect of all, for Corby, however, was that many parents felt they were kept in the dark about what was happening, so that while there were exceptions, and in some cases social workers had gone to great lengths to explain the system and the likely outcomes, in two cases the parents were not aware until later in the process that they and their children were the subjects of child abuse investigations.
An interesting finding in the light of my previous discussion about the efficacy of the identification and diagnosis of abuse was that in only two of the 25 families selected for follow-up was abuse admitted.
Four were thought not to have abused their children, but still to be in need of social work intervention, while 16 were considered to have abused their children but there was no unequivocal evidence that they had done so.
Issues concerning denial and/or the differential interpretations of events and their implications were evident throughout the study.
The social workers experienced the child abuse system in a variety of ways.
Some accepted it without comment and others were positive about the support provided by case conferences, procedures and registers in dealing with complex and difficult cases.
Others were critical.
Many commented that the concentration on child abuse skewed their professional response to the needs of children and families more generally: Finally, one study (McGloin and Turnbull, 1986; 1987a; 1987b) has focused on the much more restricted issue of the effects of parental participation at child abuse review case conferences.
Its overall conclusion was that such a policy increased the mutual respect and understanding of social workers and parents and contributed to improving the thinking, discussion and decision making.
However, such a policy could not be seen in isolation as it had implications for practice more generally, including procedures and training.
Implicit in these views was the fact that child abuse was considered to be only one of a range of problems that many families who come under the system's microscope were experiencing, and that there was a need to respond to all the problems including child abuse, rather than of necessity giving it priority.
(Corby, 1987a, p.129)
None of these studies explicitly attempted to identify and evaluate, from the perspective of social workers or parents, when, why and how some types of intervention had beneficial outcomes and others did not.
It is perhaps particularly ironic that as yet we have no studies which have attempted to evaluate interventions from the point of view of the children themselves.
It is to be hoped that in the light of the Cleveland Report's comment that ‘the child is a person and not an object of concern’(Secretary of State for Social Services, 1988, p.245) that urgent efforts will be made to ensure that the child's views and perceptions of practice are articulated via sensitively designed research.
What is important is that the studies outlined in this section have attempted to gain an insight into day-to-day practice.
In some respects their concerns run parallel to the much more extensive studies recently carried out on social work decisions in child care more generally and which have been extensively referred to elsewhere in this volume (summarized in DHSS, 1986).
A number of these latter studies explicitly included data derived from the experience of parents as well as social workers (Packman et al .,
1986; Millham et al .,
1986) and one study also included interviews with children (Fisher et al .,
1986).
In many respects the issues identified seem similar to those identified by Brown and Corby in that: the differing perspectives of parents and social workers may go unrecognized; parents of children may feel pushed aside and disillusioned; and when parents felt that their problems and wishes were understood they valued this highly.
The implication seems quite clear — the models of good practice developed in more general child care are equally applicable to child abuse and child protection work.
If, as I have tried to demonstrate, the problem of child abuse is itself one dimension or label given to the way problems between children and adults manifest themselves then this should be recognized in practice.
Rather than seeing child abuse as an exceptional problem requiring an exceptional response, and hence a qualitatively different practice, we should see it as part of child care and hence child care practice.
At many points in this chapter we have noted the problems of trying to define child abuse, identifying the characteristics which separate the high risk from the rest and hence aid prediction, together with the problems of constructing preventive and treatment interventions which concentrate exclusively on child abuse.
I am not arguing that children do not suffer at the hands of adults; clearly they do and again we have looked at the evidence concerning incidence and prevalence.
What I am suggesting, however, is that we could gain considerably by recognizing in research, policy and practice that child abuse is centrally concerned with debates about the way we bring up children and is hence centrally concerned about child care.
In the process the message for practitioners seems to be that child abuse and child protection practice should be located in child care practice.
Thus the values, principles and skills which inform the latter should also inform the former.
In doing so the ‘enlightenment’ that can be gained from research in helping us develop good child care policy and practice should be just that which should inform good policy and practice for child abuse.
In the process we should critically re-evaluate how we understand the relationship between research, policy and practice in childcare and research, policy and practice in what we refer to as child abuse and child protection work.
Such a re-evaluation requires a debate on issues of central importance for both the professionals and researchers involved.
Note