

‘WORLDWIDE DISASTER TOLERANCE’ FOR HEWLETT HP 3000
Hewlett-Packard Co is claiming ‘worldwide disaster tolerance’ for its new HP SharePlex/iX, a RISC-based computing cluster for the HP 3000 business system.
SharePlex/iX is claimed to use standard networking capabilities such as X25 to provide complete application-environment replication anywhere in the world, and it is supported on all HP 3000s, including the old 16-bit ones.
The key components of the system are the HP OpenView System Manager networked systems management product, and NetBase, a product from Newport Beach, California-based Quest Software Inc.
The OpenView System Manager management tool monitors and controls geographically dispersed systems within the cluster, keeping an eye on system, subsystem, job stream, tape requests and applications; and controlling functions such as node shutdown, start-up failover and console commands.
Netbase, integrated with the OpenView System Manager, is claimed to provide proven capabilities in application-environment replication, transparent network file access, shared print queues and transparent network program execution.
Following a disaster, the system is designed to bring users back on line in minutes, and offers enhanced availability through a no single point of failure configuration, transparent workload balancing across systems, data shadowing and transparent printer spooling throughout the network.
HP SharePlex/iX will be sold through Hewlett-Packard and is expected to be orderable on May 1.
Marketing and support will be handled jointly by the company and by Quest Software, but no indication of price was given.
NORTHERN TELECOM HAS MULTIMEDIA CELL AND FRAME PASSPORT SWITCH
Northern Telecom Ltd has unified its data network products under the name Magellan, and has announced a cell-based networking switch designed to bring together data, speech, video and image networks.
Called Magellan Passport, it is the first cell-based product in the Canadian's Magellan networking range and can handle both cell and frame switching.
Cell switching, which minimises the amount of processing in each switch, is geared to systems that handle information in a variety of forms such as data and video, while frame switching is efficient at handling burst data.
Passport is designed to be used as an upgrade for existing frame-based systems, when users want to add Asynchronous Transfer Mode cell switching functions.
The Passport switch is designed to complement the capabilities of the DPN 100 packet switching product line, and provides bandwidth consolidation for the heterogeneous traffic.
It has an aggregate capacity of 1.6Gbps in a single shelf configuration.
Each board includes RISC processors and custom chips to ensure high throughput for access and trunking.
Enhancements to the Passport switch will include support for Ethernet, Token Ring and FDDI interfaces as well as transparent, source route, and source route transparent bridging.
It will be generally available in the first quarter of 1994.
No prices.
EDINBURGH TEAM DOES TEXT-TO-SPEECH SOFTWARE FOR NINE EUROPEAN TONGUES
Researchers at Edinburgh University's Centre for Speech Technology yesterday announced the development of software to convert text into speech electronically in all nine official European Community languages, and said it would create quality-controlled pronunciation dictionaries of all Community city, town, street, family and product names in machine-readable form.
The standard pronunciation of up to 1m names in each of Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Greek, Italian, Portuguese and Spanish will be included.
The Edinburgh Centre is co-ordinating research from universities and telecommunications companies in the nine countries involved in the two-year project — which is being funded by the Community.
CELLULAR, TVX TEAM ON SINGLE CHIP SECURITY CAMERA
Cellular Inc of Englewood, and TVX Inc, Broomfield, both Colorado came together in Dallas yesterday to introduce a means of transmitting video images from a miniature camera to a personal computer using the cellular and terrestrial phone network.
TVX, owned 40% each by Cellular and Automated Security Holdings Plc, here, holds the distribution rights for the TVX camera systems in North, Central and South America.
The TVX system is effectively a camera-on-a-chip: camera and lens are integrated onto one chip about the size of a postage stamp, and it is designed to provide visual verification of the cause of an alarm at the time of an incident, and provide a method to distinguish actual emergencies from false alarms.
It takes four pictures within five seconds and transmits them in under a minute; it incorporates infra-red strobes, making it effective without light.
The images can be viewed by a monitoring station with a standard personal computer and a VGA monitor.
No price was given for it.
SOUTHWESTERN BELL, COX CONFIRM UK CABLE VENTURE
Southwestern Bell Corp, St Louis, Missouri and the Cox Cable arm of Cox Enterprises Inc, Atlanta yesterday formally announced their agreement to form a UK partnership in cable television and local telephony.
Under their memorandum of understanding, Cox will take an initial 25% in the UK operations currently owned by Southwestern Bell, with options to increase its stake; Cox declined to comment on speculation that the deal was worth $300m.
According to Reuter, investors have so far spent £1,000m running cable past 2m UK homes, signing 440,000 cable TV subscribers.
Southwestern owns and operates cable TV and telephone businesses in the Midlands and Northwest covering 1.2m homes; its cables pass 245,000 of those, and it has a penetration rate of 23%.
ENCORE FAR EAST VENTURE WITH NEW STRAITS TIMES
Encore Computer Corp, Fort Lauderdale, Florida has teamed with New Straits Times Technologies Pvt Ltd of Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia to establish Asia Pacific Encore Pvt Ltd, and looks for it to generate $55m of business over the next five years.
The new company will distribute Encore's Infinity 90 systems and its real-time products to distributors in South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong, China, Malaysia, Indonesia, Brunei and the Middle East.
HYBRID VIGOUR RULES AS HARRIS ADACOM, TRANSPLANTED TO ISRAEL POPS PLETHORA OF PRODUCTS
The influx of new citizens from Russia may be exacerbating the friction in the settlements being established in the Israeli-administered territories won from the country's Arab neighbours in the various attacks on the country since 1948, and it represents an exodus of skills that Russia can ill afford to lose, but it is doing nothing but good for the vibrant information technology sector of the Israeli economy.
Adacom group, part of of Harris Adacom is embarking on a substantial product and organisational expansion.
The IBM communications specialist announced last month its intended expansion into Asynchronous Transfer Mode switching, wireless local networks and Unix communications markets.
Additionally, it unveiled an unusual multiprotocol router which encapsulates TCP/IP traffic within IBM Corp's Systems Network Architecture, rather than the more conventional practice of encapsulating SNA packets within TCP/IP.
The product could prove a boon to existing SNA users who will be able to incorporate other protocols within their existing SNA networks rather than having to build a separate bridge-router-based backbone.
Harris Adacom was formed in 1990 when the Israel-based Adacom Group Ltd bought out Harris Corp's data communications equipment arm and adopted the new combined name.
Byzantine
Although Harris Adacom Corp is nominally the parent holding company, most research and development and manufacturing work continues in Israel, where there is a byzantine corporate structure consisting of Adacom Technologies Ltd, the holding company quoted on the Tel Aviv stock exchange, and six subsidiaries, each of which specialises in different areas of the business.
Several of the companies were newly founded last month, the most ambitious of which is Advanced Computer Technology Ltd or ACTec, which is charged with producing both an Asynchronous Transfer Mode switch, and separately, a wireless local network system.
Exactly how the latter will be is still a little bit hazy, according to Shlomo Harari, managing director of another of the six companies, Adacom WorkStation Interconnectivity Ltd or ASI.
Harari says that ACtec has hired a team from the Israeli army to work on spread-spectrum technology and ‘they know what they are doing’.
As a result, he expects to see a wireless local network launched before the end of the year.
As for Asynchronous Transfer Mode switches, the company is going for customers that want private networks, rather than public telecommunications operators.
Universities, banks and the like are being singled out as potential customers, and Harari's best guess is that ACTec should have a product within 14 to 18 months.
He says that some of the technology, such as the switch fabric, will be bought in, though the source has yet to be decided.
While these are still in the future, the  aforementioned SNA-multi-protocol router will make its debut at this month's Cebit show in Hanover.
It is the product of Adacom Network Routers Ltd and Harari says that 40 of the boxes are already out on beta test, one of them at IBM Israel Ltd, which he says has proved enthusiastic.
And no wonder.
Despite IBM's commitment to supporting other networking protocols, the company still holds SNA and its Advanced Peer to Peer Networking dear to its heart.
The approach taken with its 6611 router, which encapsulates SNA within TCP/IP satisfies the multiprotocol yearnings of its customers, but has the disadvantage, from IBM's point of view, of speeding the growth of non-SNA networks within its customers' organisations.
How much better it would be to let them keep their existing SNA networks and pass other traffic across them.
Many of IBM's customers should be quite attracted to the idea too: APPN is generally recognised to be a flexible and robust set of networking protocols, and its users have substantial amounts of money and expertise tied up in it.
The L2-SR router is claimed to pass TCP/IP, Novell Inc's IPX/SPX and NetBIOS across the network.
The box uses LU6.2 as its native transport protocol and appears on the SNA network as a PU2.1 device.
It can also be managed by NetView or SNMP.
A guide price of $8,000 is being quoted for the router, which can support one or two local network connections and up to four SDLC links running at T1/E1 speeds.
Processing requirements for the approach are not, apparently, that heavy.
The company says that it is making do with a single Intel Corp 80486 processor to drive the device currently.
Other announcements from the Adacom group include the Intellijet — a series of twinax and coax printers and adaptors that enable Hewlett-Packard Co Laserjet III series printers to be used in the IBM environment, and use IBM's Intelligent Printer Data Stream, which comes from Adacom workStation Interconnectivity Ltd.
Sans screen
The same company is also releasing an intelligent workstation, to bolster its terminals business.
Priced at roughly $1,500, the WS-IT is 80386-based AT clone sans screen and keyboard, the idea being that it can use the existing dumb terminal keyboard and VGA screen.
Around the back it sports twinax, coax and local network connections, and comes with a solid state disk and built in 3270 and AS/400 emulations.
ACE Communications Ltd has come up with Spidernet (a name that may cause a few concerns for the Edinburgh-based Spider Systems Ltd) a hub that supports both Token Ring and direct-attached coaxial and twinaxial connections.
Consequently the company is touting it as the first hub to support seamless migration from direct-attached to Token Ring-attached devices.
Curiously it is manageable only using SNMP protocols at the moment, although a NetView agent is being developed.
The final new company in the clutch of six is Adacom Gateway Systems Ltd, which is busily transplanting the company's existing ‘Supernet’ gateway software from its IBM environment to Sun Microsystems Inc's Solaris operating system.
Not surprisingly, given the number of new products it has on the go, the company says that it is ploughing some 12% of its turnover back into research and development.
It is helped, it acknowledges, not only by research and development grants from the Israeli government, but also the current influx of brainpower from the former Soviet Union.
DEC STARTS FEEDING OUT SAMPLES OF ITS 200MHz  ALPHA RISC
Digital Equipment Corp last week made samples of its 200MHz Alpha RISC chips available, priced at $3,500.
Volume shipments will start in July, at $1,231 apiece for quantities of over 10,000 — although it's difficult to conceive of any third party able to forecast that it will ship 10,000 machines during the lifetime of the chip, and even the most optimistic parallel processor builder could hardly hope to ship that many nodes in any foreseeable time-frame.
DEC also cut prices on its 150MHz Alpha to $853 from $1,355 a unit in 10,000-up quantities, effective July.
Samples will be cut to $1,900 from $3,375 next month.
The 150MHz version has been shipping since September.
DEC said the 200MHz benchmarked at 200 SPECfp92 and 106 SPECint92 and an aggregate 184 SPECmark89.
DEC claimed that at $7 an aggregate SPECmark, the chips beat out all comers on the price-performance curve.
It also made a point of saying that the chips would enable personal computer applications reach their full potential under Microsoft Corp's Windows NT.
SIEMENS NIXDORF LAUNCHES ‘WORLD's FASTEST PERSONALISED MAGNETIC INK CHARACTER RECOGNITION PRINTER’
Siemens Nixdorf Information Systems Ltd, based in Bracknell, Berkshire is branching out into a new niche printing market with its 2140 MICR — hailed as the world's fastest personalised Magnetic Ink Character Recognition printing system.
The system will enable banks, building societies, security printers and government departments to print cheques and credit slips faster and more cheaply.
This is because it can cope with printing personal details such as customer name, branch sort code and address — along with the magnetically coded cheque/slip number, bank code and account number, included at the bottom of the cheque — a process that has to be carried out in two separate stages using current techniques.
The printer combines Siemens' light emitting diode print technology with the established magnetic ink recognition system from Californian company Troy, both of which are controlled by a specially adapted 80486-based PCD4T terminal.
Siemens uses arrays of hundreds of tiny light-emitting diodes rather than lasers in the 2140 printer because it reckons they provide more accurate printed text and graphics, faster.
This is because every diode is individually calibrated and balanced to ensure uniform printing across every single line.
The 2140 machine prints 98.5 feet of paper a minute and can produce half a million cheque books a month.
It can also print on A3 size paper, which is several inches wider than previous technologies allow, so enabling two cheques or slips to be printed side by side.
Siemens says this halves current cheque book production costs, enabling users to print 1,000 cheques for £1.50.
The controlling terminal, a specially customised personal computer, has a Windows-style graphical colour interface and word processing system that can be used to design cheque and credit slip pages — particularly useful for UK customers dealing with different types of crossed and uncrossed cheques.
The printer costs £250,000 and is available now from Siemens in the UK.
It will be selectively marketed in countries like the UK, France and Spain where cheques are widely used.
Siemens says that few major innovations have been brought out for this small but very steady market for the past 10 years, which should guarantee take-up.
It has just completed a successful trial with one major high street bank and is convinced that others, anxious to cut costs, will share in the enthusiasm.
Siemens hopes to shift around 12 of the things a year.
UNIFY USES VISIX SOFTWARE'S GALAXY TO BUILD ITS OBJECT-ORIENTED VERSION OF ACCELL
Unify Corp, Sacramento, California is using Galaxy, Visix Software Inc's new object-oriented application programming environment, to build its next generation of software products, including Accell/OO, an object-oriented version of its proprietary language development system.
Accell/OO — or whatever it is called by the time it comes to market — will have full graphical and object-oriented functions, Unify says.
Reston, Virginia-based Visix's Galaxy software, introduced last year, enables developers to develop applications across multi-vendor systems irrespective of operating system or graphical user interface.
Galaxy is written in C and C++, and provides an application programming interface plus an open software backplane for third party tools to plug in to.
According to Unify, Galaxy will ‘pretty up’ Accell's look and feel, and enable it to hook into other graphical and non-Unix environments.
Galaxy currently supports Motif, Open Look, IBM Corp's Common User Access, X Window, the Object Management Group's Common Object Request Broker specification, the Open Software Foundation's Distributed Computing Environment, Sun Microsystems Inc's Open Network Computing environment, Microsoft Corp's Object Linking and Embedding specification and the Apple Computer Inc Macintosh.
Unify, which unveiled a bunch of Accell enhancements last year — including Accell/SQL, a gateway that provides Unix-to-IBM DB/2 access, and Accell/TP, its Tuxedo-based transaction processing language — says it hopes to begin releasing its object-oriented products by the end of this year.
NOVELL TO USE SABER MENU SYSTEM SUBSET IN NETWARE 4
Dallas, Texas-based Saber Software Corp has licensed a subset of the Saber Menu System for MS-DOS, to Novell Inc, which will include the Saber Menu Language in NetWare v4.0, so it will be goodbye to the old Novell Menu utility MENU.EXE.
The agreement also allows Novell to integrate the technology in future versions of NetWare.
Saber hopes that as a result, a greater number of users will decide to adopt the full suite of Saber management utilities.
UK MOBILE USERS SPECIAL INTEREST GROUP IS FORMED
The UK Telecommunications Users Association has formed a new Mobile Users' Special Interest Group, intended to represent users across a range of mobile technologies such as cellular, paging, mobile data and private and public cordless communications.
All Association members automatically become Associate Members of the group, and both members and non-members can become Corporate members, giving access to services including publications and updates, and representation to government and industry.
The first meeting is to be held within two weeks, to finalise activities for the remainder of 1993.
BULL GIVES THE DETAILS ON ITS EARLY RETIREMENT PROGRAMME IN FRANCE
With an eye to reducing its staff level in France by between 6% and 7%, 800 to 900 people, this year, Compagnie des Machines Bull SA has announced it will open a period of voluntary departure between May 1 and June 30 (CI No 2,118).
‘It is not the objective of the company to lay people off, but to reduce our costs,’ it said.
Those employees that choose to leave will receive payments in addition to the compensations required by the French government for laid-off employees for a maximum total of 18 months of salary for managers.
Bull has put in place some restrictions on which employees can accept the offer, in order to avoid the risk of losing the youngest and most talented staff, a problem experienced at other manufacturers such as IBM Corp.
Only salaried employees with five years at Bull can apply for departure, and Bull will limit the numbers to 60% managers and 40% non-managers.
And Bull has reserved the right to veto departure requests from those people in ‘vulnerable positions’ or with ‘sensitive skills.’
Bull is also asking salaried employees to reduce their work time or to take unpaid leave.
According to Les Echos that could not be corroborated with information from Bull, employees that choose the first option will get three months salary for agreeing to reduce their work time for two years.
Bull confirmed that those taking unpaid leave will get a bonus proportional to the duration of their absence (three months salary for a year, six months for two years, nine months for three years), but that they will have no guarantee of getting their job back after the leave.
Bull will announce its 1992 results on Thursday.
SLIGOS CONCENTRATES ALL ITS SMART CARD ACTIVITIES IN SOLIAC SUBSIDIARY
Sligos SA, France's second largest software and services company, has put all its activities relating to the manufacture of Smart Cards into its Solaic subsidiary.
Charged previously only with card fabrication, Solaic now customises the cards with a software mask that contains all the information necessary for the card to perform the desired function, and engineers systems that use the cards.
The three spheres of activity combined brought Solaic 1992 revenues equivalent to $58m — $41m from card manufacture, $15.5m from customisation services, and $1.5m from systems engineering.
Francis Lavelle, managing director of Solaic, said the company expects to do $70m all told this year, of which $58m should come from card manufacture, $9.6m from customisation services, and $2.5m from systems engineering.
Lavelle explained the projected drop in services revenues, saying 1992 was ‘major year’ for reissuing banking cards in France, a process that occurs every two years.
This year, Solaic will renew the cards it distributed in 1991, which were fewer than in 1990, he said.
Solaic also announced three new contracts with public telecommunications operators in Sweden — Televerket, Portugal, TLP, and Holland, Koninklijke PTT Telecom  Nederland NV.
Televerket and TLP ordered 1m and 500,000 pre-paid phone cards respectively under the contracts, while PTT Telecom contracted Solaic to establish a phone card payment system in Holland.
Solaic estimates that the European market will get through 320m of the embedded microprocessor Smart Cards in 1995 for a variety of applications.
IBM ESPANA ACHIEVED A BETTER OUTTURN FOR 1992 THAN MANY OF ITS SIBLINGS
While IBM Espana SA may have had a ‘rather complicated’ year, unlike the rest of the company, it at least managed to make a profit.
President Joaquin Moya said he wasn't disappointed because the results only mirror the general state of the industry.
In fact, he expects that ‘1993 will be worse than 1992’.
The subsidiary's profits came out at 80% of 1991 figures and were equivalent to $2.2m, while turnover fell 11.7% to $168.1m.
Revenues from the domestic market dropped 13.7% to $113.3m.
Moya conceded that hardware sales had plummeted, but he said that RISC workstations, software and in particular services — revenues here were up 50% — had all shown growth.
Software and services generated 44% of the total turnover in the domestic market, up from the 36% generated in 1991.
CGI INFORMATIQUE LOOKS FOR FACILITIES MANAGEMENT ACQUISITION OR VENTURE
At the company's annual meeting, executives from CGI Informatique SA, developer of the Pacbase software engineering system, said fiscal 1993 has so far not lived up to expectations, and indicated that the company will be considering either an acquisition or joint venture in the facilities management market.
‘We had hoped that the end of the year — 1992 — which is the first part of our financial year (CGI ends its fiscal year on August 31), would signal a recovery, but although the first two months — September and October — improved on the year before, they were followed by November and December, which were less and less good,’ said Robert Mallet, president-director general of the group.
‘For 1993, we hope to maintain our revenues and profit with last year's level,’ he concluded.
CGI's financial year 1991-92 saw its revenues grow 13.6% (of which only 2% was internal) to the equivalent of $367m, but net profit dropped 13.4% to $26.4m.
In specific geographic areas, however, CGI's activity has improved.
Its US business was profitable in fiscal 1991-92, where it lost money the previous year, said Bernard Chapot, vice president-director general, and its revenues this fiscal year should top $40m, from approximately $39.5m last year.
‘For the moment, the US is not one of the worrisome elements in the group's activity.
On the contrary, it is one of the better performing ones,’ he said.
Chapot added that the company is seeing a recovery in its US Pacbase sales since Computerworld printed a test result that rated Pacbase the number one software engineering system in overall functionality and user friendliness.
Chapot also singled out CGI's UK group for praise as a ‘well managed group with positive, stable results.’
The UK group's profit is largely due to the Popins  manufacturing requirements planning software, ‘which is well situated in the market,’ he said.
A section of the company's annual report discussing future prospectives indicates that facilities management at CGI has traditionally been more an auxilliary activity than a driving one.
Furthermore, it says, ‘new interest in the market brings us to re-evaluate our position’ and to determine whether to increase activity via acquisition or joint venture.
Mallet said the high cost of entry into the market was precisely why CGI would undertake it through one of those two means because ‘we don't believe that we can do it all ourselves.’
INSTEM, HIT BY THREE CUSTOMERS GOING INTO RECEIVERSHIP, RESTRUCTURES
Profits at Instem Plc for the year ending December 31 were hit by three of its electronic manufacturing OEM customers going into receivership.
It had to make provisions of £386,000 to cover bad debts.
But the electronics and computer systems dealer is currently reorganising the structure of its business to make sure it can address changing demands in its markets.
These comprise mainly privatised industry, such as British Nuclear Fuels, regional electricity and water boards, although pharmaceutical companies are also a well-established source of income.
Pre-tax profits were below target, dropping 43.1% to £575,000.
While chairman David Gare said the group performed well throughout the year, he had expected this year's figures to be better than last.
Unfortunately, even if the bad debt provision is ignored, profits were still slightly down, to £961,000 this time from £1m last.
Nonetheless, in view of its ‘exceptional circumstances’, the board is recommending the final dividend be held at 1.8 pence, making 3.1 pence for the year — a rise of 3.3% on last year.
Turnover likewise fell 9.7% to £14.3m, because, Gare said, order levels were below expectations.
While some customers took a long time to make decisions, other very complicated projects took longer than anticipated to organise.
In addition, the majority of Instem's contracts consist of large operational management systems for data acquisition and control, which in some cases took longer than expected to complete.
As payment comes in big lumps when the job is finished, income, Gare noted, tends to be uneven.
To ensure that long-term, the Stafford-based company is still in a position to win business from those industries investing most in automation, it is reorganising its structure to become more market-focussed.
First, Gare has set up customer and market groups for electricity transmission and distribution; power generation; nuclear fuel enrichment and reprocessing; and pharmaceutical research.
Second, he has centralised resources such as electronics manufacturing facilities, and professional and materials management staff.
Each of the groups has access to such resources, but only as and when required.
No redundancies will result, Gare added, as this is a ‘forward-looking’ move.
The idea is to prevent future overlap in terms of staff and office space as the company grows.
Finally, Instem is keen to focus investment on developing its own products and expertise in the area of computer services, although it will continue to provide electronic manufacturing services to OEM customers.
NOW NORSK DATA ASKS FOR ITS OSLO LISTING TO BE CANCELLED FOR TWO MONTHS
Norsk Data A/S, yesterday asked for its listing on the Oslo bourse to be temporarily cancelled — for up to two months, although it says it hopes to reach final agreement with its major creditors this month.
Norsk Data restructured to become a holding company in October 1991 and transferred all operating activities to subsidiaries with separate financing.
It says its Nordic Data holding company, set up in late 1991, had a 1992 profit after financial costs of £9.2m on turnover of £77m, but gave no comparisons with 1991.
Nordic Data A/S has the same management as Norsk Data and owns Comma Data Service group, Norsk Data Ltd and ND Service Team.
SHARE & BOND ISSUES
Motorola Inc issued $200m of 6.50% senior notes due March 1 2008 at $99.34% through Merrill Lynch & Co.
SCI Systems Inc, Huntsville, Alabama contract manufacturer called all its outstanding 9% subordinated convertible debentures due April 1 2015 for redemption on April 1.
Holders will have the option to convert their debentures into the company's common stock at a conversion price of $11.875 per share.
Unisys Corp plans to redeem all its $200m outstanding 9% notes due October 1 1993 at 100% of the principal amount of the notes, plus accrued interest at the end of the month.
The company notes that the action signals its ability to use early redemption or repurchase programmes as part of continuing efforts to reduce debt and make best use of its cash.
Debt net of cash has been reduced more than 60% from its peak in the third quarter of 1989 and debt net of cash to capital ratio is now 42% compared with a peak 61% in second quarter 1991; the company's goal is to get to 25% or less.
COMPANY RESULTS
Autodesk Inc has reported fourth quarter net profits up 17.7% at $11.2m, on turnover up 48.2% at $98.6m; net profit for the year to January 31 was down 24.1% at $43.9m, on turnover that rose 28.9% to $353.2m.
Net earnings per share rose 15.8% to $0.44 in the quarter, down 23.8% to $1.76 in the year.
Comparisons are made with restated figures.
Communications Satellite Corp has reported fourth quarter net profits up 7.6% at $16.9m, on turnover up 10.8% at $156.5m; net profit for the year to December 31 was up 4.2% at $42.9m, after $23.4m  restructuring charges this time and $26.6m losses from the cumulative effect of an accounting change, on turnover that rose by 7.8% to $563.6m.
Net earnings per share rose by 7.6% to $0.85 in the quarter, and fell by 7.2% to $2.18 in the year.
Compression Labs Inc has reported fourth quarter net losses of $1.9m down from losses of $17.7m last time, after $18.9m non-recurring charges, on turnover up 45.1% at $31.2m; net losses for the year to December 31 stood at $3.3m against losses of $15.1m last time, on turnover that rose 48.4% to $107.8m.
Komag Inc has reported fourth quarter net profits up 386.4% at $4.4m, on turnover that rose 33.1% at $96.3m; net profit for the year to January 3 was up 10% at $16.9m, on turnover that rose 17.1% to $326.8m.
Net earnings per share rose 400% to $0.20 in the quarter, and 5.3% to $0.79 in the year.
The 1993 figures were reported at 14 and 53 weeks.
Litton Industries Inc has reported second quarter net profits up 2.7% at $44.4m, on turnover down 7.8% at $1,259.3m; mid-term net rose 2.8% to $87.2m, on turnover that rose 3.7% at $2,626.5m.
Net earnings per share, adjusted for a two-for-one stock split paid in May 1992, rose by 1.9% to $1.07 in the quarter, and by 1.9% to $2.10 in the half.
Twin Disc Inc has reported second quarter net profits up 67.7% at $218,000, on turnover up 6.7% at $34.4m; mid-term net losses of $14.2m up from losses of $97,000 last time, after $14.4m charges due to the cumulative effect of an accounting change, on turnover that rose 8.6% at $66.7m.
Net earnings per share rose by 60% to $0.08 in the quarter.
Instem Plc has reported net profits for the year to December 31 down 43.7% at £384,000, after £386,000 losses due to customers going into receivership, on turnover that fell 9.7% to £14.3m.
At the pre-tax level, profits were down by 43.1% at £575,000. £Earnings per share fell by 44.1% to 8.5 pence.
IBM FORM ANOTHER COMPANY
IBM Corp has yet another new company, IBM Software Manufacturing Co, which it has formed in Somers, New York to provide ‘a full range of fulfillment services to software developers’: translated into English, that means duplicating floppy disks, producing and printing manuals, doing foreign language translation, packaging and assembly, and even providing worldwide distribution and marketing support; the new company has been formed to exploit the fact that IBM already offers these services through its IBM Programming Systems line of business to other IBM units and independent vendors; the company has also opened a CD-ROM manufacturing facility in Charlotte, North Carolina.
TRANSMISSION EQUIPMENT JOINT VENTURE FROM ROBERT BOSCH AND NORTHERN TELECOM
Robert Bosch GmbH and Northern Telecom Ltd say they are in discussions that could lead to a 50-50 joint venture to develop, manufacture, and market transmission equipment — yes, Bosch's main business is motor components, but we're talking data transmission here — under the global CCITT standard, including Synchronous Digital Hierarchy systems: Northern Telecom says the deal would complements its strategic tie with Matra Communication SA.
ACTIVE MATRIX DISPLAY DUMPING DECISION UPHELD
The US International Trade Commission has upheld the ridiculous decision that Japanese manufacturers are dumping active matrix liquid crystal displays on the US market to the detriment of a handful of tiny US manufacturers that could never meet the demand from the likes of Apple Computer Inc and IBM Corp, but that alleged dumping of electroluminescent displays has not hurt the US electronics industry; the active matrix displays carry prohibitive 62.7% tariffs, which apply to imported screens but not to assembled machines that include them, while the  electroluminescent displays carried only a 7% tariff.
MVS ON ALPHA AXP SYSTEMS.
WHY?
Now why would anybody want to do that?
Digital Equipment Corp watcher Terry Shannon says an unnamed third-party software developer is thinking about converting IBM Corp's MVS mainframe operating system to run on Alpha AXP systems.
ADAPTEC DISK CONTROLLERS PROFIT FROM PC PRICE WARS
Milpitas-based Adaptec Inc is making hay with its disk controllers from the boom in personal computer sales generated by the price war, and says it expects to report net profit of about $50m, 1.90 per share for its fiscal year to March 31 1993, on sales more than double last year's $150.3m.
SUN CONFIRM FIRSTPERSON FORMATION
Sun Microsystems Inc has confirmed formation of the wholly-owned personal communicator unit FirstPerson Inc (CI No 2,118) and says that its key focus will be on developing software that enables different types of digital devices to swap data and work together — it has in mind televisions, radios, satellites and computers — and to license the software and technology to other companies for use in their electronics products, putting it in direct competition with General Magic Inc, while mirroring some of the concepts of the Echelon Corp Local Operating Network; boss of the new company Wayne Rosen said that FirstPerson has not ruled out collaborating with General Magic.
SLIGHT GROWTH FOR PRODUCTS AND SERVICES IN NEXT TWO YEARS
The West European market for computer products and services will grow by about 4.3% in 1993 and 6.8% in 1994, according to Bruno Lamborghini, president of the Eurobit industry group, which presented the study to a conference in Brussels: market growth was 14.2% in 1989 and 8.9% in 1990, slowing to 4.3% in 1991 and just 3% last year, having topped 15% for most of the 1980s.
JAPANESE COMPANIES MAY MERGE TO AVOID COMPETITION
Two of Japan's three private satellite communications companies will probably merge to avoid excess competition against each other, Reuter reports from Tokyo, quoting a spokesman for Japan Communications Satellite Co Inc: he said that C Itoh & Co and Mitsui & Co Ltd, major shareholders in his company, have been negotiating for the merger with Nissho Iwai Corp and Sumitomo Corp, main shareholders of Satellite Japan Corp since last year because of falling orders for the services for the two groups; Hughes Communications Co Ltd is expected to take the opportunity to sell its 30% in stake in Japan Communications Satellite and withdraw from Japan's communications market.
NEC TO SAMPLE VRX MIPS R4000 BY YEAR-END
NEC Corp is to sample its low power VRX MIPS R4000 derivative by year-end: a 100MHz R4000 implementation is also planned for later in 1993.
DUAL-MODE CDMA/ANALOGUE PHONE FROM QUALCOMM
Qualcomm Inc, San Diego claims to have the industry's first hand-held, dual-mode Code Division Multiple Access and analogue cellular phone: the 12oz CD-7000 accesses 832 FM channels and an equivalent 8,000 to 16,000 channels in Code Division Multiple Access mode; it will be out in the autumn, the company said, but gave no prices.
ICL LOOKS LIKE FUJITSU's BEST ASSET
With Amdahl Corp faced with an uphill struggle to adjust its business so that it can thrive in a post-mainframe world, and all its other major investments — things like the former Poqet Computer Corp and HAL Computers Inc still in the development stage and demanding more capital, while its own core business is a victim of the mainframe malaise, Fujitsu Ltd's 80% of ICL Plc begins to look the company's most valuable asset, making it increasingly likely that the company will in due course want to float a lot more than the 25% it originally suggested on the London International Stock Exchange: Fujitsu's biggest problem is the one now facing all big Japanese companies — that the days of cheap capital at home are gone with the bubble economy, probably forever, and many Japanese companies issued convertibles in the 1980s that are coming up to maturity; with prices on the Tokyo exchange still bombed out, few holders are going to want to convert into shares, which means that issuers will have to raise expensive new capital on the international markets to redeem them.
FUJITSU's VALAUATION
For the record, Fujitsu Ltd's target flotation price of 225 pence a share appears to value the company at £1,200m, the 80% stake at £960m, the cost of three new chip plants.
EVER HOPEFUL AMERITECH
Ever hopeful, Ameritech Corp, Chicago yesterday proceeded with its plan and filed with the US Federal Communications Commission for permission to offer long-distance telephone service and cable television in return for surrendering its local telephone exchange monopoly.
NYNEX REROUTES WORLD TRADE CENTER LINES
Nynex Corp's New York Telephone says it has rerouted 2,000 telephone lines from the World Trade Center to tenants' temporary offices scattered through Manhattan since Friday's explosion; it says it has also installed 1,000 new lines and 100 T1 high speed dedicated lines since the emergency.
ROMANIA — US DIGITAL CONNECTION GOES LIVE
Romania's first digital telephone connection via satellite to the US — where it links to Sprint Corp's network, has just gone live: according to Reuter, Romtelecom and Sprint both use Satellite Transmission Systems Inc digital equipment.
ECCENTRIC MEYERSON MAY BE JUST THE CURE
Perot Systems Corp chief Morton Meyerson, seen as a front-runner for the chief executive post at IBM Corp, is described by the Wall Street Journal as an exuberantly eccentric Texas hacker and outdoorsman who lives in a converted electrical substation with exposed plumbing, a massive crane hanging from the ceiling, and an elaborate concert hall’— sounds just the man for the task of turning IBM around.