

STERLING TO BUY SYSTEMS CENTER
Sterling Software Inc has been very quiet since it bought Informatics, but yesterday the Dallas firm agreed to buy Net/Master owner Systems Center Inc, formerly VM Software, Reston, Virginia for $185m in shares.
NOVELL ‘MAY BUY NEXT FOR NEXTSTEP’
In its relentless quest to buy up every open operating system technology that does not belong to Microsoft Corp, Novell Inc is reportedly considering buying what is left of NeXT Inc if it can come to terms with founder and controlling shareholder Steve Jobs.
According to Microscope, Novell's idea is to use the Berkeley Unix 4.3-compliant NeXTstep object-oriented display system as a front end to a new NetWare that — like NeXTstep — would be built on top of the Mach Unix kernel from Carnegie Mellon University and would add object technology.
US BABY BELLS UNVEIL THEIR PERSONAL COMMUNICATIONS PLANS
Personal communications services are bursting out all over in the US and three Baby Bells this week announced plans for trials of new services.
Englewood, Colorado-based US West Inc announced from Boise, Idaho that it plans a market trial in America's potato capital of Personal Communications Services starting a year from now.
The $10m trial of the wireless communications system based on very low-power, digital radio communications will involve personal handsets and microcellular technology to enable users to be immediately and constantly accessible — 1,000 trial participants will use the pocket phones to make and receive calls within the coverage area, on both home base stations and 500 or so public base stations in the downtown and other densely-populated or widely visited parts of Boise.
US West partners Cable & Wireless's Mercury PCN Personal Communications Network subsidiary.
Trial participants in Boise will use L M Ericsson Telefon AB DECT1800 radio base stations and handsets transmitting in the 1.88GHz to 1.9GHz band.
Meantime Southwestern Bell Corp's mobile systems unit and Matsushita Electric Industrial Co Ltd's Panasonic Communications & Systems Co claim the first commercial personal communications service in the US.
FreedomLink, to be offered first in Boston this month and in all its 54 markets by the end of June, operates within offices, factories or businesses, with radio base stations tied to the organisation's PABX.
But off premises, the pocket phone operates as an ordinary cellular phone.
Each Freedomlink will  initally support up to 63 pocket phones.
And BellSouth Corp's BellSouth Telecommunications is testing the on-premises-only Northern Telecom Ltd Companion system launched in Hong Kong last year and at Hannover last month — which adds a cordless system to a PABX.
BellSouth calls it Wireless Centrex.
IBM CUTS FOUR EURO-PLANTS LOOSE TO SINK OR SWIM
A decision by IBM Corp to collapse the work building storage systems for the AdStar unit in San Jose into just three plants from the present 10 is causing widespread concern across the IBM empire — and IBM Europe is simultaneously cutting an initial four plants loose to sink or swim, only one of which is directly affected by the AdStar decision.
Havant in the UK — which does make disk drives; Jrfalla, making printers in Sweden; Valencia, making low-end ES/9000s in Spain, and at least a part of the big Montpelier mainframe and chips complex in France, are being re-classified as autonomous business units under their own managements, free to seek work outside as well as where they can from within IBM, but they are under notice that if they can't demonstrate that they can operate profitably in 12 months, they will be closed.
Six other international plants are to get the same treatment, and their identities will be revealed within a week.
Overall, 10,000 jobs will go in Europe over the next two years.
On the storage side, the surviving plants are San Jose, Mainz and Fujisawa, which means that 700 full-time and 1,200 temporary posts go in Rochester, Minnesota.
Rochester will continue to manufacture disk substrates and design the low-end disk drives.
COPAM TO FILE FOR BANKRUPTCY PROTECTION
Copam Electronics Inc, describing itself as Taiwan's second biggest personal computer maker, is seeking court protection from its creditors after making a $19.2m loss in 1992 on sales of about $100m, and saddling itself with $77m bank debt.
It looks for recovery on the back on a new pocket computer out next week.
MASPAR WOOS MOVIE MAKERS WITH PARALLEL PRISM VIDEO
Sunnyvale, California-based massively parallel systems builder MasPar Computer Corp has put the Prism video compression software from Prism Interactive Corp, Wheaton, Illinois up on its machines, and claims that the combination is the first system capable of producing broadcast quality Motion Picture Experts Group-compatible video output in real time.
The Prism encoder enables its output to be optimised for a particular target decoder design to maximise image quality at the lowest possible bit rate so that a video-on-demand service provider can minimise central disk storage and maximise use of the available system bandwidth.
It can also be tuned to trade off video quality against compression speed.
MasPar sees the combination being used to take care of the problems created by the need for economical storage, low-speed transmission and bandwidth multiplication for applications such as video-on-demand over telephone networks, direct broadcast satellite and cable television services, optical disk and Compact Disk Karaoke.
The compression system accepts CCIR-601 D1 digital video input, YUV 4:2:2, 720 by 480 pixels for NTSC, 720 by 576 pixels for PAL and SECAM, and an average of 16 bits per pixel and 30 frames per second.
Other input formats and bit rates can also be accommodated.
Initially, output will be SIF resolution, or 352 by 240 pixels, 1.5Mbps and 30 frames a second but output can be generated at any format, resolution or bit rate that the application requires, so long as the system configuration is adequate to support the desired compression rates and quality factors.
The MasPar Prism compression system will be offered on a range of configurations priced from $250,000 to $1.5m and will be commercially available for end-users and system integrators in the third quarter.
HUBRIS RULES AS ICL UNVEILS ERGONOMIC SPRING COLLECTION OF PERSONAL COMPUTER PRODUCTS
ICL Plc has launched its Spring collection of personal computers and related products,(CI No 2,124), saying that ‘like the best fashion, ICL PCs are made for the individual’.
The company called it the most significant announcement in its personal computer history, adding that it had two aims: firstly, to become the number one in personal systems in Europe; second, to be the number one supplier and implementor of choice for client-server technology.
And it reckons that the Power 93 range will propel it into just such a position, taking over the place previously occupied by US vendors.
Over the past year alone, the group claims to have jumped from being the ninth most popular supplier of personal systems in Europe to being sixth, with unit shipments up 40%.
Furthermore, it believes it is not just another personal computer provider, saying that it can't simply ‘be compared with someone like Compaq’— it prefers to be thought of as a supplier of personal systems.
Managing director of ICL Personal Systems David Mills also claims that the Spring collection is well placed to exploit the growing trend towards client-server technology — in fact, the company said it can now offer ‘everything you need for client-server computing’.
To back up this strategic move, Mills cited figures from market researcher's the Gartner Group, which forecasts that the number of applications based on client-server kit will grow to 65% in 1995 from 8% today.
Unique position
ICL reckons it is in a unique position in several ways —‘it is big, serious, and here to stay’.
Its understanding of ergonomics, it attests, ‘is in a class of its own’, and it has a ‘comprehensive vision of the future of corporate computing’.
Moreover, ICL's wholly-owned personal computer reseller, Technology Plc, believes that the company's new machines are unique in terms of style, their conformance to ergonomic standards — especially as, according to ICL, 1993 will be the year of ergonomics — and their inclusion of ICL's integrated Powermaster system, which is designed to conserve energy — if, after a pre-defined time, a user doesn't operate his mouse or keyboard, then a control program blanks out the screen.
If it stays blanked for more than three minutes, the monitor switches to stand-by mode.
The electron beam and all deflection circuits are switched off, but as the CRT cathode is still active, the machine takes only three seconds to warm up if the keyboard is touched.
After half an hour, the box goes into power-save mode.
The CRT cathode is switched off, and only the wake-up components remain active.
However, according to ICL, it takes only 10 seconds to reactivate the system.
The benefits of this, the company claims, are minimal heat dissipation and power consumption, saving a customer $200 per workstation per year in electricity costs — in fact, it attests that if Powermaster was incorporated into every personal computer in the UK, then the UK would need one less nuclear power station.
Powermaster is also said to result in less noise due to internal fans and disk drives being switched off when not required.
And finally, it provides enhanced security because passers-by can't see what is on the screen.
Technology director of ICL operations Steve Sowery says the company spent a lot of time and will spend a lot of money on positioning the new ICL range.
This comprises, among others, two models of the ErgoPro XG — these are based on Intel Corp 80486SX/33 and 80486DX2/66 microprocessors, and include Overdrive processors for the Pentium chip when it arrives.
ICL will release its new server products the very day that Pentium is released.
Each has 4Mb of memory, with local bus graphics, a high security BIOS, an integrated SCSI slot, Powermaster, audio and local area network capabilities built into the motherboard.
They are targeted at professional users, multimedia and natural data applications, and will be available in Europe from April 5, though two weeks earlier in the UK.
Then, there are eight models in the ErgoPro range — these consist of a range of personal computers and notebooks, aimed at the professional and large corporate user.
All come with either two slot housings, which provide room for one external and one internal mass memory device, or four slot housings, which doubles this capacity.
They are based on 80386SX/33, 80486SX/25, 80486SX/33, and 80486/33 chips.
The 80486 models have 4Mb or 8Mb of memory, can be upgraded to Pentium, and have local bus graphics, with cache and video upgradeability.
The 80386 versions have 2Mb or 4Mb of memory.
All ErgoPro's come pre-loaded with MS-DOS 5, Windows 3.1 plus mouse, and have hard disks of 85Mb, 120Mb, 170Mb, 245Mb and 525Mb.
The range will be available in Europe as of March 22, but again two weeks earlier in the UK.
Volume shipments of all ErgoPro products will begin in April.
ICL reckons that its ErgoPro range is ‘in every respect better than any other on the market’.
Next in line is the ErgoLite range of four desktop computers, intended for the business or home user that wants a cheaper product.
These are based on 80386SX/25, 80486SX/25, 806486/33 and 80486DX2/66 processors.
Two entry notebooks are also available, based on 80386SX/25 and 80486SX/25 chips.
The latter has a colour display.
To meet the demands of the fast growing notebook market, which Technology says now makes up 20% to 25% of total turnover, ICL has introduced its ErgoPro N3/25v sub-notebook.
This has a PCMCIA expansion slot, weighs 4 lbs and again comes with MS-DOS 5 and Windows 3.1.
Its 3.3V design enables the battery to last for approximately eight hours.
Two new 80486SL-based notebooks are also added to the NB range, one with a black and white display, the other with colour.
Both communicate via a docking station, slim docking module, a mobile communications adaptor, ‘the same size as a fag packet’, and a range of modems.
According to ICL, notebooks have two distinct uses: first, they are a user's only or main machine — so, it must be possible to plug them into a local network, and they must have the functionality of a standard personal computer.
Second, users want them to be portable, so size and battery life is important.
ICL, of course, claims that its boxes fit the bill on both counts.
ICL enhanced its MX, FX and CXe server product lines by producing two new RAID disk array subsystems — the PowerArray for RAID Level 0, 1 and 5, and PowerCache, which caches SCSI II EISA disks to increase throughput.
The MX multiprocessor range is updated to incorporate four 50MHz 80486s and run Santa Cruz Operation Inc's Unix System V.4, and Microsoft Corp's Windows NT, when this becomes available.
Pentium-based products will also be released, when Intel starts shipping the chip.
ErgoView terminals
In addition, the company broadened its range of terminals by launching its 15″ ErgoView open display stations for the desktop market.
It reckons it is working towards completely redefining personal computers and terminals, and the new products are ‘designed to break down all barriers’.
The essence of these terminals can be changed using a plug-in personality module.
So, users can migrate between terminal types, from a proprietary to an open environment or from a terminal to client-server environment as required.
Conversely, the ErgoClient is an ‘intelligent display station that fills the gap between terminals and PCs.’
It is intended to make it easier for customers to migrate from a centralised to client-server system without major investment.
An ErgoView terminal can be upgraded to an ErgoClient terminal with the addition of the relevant personality module.
It is based on personal computer architecture, and can be directly attached to the local network in a client-server architecture.
It also provides local storage facilities, and interfaces for peripherals.
Finally, ICL made additions to its TeamWare software and networking offerings to integrate workstations, local network and Unix servers, ICL and IBM mainframes into a client-server environment.
This, ICL claims, ‘allows you to keep all choices a la carte’, but it also provides the user with support — each user is free to take anything from the range he requires, and although they can have a personalised user interface, the products are integrated and conform to uniform design.
The TeamOffice office information system was extended to support Santa Cruz Unix and Unix System V.4.
It previously supported OS/2, MS-DOS, Windows, and ASCII terminals.
Later this year, it will also be upgraded to support Unix V.4.2.
EtherTeam 16i, a third generation Ethernet adaptor, incorporating the new EtherCoupler chip from Fujitsu Ltd, was also released.
No pricing was available on any of the new products.
ARCHITECTURE-NEUTRAL DISTRIBUTION FORMAT PRODUCT PROGRAMME TO FOLLOW END-OF-YEAR MEETING
With the US Defense Advanced Research Project Agency and European Commission Esprit project now backing it, the Architecture-Neutral Distribution Format applications portability mechanism has now achieved the critical mass needed to drive it to market, believes Open Software Foundation chief technologist Ira Goldstein.
Indeed, at least one unspecified outfit is thought to have decided that the Architecture-Neutral Format is commercially viable now.
However, while the Architecture-Neutral Format is unlikely to appear on the market this year, Goldstein says that the Foundation plans to hold a conference on the technology at the end of the year, to find out which companies are interested in bringing the stuff to market and how it can be best introduced to an industry audience already blinded by science.
Goldstein fully expects an Architecture-Neutral Distribution Format product programme to be initiated during 1994.
Since its conception, the Format has been winning hearts and minds as a useful mechanism.
It should enable software vendors to write and distribute a single version of an application that will run unchanged on the generality of laptops, workstations and large-scale systems.
The problem has been how to get get it out of the labs and into the industry, and ‘I can't tell what's going to happen when the horses are led to water,’ admits Goldstein.
Concerted
Apart from a concerted effort by its backers, which could be shaped at the end of year meeting, Goldstein says only catalytic events will otherwise drive the Architecture-Neutral Format to market.
Things like a single influential company adopting the Architecture-Neutral Format unilaterally for portability across multiple hardware and operating system environments; a standards body like X/Open Co Ltd, IEEE or the US National Institute for Standards and Technology mandating it; government procurement bodies insisting on it; or a significant new technology coming to market on it.
The Architecture-Neutral Format specification is now complete and a beta release will be testing later this year.
In fact most outstanding problems were ironed out over the last couple of months, Goldstein says; bug fixing remains.
Commercial quality Architecture-Neutral Distribution Format installers will become available for a range of architectures, as will a reference implementation of the thing using public domain GCC compilers.
All property rights to the Architecture-Neutral Distribution Format are owned by the UK's Defence Research Agency, which developed and subsequently licensed the technology Format to the Software Foundation and Unix System Laboratories Inc — licences are available from both.
ARTISOFT OFFERS UNIX SUPPORT WITH NEW NETWORK DRIVER SUPPORT KIT
Low-end network operating system developer Artisoft Inc has announced a new kit enabling its LANtastic local area peer-to-peer operating system to interconnect with other operating environments, as well as providing a Network Driver Interface to the LANtastic NetBIOS.
The Tucson, Arizona company claims that Network Driver Interface Support for LANtastic Kit will enable users to load or stack multiple protocols, providing support for transparent access across systems, including Unix (via Network File System), NetWare (using a separate IPX NDIS driver), and the IBM Corp mainframe.
The company claims that these protocols can be loaded and accessed simultaneously without interrupting the LANtastic network connection.
Available from the end of last month, the kit will have a list price of £150, the company says.
EXTENDED INDUSTRY STANDARD ARCHITECTURE GANG GETS TO WORK ON A 64-BIT SUCCESSOR TO THE EISA BUS
The Extended Industry Standard Architecture  subcommittee is planning a 64-bit replacement for EISA bus that will transfer multiple data packets at rates faster than 200Mb per second.
The new bus is expected to be launched later this year on Intel Corp Pentium-based machines and is being developed by for the subcommittee by National Semiconductor Corp.
But versions configured for existing AT and EISA-based systems are also planned.
According to US press reports, the 64-bit bus architecture will be backwards-compatible with AT and EISA boards, but they will not be able to upgrade to the higher performance.
Instead, the new bus will be designed as an asynchronous bus capable of handling streaming data.
The EISA bus was originally developed by a consortium of nine companies led by Compaq Computer Corp that did not want IBM Corp's pricey-to-license Micro Channel wished upon them.
UNIR SIGNS UP TO BRING AT&T's CALICO OBJECT-ORIENTED ‘SUCCESSOR TO UNIX’ SYSTEM TO MARKET
AT&T Co and Unir Corp have extended their marketing agreement on AT&T's Bell Laboratories-developed Calico object-oriented programming language and operating environment technology that Unir claims is the successor to Unix.
Unir will now be able to negotiate with large computer vendors and software houses on AT&T's behalf to facilitate Calico's transfer to the commercial market.
Pricing will depend on the type of technology transfer involved.
Maximum access to all of Calico's object-oriented technology, including the source code, documentation and licensing rights should run about $750,000.
Calico is currently available on 68000 and Sparc systems.
Under a previous agreement, Unir is implementing it for iAPX-86.
Unir, which is pressing the time-to-market argument, says that Calico can be applied to pen-based computing, object-oriented database servers, real-time object-based systems and special-purpose telecommunications systems that are either open or proprietary.
Unir will continue to develop and support its Calico-derived C++ (Cat) programming language and Conix operating environment.
It says it is currently negotiating with several Sparcsystem builders to ship Conix as a standard component on every machine.
Volume pricing is less than $50 per workstation.
Conix can run all existing applications as well as applications developed under C++.
Unir says binaries developed using C++ can be run without being recompiled on any processor that supports Conix, enabling developers to distribute the same binary for Sparc, 68000 family and iAPX-86.
ISKRATEL FROM SLOVENIA DEMONSTRATES HOW TO BREAK THE LOG JAM HOLDING UP TELEPHONE EXCHANGE SALES
The brick wall faced by virtually all suppliers attempting to win modernisation contracts for city telephone exchanges in the larger cities of the Russian Federation seems to have been breached by the Slovenian firm IskraTEL.
At the end of 1992 the company installed the first 1,000-number exchange in Ekaterinburg, which was assembled at the local Ural Electromechanical plant.
The deal marked the culmination of years of negotiation with the city authorities.
In the first months of 1993 the firm announced a string of other contracts in Siberia and the Urals.
Recently a deal worth $2m was struck with the Nizhnevartovskneftegas (Nizhnevartovsk Oil & Gas) combine and the Sibneftepererabotka (Siberian oil processing) combine to supply telephone exchanges each with a capacity of 8,000 numbers.
The installation is due to be completed this month.
The company has also won a $6.2m contract with the Tyumen regional government to provide an intercity telephone exchange for the city.
The capacity of the exchange will be 5,000 channels.
According to Vladimir Smirnov, manager of the Tyumen intercity exchange, the installation of the new equipment was also due to be completed this month.
The company will soon complete the installation of two local telephone exchanges in Tyumen (numbers 32…and 33…) with a total capacity of 26,885 numbers in the city.
IskraTEL specialists are currently laying optical fibre cables to connect the city's exchanges.
In stark contrast, at the end of 1989 NEC Corp signed a contract with the Ekaterinburg City Telephone Network for an exchange with a capacity of 30,000 numbers (costing $10,000) which was to be paid for by raw materials.
Wrangling
After years of wrangling, the contract was suspended in 1992.
NEC has come across similar problems is Novosibirsk.
In both cases the heads of the city telephone networks (Vladimir Panov in Ekaterinburg and Valentin Dolgoborodov in Novosibirsk) say the company would only take full payment in advance and insisted on using its own engineers on the projects.
These issues eventually proved impossible to resolve.
The main stumbling block for all suppliers like NEC is that few city networks have much hard currency to spend on new equipment, and since local rouble telephone charges are so low, no company can recoup the initial investment from tariff income.
So far only IskraTEL seems to have got around this problem.
Producing equipment based on old licences from Alcatel NV, the firm used to be a major telecommunications supplier to the former Eastern bloc.
Though it now has few East European customers it has proved that with cheap, intermediate technology and a limitlessly flexible approach to business, it is possible to sell exchanges to Russian cities.
IskraTEL's exchanges are cheap, modular — they can be purchased in stages as funds become available, and compatible with most of the equipment already installed (much of it by IskraTEL).
What the company has also been at pains to do it allow local input into its products.
It was partly by successfully organising joint local production of its exchanges in Ekaterinburg that the firm succeeded at the expense of NEC.
SIEMENS NIXDORF TO ESTABLISH A RUSSIA-WIDE POLICE NETWORK
Siemens AG has been having such a tough time in the former Soviet Union with its nuclear safety and telecommunications projects that it has been cutting back and recalling expatriates early (CI No 2,043), but Siemens Nixdorf Informationssysteme AG does have some work.
It has embarked on a an information network which will enable Russia's regional police forces to share information, according to Izvestiya.
Covering all the 15 regions that make up the Russian Federation, the network is to be used by the Russia Interior Ministry for criminal investigations and resources management.
The network will be built on three levels: city, regional and national.
The regional information networks are to be established this year and next, and the All-Russia network is expected to be completed by 1998.
The total cost of the project has been estimated at some $30m.
SOVAM TELEPORT ESTABLISHES PACKET SWITCHING NODE IN UFA
SoVam Teleport, now part-owned by Cable & Wireless Plc here in London, has established a new packet switching node in Ufa, Bashkirria: the new facility will enable the company to market dedicated communications lines between the city and Moscow, with connections to the rest of the public network; Ufa is a centre of oil industry enterprises and it is at these customers that SoVam is targeting its new service; the company also aims to set up new nodes in the cities of Chelyabinsk, Salavat and Sterlitomak in the near future.
AUTODESK RUSSIA STARTS AUTOCAD DISTRIBUTION
Sausalito, California-based Autodesk Inc's Autodesk Russia has started distribution of the latest version of AutoCAD in Russian: the company is planning a Russian road show to demonstrate the new product; the price of the English version of AutoCAD 12 is $5,000 while the Russian version will cost in the region of $1,400 to $1,600; upgrades will cost $500.
STEEPLER TO DISTRIBUTE HP APOLLO 9000 SERIES 700
Moscow-based Steepler has signed an agreement with Hewlett-Packard Co under which it will handle distribution of the HP Apollo 9000 series 700 workstations, marking the Palo Alto company's first reseller agreement for products other than its personal computer systems — previously all workstations were sold direct by Hewlett-Packard Moscow in partnership with local software partners; Steepler is planning to major on offering the machines for running graphics applications.
MOSCOW CURRENCY EXCHANGE TO BECOME SPRINT CUSTOMER
The Moscow International Currency Exchange is soon to become a Sprint Networks customer: according to Izvestiya, the exchange will be using Sprint's electronic mail service; the  currency exchange determines the official exchange rate of the rouble against foreign currencies at twice weekly exchange sessions.
XEROX's XSOFT DOCUMENT MANAGEMENT SOFTWARE ARM LOOKS FOR BIG BUCKS OUT OF EUROPEAN MARKET
Xerox Corp's XSoft document management software division says it is opening new sales and services centres in London, Zurich, Dusseldorf and Paris.
The move reflects the importance of the European market, which is expected to generate 40% of the Palo Alto company's 1993 revenues.
The UK office is to service Northern Europe — Norway, Denmark and Finland.
Central Europe — Germany, Switzerland and Austria — will be jointly handled from Zurich and Dusseldorf.
The French office will cover Belgium, Spain, Italy, Greece and Portugal.
Rank Xerox Ltd will remain a major XSoft distributor, to which a network of systems integrators, value-added resellers and dealers are to be added.
Accompanying the news was the launch of Inconcert, a new workflow manager for client-server systems.
InConcert works by modelling business processes and tracking documents like spreadsheets, forms and graphics through each stage.
It has a graphical user interface, provides SQL database support and can be easily customised for a variety of applications such as publishing, insurance, legal, retail distribution, health care, aerospace and government.
It is available in client and server implementations for Sun Microsystems Inc Sparcstations and IBM Corp RS/6000s along with 80386 and 80486 personal computers.
European pricing is expected to come in around that of the US at $22,000 per server licence.
XSoft added that its GlobalView for X document management system will now run on IBM Corp's RS/6000s and Sun Sparcstations running SunOS 4.1, Open Windows 2.0 or the Motif Window Manager.
User licences are £1,500.
Also promised is soon is Version 1.5 of its personal computer package Rooms for Windows, to be followed by Rooms for X Window.
NORTHERN TELECOM SHOWS COMPANION CORDLESS SYSTEM AT HANNOVER
Northern Telecom Ltd used CeBit to launch its Companion CT2 wireless telephone system, and has signed distribution agreements in Holland, Sweden, the UK and Germany.
Companion is claimed to be the first complete system to conform fully to the CT2 Common Air Interface CAI standard.
It comprises lightweight handsets, radio base stations and a wireless controller that incorporates the mobility software.
The system operates in the 864MHz to 868MHz band, rather than the public CT2 wavelength of 900MHz.
As such, it is targeted at private use within organisations.
The CT2 wavelength is open, in that any approved equipment can use it, without the need to obtain a licence.
Two models are available: the Companion 100, a wireless controller supporting up to 80 portable phones behind an existing telephone system, and the Companion 10, a stand-alone system that supports up to 32 portables.
Radio diagnostic and deployment tools are also available.
The company has demonstrated mobile voice and data services capable of roaming and hands-off operation.
Applications include mobile facsimile, data sharing and transfer and remote computer access.
Companion will be distributed in Holland by Koninklijke PTT Telecom Nederland NV, Sweden's Televerket and by British Telecommunications Plc from this year.
No word on the German market.
ERICSSON HAS INTERFACE BETWEEN THE MD100 AND IBM's CALLPATH SERVICES
L M Ericsson Telefon AB has announced an interface for integrating its MD110 digital PABX system with IBM Corp's CallPath Services Architecture, to provide support for computer-integrated telephony.
MD110 ApplicationLink provides call identification and database information about incoming and outgoing calls.
Calls can be made, answered and transferred directly from the computer terminal.
Where calls are transferred, database information is also passed on.
The MD110 ApplicationLink for CallPath will be available for IBM's AS/400, ES/9000, RS/6000 and PS/2 machines.
It will provide interworking between databases on these systems and the MD110's telephony functions.
The MD110 is also available as an open standard interface based around the European Computer Manufacturers Association standard for Computer Supported Telecommunications Applications, CSTA.
This means it can support integrated applications with any system conforming to the standard.
Ericsson says the PABX can also interwork with Digital Equipment Corp's Computer Integrated Telephony interface.
CINCOM's CONTROL:MANUFACTURING FOR UNIX IS NOW UP UNDER HP-UX AND DEC's ULTRIX
As promised last March (CI No 1,878) Cincom Systems Inc has launched the Unix version of its integrated manufacturing software, Control:Manufacturing.
The most obvious change is that the product sports a clutch of graphical tools, all running under Microsoft Corp Windows.
The user gets access to everything through the control desk applications application, programmers get a swish Windows-based Developers Workstation and executives get a new Decision Support/Executive Information System.
The Cincinnati, Ohio company originally said it would convert its software to run on HP 9000 Series 8000 machines under HP-UX Unix and that Hewlett-Packard Co had signed a joint development and marketing agreement.
A similar deal has now been struck with Digital Equipment Corp, and the manufacturing software is available immediately for the Ultrix version of Unix with support for DEC's OSF/1 following in the second half of the year.
The portfolio will be further expanded in the future as extra Unix variants are supported; no names yet, except to say that the company is not rushing to implement under IBM Corp's AIX: most customers who are interested in a Unix version are looking for prime open system vendors, says UK marketing manager David Miller, adding that AIX is not usually towards the top of the list.
Other new features include international support, not only handling languages, but also country's financial and accounting vagaries and European value-added tax (Intrastat) reporting.
Finally, the company was proudly showing of its multi-site support; the software's ability to handle communications between remote plants ordering and producing parts.
While this feature is already implemented in the most recent version of Control:Manufacturing for the DEC VMS and IBM versions, its presence in the Unix version means that the new decision support software can collect, summarise and present manufacturing data from across the enterprise.
The support software, together with the graphical front ends will appear on the older systems within the next six months, the company says.
SHARE & BOND ISSUES
Applied Signal Technology Inc, developing reconnaissance equipment to collect and process telecommunications signals in Sunnyvale, California got its initial public offering of 2.2m shares, 2m of them new, away at $7 per share, and will use the $13m or so net proceeds to repay debt and for working capital.
Cowen & Co was the lead underwriter.
AT&T Co raised $400m with an offer of 4.5% notes due February 15 1996 at a $99.44% reoffer price to yield 4.71%.
Proceeds will go to the previously announced redemption of AT&T's $1,750m in long-term debt; Morgan Stanley & Co Inc was lead manager.
Leasing Solutions Inc, a San Jose company dealing in information processing and communications equipment, principally leasing it ‘to large creditworthy companies’, got its initial public offering of 1m new shares away at $5.00 per share and plans to use the $4.5m or so net proceeds to buy equipment for lease.
Needham & Co Inc was managing underwriter.
Southwestern Bell Corp raised $350m in a two-part issue: the first tranche consists of $200m 6.375% notes due April 2001, priced at $99.904% to yield 6.38%; the second is $150m of 6.625% 12-year notes priced at $99.33% to yield 6.707%.
Merrill Lynch Capital Markets Inc was the lead underwriter.
Southwestern Bell Corp's Southwestern Bell Telephone Co is also calling for redemption two issues of debentures  totalling $450m, which will result in The issues being called are $150m of 8.25% notes due September 1 2005, redeemable at $101.78% plus accrued interest, and $300m of 8.75% notes due November 1 2024, redeemable at $103.34% plus interest.
Zenith Electronics Corp filed a shelf registration with the Securities & Exchange Commission for 4m shares to raise cash to cut short-term borrowings and for working capital; the Glenview, Illinois company also agreed to sell 1.2m to 1.5m new shares to Fletcher Capital Markets Inc.
The sale will be in the next two months, provided regulatory approval is granted, and will be tied to market price; Zenith shares are currently trading at $6.625.
CREDIT RATINGS
Compania de Telefonos de Chile SA's $182.6m proposed convertible bond issue won ratings of triple-B-minus rating from Standard & Poor's Corp, and Baa-3 from Moody's Investors Service Inc; Standard & Poor's said its rating reflects the company's dominant position in local telephone services, growth prospects, and favourable regulatory framework; Moody's that it believes the company will continue to be the largest telecommunications company in Chile and will benefit from a supportive regulator.
COMPANY RESULTS
Creative Computer Applications Inc saw net profits for the year to August 31, including $63,000 gains, down 1.4% at $204,357, against 1991 figures that included $76,000 gains, on sales up 2.2% at $4.7m.
Net per share fell 10% to $0.09 in the year.
Dataflex Corp saw third quarter net down 87.0% at $173,000 on turnover down 40.8% at $16.0m; net profit for the year so far was down 81.1% at $652,000 on turnover that fell 33.9% to $46.9m.
Net earnings per share fell 86.1% to $0.05 in the quarter, 79.6% to $0. 19 in the nine months.
Imtec Inc saw second quarter net profits down 9.7% at $39,468, on turnover up 10.7% to $1.8m; mid-term net losses were $28,301 against profits of $55,432 last time, on sales that rose 3.7% to $3.2m.
Net earnings per share stayed at $0.03 in the quarter.
Insignia Systems Inc saw fourth quarter net profits of $202,396 against losses of $174,505 last time, on turnover up 44.5% at $3.1m; net profit for the year to December 31 stood at $516,817 against losses of $1.3m last time, on turnover that rose 69.8% to $11.2m.
Net earnings per share amounted to $0.04 in the quarter, and to $0.10 in the year.
Lincoln Telecommunications Inc has reported fourth quarter net profits up 6.8% at $7.9m, on turnover up 3.4% at $45.5m; net profit for the year to December 31 was up 6.4% at $29.6m, on turnover that rose 4.3% to $176.2m.
Net earnings per share rose 8.9% to $0.49 in the quarter, 7.8% to $1.79 in the year.
Comparisons are made with restated figures.
Meca Software Inc has turned in second quarter net profits up 289.6% at $187,000, on turnover that rose by 78.4% to $9m; mid-term net losses amounted to $773,000 up from losses of $685,000 last time, on turnover that rose 110.3% at $14.8m.
Net earnings per share rose 300% to $0.04 in the quarter.
Microtest Inc has reported fourth quarter net profits up 63.7% at $1.2m, on turnover up 37.5% at $7.8m; net profit for the year to December 31 was up 192.8% at $7.1m, on turnover that rose 53.9% to $26.5m.
Net earnings per share rose 45.5% to $0.16 in the quarter, and 162.5% to $1.05 in the year.
Microtouch Systems Inc has reported fourth quarter net profits up 38.7% at $520,000, on turnover up 25.4% at $7.4m; net profit for the year to December 31 was up 114% at $2.3m, on turnover that rose 61.5% to $30.5m.
Net per share remained at $0.15 in the quarter, rose 81% to $0.76 in the year.
Printronix Inc has reported third quarter net profits of $603,000 up from $1.7m losses last time on sales up 9.0% at $23.8m; nine month net losses were $3.2m, after a $1.0m charge, down from $7.2m losses last time on sales up 8.3% at $70.6m.
Net earnings per share were $0.19 in the quarter.
Sierra Semiconductor Inc has reported fourth quarter net profits down 47.1% at $2.1m, on turnover down 8% at $22.2m; net profit for the year to January 3 was down 9.3% at $11.8m, on turnover that rose 7.4% to $92.3m.
Net per share fell 48.6% to $0.19 in the quarter, 16.9% to $1.08 in the year.
The 1993 figures were reported at 14 and 53 weeks.
TexScan Corp has reported second quarter net losses of $4.2m, after $2.7m restructuring charges, against profits of $109,000 last time, on turnover that fell 4.2% at $9.8m; mid-term net losses amounted to $5.8m up from losses of $370,000 last time, on turnover that fell by 7.4% at $17.7m.
Torchmark Corp has reported fourth quarter net profits up 5.5% at $66.9m; net profit for the year to December 31 was up 7.7% at $265.5m.
Net earnings per share, adjusted for a three-for-two stock split paid in August 1992, rose by 12.3% to $0.91 in the quarter, and by 14.4% to $3.58 in the year.
IIS Intelligent Information Systems Inc has reported fourth quarter net profits up 44.9% at $2.3m, on turnover that rose 3.1% to $12.8m; net profit for the year to December 31 was up 22% at $7m, on turnover that rose 2.7% to $45.1m.
Net earnings per share, adjusted for a three-for-one stock split paid in February 1992, rose by 38.5% to $0.18 in the quarter, and by 19.1% to $0.56 in the year.
The Israeli company reports figures in US dollars.
TT Group Plc reported net profit for the year to December 26 up 16.1% at £12.2m on turnover up 8% at £171m.
At the pre-tax level, profits rose 14% at £16.6m; earnings per share rose 11% to 16.8 pence.
IBM AWAIT SOVIET PAYMENTS
IBM Corp's vast personal computer contract with the former Soviet Ministry of Education ended early with just 15,000 machines installed in schools and only 75% of those paid for, IBM Europe chief Renato Riverso told the Wall Street Journal; he also said that IBM has yet to receive its first payment on its $150m contract to provide Aeroflot with a modern reservations system.
SYNCORDIA TO RUN COMMS NETWORK FOR BP
British Telecommunications Plc's Atlanta-based Syncordia Corp is finally able to announce its contract to run a major part of the communications network for British Petroleum Co Plc: Syncordia will take over the management of a large part of BP's existing communication infrastructure, including all North Sea communications; no value given.
AT&T CAPITAL CONTINUES RESTRUCTURING
AT&T Co's equipment leasing and finance subsidiary, AT&T Capital Corp, has restructured as part of an ongoing process to become more financially independent: it formed a subsidiary that will keep the AT&T Capital name and continue to conduct most of its current businesses, and plans an initial public stock offering this year, the aim being that it should be able to issue debt independent of AT&T support; as part of the restructuring, AT&T has guaranteed the debt outstanding as of March 31 of AT&T Capital and AT&T Credit, but the support agreement with AT&T Capital was terminated as from yesterday; AT&T retains AT&T Capital's Lease Finance assets, consisting primarily of equity interests in project finance transactions and leveraged aircraft leases, the company said.
SCNEIDER RUNDFUNKWERKE CONFIDENT OF FURTHER IMPROVEMENTS
Munich-based consumer electronics group Schneider Rundfunkwerke AG, ravaged by personal computer price wars, says it cut its group loss to less than $45m 1992 from $90m the previous year, and it told Reuter it hopes to approach breakeven this year; 1992 sales were around $310m compared with $377m done in 1991.
IDB WORLDCOM AND TELEFONOS DE MEXICO SIGN AGREEMENT
Los Angeles-based IDB Communications Group Inc says its IDB Worldcom signed an operating agreement with Telefonos de Mexico SA de CV to offer international phone service.
ERICSSON TO SUPPLY $300m WORTH OF EQUIPMENT TO GUANDONG POST
L M Ericsson Telefon AB has a contract worth $300m to supply telephone exchanges and related equipment to Guangdong Post and Telecommunications Bureau, the largest contract it has yet signed in China; the contract formalises a broad agreement made back in June 1992.
TRINZIC COMPLETES CHANNEL COMPUTING DEAL
Palo Alto, California-based Trinzic Corp, formerly Aion Corp, has completed its previously announced acquisition of Channel Computing Inc Portsmouth, New Hampshire for 1.85m new Trinzic shares, worth $8.1m.
MCI SHIPS GEC-MARCONI VIDEOPHONE
MCI Communications Corp is now shipping the GEC-Marconi Ltd VideoPhone for $1,500 the pair after getting Federal Communications Commission approval for the device, which is being sold here in the UK, in Japan, Singapore and Germany.
BULGARIAN TELECOMMUNICATIONS SET TO ANNOUNCE TWO MORE FOREIGN INVESTORS
The Bulgarian Telecommunications Co, which last week gave contracts to Siemens AG, L M Ericsson Telefon AB, Alcatel NV and Northern Telecom Ltd under its $300m modernisation programme, says it will announce two more foreign investors shortly: ‘We will announce soon our partners for building up a surface satellite station and for introduction of a new digital overlay network,’ Antoni Slavinski, deputy chairman told Reuter; and a joint venture between Bulgarian Telecommunications Co and US Sprint International Inc will start operating on April 15; Sprint Business Telecommunications Co will enable customers in Bulgaria to link host and personal computers with others around the world, and says it already has some 50 applications, mostly from foreign companies operating in Bulgaria.
MCI TO PROVIDE CONNECTION BETWEEN CANADA AND MEXICO
MCI Communications Corp has been chosen to provide end-to-end digital connections for voice and data transmissions across the US and between Canada and Mexico to a group called the Multilateral Initiative, composed of 32 European, Asian-Pacific and South American telecommunications carriers; the value of the pact was not revealed.
US THREATENS SOUTH KOREA WITH BLACKLIST
The US is threatening to add South Korea to a blacklist of countries where illegal copying of software is deemed to be widespread: penalty tariffs would be levied on imports.
PHILIPS TO SELL OPTICAL FIBRE INTERESTS
Philips Electronics NV, which wanted to put the unit into a joint venture with Siemens AG, has now reached agreement to sell its optical fibre activities and 50% of its share in Yangtze Optical Fibre & Cable Co Ltd, Wuhan, China to Draka Holding NV, on undisclosed terms.
NYNEX TO TAKE $475m CHARGE
Nynex Corp says it will take a charge of $475m this year for adoption of the accounting change for post-retirement health benefits.
SUSPICIOUS MINDS
The trouble with All Fools' Day is that every newspaper story suddenly looks suspect, but we assure subscribers that IBM Corp really is paying Louis Gerstner all that money it can't afford, that the sports shop that sells guns in Kingston really did close early and the UK government is considering a Congestion Charge, but we confess that we have no evidence that the next computer industry consortium will be a catch-all called Computer Industry.
ALL FOOLS PRIZE
There was a ripe collection of April Fool items flying around the industry this year, with BICC Plc's BICC Information Systems & Services promoting its underware, the first two items being BISS-SLIP for Synchronised Linked Internet Protocol and BISS-NICS Network Integrity Circuit Service, and Chase Research Inc of Nashville, Tennessee threatening to knock MS-DOS, Unix and NT off their perches with a resurrected CPM/93 version of the late lamented CP/M operating system — and comes on 300 8″ floppies, bundled with an 8″ floppy drive for $100; but the prize has to go for Hewlett-Packard Ltd, which yesterday announced new security features for its Vectra personal computers — User Fingerprint Recognition on all models, and both Photographic Recognition — a tiny camera in the middle of the screen that recognises you even when you come back with a tan, and Odour Recognition — designated users must not change their perfume or after shave — on 80486 models; not recognised?
The screen blanks and a 150dB alarm goes off.
GATES KNOWS OF NO MOVES TO FORCE MICROSOFT RESTRUCTURE
Microsoft Corp chairman Bill Gates said in a televised interview with CNBC-TV that he knows of no effort by the US Federal Trade Commission to force a restructuring of Microsoft, despite its ongoing probe: ‘I certainly haven't heard any suggestion that they're even considering something that would change the structure of our company,’ Gates said; he also warned on the Business Insiders programme that Microsoft Corp will not be as profitable in the long-term as it has in recent years —‘The kind of profit margin we've had in the past will be very unlikely for us to achieve in the future; we've said after tax margins probably won't stay over 20% in the mid to long-term, and they could go quite a bit lower than that in the short-term,’the company's chief executive declared.
DEC RETURNS TO TECHNOLOGY
Digital Equipment Corp realises that it may have been a little hasty in taking its toys away in a huff, and has returned to the Technology Plc fold by re-appointing the Warrington-based company as a value-added reseller for predominantly desktop and server products: DEC withdrew its business, when Technology was acquired by ICL Plc in July 1992 (CI No 1,966); Technology has now joined DEC's Corporate Reseller Programme, and, according to DEC UK's director of complementary solutions organisation sales, Ian Smith, the company is expected to ‘play a key role in our increasingly value-added reseller-led product selling strategy’.
IDEA BUSINESS SOLUTIONS LAUNCH 80486DX 66MHz NOTEBOOK
London-based Ideal Business Solutions Ltd claims to be the first to market with an 80486DX 66MHz notebook computer, the EPS-486: the machine has a 10″ active matrix colour display, PCMCIA slot, 4Mb of memory, 128Mb of RAM, a removable 200Mb hard disk, and a portable expansion unit, housing three 16-bit expansion cards; it weighs 6.4 lbs and costs a  phenomenal £2,000.
MULTIMEDIA VIEWER PUBLISHING TOOLKIT VER 2.0 THIS MONTH
Microsoft Corp says its Multimedia Viewer Publishing Toolkit Version 2.0 will be available early this month for $500: the new generation supports several emerging multimedia systems and brings content-based title development within reach of publishers that might not know programming languages, the firm said; Viewer 2.0 replaces the Multimedia Development Kit, the registered users of which can upgrade for $200.
X INDUSTRY ASSOCIATION TAKES OFF
That long-anticipated non-profit X trade association, the X Industry Association, brainchild of The X Business Group, is getting off the ground: it's picked itself a chairman in David Harris of Adobe Systems Inc and the board includes Peter Winston of Xhibition, Peter Shaw of AGE Logic Inc, Stephen King of Tektronix, Brian Fitzgerald of Digital Equipment Corp and Michael Harrigan of Network Computing Devices Inc and Anil Malhotra of IXI Ltd; members include Applied Digital Data Systems, Grafpoint, Hummingbird, Kinesix, Non Standard Logics, Omron, Shographics, TeleSoft, Visual Edge and Walker, Richer & Quinn; the new body is to market, promote and educate in the name of X, leaving the X Consortium, while it still exists, to grapple with the technical issues.
LARGEST XTRA PROCESS EVER
X/Open Co Ltd is about to embark on the largest Xtra process ever: it expects to invite 50 to 75 user groups worldwide to participate, get 35 to 50 of them actually involved and circulate 10,000 multiple-choice questionnaires in six languages: English, French, German, Spanish, Chinese and Japanese; it is now trying to figure out how to get feedback from the non-industrial nations; results will probably appear in Rome in early December.
SPECTRUM SIGNAL PROCESSING TEAMS UP WITH TI AND IBM
Vancouver-based Spectrum Signal Processing Inc has teamed up with Texas Instruments Inc and IBM Corp to develop a suite of multimedia products for the personal computer using the MWave standard: the first two will design, develop and test the first in a family of boards and IBM will apply the technology to multimedia markets such as video.
VODATA LAUNCHES VODAFAX BROADCAST
Vodafone Group Plc's Vodata Ltd has launched a facsimile broadcast service, Vodafax Broadcast: users load information onto a personal computer or facsimile machine and send it to their unique number: information is automatically distributed to a predefined list of recipients, either immediately or at a pre-set time; there is a £25 connection charge, a £10 monthly charge for the first distribution list and a £5 monthly charge for subsequent lists; distribution costs from 10p to 14p per minute per recipient.
ASCII CORP TO START PEDDLING UNIXWARE
Ascii Corp, the Japanese software company founded by Bill Gates's erstwhile buddy Kay Nishi, is going to start peddling UnixWare this month, figuring that it can do $4.2m in sales year one; a Japanese-language version is due in July and Ascii reckons 30 to 50 value-added resellers out of the 200 that sell Informix should bite.
PRECISION SOFTWARE TO START OPERATIONS IN SWINDON
Precision Software GmbH, the German distributor of Boulder, Colorado-based XVT Inc's graphical user interface builder is opening an operation in Swindon, UK, called Professional Software Ltd: the unit, run by former Cambridge Computer Graphics sales and marketing manager, Paul Morgan, will take over XVT distribution from London-based Personal Workstations Ltd, which becomes a customer for it.
ML ELECTRO-OPTICS ADDS TO RANGE
Oldham-based ML Electro-Optics Ltd has added three new backplane chassis to its range: the SX8000-4 can support four Ethernet local networks on the backplane, as well as cascading from the front; the SX8000-2 also includes support for an additional four Token Ring local networks and up to 14 FDDI networks; the SX8000-3 adds a 1.5Gbps bus on a 96-pin connector, with 32-bit or 64-bit parallel data transfer capability, the company says.
UNIX INTERNATIONAL SHUTS AUSTRALIAN OUTPOST
Unix International has shut down its one-person Australian outpost leaving only secretarial liaison.
USL EX-DIRECTOR RESURFACES
Unix System Laboratories Inc's ex-director of strategic marketing Paul Calkin has surfaced as a principal in Systems & Software Integration & Distribution Inc where he and his staff are building a business consulting personal computer and low-end Unix companies on high-end strategic and sales issues.
UNIFORUM ‘93 NOT SO IMPRESSIVE
The Unix festival, UniForum ‘93, didn't feel as successful a show as it was last year: it was spread out over a lot more acreage and split into two widely separated pavilions, and attendance looked sparse and the aisles empty despite show management's claims of a 10% increase in traffic — like as not, it was talking about the pre-registration which was up, but unofficially we hear attendance was down; UniForum is still more a Unix celebration than anything else but it remains to be seen whether there will still be things to celebrate or whether erosion has set in.
BGS SYSTEMS INTRODUCES VISUALISER
BGS Systems Inc, Waltham, Massachusetts, announces it has introduced a visualiser for its Best/1 capacity management software line.
NETWORK SYSTEMS TO SUPPLY BRIDGE-ROUTERS TO NEW JERSEY BELL TELEPHONE
Network Systems Corp, Minneapolis has announced it is supplying its 6000 Series multiprotocol bridge-routers to New Jersey Bell Telephone Co: they will be used for the Metropolitan Area Network being installed for the US Army at Fort Monmouth, New Jersey; the order comprises an initial 21 Model 6614 and 6617 routers (with another 12 planned for future installation), to be installed as part of a FDDI-based fibre optic backbone; value of the order was not released.
PORT OF LONDON AUTHORITY UPGRADES CONTROL CENTRE
The Port of London Authority has upgraded its navigation control centre at the Thames Barrier and as part of the improvements, Wordsafe voice-logging equipment from the Racal Recorders arm of Racal Electronics Plc has been installed to record all VHF traffic on the Port Operations frequencies between ship and shore, as well as telephone lines to the emergency services.
SUN CEO IS LARGEST SINGLE SHAREHOLDER
Don't know why we never realised it before but Sun Microsystems Inc chief executive officer, Scott McNealy is the company's largest single shareholder with about 2.1m shares or 2.2% of the outstanding stock, making him worth about $60m.
LINKWATCH ALLOWS PC MONITORING AND CONTROL
San Jose-based 3Com Corp's new LinkWatch Token Ring software enables personal computers equipped with the company's Token Ring adaptors to be monitored and controlled, either locally or remotely, from any SNMP-based management station: network managers can check network activity, obtain configuration data, manage personal computer network links and receive information about individual personal computers; be available in July, LinkWatch Token Ring will be £325.
HONGKONG TELECOM PLANS ON HOLD
Hongkong Telecom Ltd has put its plans to transfer operator assistance services to the Chinese mainland on hold: the company said last week that talks with the Chinese authorities had stalled — no doubt more frosty fallout from Governor Patten's belated recognition that Britain owes Hong Kong democracy.
DECISIONS, DECISIONS!
Ironic when you think back, isn't it — in the early 1980s, IBM Corp had pretty much identical deals with Intel Corp and Rolm Co in which it bought about 20% of each with the right to take go up to 30% — and in its wisdom, in mid-decade, it decided to buy Rolm outright, and to sell all its Intel shares…