

SUN RALLIES PUBLIC WINDOWS INITIATIVE TO PRE-EMPT MICROSOFT
In an attempt to forestall or derail Microsoft Corp's likely objections to its WABI Windows Applications Binary Interface for running Windows applications under Unix, Sun Microsystems Inc is expected to reveal at the WABI launch tomorrow that it has orchestrated a Public Windows Initiative pressure group of vendors that will attempt to force Microsoft to open up, if not make public, its future plans for the Win16 16-bit application programming interface for Windows 3.1, this week's issue of our sister paper Unigram.X reports.
Sun is striking not only against possible legal challenges but also against Microsoft's promise to ‘make Windows such a moving target that Sun could not keep up’.
Membership of the Public Windows Initiative is said to be a condition of taking a WABI licence — all licensees are understood to have been sworn to secrecy under the direst of imprecations.
The Public Windows Initiative — with the Common Open Software Environment at its side — will try to claim the moral high ground on the issue of open specifications and is likely to cloak Microsoft in what used to be IBM Corp's mantle.
UNISYS STRESSES ITS FRAGILE STATE AS RETIREES RAIL
Although it has been telling the world how successfully it has recovered, Unisys Corp made clear at the annual meeting last week just how parlous the company's condition remains.
Faced with a band of former employees livid that the company is phasing out payment of medical expenses for life for its retired employees, the company said the phase-out, over three years, was essential to the survival of the company, which remains on the fragile edge of recovery.
Chairman James Unruh said the decision had been painful for Unisys, but that the company saw little choice.
Due to a change in federal accounting standards, Unisys says, it would have been forced to take $700m in one-time charges against earnings if it did not cut the benefits, and that would wipe out one-third of the still debt-burdened company's net worth.
It also could not afford the $100m in annual costs it would face to keep the programme going.
Employees' representatives counter that many that accepted early retirement offers would never have done so without the promise that medical expenses would be covered for life.
‘Health care is not extraneous, it's a matter of life and death and it cannot be cut,’ Democratic Senator Harris Wofford of Pennsylvania told a rally outside the meeting in Philadelphia; several suits against Unisys have been brought over the issue.
HEWLETT SETS HP100LX WITH LOTUS cc:MAIL INSIDE
Hewlett-Packard Co is today scheduled to unveil a faster version of its hot HP95LX handheld computer, which will include first fruits of the company's collaboration with Lotus Development Corp on software for mobile computers.
According to Reuter, the new HP100LX is built around the Intel Corp 80C186 and is 50% faster than the two-year-old original; the 11 oz machine will come bundled with Lotus's cc:Mail electronic mail package and cost $750.
The company told the news agency that it has sold more than 200,000 of the 95LX model and will continue to sell both models — but ‘We expect the 100LX to be even more popular and open up a whole new market.’
Also bundled will be Microsoft Corp's MS-DOS 5.0 operating system and Lotus 1-2-3 spreadsheet.
To use cc:Mail, users will have to plug in an external modem.
PHILIPS TO SELL ITS 35% OF FIRM TO MATSUSHITA FOR $1,600m
Transforming at a stroke the state of its balance sheet, Philips Electronics NV on Friday announced that it is to sell its 35% stake in the Japan-based Matsushita Electronics Corp to its partner in the venture, Matsushita Electric Industrial Co Ltd for a whopping $1,600m.
Matsushita said the transaction was subject, among other things, to working out mutually acceptable definitive agreements and their approval by the directors of both Matsushita and Philips.
It said the two would continue to exchange licences in the field of Matsushita Electronics's present activities — manufacturing integrated circuits, television tubes and light bulbs.
Matsushita Electronics has 22,000 employees in Japan, Singapore, Malaysia and the US.
The market was pleasantly stunned by the deal, since no-one had realised that the stake was worth anything like the sum agreed.
‘If it is three billion guilders up front, it is an incredible deal,’ one London-based analyst who declined identification exclaimed to Reuter.
Philips said the sale was agreed because Matsushita Electronics was becoming too large for the joint venture status to be appropriate.
Philips shares traded in London, Belgium and on the Instinet international trading system all soared on the news, by an average 9% by noon London time Friday; the Amsterdam share market was closed for a holiday.
Although the sum will make a considerable dent in Philips' net debt, it doesn't get the company out of the woods altogether — total borrowings are $8,500m.
NETWORK SYSTEMS TO BUY BUS-TECH
Minneapolis Hyperchannel specialist Network Systems Corp is to buy Bus-Tech Inc, a privately held interconnect controller company in Burlington, Massachusetts, for $24.5m.
The two firms aim to combine technologies to provide mainframe access and archiving for users of Novell Inc's NetWare for SAA.
WANG INTENDS TO CUT YET ANOTHER 1,500 FROM ITS PAYROLL
The devastating bloodletting at Wang Laboratories Inc is not over yet, with its third quarter figures (in page five), the company said that the cut in its global workforce to 7,800 from 9,300 made on March 16 is not the end.
It says it intends to get staffing down to 6,300 — compared with 31,000 at its peak four years ago.
Based on current business levels and industry conditions, it expects turnover for the 1993 fiscal year to June 30 to be be between $1,250m and $1,300m.
It says likely decline of its proprietary systems leads management to ‘project revenue of $1,000m in fiscal year 1994.’
It aims to sell still further assets.
SURVEY FOR BRITISH TELECOM UNCOVERS THE CHANGING FACE OF COMPUTING IN WORLD OF FINANCE
While over a third of the world's financial institutions still treat information technology as an after-thought in their business planning, information technology plays a key role in the increasingly important global networking arena.
These are the findings of a survey commissioned by British Telecommunications Plc's systems integration division, Customer Systems —‘the largest UK systems house that no-one's ever heard of’.
The aim of the research was to see in which areas of the financial world the firm's services were most needed.
So it hired a US market research company, G2 Research Inc, which specialises in systems integration and computer services, to question information technology directors, plus a mix of other directors and end-users, at 77 wholesale finance organisations in Europe, the US and Canada.
These were primarily large institutions that fell into four groupings: commercial banks; financial exchanges; securities and investment banks; and others, such as building societies and credit unions.
The research revealed several significant trends.
Adjunct
First, while 64% of all such organisations said that information technology planning was an integral part of their business strategy, the remaining 36% planned their business policy first and implemented their computing systems later.
This, according to Customer Systems manager of finance sector marketing Bernard Uzzell, leads to pressure being placed on computer departments at a business level as they try to co-ordinate strategies on a limited budget.
Those most inclined to integrate the two concepts are foreign exchanges — managers here are usually younger than those in other financial institutions, G2 consultant Oliver Pflug said, and have more appreciation of the benefits technology can offer.
European commercial banks were also more likely to follow such a policy as they often have steering committees with functional executives to co-ordinate the integration of the two policies.
Those most unlikely to see information technology as a core part of their business, on the other hand, are the overseas subsidiaries and divisions of Japanese commercial banks, because policies are decided centrally in Japan rather than locally.
Pflug, therefore, concluded that ‘the management view prevalent 15 years ago of information technology as an adjunct to, as opposed to a key part of the business, is still alive and kicking today’.
Furthermore, he believes that business and technical managers are polarised in their views — the former see systems engineers as simply interested in technology for technology's sake, adopting a piecemeal approach to business rather than building systems that will lead to enhanced company profits.
Information technology professionals, however, feel that business managers have no understanding of, or interest in, technology.
But, says Pflug, the move away from mainframes in favour of distributed computing environments is forcing change — business professionals are making more and more final information technology decisions, while computing personnel are merely shaping the technical side of the project.
Nonetheless, manufacturers are still not pushing the business benefits of technology to any great extent — some 80% of those questioned said that bidding vendors had never formally evaluated what they should invest in from a strategic point of view.
Finally, Pflug concluded that ‘As the industry becomes more competitive, with increased regulatory scrutiny and shrinking margins, it is the organisations that make the connection between business and information technology that are likely to survive and prosper’.
Second, while two thirds of respondents espoused an open systems policy, in reality few are adopting it — again, open systems is regarded as a technology to keep the computing professionals amused rather than something that will show real business benefits.
Moreover, Uzzell said, companies are of the opinion that there are always more important things to be done.
Other barriers to implementing open systems include the initial cost of the move in terms of time and money; re-training; and the need for business re-engineering.
Third, as the financial market becomes increasingly global and competition grows, financial institutions are finding that they need to network their resources more and more — whether that be data, staff, or computer hardware — both company-wide, country-wide and across different time zones.
Global industries, such as securities and commercial banking are using isolated systems less and less, and are instead becoming increasingly dependent on both voice and data networks.
Nonetheless, approximately 40% of those questioned still have separate computer and telecommunications departments, although Pflug does predict that these two functions will converge rapidly over the next three to five years.
Fourth, spending on front-office systems, such as those supporting foreign exchange, funds and transfer payments, is not expected to grow as fast as that on back-office systems, covering such applications as transaction processing, clearing and settlement.
Annual expenditure growth is expected to be about 15% and 19% respectively.
According to Pflug, this is for historical reasons — during the 1980s, organisations focussed spending on mission-critical applications to the detriment of the less exciting back-office kit, but ‘this is now coming back to haunt the industry’.
The imbalance now needs to be redressed, because ‘if the back office is ineffective or incompatible, the costs can be phemonenal’.
In the words of Uzzell, ‘people are looking to turn the back office from an overhead into a competitive tool’.
Possible ways of doing this include providing end-users with real-time information up-dates and valuations by means of digital data feeds and networked trading desks.
Fifth, the study showed a clear trend towards facilities management.
This market is currently valued at $6,500m worldwide and is expected to grow at an aggregate annual rate of 13%.
Pflug reckons that in real terms, organisational expenditure on internal services is likely to fall as companies focus ever more on their core activities.
The recession that hit the financial world in the late 1980s led to a rapid fall in spending, and a resultant pruning of staff.
Skills
This now means that many institutions no longer have the business and technological skills in-house to take on large systems integration projects, and are looking to external providers to save them money on services and hardware.
In Uzzell's opinion, ‘companies now want their investment in computers and telecommunications to relate to business volumes’ as a way of ensuring that they get value for money.
Finally the survey revealed that worldwide information technology spend in the wholesale finance market will hit some $20,000m during 1993, increasing at 9% or so a year over the next five years.
While exchanges will show the fastest growth at 18%, commercial banks and capital markets still account for more than 75% of total spend.
So, all in all, Uzzell said he felt quite reassured by the results —‘with the shift away from a hardware-oriented industry towards an emphasis on software, services and global networking, integrators who understand business issues have a vital role to play in the industry’.
AMSTRAD EYES ONE OF TWO HOT NEW HANDHELD ORGANISER PRODUCTS FROM LOW-PROFILE EDEN GROUP OF CHESHIRE
Eden Group Ltd, the company behind Amstrad Plc's PDA600 personal digital assistant (CI No 2,131) says it looking for partners to manufacture and sell two new prototype machines.
Amstrad Plc has confirmed that it is talking to the company about taking on at least one of the products.
The more innovative is the ‘PenTel’, a feature-phone without keys which combines Eden's pen-driven organiser features — address book, handwriting recognition and so forth, with a handset, autodialler and facsimile modem.
The product sounds exactly like a sketch that Amstrad issued at the launch of the PDA, and which was described as a possible future direction.
Rainow, Cheshire-based Eden says that it has been working with unnamed telecommunications operators and user groups on the design of the phone, and envisages both business customers and consumers being interested in the device.
The PenTel capitalises on the pen interface by enabling users to send sketches and data to fax machines, other PenTels, network servers or personal computers, but, just as importantly, it avoids the mass of incomprehensible keys that currently bedevil multifunction phones.
The company quotes a target retail price of £300.
The second product, the A5 PaperTalk is essentially an up-market version of the Amstrad PDA.
Together with the normal features, it incorporates a monochrome liquid crystal VGA screen, facsimile modem, infra-red communications and a PCMCIA type 2 slot for peripheral expansion.
Notable
But the most notable addition is the inclusion of a full blown MS-DOS environment, not so that existing applications can run (the device hasn't got a keyboard), but so that developers can write new programs for it.
Eden continues to eschew either Go Corp's PenPoint or Microsoft's Windows for Pen Computing on the grounds that they are too resource-hungry: instead the developer gets MS-DOS and access to the handwriting recognition and graphic interface hooks built into ROM.
Managing director David Crisp says that he is talking to three potential manufacturers at the moment, one of which is presumably Amstrad.
He believes that agreement may be only a month or two away, however any deal is not necessarily exclusive.
Unlike its competitors, Eden is still avoiding building in support for wireless data networks in its machines: it's an attractive market on paper but ‘we've looked at the available technology and put together designs, but haven't taken it very far because the pricing just hasn't worked’ says Crisp.
Eden's licensing policy is relatively flexible, but usually works on an initial charge plus royalty basis.
OPUS HAS NEW SINGLE BOARD SPARC COMPUTER FOR MS-DOS MACHINES
Fremont, California-based Opus Systems Inc, which has been undergoing the trauma of prepackaged Chapter 11 bankruptcy proceedings — a sort of jail sojourn where the keys are left in the door — has announced the SparCard 2+, its next generation Unix single board computer for plugging into personal computers, offering 25% performance improvement over its predecessor, the SparCard 2.
SBus performance is also claimed to have been increased 25%.
The 50MHz SparCard 2+ single board computer delivers 35.6 MIPS and is designed for personal computer builders and systems integrators needing additional processing power for their embedded Unix systems.
Host performance is said to be unaffected by the board.
The Sparc Compliance Definition-conformant board includes a maximum 64Mb SIMM, on-board Ethernet, SCSI connectors, two SBus connectors, two serial ports, an audio port and AT interface.
It supports Solaris 1.1.
Pricing starts at $5,000 with deliveries in June.
ROSS SYSTEMS PROCESSES A RAPIDLY RISING NUMBER OF ORDERS FOR ITS MANUFACTURING SOFTWARE FROM PROCESS INDUSTRIES
Recession?
What recession?
The demand for process manufacturing software is soaring according to the UK subsidiary of Redwood, California-based Ross Systems Inc.
Process industries produce a number of items from a single raw material, as opposed to discrete manufacturers which produce a single product from multiple raw materials.
Typical process industries are food, pharmaceutical and chemical processing — all core markets for Ross.
This is good news for the company since all three markets are relatively recession-proof so far as the demand for their product is concerned, which in turn makes them a fairly buoyant customer base.
All three are also becoming increasingly competitive, prompting managers to turn to automated manufacturing techniques, to monitor and control production  processes and costs.
Ross claims that the Promix system it acquired in 1991 having taken over Pioneer Systems (CI No 1,730) is one of the few available packages specifically designed to address the booming process manufacturing market, with other offerings tending to be adaptations of discrete systems software.
Promix comprises 10 modules including process planning, product and process costing, quality assurance, batch tracing and scheduling alongside a range of accounting and financial modules.
New sales order processing, production and materials planning modules are also promised soon.
The  system runs under Digital Equipment Corp's VMS, VMS Ultrix, RISC Ultrix, Santa Cruz Unix, HP-UX and is Posix compliant — DEC and Hewlett-Packard Co being the choice of the majority of its customers.
And it can be customised using GemBase development tools from Ross.
Promix is currently used by around 30 UK companies including Spillers, Telfords Foods and the Co-operative Wholesale Society.
New contracts have also been won recently with tyre manufacturer Avon Tyres, which invested £1m in Promix, and Pan Britannica Industries Ltd, an agricultural and garden products manufacturer which is replacing its present custom ICL Plc-based system with Promix modules.
Promix is now the main product offering from Ross and is expected to generate some £15m sales in the UK this year, as opposed to £8m last year.
Meantime process-type industries make up some 60% of the total number of Ross's manufacturing customers — a figure that is expected to grow in line with the expected 15% to 20% increase in the UK market for process-based systems — and Ross intends it to include an increasing number of large multinational customers.
MICRO DECISIONWARE INTERNATIONAL FORMED TP PUSH DATABASE GATEWAY
Database gateway specialist Micro Decisionware Inc, Boulder, Colorado, has opened international headquarters in the UK.
Newly-formed Micro Decisionware International, in Maidenhead, Berkshire, will sell and support its flagship product, Database Gateway.
Vice-president, international operations Terry Booth will head up the operation.
The office will be responsible for setting up indirect sales channels across Europe, South America and the Asia-Pacific.
Simultaneously, the company announced its first Unix-based Database Gateway product, a version for AIX, which provides access from DB-Library and Open Data Base Connectivity applications and enables the transfer of data between enterprise data sources and SQL Server.
Although the company has been going since around 1980, for a long while it concentrated on research and development projects for other companies: this approach stems from its roots as an offshoot of the University of Colorado.
Indeed, according to Booth, it is only in the last couple of years that it has focused on product marketing.
In the UK, the company's products will continue to be distributed by Camberley, Surrey-based Admiral Group Plc.
Micro Decisionware says it also has distribution agreements in place in many other European countries.
Remote access
Despite the new push for international business, Micro Decisionware is to continue concentrating on its core database access gateway range.
Database Gateway provides transparent data access across a variety of relational databases including IBM Corp's DB2/6000, DB/2, SQL/DS, OS/2, Sybase's SQL Server, Oracle and Informix — it is IBM Distributed Relational Database Access- and Microsoft Open Database Connectivity-compliant.
The addition to this range is claimed to provide a broad array of functionality including remote access to DB2 data from DB-Library and Open Data Base Connectivity applications; direct access to CICS transactions and applications with client-server systems; access to non-relational data sources and the integration of mainframe production data and applications with client-server systems, and bi-directional transfer of data between mainframe and local network data systems.
Its performance features are claimed to include data compression, suppression of Advanced Program-to-Program Communications messages, and the flexible use of temporary storage.
The product is going into beta test, and if that goes as planned, it is scheduled for delivery this July.
PERFORMANCE TECHNOLOGY ARRIVES IN BRACKNELL TO SPEARHEAD MOVE INTO EUROPE
San Antonio, Texas-based Performance Technology Inc, which specialises in peer-to-peer networking products, has formed a UK-based subsidiary company to spearhead a push into the European market.
To be based in Bracknell, Berkshire, the new company intends to recruit a new tier of value-added resellers to complement its existing network of resellers for its product range.
This includes the PowerLan peer-to-peer networking system, the company's flagship product, of which version 2.30 has also been announced.
Other products include the Powerfusion system for integrating personal computers running MS-DOS or Windows with Unix hosts, Powerfusion for Workgroups (which enables IBM Corp's RS/6000s to be integrated into a workgroup), the PowerSave high speed tape back-up facility for Banyan Systems Inc, Novell Inc and PowerLan networks, and PowerBridge for linking two or more PowerLan networks together.
Last year, there were protracted negotiations for Tucson, Arizona-based direct rival Artisoft Inc to take over Performance, which got as far as the two signing a letter of intent to that effect.
However, according to Dave Ball — who was European Marketing Director for Artisoft at the time but has now switched camps to take up the same role at Performance — the deal fell through at the end of last year.
He would not say precisely what it was that caused the parting of the ways.
The company's next step is to try and boost its profile in an established market dominated by big-name players.
Ball believes that PowerLan is particularly suited to users that want the option of growing their networks and interlinking them across different systems, and that these facilities will be enough to distinguish it from its competitors.
The product is being targeted at small to medium sized work groups, and operates over Ethernet, ARCnet and Token Ring topologies.
The new version adds support for non-dedicated servers running under Windows 3.1 in Enhanced Mode at no additional cost, and NetBIOSes for OS/2.
Utilities for file and resource management and remote screen access are integrated into the system, and the company is bundling the Office Logic electronic mail system from LAN Aces Inc with the new per-node licence, while with the unlimited peer-to-peer licence, an eight user version of Lotus Development Corp's cc:Mail is included.
The PowerLan two-user starter kit is priced from £138, and the single user add-on package is to cost from £69.
LAN SUPPORT GROUP LAUNCHES BINDVIEW ON UK MARKET
The LAN Support Group Inc, based in Houston, Texas, has announced the UK launch of BindView Network Control System, a modular network management system for Novell Inc NetWare local area networks.
The system comprises three key modules, which are centred on the Network Control System Console.
An information retrieval system, this provides report configuration files as well as options for filtering information, sorting, report layout, output, and scheduling.
The Server Information Module provides security audits, disk space analysis, user documentation, file server documentation and directory and file information, and is also responsible for printer configuration and queueing.
Finally, the Workstation Auditing Module tracks equipment configuration, and also provides software and hardware inventory features.
The revision history of files can also be monitored, while user-definable alerts are claimed to track important events based on user-specified urgency levels.
The LAN Support Group has also said that later in the year it is to add a fourth module, the Software Distribution Manager, which enables BindView to distribute applications across several local area networks from a single site.
The company says that the product is being pitched particularly at the UK top 400 and US Fortune 1,000 companies.
SHARE & BOND ISSUES
AT&T Co has raised $400m with an issue of notes due May 1 1995 at par to yield 3.35% for the first year, after which the notes' yield will float on a quarterly basis over the three-month London Interbank Offered Rate and are noncallable for life.
The lead manager for the issue was Lehman Brothers.
GTE Corp, Stamford, Connecticut has issued $500m of 7.83% debentures due May 1 2023 and callable after 10 years, offered at par, via Goldman, Sachs & Co.
Jabil Circuit Inc, St Petersburg, Florida got its initial public offering of 2.5m shares, 2.25m new, away at $7 per share.
The independent supplier of turnkey manufacturing services for circuit board assemblies, subsystems and systems to major OEM customers in the personal computer and workstation, disk drive and other computer peripherals, communications and automotive industries.
Co-managers were Bear, Stearns & Co Inc and Unterberg Harris.
OTHER FINANCINGS
Archer Communications Inc, Calgary, Alberta reports that it has received $2.25m from Capcom Co of Japan and its Capcom USA Inc unit, as the second and final stage of a previously announced $6.525m loan agreement.
Archer said it will use the funds to continue its marketing efforts to the home video game and desktop multimedia industries, while maintaining development activities for future generations in audio products and hearing aids.
Capcom has an exclusive distribution agreement for Archer's QSound chip for the video arcade industry.
Advanced Logic Research Inc reported a third quarter net loss of $1.3m, against a $933,000 profit last time, on sales down 22.2% to $43.9m; net loss for the nine months was $2.2m against a $1.4m profit last time on sales that slumped 18.3% at $86.3m.
Davox Corp saw first quarter net profit of $215,778 against losses of $754,107 last time, on sales down 4.8% to $8.2m.
Net earnings per share were $0.04.
E-Systems Inc saw first quarter net profit of $27.4m against losses of $153.8m last time, after $178.5m losses last time due to the cumulative effect of an accounting change, on turnover up 6.9% to $531.4m.
Net earnings per share were $0.81.
General Parametrics Inc has reported first quarter net losses of $226,000 against profits of $175,000 last time, on turnover that fell by 17% to $2.9m.
In Focus Systems Inc has reported first quarter net profit up 53.6% at $968,105, on turnover up 32.4% to $16.7m.
Net per share rose by 28.6% to $0.09.
Information Solutions Inc has reported first quarter net profit of $154,255 against losses of $289,010 last time, on turnover that rose 280.4% to $1.4m.
Net earnings per share amounted to $0.10.
Internet Communications Inc saw net losses of $118,000 for the year to January 31 against profits of $244,000 last time, on sales up 1.1% at $7.8m.
Interphase Corp has reported first quarter net profit up 255.8% at $306,000, on turnover up 20% to $11.1m.
Net earnings per share rose 250% to $0.07.
Lam Research Corp has turned in third quarter net profits up 124% at $5.5m, on turnover up 72.7% at $69.2m; net profit for the nine months was up 83.5% at $12.6m, on turnover that rose 46.6% to $177.7m.
Net earnings per share rose 88.9% to $0.34 in the quarter, and 49.1% to $0.79 in the nine months.
Martin Marietta Corp has turned in first quarter net losses of $335.6m, after charges of $412m from the cumulative effect of an accounting change this time, against profits of $74.6m last time, on turnover that fell by 14.8% to $1,168.6m.
McCaw Cellular Communications Inc has reported a net loss of $14.0m, down from a loss last time of $99.1m, on turnover that rose 20.2% at $302.9m.
MilTope Group Inc has reported fourth quarter net profits down 13.8% at $1.3m, on turnover down 14.4% at $28.2m; net profit for the year to December 31 was up 31% at $4.3m, on turnover that rose by 11% to $114.4m.
Net per share fell 15.4% to $0.22 in the quarter, and rose 29.8% to $0.74 in the year.
Parametric Technology Inc has reported second quarter net profits up 108.5% at $9.8m, on turnover up 98.1% at $38m; mid-term net rose 112.9% to $18.1m, on turnover up 97.6% at $70.6m.
Net earnings per share, adjusted for a two-for-one stock split last time paid in February 1993, rose 112.5% to $0.17 in the quarter, and 106.7% to $0.31 in the half.
Penril Datacommunications Network Inc has reported second quarter net profits down 87.4% at $102,000, on turnover up 12.4% at $13.3m; mid-term net losses amounted to $694,000 against profits of $1.6m last time, on turnover up 3% at $24.6m.
Net earnings per share fell by 83.3% to $0.02 in the quarter.
Perceptronics Inc has turned in third quarter net losses of $2m against profits of $49,036 last time, after $12,700 tax credits last time, on turnover that fell by 70.6% at $1.7m; net losses for the nine months stood at $4.9m against profits of $380,109 last time, after $142,500 tax credits last time, on turnover that fell by 47.6% to $9.5m.
Quality Systems Inc has reported third quarter net profits of $94,300 against losses of $196,200 last time, on turnover up 3.9% at $2.8m; net profit for the nine months stood at $208,000 against losses of $579,800 last time, on turnover that rose by 2.8% to $8.5m.
Net earnings per share amounted to $0.02 in the quarter, and to $0.05 in the nine months.
Vertex Communications Inc has reported second quarter net profits up 36.8% at $937,000, on turnover that rose 14.7% to $13.3m; mid-term net profits rose 33.2% to $1.7m, on turnover that rose 14.2% to $25.8m.
Net earnings per share rose 15% to $0.23 in the quarter, and 21.1% to $0.46 in the half.
Wall Data Inc has turned in first quarter net profits up 60.2% at $1.1m, after $155,000 tax credits last time, on turnover that rose by 95.3% to $10.1m.
Net earnings per share rose 30% to $0.13.
Wang Laboratories Inc has reported a third quarter net loss of $87.2m after restructuring charges of $75.8m, up from a loss last time of $6.3m, which was after a pre-tax gain of $29.4m from sale of assets, on turnover down 36.1% at $294.8m; net loss for the nine months was $153.4m, up from a loss last time of $22.9m, on sales off 29.2% at $1,006m.
Western Micro Technology Inc saw first quarter net profit up 683.3% at $47,000, on turnover up 11.9% to $21.6m.
Net earnings per share stood at $0.01.
Xyplex Inc has reported first quarter net profit up 29.3% at $2.3m, on turnover up 42.3% to $18.1m.
Net earnings per share rose by 27.6% to $0.37.
Acer Inc has reported net profit for 1992 equivalent to $2.2m against a loss last time of $23.5m, on turnover off 2.7% at $473.3m; no per share figures.
Conversion at $0.0387 to the Taiwanese dollar.
GENERAL MOTORS MAY SELL STAKE IN ELECTRONIC DATA SYSTEMS CORP
General Motors Corp may need to sell a stake in Electronic Data Systems Corp in order to overcome a $14,000m worldwide pension obligation, industry analysts told Reuter: chief financial officer Richard Wagoner said the automaker plans to make a ‘significant contribution’ into its pension fund this year and next year, and over the next six or seven years, hopes to eliminate its pension fund liability completely; analysts say it could raise almost $5,000m by selling a 25% stake in the computer services giant, and Lehman Brothers automotive analyst Joseph Phillippi said he expects it either to sell a stake or return to the equity markets; officials from both the General and British Telecommunications Plc say that any deal for the UK phone giant to buy a stake in EDS is far from certain.
IBM TO LAUNCH THINKPAD LAPTOPS
IBM Corp will launch two new Thinkpad laptops within the next couple of weeks according to documents seen by Computerworld: the paper says the new ThinkPad 720 and 720C machines will be based on the current Model 700s with faster 25/50MHz 486SLC2 processors, 160Mb hard disks and management facilities that bump battery life up to 7.75 hours on the monochrome and 4.8 hours on the colour version; the new machines also have improved peripheral  support , with space for either two PCMCIA type 2 cards or a single type 3; a new sub-notebook computer is also ready, but will not be announced until the summer.
CYRIX SAYS ITS COMPETITOR TO PENTIUM IS IN THE DESIGN STAGE
Cyrix Corp of Richardson, Texas says its 64-bit superscalar competitor to Intel Corp's Pentium processor is currently in the design stage: it may sound a little optimistic, but the company claims that it will ship in first half of 1994.
ALCATEL SIGNS ACCORD WITH COMBELLGA
Alcatel NV said its equally-owned Alcatel Qualcomm joint venture with Qualcomm Inc signed an accord with Combellga for the sale and service of its satellite truck messaging and tracking system in Russia: Combellga is a joint venture between Russian telephone company Comincom, Belgian telephone operators MGTS and Belgacom and Alcatel's Belgian unit Alcatel Bell Telephone Co SA.
MCCAW CELLULAR COMMUNICATIONS SELLS 14.5M NEW SHARES
McCaw Cellular Communication Inc reported that it sold about 14.5m newly issued shares of Class A common stock to AT&T Co for $400m as part of AT&T's negotiated attempt to win a 33% stake for $3,730m and acquire an option for voting control of wireless phone company.
MICROSOFT AND SAP AG EXTEND THEIR REALTIONSHIPS
Microsoft Corp and SAP AG, Walldorf, announced on Friday that they are extending their existing relationships based on SAP's announcement last month that it would put its client-server-based R/3 applications up under Windows NT: the worldwide agreement elevates the joint technological co-operation to the next level, adding joint marketing and development — the two will exchange technology and industry expertise and experience to improve development of client-server system architecture and products.
ELSAG BAILEY ACQUIRES CONTROLS INC
Elsag Bailey SpA has acquired Ferranti International Controls Inc of Houston, and according to the Financial Times, Ferranti International Plc is in process of getting out of the US, where it does some $100m a year, some 25% of the total, and employs about 1,000 people: it is winding up a Pennsylvania company, Ferranti International Simulation & Training and will sell the rest.
ACER RETURNS TO PROFIT
Commenting on its 1992 figures (see page five), Acer Inc, Taiwan says that it returned to profit because of better results at its US subsidiary, Acer America Corp, which turned in heavy losses last year.
SOUTH KOREA REVISE UPWARDS EXPORT TARGETS
South Korean electronics companies have revised upwards their export targets for this year, encouraged by a surge in their shipments during the first quarter of this year: Samsung Electronics Co Ltd said it had raised its export target to $6,200m from its original target of $5,800m, and from $4,700m last year; Goldstar Co Ltd said it would be able to export $3,400m this year, up from its previous target of $3,200m and the $2,570m last year; Daewoo Electronics Co Ltd says it sees a smaller increase.
XETA CORP TO DISTRIBUTE HITACHI HCX5000
Tulsa, Oklahoma-based Xeta Corp is to distribute Hitachi HCX5000 PABXes for Hitachi America Ltd.
FUJITSU TO DISTRIBUTE SEQUELINK UNIX SOFTWARE PRODUCTS
Fujitsu Ltd has signed with the Gnosis Pacific arm of Antwerp-based Gnosis NV to distribute Gnosis' SequeLink Unix software products: SequeLink is a suite of software products that run on both an MS-DOS personal computer and on the Unix server running the SQL database.
SIS DISTRIBUTION TO DISTRIBUTE COMPAQ PC'S
The SiS Distribution Ltd subsidiary of Hong Kong-listed SiS International Holdings Ltd is to distribute Compaq Computer Corp's personal computers in the Taiwanese market.
BORLAND INTERNATIONAL SETS UP CLIENT SERVER DIVISION
Borland International Inc is setting up a Client-Server Division to develop and market server applications, and provide technical support, service and training: products to be managed by the Client-Server Division include the InterBase server; upcoming SQL link products for Windows and current SQL links for MS-DOS; IDAPI middleware; and client developer kits based on desktop products such as Paradox for Windows, and products under development, such as dBase for Windows; the foundation is to be the Borland Object Component Architecture, constructed on the InterBase Engine.
ADVANCED LOGIC RESEARCH COMMENTS ON LATEST FIGURES
Commenting on its most recent losses (page five) Advanced Logic Research Inc, Irvine, California said that more price competition reduced its turnover, and that its gross margin for the latest six months was just 14% compared with 22% in the year-ago period; the impact of the reduction was partially offset by cost-cutting programmes, and its cash position improved by $5.5m to $35.1m during the latest six months while the company simultaneously cut bank debt $7m.
MASTERCARD AND CHECKFREE TEAM TO PROVIDE REMOTE BANKING SERVICES
MasterCard International Inc has teamed up with Checkfree Corp to provide banks and their customers in the US with remote banking service, enabling customers to pay credit card bills and get financial information via the telephone or personal computer: MasterCard will provide technology, network management and marketing support and Checkfree will provide electronic bill payment processing, customer service and operations development for the new MasterBanking service.
CYPRESS SEMICONDUCTOR BOARD AUTHORISES SHARE BUY-IN
Cypress Semiconductor Corp said its board authorised buy-in of a further 1m shares from its 37.6m outstanding: it bought in 2.9m shares in 1992 and 1.5m already this year.
AT&T TO HOLD ITS STAKE IN CARLO DE BENEDETTI'S COMPAGNIE INDUSTRIALI RIUNTI UNTIL END OF YEAR
AT&T Co will hold its 16% stake in Carlo De Benedetti's Compagnie Industriali Riuniti SpA until year-end but its three board nominees quit.
AT&T WINS $30M CONTRACT FROM US IRS
AT&T Co has a $30m 10-year contract to install a voice messaging network for the US Internal Revenue Service and other Department of the Treasury agencies: the installation will include nearly 200 Audix Voice Messaging Systems and a number of ATT Definity Communications Systems to improve operating efficiency by providing voice processing  capability for up to 150,000 Treasurers.
PRICE CHANGES AT THE BUNDESPOST?
Hold on!
Isn't that a bit precipitate?
According to Reuter, the Deutsche Bundespost Telekom plans to change its method of billing customers for phone calls in preparation for a broad price reduction at the start of — the next decade.