

NOW TEXAS INSTRUMENTS LICENCES THE ARM RISC CORE
In a break from Advanced RISC Machines Ltd's usual policy of licensing entire ARM chips to its semiconductor partners, it is simply licensing the 32-bit core to Texas Instruments Inc for use in real-time control applications for the automotive industry.
Texas Instruments intends to incorporate the architecture into its Prism range of 8-bit and 16-bit customised microcontrollers (CI No 2,003) to create deeply embedded controllers for applications such as engine and chassis control.
It also plans to combine the core with its own customisable signal processors to create highly integrated and differentiated signal processing systems for such applications as cellular products and hard disk drives.
Ultimately, it wants to use ARM technology in the mobile computing arena.
Texas Instruments said the decision to sign the non-exclusive agreement was based on several factors: first, the technology is available now; second, the ARM core operates at low voltages and offers ‘the best MIPS per Watt in the industry’— approximately 200 MIPS per Watt, compared with the AT&T Co Hobbit at 37 MIPS per Watt; third, it integrates easily into larger chip designs; fourth, it provides good price-performance — to buy chips in volume from Advanced RISC would cost less than $30 per unit; fourth, the chip is tiny — an ARM6L has a die size of 5.9mm square — and there is a strong need in the automotive industry to reduce the size and weight of components.
Advanced RISC Machines is charging Texas Intruments a licensing fee for its technology and will charge a royalty per chip shipped.
It will also undertake joint development work with a team of Texas engineers.
The Cambridge-based group said the deal is the first step in broadening the customer base for ARM chips, and opening the technology up for use in niche consumer markets, where low power consumption and low cost are key.
It also sees the pact accelerating ‘the acceptance of the ARM architecture as the predominant processor for new emerging applications’.
AMERICAN MITAC FOLDS ITSELF INTO DISTRIBUTOR COMPAC
American Mitac Corp, the US end of Taiwanese personal computer manufacturer Mitac International Inc, is combining its operations with those of Fremont, California distributor of computers and peripherals Compac Microelectronics Inc.
The two will consolidate North American operations under the Compac name to create ‘the first computer distributor with full-scale manufacturing capability’.
Mitac last year bought majority ownership of Compac from Qume Corp.
The company is considering launching a line of Compac-branded machines to build on its ‘strong channel reputation’.
Compac will continue to distribute its existing line of products which range from Panasonic printers and Maxtor Corp disks to US Robotics modems and Toshiba Corp CD-ROMs.
COMPUTER NETWORK TO BUY ULTRA NETWORK TECHNOLOGIES
Ultra Network Technologies Inc, the pioneer of 800Mbps and up local area networking, has signed a letter of intent to sell out to Maple Grove, Minnesota-based Computer Network Technology Corp, which has agreed to pay about $1.88m in shares for the privately held firm.
FIRST CRAY-3 SHIPS AT LAST Colorado Springs-based Cray Computer Corp finally shipped its first Cray-3 supercomputer.
Customer for the four-processor 128M-word machine, which has a  2.08ns — 480MHz — clock, ‘fastest in the industry’— is the National Center for Atmospheric Research, which will not pay anything during a six-month trial.
IBM STEPS UP ITS OEM PITCH, OFFERS 9371 Co-PROCESSOR, WRITING CODE
IBM Corp yesterday stepped up its pitch for OEM business, most strikingly offering an enhanced version of the 9371 microprocssor-based Personal/370 Adapter/A co-processor, so that designers can build 370-compatibility into workstations via a co-processor.The company's Entry Systems Technology — Personal Systems business unit is also offering some of IBM's handwriting recognition products to third parties, including technology that recognises both script and block capitals; and in addition to the currently available PenPoint version, ThinkWrite will be available this year in versions that run under OS/2 and Windows for Pen Computing.
It is offering its Audio Solution Board, which is a single board system with support for CD ROM drives, and is intended to enable a computer to be used as a sound studio.
And its LANStreamer MC 32 Adaptor, which eliminates local network bottlenecks, and Person to Person/2, designed to enable people at remote locations to work together, are among five new local networking OEM products now offered by IBM.
SONY ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING BUYS UK GAMES FIRM PSYGNOSIS
The Sony Electronic Publishing Co unit of Sony Corp has acquired Liverpool-based computer and video games software developer and publisher Psygnosis Ltd on undisclosed terms.
Psygnosis, a Queen's Award for Exports winner in this year's list, will continue to market and distribute computer software under its own brand, as well as developing software for Sony Electronic Publishing's video games division.
The value of the deal is estimated at £12m to £16m; the company, which employs about 100 people and was founded in 1984, made its fortune with the Lemmings series of games, and saw sales rise nearly 40% to £6.8m in the year to July 1992, and is forecasting £1.5m pro fit on £12m sales this fiscal year.
COMPRESSED: STAC HAS TO LAY OFF 40 EMPLOYEES
Carlsbad, California-based compression algorithms specialist Stac Electronics Inc, is laying off 40 people.
The company, which offers the Stacker family of data compression products for personal computers, has been unsettled by Microsoft Corp's inclusion of compression in MS-DOS 6, which is blamed for the job cuts.
The company says it has four new products coming this quarter — Stacker for Macintosh, Stacker for OS/2 & MS-DOS, and two new releases of Stacker for Windows & MS-DOS to address the compression shortcomings of MS-DOS 6.0, and it now has a streamlined organisation.
MICROSOFT PITCHES FOR 1m SALES OF WINDOWS NT IN THE FIRST YEAR OF MARKETING
Microsoft Corp formally launched its widely-previewed Windows NT operating system at the Comdex-attached Windows World in Atlanta, Georgia, yesterday.
Windows NT is the Redmond, Washington company's first 32-bit offering — and the first to offer support for multiple processors — and will be available in configurations for client and server systems.
Client versions of Windows NT are expected to be generally available by June 30, although Microsoft chairman Bill Gates tendered a conservative 60-day timescale for introduction at the launch.
He described Windows NT as representing ‘nothing less than a fundamental change in the way all companies can address their business requirements.
Using Windows NT, he said, ‘companies can downsize critical applications, provide high performance personal computing, integrate their existing desktop business applications and pull together data from all over the organisation.’
Windows NT is designed for use on Intel Corp 80386, 80486 and Pentium-based systems, and is also being supported on the Digital Equipment Corp Alpha AXP and Silicon Graphics Inc MIPS R4000 RISCs — both 64-bit architectures.
Microsoft claims it is certified for over 1,000 systems, including 25 symmetric multiprocessors, supports 650 printers, 50 SCSI peripheral devices, 25 network adaptors and 12 different types of display adaptors for VGA, SuperVGA and XGA video modes.
It says 75 application development toolkits are available now — with 175 more expected by year-end — 50 applications already shipping — with 450 more (32-bit packages) due by year-end — with 1,500 more under development.
Microsoft says more than 25% of these are being converted from Unix, VMS, AS/400 and other high-end systems.
Described as a superset of Windows 3.1 for Workgroups, Windows NT comes with the Windows interface, Object Linking & Embedding, Dynamic Data Exchange, offers multithreading, security, object management and support for the Win32 application programming interface.
The Advanced Server version of the operating system additionally includes centralised management and security, remote access services, and network support for Apple Computer Inc Macintosh systems.
Microsoft boasts it could take ‘as little as a year for Windows NT to surpass other established high-end systems as the platform of choice for corporate networking and high-end business applications.’
Delivering 1m copies
However analysts observe that Microsoft's goal of delivering 1m copies in the first year is trifling compared to the 25m copies of Windows it has shipped since May 1990.
Nevertheless, they say, Windows NT will be fundamental in Microsoft's strategy to move it business from desktop personal computers — MS-DOS already runs on about 90% of the 140m machines worldwide — to mid-range and high-end systems.
The desktop, or client, versions of Windows NT will be priced at £400 — $500 — on a per-unit basis, or £250 as an upgrade from Windows 3.1 or OS/2.
Multiple licence packs start at £340 and go to £28,900 for 100 users.
Academic rates go from £169.
Windows NT Advanced Server, which runs a desktop network, will be £1,130 — $1,500 — until year-end — £2,300 — $3,000 thereafter.
Upgrades from LAN Manager or OS/2 is £470.
Multiple licence packs start at £960 and go to £18,060 for 20 users.
Academic rates start at £969.
The SQL Server for Windows NT, co-developed with Sybase Inc, goes from £800 for a single-user licence to £12,000 for 1,000 users.
SNA Server for Windows NT for 20 users is £2,000, £4,800 for 250 users.
OEM customers are expected to get the software at up to 80% off list, depending on volume.
KEYNOTE ADDRESS AT COMDEX
Delivering the keynote address at the Windows World annex to Comdex yesterday, Bill Gates announced that NT source code will be given to some US research institutions, including the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, the University of Washington, Stanford University, Browns University and Xerox Palo Alto Research Center and they will be free to make their own enhancements to the Microsoft Corp operating system: Unix System Laboratories Inc has been less encouraging of the university fraternity in recent years, and the move is intended to unsettle the Unix community; Gates also claimed NT's Posix interface made it as easy ‘to move applications here as to any of the versions of Unix out there.’
NT SALES FROM USERS UPGRADING EXISTING WINDOWS
Among the queue of nervous users invited onto the stage to be interviewed by an avuncular Bill Gates was one from National Westminster Bank Plc, which is developing a document management and workflow system based on 40 multiprocessor Sequent Computer Systems Inc servers and 150 Windows for Workgroups clients; Gates said 20 hardware vendors have now agreed to bundle NT with their hardware — but starkly different from this focus was Gates' assertion that most NT sales would come from people upgrading existing Windows machines.
INTERGRAPH SHOWCASES TECHNICAL APPLICATIONS FOR NT
Intergraph Corp is showcasing 30 technical applications for Microsoft Corp's NT at the show.
ranging from geographic information systems to architectural systems, the first of about 300 Intergraph technical applications slated for Windows NT by the end of 1994.
IBM AND PHOENIX TO LICENSE IBM PC BIOS
IBM Corp joined with Phoenix Technologies Ltd to license the IBM personal computer BIOS: the program enables OEM customers to access IBM's SurePath PC Standard specification for software compatibility interfaces, and through Phoenix, they will also get access to IBM's Architecture Review Board to extend the SurePath PC standard specification for new technologies and features, the partners said.
DELL, SUPERMAC AND ADOBE FORM POWER PUBLISHING ALLIANCE
Dell Computer Corp, SuperMac Technology Inc and Adobe Systems Inc announced formation of the Power  Publishing Alliance to offer two Windows-based colour publishing systems, the Dell Power Publishing Workstation (433/ME0 and The Dell Power Publishing SuperStation (466/ME), to be available from Dell from June 22: the systems are equipped with SuperMac's SuperMatch colour monitor, SuperMatch Thunder/24 EISA video board and Adobe software; the Power Publishing WorkStation is $6,700, the Power Publishing SuperStation is $9,000.
IBM ANNOUNCES MULTI-MEDIA TECHNOLOGY FOR VALUEPOINT LINE
IBM Corp is using the show inter alia to announce that it has equipped all 30 models of its ValuePoint line with multi-media technology, which will be available on a built-to-order basis, using Creative Technologies Inc Soundblaster boards and other third party products: MultiMedia ValuePoints will range in price from $2,100 for an 80486SX model to about $3,500 for a high-end 80486 DX2 system.
COSE FAVOURS BREADTH OVER DEPTH IN DESKTOP SPEC
With its self-imposed end-of-June deadline for publishing a common desktop environment specification now just six weeks off, the Common Open Software Environment firms — Hewlett-Packard Co, IBM Corp, Santa Cruz Operation Inc, Sun Microsystems Inc, Univel Inc and Unix System Laboratories Inc — are circulating (internally) a draft form of the ‘Process Paper’ which covers the scope of COSE and describes who will do what for the first of its promised offerings.
The brief contains schedules and an organisational chart.
We understand the intent is to go for breadth first, and depth — how the application programming interfaces will actually work — later.
It plays hard on the so-called ‘90-10’ rule, claiming that 90% of the code is already out there and that only 10% needs to be written.
We understand they want to give the impression that the scope of the common desktop is well understood — but in the full knowledge that underneath, the details have not been fully worked out.
One insider said he could not believe the amount of code that will eventually be involved.
What his firm is worried about is how it will be able to meet its commitment to deliver an interim COSE-like product before the end of the year.
The most pressing requirement is for a COSE developers kit — existing customers of OSF/Motif, IXI Ltd X.desktop or Hewlett-Packard's Visual User Environment desktops won't get upgraded until something is out — and the danger, according to the source, is that someone will break ranks and ship a developers kit without the blessing of the others.
Presently, each of the COSE participants is pledged to brief its partners and licensees on the ramifications of the COSE movement.
Unix Labs, by virtue of its position as Unix mama, wanted to be first, and did its pitch the week before last with X/Open Co Ltd explaining the fast track process and Hewlett-Packard observing.
Meanwhile Microsoft Corp is waging its own spoiling campaign and is going around trying to persuade small software developers to put their applications up under Windows NT first.
The Tuesday morning session at June's Xhibition show, in San Jose, California — which will include all the COSE people and Microsoft — will be the milestone event where all this is revealed.
Just don't ask any tricky questions about what the object model will be or how the applications will communicate with the desktop.
DEC COSIES UP, MAY OFFER HABITAT PERSONALITY
Digital Equipment Corp also has a copy of the paper, and some of the Common Open Software Environment people think that DEC is now only a photo opportunity away from announcing that it is becoming a member too.
DEC, on the other hand, which has been having COSE talks at both the strategic and technical levels, feels there might still be a few loose ends to tie up, some of them perhaps circulating around the ‘Process Paper’ that is expected to be made public soon.
DEC has found it has another piece of technology to throw on the COSE heap.
Besides its low-profile Object Group Common Object Request Broker Architecture-compliant Application Control Architecture Service application integration scheme, it thinks that COSE might like Habitat, its technology for enabling an operating system to take on the personality of another as it does with Unix System V.4 on its OSF/1 system — and it wouldn't expect fellow COSEs to implement it right away.
JAPANESE MAJORS START COSE INTEREST GROUP
And Japan is now in on the Common Open Software Environment act too — Fujitsu Ltd, Toshiba Corp, Hitachi Ltd and Yokogawa Hewlett-Packard Co are forming COSE Japan Special Interest Group, a counterpart, they say, to the existing operation in the US.
The effort is apparently different from DICOP, an action previously undertaken by Mitsubishi Electric Corp, Unisoft Ltd, Ing C Olivetti & Co SpA, Novell Inc, Unisys Corp, Seiko Epson Co, ASCII Corp and even DEC to produce a Japanese version of the COSE desktop.
The firms were briefed on COSE shortly after the COSE announcement and are said to have been encouraged to make their voices heard.
COSE Japan says it will make public the specifications for Japanese-language processing functions necessary for their domestic market.
Shipments of products to the standards are expected in first half 1994.
UNGERMANN-BASS ANNOUNCES NETDIRECTOR FOR UNIX
Tandem Computers Inc's networking equipment company Ungermann-Bass Inc has launched a version of its NetDirector network management system for Unix.
NetDirector for Unix supports Asynchronous Transfer Mode and is based on Hewlett-Packard Co's OpenView.
The two companies have also announced an agreement to co-operate on local network management technologies.
NetDirector for Unix consists of Hewlett's OpenView and Network Node Manager application, and Ungermann applications and future third party applications.
It is an extension of the company's OS/2 network management products.
It can share information with NetDirector for OS/2, including support for client-server, full implementation of an SQL database and various network management applications.
First applications supported by NetDirector for Unix will be Ungermann's FocusView network management products for its Access/One Enterprise Hub: Access/One Focus/View, which provides hub management, Ethernet FocusView and Token Ring FocusView.
The company plans a second release of NetDirector for Unix later this year to include more management applications, improved integration with NetDirector for OS/2 and management of Ungermann-Bass's Virtual Network Architecture.
Ungermann-Bass has also announced what it claims is the first multi-protocol communications product for remote personal computers and terminals to be fully integrated into the hub environment.
Asynchronous server
The ASM160 is an asynchronous communications server, designed as a module for the Access/One Enterprise hub, which provides managed communications for both local and remote terminals, personal computers, modems and printers to multi-protocol Ethernet local networks.
The company says it supports 16 serial ports operating at up to 115.2Kbps.
Protocols supported include TCP-IP, XRemote, Local Area Transport, Telnet 3270, and wide area protocols Serial Line Internet Protocol and Point-to-Point Protocol.
The ASM160 offers an expandable memory architecture, allowing configurations of up to 8Mb of RAM, using Standard Single In-line Memory Modules that allow for simple, in-the-field upgrades.
All ASM160 modules ship with 2Mb of base memory.
The ASM160 lists for $3,200 and will be available next month.
SUN AMBUSHES HYUNDAI's AXIL — INJUNCTION CHARGES MISAPPROPRIATION AND THEFT
Sun Microsystems Inc quietly filed a civil suit in Superior Court in California on March 3 against Axil Workstations and its parent Hyundai Electronics of America, charging the San Jose, California Sparcsystems builder with misappropriation of trade secrets and theft of the layout and manufacturing blueprints for an unreleased Sun-developed system board code named Ambush.
The suit seeks injunctive relief and monetary damages and the court has handed down a preliminary injunction forbidding sale of Axil's Model 230 SparcStation 10 clone and a temporary restraining order on its Model 310.
Sun said Axil had no licence to the board.
The alleged theft is said to be related to Axil's hiring a Sun engineer who is named in the suit.
Sun said it was bringing action over the alleged theft to keep the playing field level, claiming Axil's illegal head start cut potential investment in the Sparc architecture.
Sun will keep a low profile on the suit lest it catch flak from other Sparcsystem builders.
NEC BRINGS TWO OF ITS IMAGE SERIES OF DESKTOP 80486 COMPUTERS TO THE UK
In an attempt to cash in on the UK corporate market's growing appetite for high speed personal computer graphics, NEC Corp has introduced its Image Series of desktops, launched in the US in February (CI No 2,116).
These are the first NEC machines to incorporate Newtown, Pennsylvania-based Tseng Labs Inc's ET4000 W32 on-board accelerator chip (CI No 2,036) on the motherboard.
Although there were three machines in the original range, only two have come to the UK.
At the top end is the 66MHz Image 466 for the ‘power user’ with a penchant for complex applications, such as computer-aided design and desktop publishing.
A more mainstream product is the 33MHz Image 433, designed for users with a variety of everyday Windows applications.
The US's low-end 80486SX/25 model will not be released in the UK.
NEC has used a number of techniques to boost performance.
Since the ET4000 accelerator chip rather than the CPU controls graphics throughput, enough processing power is freed up to deal with more complex applications, such as desktop publishing.
The chip also incorporates True Color technology, which can display 16.7m colours on a VGA screen.
Processing speed is further enhanced by NEC's OptiBus technology.
This increases data transfer rates between the CPU and the integrated input-output subsystems by up to 30%.
OptiBus also acts as a local bus for the hard drive, reducing access times.
Apart for the graphics processor, the boxes also sport NEC's ImageVideo, a local video bus that runs at the processor's external clock speed — this made its  debut with the company's Powermate Series.
Finally, ImageSync automatically tunes to the refresh rate of certain NEC MultiSync monitors, providing flicker-free images.
The UK Image Series family is based on an Intel Corp full 80486 microprocessor, and incorporates a socket for the Pentium P24T Overdrive chip, when this becomes available.
As a result, users will be able to upgrade their machines as necessary.
Each box comes bundled with MS-DOS and Microsoft Corp Windows, but options include an on-board 50-pin SCSI 2 host adaptor and cable for extra storage or use of CD-ROM for multimedia applications; and a network card that can be plugged into a 16-bit network adaptor socket.
The Image Series is out now, and costs £1,735 for the Image 433 and £2,175 for the Image 466 with 170Mb hard disks.
SEQUENT ENABLES MICROSOFT TO INCLUDE 30-WAY PROCESSOR SUPPORT IN NT
Sequent Computer Systems Inc, a key partner in Microsoft Corp's NT-on-multiprocessors push, is believed to have sent Microsoft changes in the code to enable Microsoft to add 30-way processor support for NT some time ago, and the last minute expectation before launch of NT yesterday was that it would be included on the NT compact disk.
Beaverton, Oregon-based Sequent was expected to be ready to show two pre-production prototypes of its high-end WinServer 5000 series, one being the much-anticipated 30-way box carrying a mix-and-match assortment of Intel Corp Pentiums and 80486 chips, in itself a design feat, and the other an 18-way WinServer 5000 fitted out with only 60MHz Pentiums, a modern-day exercise in conspicuous consumption considering the rarity of the chips.
Sequent is preparing for its early NT customers to start deploying soon.
To straddle the hurdle between its Unix commitments, where it derives its revenues, and NT, Sequent last week reorganised its management to give it more strategic depth.
The general manager of its NT business unit Paul Gifford was named to the post of vice-president, systems architecture responsible for bringing NT, the hitherto poor relation, into the mainstream and working out how it harmonising with Unix.
It has also named former UK marketing director Mark Miller vice-president of marketing and given the new post of vice-president of corporate planning to Gael Curry, anticipating a quickening in sales.
Former senior vice-president of marketing Dennis Peck is now consulting for the firm, mostly on large-scale Unix issues, as a result of both the merciless California property market and a highly successful wife who sells computers for another company, two reasons that make his moving to Oregon impossible.
BT NORTH AMERICA ADDS TO ELECTRONIC DATA INTERCHANGE OPTIONS
British Telecommunications Plc's BT North America has enhanced its EDI*Net fully managed service by adding a range of access methods to it.
As well as X400, X25, Async and Bisync, it is now also offering Odette File Transfer Protocol, enabling dropped sessions to be picked up in the middle of transmission.
In June customers will be able to send messages via EDI*Net direct to partners' facsimile and in December, the addition of SNA3270 will enable IBM users to exchange EDI messages with non-SNA users.
The announcements mean that EDI*Net customers can communicate with trading partners using the technology that is most suitable to their overall computing strategy.
Disparate communications methods are managed seamlessly by British Telecom via its Global Data Network.
BT has also outlined plans to support the X435 addressing standard by early 1994.
X435 contains information such as interchange control numbers and Electronic Data Interchange document content types — helping improve security and audit trail capabilities.
In the third quarter this year, BT will implement a ‘hot standby’ procedure: mirror images of EDI transmissions will be recorded by the company's EDI*Net host in California and by the back-up host in Maryland.
INTERGRAPH UNVEILS CLIPPER, AST's APX-86 MACHINES FOR NT
Intergraph Corp, Huntsville, Alabama has introduced a new Clipper C400 RISC-based desktop and two multiprocessing Intel Corp 80486-based servers geared to run for Microsoft Corp's Windows NT.
The model 2350 desktop machine delivers a claimed 28.9 SPECfp92 and 199.9 SPECint92.
It comes with a 19″ colour monitor, 32Mb of memory, 426Mb disk, up to 8Gb of storage and an 8-bit graphics subsystem.
It is priced at $13,000.
The Interserv MP42 and MP44 are essentially re-badged AST Research Inc machines and come with two to four 80486 CPUs, 64Mb memory, 540Mb disk, support for up to 32Gb storage, 600Mb CD-ROM, six EISA slots and support for RAID levels 0, 1 and 5.
They cost from $69,000 to $84,000 and run Santa Cruz Operation Inc Unix — Windows NT follows later this year.
In addition, Intergraph will be converting its MicroStation CAD package for IBM's RS/6000 line.
INSIGNIA SOLUTIONS INVITED INTO THE SELECT BAND THAT HAVE LICENCES TO MICROSOFT WINDOWS SOURCE
Microsoft Corp didn't wait for Sun Microsystems Inc's SunSelect unit actually to announce its Windows-under-Unix Wabi system before taking retaliatory action (CI No 2,1620.
It has now formally signed an agreement that enables the High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire and Mountain View, California-based Insignia Solutions Ltd to modify Windows source code at the application programming interface to improve the performance of its SoftPC Windows under Unix package.
Along with the source code, Insignia gets associated intellectual property including the Windows user interface, Windows Application Programming Interfaces, and rights to use the Windows trademark and logo.
The agreement will also enable Insignia to improve the Windows on Apple Computer Inc Macintosh version of its emulation software.
Microsoft says that it is developing tools which will enable C and C++ developers building Windows-based applications to target the Macintosh.
The tools will give developers access to Macintosh System 7 programming interfaces, and will include a layer that implements Windows APIs on the System 7 operating system.
Access to Microsoft's technology should make SoftPC run MS-DOS and Windows programs at near native performance by the end of the year.
Insignia has already taken a 10% stake in Bridgefield, Connecticut-based Bristol Technology Inc, capping a deal for the two firms to develop and combine products that will enable Windows applications to run on desktop Unix systems.
The project is focused on the speed at which programs run.
Bristol's source-level Windows-under-Unix API, Wind/U, will be made to run Windows applications.
Insignia's SoftPC runs 16-bit binary MS-DOS and Windows programs under Unix.
No more is known at present because plans are still changing, but Bill Gates's threats to make life miserable for Wabi by bringing out competing products of his own are believed to involve Bristol and a Microsoft licence to Wind/U.
Insignia's SoftPC — which is being used to run 16-bit MS-DOS and Windows applications under Windows NT — will be the other binary rock that Microsoft throws at Wabi.
With Windows source code, Insignia would not face the problems that Sun faces keeping up with Windows development.
Microsoft has also licensed Windows source code to companies such as Citrix Systems Inc, which will deliver a multi-user version of Windows NT.
ET TU, SHARE: IBM's MAINFRAME USER GROUP EMBRACES DOWNSIZING, DEMANDS QUANTUM PRICE-PERFORMANCE LEAP
Share, the user group for IBM Corp mainframe users, reckons that no-one can afford to ignore the downsizing phenomenon any more, and wants to dedicate itself to such concepts as open systems and integration.
According to Computerwoche, president of Share Europe Dieter Erwin stated at the group's spring conference, ‘The days of pure Blue are long gone’.
Share represents the interests of IBM users and tries to bring its influence directly to bear on the company.
And more than anything else, it is demanding client-server systems.
However in Erwin's opinion, ‘While it's talked about a lot, not enough is being done’.
Nonetheless he feels ‘the poor economic situation has really speeded up the move towards more openness.
This applies not just to the technical side, but also to information policies’.
But IBM still needs a radical rethink of its ideas, especially with regard to price-performance issues, which users are examining ever more critically.
Erwin even questions whether there is room for the mainframe in this scenario —‘If the mainframe's price-performance relationship is the same in five years as it is now, it doesn't stand a chance’.
MEDIA COMPUTER TECHNOLOGIES CHIP PROMISES TO CUT MULTIMEDIA COST
Media Computer Technologies Inc of Santa Clara reckons that its new Video Manager+ — VM+ — chip has got the wherewithal significantly to reduce the cost of multimedia support on personal computers.
VM+ is an ASIC which incorporates various facilities needed for manipulating full motion video such as filters, scaling and incremental zoom functions.
Additionally the company claims that a lot of the glue logic normally needed has been incorporated into the chip so that a full SuperVGA card with support for video and audio recording and play-back can be built using 11 chips.
The company says that it has licensed the technology to several board and systems manufacturers, who will be announcing board-level products in the next few weeks at prices between $300 and $600.
One of these is an OEM deal with Hyundai Electronics America.
The chip accepts digitised input from NTSC, PAL television or CCIR-601 video sources as well as YUV or RGB digital streams.
Media Computer reckons that combining audio, video and graphics onto a single board will avoid incompatibilities common in personal computers stuffed full of multimedia boards, but in addition one of its customers is building the chip-set into a personal computer motherboard and the company says that it expects to see more this as multimedia standards firm up.
VM+ supports Video for Windows and Apple Computer Inc QuickTime interfaces as well as Intel's Indeo video compression hardware.
A reference design kit is available to OEM customers including board, design database, driver and application software and the VM+ ASIC is available to add-in board manufacturers and OEM customers for $39 each in quantities of 10,000.
UK PERSONAL COMPUTER DIRECT MARKETERS' ASSOCIATION FORMED TO PROTECT CUSTOMERS — BUT THE US MAJORS STAY AWAY
The UK personal computer industry's first direct sales trade association was launched on May 21 both to try to protect customers from a business  renowned for its cowboys and to guarantee customers a certain level of service quality.
The Personal Computer Direct Marketers' Association, PCDMA, is the brainchild of sales and marketing consultant Keith Warburton, and includes not only companies that sell hardware direct to the corporate or business user, but also ‘off-the-page’ systems integrators, value-added resellers and dealers.
The eight founder members are Viglen Ltd; Granville, which includes Time and Colossus; Dan Technology; Kamco Computer Systems; Evesham Micros Ltd; Mesh; Centerprise International Ltd; and CIC Computers Ltd.
Each paid Warburton ‘an insignificant amount to underwrite development’ as well as an initial £500 application fee and an annual membership fee of £2,200.
Hi-Grade was originally on the list too, but pulled out due to‘a personality clash’, while Elonex Plc did not want to get involved.
Others confused the new body with the Direct Marketing Association, a link that Warburton firmly refutes.
The Direct Marketing Association, he says, has about 500 members — mainly financial services firms, publishing houses and charities — but its primary aim is to raise the public image of direct marketing.
While membership of both organisations is not mutually exclusive, he added, the Personal Computer Direct Marketing Association was set up to protect customer interests and the interests of the direct sales computer industry alone.
Despite the dearth of big names, Warburton believes it is still early days and claims he is pleased with the interest shown so far.
The problem with the big boys, he reckons, is they believe customers already equate their name with quality, which is not necessarily true.
Other newly-joined ‘launch’ members comprise MBC, AJP, TSL, and Compusys Ltd, but Warburton expects three major names that are currently fence-sitting and will join very soon.
The three, he said, would add another £50m in revenues to companies with a combined turnover of £200m.
Represents 20% of the total
As he values the entire UK direct sales market at about £1,000m, this means his association already represents 20% of the total —‘not bad’, he reckons, ‘for an association that has just been launched’.
But the PCDMA, he says, although ‘not a closed shop’, won't just let anyone join.
Members must have been trading in the UK for at least two years and must disclose their turnover and profits — lack of profits are not a bar to membership however, he added, because ‘we would hate to disallow the big international business machine companies’.
Firms that have directors on their boards, who have headed failed organisations, will also not be eligible for membership because of the instances when companies have gone bust and then resumed trading almost immediately under a different name.
As for codes of practice — members must deliver their products within 14 days and are not permitted to debit the full amount of a credit card sale until at most three days before they ship goods.
They cannot advertise prices for sale to the public that do not include value-added tax, and are not allowed to submit products, quoted at base model price, to magazines for review or to customers for evaluation, if they exceed the usual specifications.
Moreover, sales staff are not permitted to speak in jargon and are obliged to help the layman understand exactly what their products are all about.
Lastly, companies must operate money-back, satisfaction-guaranteed schemes, and be willing to submit to independent arbitration in cases of irreconcilable disputes.
But Warburton reckons that although this is a good public relations move, it will be the members that benefit most.
The best firms, he said, usually just give in, whereas under arbitration, they could actually win their case.
Each member has one democratically elected representative on the board, who, in turn, has one vote either to admit or reject new members.
This vote can also be used to eject organisations that continually offend against the ‘customers charter’.
Warburton's next aim is to set up a fund to help users should a particular company go into liquidation.
While no decisions have been reached on how this would be organised or financed, he is also holding discussions with various insurance companies.
Although Warburton acts as co-ordinator for the association, meetings will be held alternately at different company headquarters.
These meetings, in his opinion, are starting to assume the status of an industry forum, where ideas on such issues as what direction the industry should take are exchanged and discussed.
CABLE & WIRELESS IN TALKS ON STAKE IN TELECOM EIREANN
The Irish state telephone monopoly Telecom Eireann has denied a report in the Irish Times that it is up for sale, but shares in Cable & Wireless Plc were up sevenpence at 721p yesterday morning on news it is in talks about possibly buying a 25% stake in the Irish phone company.
‘Ireland is a lot nearer home than Cable & Wireless might otherwise have looked, and it's undeveloped territory,’ Henderson Crosthwaite telecommunications analyst Patrick Hickey commented to Reuter.
Cable & Wireless said that the talks were at an early stage.
The Irish Times meantime had suggested that British Telecommunications Plc and AT&T Co were bidding for a stake in Telecom Eireann; a spokeswoman for Telecom Eireann said that the company had received an assurance from the Irish government that there were no plans for its privatisation.
But she added that she understood that AT&T was interested in setting up a competitor to Telecom Eireann.
AT&T and British Telecom refused to make any comment.
FRENCH PABX MAKER BARPHONE CLOSE TO BEING ACQUIRED
French PABX manufacturer Barphone SA, which holds 25% of the French market for PABXs of less than 25 ports, has said it is close to being taken over by an un-named foreign industrial group.
Managing director Michel Apchin confirmed takeover rumours, saying ‘We have been in negotiations for the last few weeks with a group that is not French.
If the accord is brought to fruition, it will mean a takeover by this foreigner,’ he said.
Among the names circulated as possible buyers are Northern Telecom Ltd (which already holds a share in Matra Communication SA), and Robert Bosch GmbH.
According to La Tribune, the buyer is offering between $28 and $30 a share.
Barphone — currently controlled 62% by the Apchin family and 28% by institutional investors — reported 1992 revenues equivalent to $63.6m and a net profit of $3.3m.
In the first quarter of 1993, however, the company saw consolidated sales drop 14%.
It's not the first time Barphone has been a takeover target.
Dassault Electronique SA tried to buy a a years ago but Apchin was not ready says La Tribune.
‘Even if I never said it clearly, it was always written that Barphone would one day or another throw itself in with a powerful group’ he declared.
VIDEO AND SOUND PRODUCTS BOOST CARLTON
While things in the television, video and film media markets have not been easy, Carlton Communications Plc has increased both interim profits and turnover, helped by sustained recovery at its video and sound products division, which includes Quantel — developer of the computer-based Paintbox television graphics generator.
Pre-tax profits rose 16.3% to £55.1m, on turnover up 56.5% to £508.3m.
The board are recommending a 10% increase in dividend to 7.4 pence.
The London-based group said that, although the market for broadcasting and post-production equipment is still fragile, Quantel's concurrent editor, Henry, sold well, while revenues from Paintbox were up 26% year-on-year.
And Quantel will soon release a couple of new products onto the market, Clipbox and MicroHenry.
Clipbox is an on-line digital disk-based presentation system, which takes images off a tape, puts them on a disk in an intelligent disk array, and then plays them.
It should be available around June.
MicroHenry is a simpler and cheaper off-line version of Henry, which should start shipping in the summer.
June will also see the release of California-based ImMIX's first and only product, VideoCube — ImMix was set up in 1991.
VideoCube is an on-line non-linear digital video editing system, which has an Apple Computer Inc's Macintosh user interface and a Macintosh  kernel .
It uses a Wavelet algorithm for video compression and provides compact disk quality audio and broadcast quality video.
VideoCube costs $38,500, and will be offered only in the US.
Mixing desk manufacturer Solid State Logic, which now generates approximately 50% of its sales from digital products as opposed to analogue, and digital video equipment builder, Abekas, also contributed to a 13.6% rise in divisional turnover to £70.1m; profits rose 50% to £12m.
Trading at the film and television services division and the video and audio production and distribution arm was generally stable.
But sales at broadcast television tripled as a result of the group winning the franchise from ITV.
Despite the costs of launching Carlton Television, the company still has a strong balance sheet, with net cash of £50.3m.
SHARE & BOND ISSUES
Liuski International Inc, Melville, New York distributor of microcomputer peripherals, components and accessories throughout the US and some foreign countries, and a manufacturer of Magitronic brand of personal computers, got its initial public offering of 1.2m shares, 1.1m of them new, away at $9.625 a share; the net proceeds to the company of $9.29m will be used to repay part of the revolving credit loan, opening of two new distribution centres and upgrading of inventory control systems.
The joint underwriters were Reich & Co Inc of New York and Foley Mufson Howe & Co of Philadelphia.
ZENITH ELECTRONICS SIGNS REVOLVING CREDIT AGREEMENT
Zenith Electronics Corp, Glenview, Illinois signed $90m revolving credit agreement with a lending group led by General Electric Co's General Electric Capital Corp.
The pact, announced in April, runs to December 31 1994, and replaces a $60m agreement.
Zenith also said it sold 500,000 shares of newly issued common to institutional investors for whom Crabbe Huson Co of Portland, Oregon serves as investment advisor.
The shares were sold at $6.75 each for a total investment of $3.4m; investors advised by Crabbe Huson own 2m shares, about 6.6%.
CREDIT RATINGS
IBM Corp's position is not seen by Standard & Poor's Corp as likely to deteriorate any further any time soon: the ratings agency affirmed IBM and its units' double-A-minus senior debt and A-1-plus commercial paper  ratings , affecting about $19,000m in debt.
‘Ratings continue to benefit from management's conservative financial policies, the agency said.
Despite aggressive cost cutting, however, it believes a weak business environment will make it difficult for the company to be profitable this year.
In addition, the agency assigned a preliminary double-A-minus rating to the senior debt part of IBM's $2,650m mixed use shelf debt filing and an A-plus rating to the preferred stock portion, saying that the preferred stock issue will bolster IBM's balance sheet with additional equity and provides further evidence of its financial conservatism.
‘This financial posture is necessary due to IBM's weak performance in recent years,’ it said, adding that IBM's favourable operations and restructuring efforts should return it to profitability in 1994, although it warns that a ‘failure to move toward a reasonable level of profitability in 1994’would result in a further downgrading.
It continues to maintain a negative rating outlook on IBM because of its business uncertainties and the question over ultimate success of restructuring.
COMPANY RESULTS
Datapoint Corp has reported a third quarter net loss of $4.9m against a profit last time of $794,000 on turnover that fell 24.4% at $48.6m; nine-month net loss was $2.8m against a profit last time of £1.3m on turnover down 11.4% at $163.4m.
Micronics Computers Inc has reported second quarter net profits up 32.3% at $3.1m, on sales up 22.8% at $50.2m; mid-term net fell 1% to $5.1m, on sales up 17.4% at $92.5m.
Net per share rose 33.3% to $0.29 in the quarter, fell 2.1% to $0.46 in the half.
Micros Systems Inc has turned in third quarter net profits up 183.6% at $1.1m, on turnover up 25.7% at $12.3m; net profit for the nine months was up 60% at $3.5m, on turnover that rose 22.7% to $36.8m.
Net earnings per share rose 200% to $0.15 in the quarter, and 55.2% to $0.45 in the nine months.
Millicom Inc saw first quarter net losses of $3.5m down from losses of $11.4m last time, after $4.6m losses from discontinued operations last time, on turnover up 13.5% to $7.6m.
Comparisons with restated figures to reflect discontinued operations.
Optical Data Systems Inc has reported first quarter net profit up 12.3% at $785,000, on turnover up 3.5% to $11.6m.
Net per share fell 9.1% to $0.10.
Telxon Corp has turned in fourth quarter net losses of $10.8m against profits of $5.2m last time, after $10.8m non-recurring charges this time and $73,000 tax credits last time, on turnover that rose by 7.4% at $55.7m; net losses for the year to March 31 stood at $12.1m against profits of $17m last time, after $22.8m non-recurring charges and $439,000 charges due to the cumulative effect of an accounting change this time and $1.1m tax credits last time, on turnover that rose by 10.9% to $238.4m.
Wind River Systems Inc has reported first quarter net profit up 2,740% at $142,000, on turnover up 40% to $6.5m.
Net earnings per share were $0.02.
Carlton Communications Plc has reported net profits for the six months to March 31 up 18.7% at £41.6m, after £2m extraordinary charges from associate companies last time, on turnover that rose 56.5% to £508.3m.
Pre-tax profits were up 16.3% at £55.1m.
Earnings per share rose by 13.9% to 18.3 pence.
PENTIUM IN SHORT SUPPLY UNTIL OCTOBER
Intel Corp, obliquely confirming nagging reports that Pentium chips will be in critically short supply at least until October, now says it will ship only about 100,000 of the chips by the end of the year, where only two months ago it was talking ‘hundreds of thousands’ of parts this year; Intel now sees 10,000 Pentiums going out by the end of June, 40,000 in the third quarter, and some 50,000 in fourth.
NeXTSTEP ENVIRONMENT LAUNCH
NeXT Computer Inc is due to launch its NeXTstep environment for Intel Corp processors at midnight tonight London time, and at the launch, it says Steve Jobs will discuss the future of object-oriented client-server computing in NeXT's new role as a dedicated software company.
WAL-MART TO SELL CUSTOM MACINTOSH PERFORMA
The Apple USA division of Apple Computer Inc authorised Wal-Mart Stores Inc to sell a custom version of the Macintosh Performa 400 series computer, initially through 500 Wal-Mart stores; Wal-Mart plans to expand distribution of Performa to about 1,400 locations by year-end.
UNISYS TO SUPPORT WINDOWS NT
Unisys Corp says it will support Microsoft Corp's Windows NT 3.1 and Advanced Server NT in client and entry-level local area networks for its customers, starting with its PW2 Advantage and Advantage Plus personal computers; the company will then offer MS-DOS, Windows 3.1, Unix System V.4, NetWare, Univel UnixWare, Santa Cruz Unix, OS/2 and the company's own CTOS.
METROLOGIE FIRST QUARTER OPERATING LOSS
Paris-based computer services and distribution group Metrologie International SA said it had an operating loss in the first quarter of 1993 due to a drop in activity and pressures to reduce gross margins: the loss was equivalent to about $3.6m and turnover on a like-for-like basis fell 15.9% to $73.5m.
HP UNVEILS NEW COLOUR PRINTERS
Hewlett-Packard Co unveiled two new colour printers, the DeskJet 1200C and the 1200C/PS, which use laser-printer functionality and plain paper: out now, the 1200C will sell for $1,700, and the 1200C/PS for $2,400; they do up to seven pages per minute and offer 600 by 300 dots-per-inch text print quality.
ZIFF-DAVIS PUBLISHING CHANGES
Ziff-Davis Publishing Co is closing PC Sources and is turning Corporate Computing into a newsletter; the first was beaten out of the market by another Ziff publication, and the latter was squeezed as Ziff's personal computer magazines increasingly encroached on its turf.
HDTV GROUPS TO POOL RESOURCES
The three groups competing for the right to develop the technology for high definition television are expected to sign an  accord to pool resources to develop the standard, the Los Angeles Times reported: it said signing of the pact, which could accelerate introduction of HDTV, was imminent; the groups involve General Instrument Corp and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Zenith Electronics Corp and AT&T Co, and Philips Electronics NV, Thomson SA, Compression Labs Inc and the National Broadcasting Co arm of General Electric Co.
OLIVETTI COURT PARADE CONCLUDED
The parade of Ing C Olivetti & Co SpA managers should finally be concluded, says a report in La Repubblica, after the Milan judges interrogated Antonio Garrani, Daniele Mosca and Carlo Lombardoni last week: the three confirmed that other bribes for the supply of computers were paid to the Ministry of Justice through the administrator of a quasi-governmental agency.
CUT IN APPLE COLOR PRINTER PRICE
The Apple USA division of Apple Computer Inc yesterday cut suggested retail prices in the US on the Apple Color Printer by 29% to $1,660 and the Apple Personal LaserWriter NTR, also 29% to $1,180.
GENERAL ELECTRIC CHANGE PRICING STRUCTURE FOR GENIE SERVICE
Rockville, Maryland-based General Electric Co's on-line GEnie service will change its pricing structure, effective July 1: the non-prime-time connect rate will drop to $3 per hour, half the current rate, but the monthly fee will increase to $8.95 from $4.95; that includes four hours of non-prime-time access to most of the GEnie services, including software downloads, bulletin boards, and electronic mail.
SONY CORP APPOINT US CHIEF
Sony Corp appointed Michael Schulhof, now vice-chairman of Sony USA Inc, to the post of president and chief executive of its US unit, which will be renamed Sony Corp of America: Schulhof joined Sony in 1974 after a mainly academic career as a physicist and worked on the development of the compact disk; in 1989, he became one of the first Americans to be appointed to the board of a major Japanese company.
DIGITAL CALLS BETWEEN FINLAND AND ST PETERSBURG
Telecom Finland and Intertelecom, the telecommunications operator for the Russian Republic, reported that they have inaugurated a fibre optic cable enabling digital phone calls between Finland and St Petersburg, Interfax news agency announced.
FURTHER ITALIAN BRIBERY ARREST
Along with Siemens Italia SpA president Giorgio Scanavacca, Italian legal authorities arrested Davide Giacalone, former advisor to Oscar Mammi, former minister of post and telecom, on bribery charges: Giacalone is charged with having accepted $5.3m from Giuseppe Parrella, former managing director of ASST, Azienda Telefonica dello Stato SpA, in the minister's study; Giacalone has already told the police that he passed the money on to representatives of the Republican party; for his part, the former PTT minister declared his innocence: ‘That I was involved in a history of billion-lire bribes is as unfounded as it is untrue — at whatever moment the magistrates tell me it is necessary to investigate my accounts, I will liberate myself immediately from parliamentary immunity,’ he said.
BT SHARES AT THE PUSH OF A BUTTON
People buying shares in British Telecommunications Plc will be able to deal in shares by punching the keys on a normal push-button telephone: the retail investment company ShareLink Ltd said the service, the first such scheme in Europe, is being offered as part of the marketing campaign for BT3, the UK government's sale of a third tranche of British Telecom shares, marketing of which began yesterday; the system will later be extended to cover other shares; the government's remaining shares are to be sold in July; pricing and details of whether all the remaining 21.8% stake will be sold are due in June.
FUJI XEROX TO INCREASE IMPORTS
Fuji Xerox Co Ltd plans to increase imports of parts to take advantage of the high yen in order to cut domestic production costs, Reuter reports from Tokyo: in the long term, it plans to raise the ratio to 30% from just a few per cent but the company is not rushing to achieve this as its export ratio of total products is low at around 20% and the high value of the yen is not severely damaging business.
BOOLE & BABBAGE BUY BACK COMMON SHARES
Sunnyvale, California-based Boole & Babbage Inc is to buy back up to 250,000 common shares from time to time in the market time for employee stock option and stock purchase.
ALL LINES FROM ATLANTA ARE BUSY
Remember when the US Interstate Highway system, designed to get people out of cities fast in the event of an emergency, failed its first and only test during the anti-Vietnam riots in Washington in 1968?
(No, I wasn't born then): at Comdex/Spring in Atlanta yesterday, our man on the spot, Chris Rose was geared to send stories from his laptop straight back to our server — until on deadline, he found all phone lines from Atlanta were busy (shame on you, BellSouth Corp) and ended up having to low-tech fax it back using a direct facsimile line.