

NEWS
Anger over curbs on inspections
Social services inspectors have reacted angrily to government moves on corporal punishment in private schools.
The government is issuing new guidance on inspections in schools after complaints some authorities were ‘over-reaching’ themselves, said a DoH official.
It is the first indication there are teething troubles with SSDs' new powers to inspect private schools under the Children Act.
Heather Wing, chairwoman of the National Association of Inspectors and Registration Officers, said it was their duty to comment on corporal punishment which affected the welfare of children.
She said inspectors should advise schools using corporal punishment that it was outmoded.
The DoH said new guidance under the Children Act may be ready by the summer.
Richard Beaver, head of Derbyshire SSD's inspection unit, said it was too early to judge the performance of authorities.
He denied his own authority had been over-zealous, a complaint levelled by one or two schools in the county, and he said inspectors should keep a watch on corporal punishment.
Court ruling condemns more children to care
Nottinghamshire SSD has reacted angrily to an Appeal Court judgement which it says will result in far more children being taken into care throughout the country.
Appeal Court judge Sir Stephen Brown blamed Nottinghamshire last week for an ‘unhappy catalogue of errors’ in a child protection case, and accused it of misusing the Children Act.
The decision has cast further doubt on the ability of the Children Act to deal with an important plank of child care policy — removing abusers rather than victims from the family home.
Nottinghamshire SSD had tried to avoid applying for powers under a care order to remove three children from their home by going instead for a prohibited steps order to exclude their abusing father.
But the Appeal Court ruled that the department was wrong to attempt to use the private law provisions of the Act to remove the abuser rather than the victims.
Sir Stephen, sitting with two other judges, said the SSD ‘should not shrink’ from taking steps to put the children under supervision or in care.
And they added: ‘The court is deeply concerned at the absence of any power to direct this authority to take steps to protect the children.’
But the SSD claimed this week that the Appeal Court's judgement flew in the face of earlier court decisions.
‘The suggestion that the local authority did not take steps to protect these children is wholly inaccurate,’ said social services director David White.
‘The local authority sought orders from the court by which the perpetrator of the abuse would be forbidden to have contact with the children, a process approved of  and followed previously by judges and local authorities throughout the country.’
Assistant county secretary David Spicer said the SSD had been acting in the spirit of the Children Act by trying to avoid ‘coercive’ measures such as care orders.
‘The result of this decision will be more applications for care orders and more children removed from their homes in order to protect them,’ he said.
While Nottinghamshire said it had messages of support from local authorities across the country, legal experts sided with the Appeal Court.
Barrister Allan Levy, who co-headed the pin-down inquiry in Staffordshire, said the Appeal Court had been ‘absolutely right’.
‘If they thought the children were in danger they should have gone for a care order in the first place,’ Levy said.
Maureen O'Hara, of the Children's Legal Centre, said: ‘Local authorities have to accept that if they've made every effort to keep children at home with the non-abusing parent and it doesn't work, they may have to be taken into care.’
Both Levy and O'Hara said the law surrounding the exclusion of abusers from their own properties needed clarification.
The government is currently considering recommendations from the Law Commission to increase the courts' powers of exclusion.
Central gets Ransom
The row about selecting a new director of social work for Central Region ended last week Mike Ransom, acting director at Dudley, was appointed to the job.
Ransom, deputy director of Warwickshire SSD, has been on secondment to Dudley since September.
He was one of only two shortlisted candidates — although the job was advertised twice and several senior Scottish deputies were interviewed.
Some candidates were unhappy about the selection process, claiming the region wanted someone more willing to fit in with the council's corporate stance, than head a professional service.
‘Deputies in Scotland are the tier to recruit from, so presumably that says something about what they didn't want,’ said one rejected applicant.
‘The key issue is that having seen 14 people with senior experience in Scotland, elected members did not have the opportunity to see what they were offering.’
But Ransom said this week: ‘I have no anxieties about the commitment of that council to the social work function, and I have a very strong track record of leading a professional service.’
Social work convenor Billy Dickson said: ‘There are some corporate issues addressed through our social strategy, but he will be appointed as director of social work.’
Ransom did not apply for the permanent job at financially-troubled Dudley — one of the lowest spending metropolitan authorities on social services.
‘It was time to move on,’ he said.
Ransom: Central solution
DSS climbdown
The government has been forced into a rapid U-turn over plans to cut social security payments to care home residents if they were absent for six days or more.
Junior social security minister Alistair Burt said payments would be extended to cover absences of up to six weeks due to admission to hospital, and up to three weeks for other reasons such as holidays.
Warner deadline
The DoH reported an ‘excellent response’ to its request for SSDs to produce proposals based on the Warner Report.
Most SSDs had submitted their implementation plans to the DoH by last week's deadline, although many said they had merely built on existing frameworks.
ADSS fears for children in psychiatric wards
The ADSS is to raise concerns with the government about a dramatic rise in the numbers of children placed in psychiatric wards over the past five years.
DoH figures reveal a 65 per cent increase in the number of children between ten and 14 years old admitted to psychiatric hospital.
In 1985, 38 children per 100,000 were admitted, while in 1990, the number had risen to 63 children per 100,000.
The figure for 15- to 19-year-olds has also risen by 21 per cent.
The ADSS wants to examine whether the rise in hospital admissions is the results of cuts in local authority children's services.
Tom Foster, secretary of the mental health sub committee, said ‘There is evidence the increase in numbers is due to the closure of special children's units.
The picture around the country for local authorities is one of reduction in children's services.’
The fear is that stretched resources have led to a reduction in places specifically for the most troubled children.
The ADSS warns that placing children with psychiatric problems on adult hospital wards may not be the most constructive way to help them.
‘Their problems may be acute, and there is a risk of being swallowed up in the mass of an adult ward.
‘Often on these wards there are not the resources to deal with the specific needs of children,’ said Foster.
But more ominous is the risk that children without mental health problems are being ‘dumped’ on the NHS, the ADSS said.
Mike Jarman, director of child care at Barnardo's warned: ‘There are few options left to social workers when they seek help with troubled children.
We have to look at what has dropped out of the system.’
Foster agreed in some circumstances the mental health of the child might be fine.
‘Adolescence is a time of strife and difficulties.
It can be that this behaviour is mistaken for psychiatric problems.’
Report says care ‘over-structured
Formal care arrangements for former psychiatric hospital patients are sometimes considered ‘bureaucratic and over-structured’, says a report commissioned by the DoH.
But the report, based on a study of seven SSDs and four health authorities by Social and Community Planning Research, also highlights the importance of inter-agency working.
It finds that the surveyed authorities spent a ‘great deal of time and effort’ developing the so-called care programme approach, although they had largely failed to implement monitoring systems.
While it was widely felt that CPA formalised good practice, some respondents said it included too many patients, impinged on clinical judgement, and required more resources to implement properly.
Liz Sayce, MIND's policy director, said the study's general optimism conflicted with earlier reports.
‘Other research would suggest in many cases the CPA is not being implemented and resources are not being committed to it.’
Calls made for secure unit
Gwent SSD has renewed its call for a purpose-built secure unit in Wales following violent incidents at the Coed Glas Assessment Centre which resulted in several young people appearing in court.
The incidents at Coed Glas have been widely blamed on the lack of secure accommodation in Wales.
They have come at a time of unprecedented pressure on the government to speed up the introduction of a secure unit.
Gwent social services chairman Graham Dally said last week he felt the current plan to provide a secure unit by 1995 was about seven years too late.
Dally: Plans are seven years too late
Gwent Magistrates Committee chairman Ross Goff accused the Welsh Office of trying to ‘pass the buck’.
Social services director Terry Sullivan recently announced his retirement from Gwent less than two years after taking over the job.
He told him committee last week that staff at Coed Glas were in a difficult situation and ‘one can only have sympathy with them’.
In one incident a police officer had to defend himself with a truncheon against a girl threatening him with a piece of broken glass.
Coed Glas is only a few miles away from Ty Mawr, the controversial children's home which is to be closed shortly after a major inquiry.
Continuing concern about the lack of secure accommodation has prompted a group of prominent people in the county to write a letter of protest to the Home Office and the Welsh Secretary David Hunt.
They included the chief constable, chief probation officer, and the chief crown prosecutor.
Death inquiry
Strathclyde SWD is to carry out an inquiry after a 15-year-old boy was found dead last month at a catholic residential school in Glasgow.
The SWD-funded school provides 24 places for children referred by children's hearings, courts or the Scottish Secretary.
The inquiry's findings will be submitted to Scottish Secretary Ian Lang.
Legal milestone
A disabled woman in Wigan has won £10,000 damages from the council after it failed to carry out necessary adaptations to her home.
The out of court settlement made two days before the trial was to be heard has been hailed as a legal milestone by the Spinal Injuries Association.
Wigan has now agreed to carry out all the adaptations and to rehouse the woman and her family while the work is done.
Rural poverty
Rural communities are at risk because of rising poverty, homelessness, and lack of low-cost housing, according to a new report (News Focus, page 5).
Produced by the Wiltshire Community Foundation, it warns the gulf between deprivation and affluence gives cause for concern.
Health myths
A new organisation is urging Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley to instigate a national education programme to end the myths and stereotypes surrounding mental health and community care.
The North West Region Approved Social Worker Interest Group wants Bottomley to reject compulsory psychiatric treatment.
Lack of funds
New research from London's Charing Cross Hospital warns councils are being inadequately resourced to care for people with severe learning difficulties in the community.
Analysing data from Westminster, and Kensington & Chelsea councils, the researchers say English SSDs should receive £300 million to cover the community costs for severely disabled people.
The actual sum awarded was £12 million.
Claimants at risk after changes
The Child Poverty Action Group has urged the government to improve the take-up of benefits and the service provided to claimants.
Launching two benefits guides, CPAG said major changes to the benefits system, partly as a result of community care and the Child Support Agency, would affect millions of claimants.
‘Appalling delays’ had been experienced by disability benefits claimants and nearly 2.5 million households missed out on means-tested benefits to which they were entitled, leaving £1.5 billion unclaimed every year in the government's coffers.
Low take-up of benefits was largely responsible for more than four million people who were living on incomes below the income support level, said CPAG.
‘Although the government has set the Benefits Agency targets for the recovery of overpaid benefits, there are no targets for improving benefit take-up.
The government has got its priorities wrong.
Absent partners face future hardship
Lobbying the leader: Protesters demonstrate outside the home of Ros Hepplewhite, chief executive of the Child Support Agency
The government has refused to acknowledge the risk of a poverty trap for those forced to pay maintenance under the Child Support Act.
Speaking at the launch of the Child Support Agency last week, Social Security Secretary Peter Lilley denied absent partners could be worse off if their gross income increases.
But Beth Lakhani, welfare rights adviser with the Child Poverty Action Group, claimed second families face real hardship if their income rises.
The rise in gross income for the second family could also result in a drop in family credit, council tax discounts and even school meals.
At the same time the first family could be no better off as every pound gained is deducted from income support.
‘The real agenda for the CSA is not making fathers more responsible but saving the Treasury money,’ said Lakhani.
Equally the formula does not take into account increased housing costs.
‘Maintenance is calculated taking only a percentage of the housing costs the absent partner faces, ignoring the demands of their new partner and family.’
The Child Support Agency will spend its first year dealing with only new cases and income support claimants, currently numbering 895,000 lone parents.
For those on income support who refuse to co-operate, an 18-month penalty cut of £8.80 will be imposed.
Problems looming on community care front
Too much paperwork and not enough money — that is the grass-roots opinion of community care's introduction.
Frontline workers this week gave a different picture of implementation from senior managers, many of whom are reporting all is well (News, 8 April).
Many urban authorities report budget difficulties looming.
Judy Jones, team manager (mental health) in the London Borough of Brent, said community care funds for the financial year were expected to run out within three or four months.
Tower Hamlets' GP Sue Anderson is also expecting massive problems due to the government's formula for allocating funds to local authorities.
She said lack of funding would create a ‘nightmare’, especially over hospital charges.
Some workers have been astounded at the amount of extra paperwork.
Assessment time has doubled, said one Lincolnshire social worker who predicted the authority's petrol budget would rise dramatically as staff make more visits to clients.
NALGO members in Leeds complained community care had been introduced ‘last minute and on the cheap’.
They are boycotting new assessment procedures, claiming social welfare officers were not being recognised for increased workloads.
Dave Draycott, senior social services steward said: ‘Training has been late and chaotic.’
In Cornwall, management denied a union claim that implementation had been mayhem.
Val Biancardi, social services shop steward, said a new computer system, developed to do assessments, had crashed with no back-up system.
But Derek Law, deputy director of the SSD, said there had only been a few teething problems.
A number of authorities had reorganised before the reforms leading to some difficulties, according to John Findlay, social services officer of NALGO.
He claimed there were potential disputes in Wakefield and Calderdale.
Guidance delayed by legal hitch
Restraint guidance for children in care, long delayed by the government, has hit another obstacle.
Last week's launch was delayed due to a ‘legal technicality’, said a DoH spokesman.
Lawyers are now reconsidering the wording of a part of the guidance and it will not be published for at least another week.
Masud Hoghughi, director of Aycliffe children's centre, said: ‘It is most regrettable that so long after the Children Act this ambiguity continues.
There is considerable anxiety and demoralisation among staff.’
The manager of one secure unit believes the delay highlights the inherent problems of the subject.
‘It is easy for the guidance to tell us what not to do, but it is very difficult to legislate for all possible scenarios.’
There was also speculation that the delay was caused by Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley because she wanted to launch it after returning from a trip abroad.
Restraint guidelines highlight risk-taking
The right of elderly people to take risks is emphasised in the first national guidelines on restraint in residential care and nursing homes.
The guidelines have been produced by the voluntary organisation Counsel and Care, which is dismayed by the government's ‘reluctance to provide official guidance’.
They are the outcome of more than 20 conferences held throughout the UK and follow an investigation by Counsel and Care which revealed widespread demeaning restraint in homes.
In a foreword, former SSI chief Sir William Utting described the findings of the investigation as sobering and chilling.
Residents have been tied to chairs and beds, made to sit in restraining chairs, zipped into cocoon sleeping bags or put into high cot-sided beds which restrict night movement.
Counsel and Care found sedatives were used without serious or regular review, and listening devices and video cameras were employed.
Jef Smith, the organisation's general manager, said older people should be allowed to take risks which can ‘add a sparkle to their lives’.
Their legal rights were not affected by admission to a home and the guidelines warn that restraining someone without their consent, or on the instructions of a third party, is unlawful and unacceptable.
Counsel and Care recommends a thorough care plan should be agreed for each resident and frequently reviewed.
It should include agreements on risk-taking and the use of last-resort restraint.
Staff should be trained to spot and interpret residents' wishes from their behaviour rather than their spoken words if communication is difficult.
The guidelines say electronic tagging should only be used with the consent of residents or a proxy.
It should be a last resort and its potential degrading and depersonalising effects should be recognised.
It is accepted that taking risks will sometimes lead to accidents and consequent criticism.
Staff should not have to take decisions on restraint without access to written guidelines and advice from managers, who should review the home's policies in the light of any accidents.
Elderly people isolated
A new report has highlighted the isolated plight of elderly people in residential care who have a hearing loss.
Their needs are largely ignored and the introduction of community care reforms seems unlikely to make any difference, according to Counsel and Care.
General manager, Jef Smith, said: ‘The current situation is bleak, with confusion about who is responsible for activating services for hearing-impaired people in residential and nursing homes.’
Research shows 60 per cent of those in homes over the age of 70 have impaired hearing, yet less than one-quarter have hearing aids.
Counsel and care suggests care staff should be trained to fit and adjust hearing aids.
GPs should offer hearing tests for all residents and care plans should specify action to take.
Private push
CCETSW's council has pledged to continue the campaign for earmarked funding for practice placements.
It sees the private sector as an area for emphasis in the coming year.
The crisis in practice placements has caused concern that the value of the new, more practice-based DipSW may be diluted.
A spokesman said the council would continue to work with associations and the government towards securing earmarked money.
New council member Stella Robinson, a private home proprietor, told the council of the lack of awareness of CCETSW among private sector agencies, and the difficulty in assessing the value of the multitude of courses on offer.
A CCETSW spokesman said: ‘Now we have our kitemark, it should provide a guide.
ADSW protests
The ADSW has condemned as ‘unacceptable’ Scottish Office proposals to end the legal requirement to appoint social work directors and social work committees.
The warning came at a meeting with Scottish Social Work Minister Lord Fraser during the associations's annual conference in Inverness.
ADSW president Jimmy Dick called on the minister to abandon the proposals.
They were outlines in a Scottish Office consultation paper on the internal management of local authorities.
Dick warned of ‘serious consequences’ of the statutory appointments were not maintained under the planned reform of local government in Scotland.
Dick: Abandon proposals
‘We support the principle that there should be a director of social work accountable for social work services,’ he said.
London charity workers take part in strike
Staff threatened to step up their strike action last week at the north London voluntary organisation Alice Hoffman Homes, as a home manager appealed against his dismissal.
Staff held a 48-hour strike last week and said a 72-hour strike would be held this week unless Paul Knight was reinstated at the home in Barnet.
Knight, based at a home for people with severe learning difficulties, complained he had received no prior warnings about his work.
‘The problems came when I protested at the removing without consultation of Christmas bonus pay and the halving of overtime paid while accompanying residents on holidays.’
Alison Watson, executive director of Alice Hoffman Homes, said there had been ‘a complete breakdown of trust and confidence’ between herself and Knight, but would not elaborate further as the appeal progressed.
NALGO branch spokesman Richard Brunner said of the appeal: ‘It's not looking particularly optimistic.’
NALGO, which represents 34 of the 120 staff at the six homes, said only two voted against the strike.
All members stayed away on the strike day.
Industrial action is rare in charities, but may increase as they take on more local authority functions and employees' interests become similar to those of council workers.
Jobs on offer
The JOB FORUM AND CAREERS CONVENTION
Social workers looking to move into care management jobs will find recruitment opportunities at the Community Care Job Forum and Careers Convention in Manchester on 19 and 20 May.
Following the incorporation of Social Work Today into Community Care , the combined event will be held at the city's New Century Hall.
Qualified workers will be sought by the SSDs and other agencies exhibiting.
Seminars will be held each day.
For exhibitor queries call   For visitors call   
NEWS FOCUS
Abusing the system
CHILDREN ACT
A court ruling on keeping abusers out of the family home has left SSD's stunned.
Mark Ivory reports
The Appeal Court's rejection of an order banning an abusing father from the family home has turned out to be the most controversial decision under the Children Act since its introduction.
Last week the Appeal Court was unable to uphold a residence order, granted by the High Court to Nottinghamshire SSD and designed to stop the father having contact with his three teenage daughters.
Appeal judge Sir Stephen Brown said the High Court had had no power to make a residence order and blamed Nottinghamshire for an ‘unhappy catalogue of errors’.
Sir Stephen, who is president of the High Court Family Division, said: ‘Unfortunately, as appears from this case, if a local authority doggedly resists taking the steps which are appropriate to the case of children at risk suffering harm, it appears the court is powerless.’
But the SSD has hit back, claiming it was the Appeal Court rather than the department which was placing children at risk.
Director David White said: ‘The interpretation adopted by the court now makes it far more likely that children at risk of abuse will need to be removed from their home rather than the perpetrator.’
The controversy centres on the extent to which a local authority can use the private law provisions of the Children Act.
Nottinghamshire originally sought a prohibited steps order to keep the perpetrator away from the family home, but was turned down by the High Court which said it had no option other than to make a residence order.
Overturning this residence order the Appeal Court was clear Nottinghamshire SSD should have used the Act's public law provisions from the outset — it should have gone for a care order or a supervision order, enabling social workers to oversee the children's welfare.
But the only powers they would have then had to stop contact with the abuser would have been to take the children into care.
The SSD argues vehemently that removing perpetrators, rather than abused children, is in the spirit of the Act.
It had acted on the basis of medically-supported allegations of sexual abuse from the father's 17-year-old daughter.
The father allegedly admitted the abuse during therapy at the Gracewell Clinic where he completed only half the programme.
The mother and the two other daughters then closed ranks with the father against further social work intervention.
‘Our social workers felt it was a waste of time going for public law orders because the girls had made it clear they would flout them,’ said assistant county secretary David Spicer.
‘They said if they were taken into care they would run away.
We felt this should not be allowed to stand in the way of the child protection process, so we tried to put the responsibility where it should properly lie — with the perpetrator.’
The SSD claims to have had messages of support from local authorities throughout the country.
‘Prohibited steps orders have been made for local authorities in county courts everywhere,’ Spicer said.
‘When our case was originally rejected we got calls from authorities all over the country saying ‘What's going on?’.’
White: Children may be removed
Allan Levy, the barrister who was joint head of the pin-down inquiry in Staffordshire, agrees with the Appeal Court.
‘The Court of Appeal is absolutely right,’ Levy said.
‘The local authority's duty lies through the public law provisions.’
But Levy admitted the case raised important issues about excluding a perpetrator from the family home.
‘It may be that Parliament has to look at this issue of excluding people from property when they've got property rights,’ he said.
Country care
RURAL POVERTY
Rural poverty will place heavy demands on community care.
Linda Chamberlain reports on Wiltshire's experience
Serious economic and social problems are putting rural communities at risk says a report on poverty in country areas.
Though hidden from view, poverty is increasing due to homelessness, lack of low-cost housing, inadequate public transport, the decline in farming, and disappearing facilities.
The report, by the Wiltshire Community Foundation, says the widening gulf between deprivation and affluence and a failure to recognise the dangers are causing concern.
Anna Marsden, director of the foundation which was established to raise new funds for voluntary work, said the gulf could make it difficult for people to seek help.
Research in one village of 200 households revealed one-third had disposable incomes of £30,000 a year or more but another had only £6,000 or less.
‘The automatic reaction is to take a mobile service to the villages but if a Citizens Advice Bureau van appeared no one would use it because the neighbours would see.’
The problems have been made worse by the continuing recession and the extra cost of providing services in rural areas.
This particularly affects SSDs which are only two weeks into the introduction of community care.
Delivery services to people in their homes will always be more expensive, but even more so in dispersed communities.
The report warns an increase in the elderly rural population will ‘place enormous pressures on the delivery of care in the community’.
SSDs will not have the resources to meet demand and many people will not receive the services they need.
This view is confirmed by Wiltshire SSD.
Chris Johns, principal officer for social care, said it would direct resources to those with most need.
Ian Cartwright, chairman of the ADSS panel on poverty, said distances and isolation created major problems for SSDs offering domiciliary support in rural areas.
A free telephone help line makes it easier for people in Lincolnshire to get benefit advice or information.
Director Malcolm Ashman said mobile services could be a vital contact.
Wiltshire Community Foundation says policies fail to acknowledge the greater cost of providing rural services.
The report says the rural voice is not being heard in government and recommends a minister be responsible for the economic and social welfare of country areas.
PEOPLE
The undercover agent takes a bow
When junior health minister Tim Yeo launched the Mansell report on services for people with learning difficulties with challenging behaviour a couple of months ago, he made the aside that perhaps his audience were wondering why there was need of such a report, given the work the King's Fund had done in the same area over the years.
There were a few who would have asked the same question, looking at Joan Rush , senior project officer with the fund, a prime mover in the group which has beavered away at the subject to bring it into the mainstream of policy and practice.
When she retires next month, challenging behaviour will be only one of the many items she will have been able to put a tick next to on the learning difficulties agenda, although she would the last to claim there is nothing left to do.
Rush is one of that group of people who coalesced in the early 70s and saw the signs that the tide might be moving in the right direction, and that they could influence its course.
But in all of this she has been the least public: less frequently on conference platforms, much less in print.
Yet her range of interests, in a field that has moved from comparative policy neglect to the very centre of the community care reforms, has been wider than almost all the others.
She might also have seemed the least likely member of the group: lacking an academic background, Rush started her professional life as a nurse.
She joined the King's Fund's then existing nursing college and later moved to director Jim Elliott's new learning difficulties project.
The rest is history, but one which records her pivotal work with the Ordinary Life initiative more than ten years ago, from which so much else has flowed; working with Maureen Oswin on bereavement which culminated two years ago in the latter's Am I Allowed to Cry?, helping to get the Campaign for Mentally Handicapped People (now Values into Action) off the ground; respite care; and the initiative to get children out of long-stay hospitals.
When visiting the USA, she observed that ordinary living could be a reality.
She banged that drum when she came back, and was moving parents to centre stage while others were still thinking about what role they might have.
Rush: A mover of mountains within the sphere of people with learning difficulties
Rush talks about valuing people; those who have worked with her stress her concern that the individual is placed in the middle of any service planning or strategies.
Her own motivation has been, she says, her background — a strong sense of injustice felt from a working class family in Cornwall.
‘Questions are asked about whether people with challenging behaviour can live in ordinary housing.
It's not about proving it; it's a moral question.’
Hardly surprising that meetings at the DoH have been know to take a different turn from that envisaged by civil servants.
And how has she done all this?
‘Joan hides her light under a bushel,’ says one who knows her well.
‘I'm a bit of an undercover agent’, she says.
But 20 years have at least seen her interests come in from the cold.
JEANETTE CUNNINGHAM is the first black woman to be appointed to Bolton's adoption and fostering panel.
The mother of a mixed race adopted daughter, she is keen to see more black families recruited.
She said: ‘There is an emphasis today on matching cultural and racial backgrounds when children are placed for adoption or fostering.
That is good, but the main problem is that not enough black families are coming forward.’
Jeanette Cunningham
The British Association for Service to the Elderly education and training unit at Surrey University has appointed RICHARD STOWE as development officer and TOM RICHARDS as training officer.
Stowe, a former principal training officer with Surrey SSD, will promote training packages to statutory, voluntary and private bodies in the region.
Richards, a training consultant, will develop courses and materials for BASE nationally.
DAVID JENKINS has been made first director of Essex Voluntary Association for the Blind.
He will be responsible for managing the association and ensuring residential, nursing and holiday homes operate efficiently.
Jenkins joined Essex SSD as a residential care officer in 1975 working with adults who have learning difficulties.
In 1986 he became general manager of the Care Fore Group's residential and nursing homes.
PRACTICE FOCUS
SEXUALITY
Sex on the agenda
Workers can find it difficult to discuss sexuality with young people in care, especially because individuals and society are prejudiced against homosexuality.
Unprejudiced support for young lesbians and gay men in care on safer sex and sexuality should be the ultimate aim of good practice.
But for this to be achieved, workers' personal feelings — and the myths and stereotypes which surround gay and lesbian sexuality — have to be openly expressed for guidance and training to be targeted effectively.
According to a CCETSW report,Sexuality, Young People and Care , the need for SSDs to develop ‘positive contexts for training, policy and development’ is essential in the light of HIV and heterosexism — the name given to oppressive attitudes which see heterosexuality as the most valid form of sexual expression.
The guide defines the complex area of sexuality, gives detailed information on safer sex, definitions of oppression, and how to approach sex, sexuality and HIV prevention with young people.
The guide's aim to influence practice is reflected in its residential child care focus.
It draws on the Children Act guidance on family replacements, where section 9.5.3 states: ‘Gay young men and women may require very sympathetic carers to enable them to accept their sexuality and to develop their own self esteem.’
In the chapter on working with young lesbians and gay men, the most common responses these young people receive from care staff are highlighted to show the way personal, misinformed attitudes can have a negative impact.
These include:
believing that there is something wrong with being lesbian or gay and referring for treatment;
trying to establish whether the young person is ‘really gay’, or asking them to prove it;
not supporting young gay men or lesbians for fear of being labelled as gay themselves.
Jeni Bremner, co-author of the guide, is a freelance trainer and consultant and has worked closely with residential staff on sexuality and safer sex.
Her motive for writing it was the dearth of relevant information and the recurrent request for sex education.
She said: ‘Staff confusion mirrored the confusion within SSDs about how to heal with the subject.’
Sexual expression: Workers can display prejudice against lesbians and gay men in care
Bremner felt strongly that workers should have the chance to explore their own personal agendas on sexuality in general, and not just focus on gay men and lesbians in particular .
She said: ‘Very few SSDs have taken action on heterosexism and they have to face the fact that many people are implicitly heterosexist.
This needs to be acknowledged within the staff team themselves.
Some of this can be achieved through training, with time to relate it back to the working environment.’
Though training it is important, the guidelines stress it cannot exist in isolation and has to be backed up by team management.
They explain that if someone thinks it is wrong to be gay because of their religious beliefs, three training sessions will not change them.
Julie Wilkes, lead adviser on HIV/AIDS at CCETSW, is concerned because, ‘we are against the notion of loving the sinner, but not the sin.
You cannot raise a young person's self esteem or prevent the spread of HIV this way’.
Wilkes became involved with commissioning and editing the guide through research carried out in 1989–90.
She wrote to SSDs and asked them a series of questions about training for residential child care staff on HIV and sexuality.
At that point, only one authority said it had offered training to staff on sex and sexuality, and many workers felt unable to talk directly to young people about sex.
One way SSDs can address the problem, said Wilkes, is to assess the needs of young people and workers.
But she added that training is necessary for it to work, backed up by personal supervision for the workers once the training is complete.
‘Training should identify how workers try to ignore certain aspects of the work and that some young people may not be having safe sex.’
Some gay and lesbian workers feel there is a dilemma about their role in the lives of young gay men and lesbians.
The existence of clause 28, which makes the so-called ‘promoting’ of homosexuality illegal, can make workers fearful about how their relationship with a young person will be perceived.
But Wilkes said they can offer something unique to their practice because of their direct experience of oppression.
Sonia Heywood, assistant director (child care) for Wiltshire SSD, expressed some of her staff's worries about getting it wrong and mishandling the whole issue.
Despite the existence of relevant guidance under the Children Act, they were still worried about clause 28 and the legal age of consent for gay men at 21.
The influence of the document on the SSD is noticeable; there are two working groups looking at developing guidance on residential care and training and sexuality.
And the HIV support grant will be used to appoint a worker to carry out research on J–HIV and sexuality.
Heywood was unsure whether SSDs would be able to make use of it fully as they are overwhelmed with the amount of present legislation and have ‘homophobic views’ to overcome.
She added: ‘Unless there is some form of staff policy and clear statements about anti-discriminatory practice, and the best way to counsel young gay men and lesbians, workers will continue to feel vulnerable and any development will be difficult to achieve.’
POLITICS
DOMICILIARY CARE
Called to register
Only one MP voted against David Hinchliffe's Bill to register private domiciliary care agencies.
But it is still unlikely to survive a second reading.
Catriona Marchant explains
Local authorities have the power to register and inspect residential and nursing homes but they can't touch home care services.
With the community care reforms now in place and growing numbers of elderly and disabled people choosing to live in their own homes this seems to be something of an anachronism.
Shadow community care minister David Hinchliffe is campaigning vigorously for a change in the law.
Two weeks ago he successfully introduced his Registration of Domiciliary Care Agencies Bill under the Ten Minute Rule parliamentary procedure.
The Bill has the support from Tory MPs like Andrew Rowe and Roger Sims but because of government opposition, is unlikely to survive a second reading on 2 July.
When the NHS and Community Care Act 1990 was passing through the Commons, amendments to register domiciliary care agencies were rejected by the government.
Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley, then junior health minister, felt local authorities' contracts with private agencies would be enough to protect clients.
This has been the unwavering government line since, even after the murder of a 66-ear-old disabled woman by a private care agency worker 16 months ago.
The woman, a client of Hammersmith & Fulham SSD, had hired a care assistant from a reputable private agency.
Police later found the woman, who was convicted of murder, had supplied false references to the agency.
Following the trial last year a national campaign was launched to try to change the law.
Hammersmith & Fulham director Denise Platt says: ‘It made us realise that people are very vulnerable in their own homes.’
But as recently as last month junior health minister Tim Yeo said publicly that self-regulation was the best way of developing the private domiciliary sector.
That is still the government's public view, but it is understood that privately ministers have conceded they may have to change the law in three or four years.
Most professionals agree with the Bill's objectives — to apply the principles of the Registered Homes Act 1984 to domiciliary care.
The Bill would require all agencies in the private, voluntary and public sectors to be registered and inspected by local authority registration and inspection units.
A named person who is suitably qualified will have full responsibility for the agency.
At present an elderly people's home must be registered before it can take residents and be inspected regularly.
But if it follows the government's call to expand into domiciliary care it will not have to register this as part of its service.
As Lesley Bell, director of Joint Initiative for Community Care, says: ‘It is absolutely crazy that anyone can set up a home care agency with no form of regulation whatsoever.
We all recognise the need for it and recognise how vulnerable people are who live in their own homes.’
David Hinchliffe thinks individuals are more at risk in the privacy of their own homes.
‘They are often housebound and frequently receive a declining number of visitors,’ he told Parliament.
‘Inevitably, the care staff helping them are supervised to a much lesser degree than they would be in a residential establishment.’
He has had strong support from social services directors who want to make community care a reliable and safe option for clients.
One told him that in the residential sector, placing authorities are often the last to realise that client abuse is going on.
The vote on Hinchliffe's Bill two weeks ago produced a vote of 188 for the Bill and only one against.
Den Dover, Conservative MP for Chorley, was the sole MP voting against the Bill.
Was the vicious rumour that he had turned up late after a liquid lunch and didn't know what he was voting for true?
No in fact it wasn't.
Dover has strong views on why this Bill should not get any further.
He says that registering care agencies would create ‘an unnecessary bureaucracy’ and would be counter-productive.
‘It would not lead to better care or value for money, it would add hurdles and handicaps to the system.’
Lucianne Sawyer, president of the UK Home Care Association, is less forceful but has some reservations.
She thinks many agencies are providing good standards of care.
She points out agencies must have licences and checks on practice are getting more stringent.
‘I am interested in a registration scheme which really does promote the sorts of standards that users want — reliable and flexible services that they can control,’ she says.
‘I am not interested in any form of registration which is bureaucratic.’
A further twist in the argument might finally persuade the government to change its mind.
A large number of private care agency customers are elderly or disabled people who are not social services clients.
They might have enough money of their own to pay for their care and never come into contact with a care manager.
‘Such people receive no protection whatsoever from the contracting arrangements,’ argues Hinchliffe.
LETTERS
GIVE US PRIDE, NOT PARSIMONY
Thanks are due to Andrew Lane (Letters, 1 April) for cutting through the confused signals about identifying and recording unmet need.
Any client being assessed for need must receive an honest professional judgement as to the services he or she requires to live decently ‘in the community’, whether in their own home or in some form of residential accommodation.
Any attempt to dodge this is professionally demeaning and destructive of a trustful caring relationship with the client.
So what if services are not, for the time being, adequate to meet the assessed needs?
That's where rationing and targeting come in.
It is doubtless embarrassing to have to explain to a client that some needs are recognised but can't be met without depriving someone else whose needs are even more urgent.
But it would be even worse to fudge the issue by trying to persuade the client that the needs aren't really there!
Virginia Bottomley and Tim Yeo are adamant that funding will prove adequate.
They have staked their political reputations on this and, perhaps more important, whatever personal respect they have earned as people who care.
If experience shows them to be wrong, as proved by hard evidence of a growing mountain of unmet need, their only honest course will be to fight for more resources and resign if unsuccessful.
It's not the business of social services staff, from directors downwards, to pull their chestnuts out of the fire by disguising the facts.
In the long run ministers have to take account of public opinion.
As with the NHS, the public overwhelmingly want care in the community to be a matter of pride not parsimony, and will support adequate funding to make this possible.
POETRY PLEAS
I want to thank the people who responded to my letter (11 February) requesting poetry written by carers about their experiences.
Many of the 35 replies gave details of the circumstances leading to it being written, their experiences and hopes.
PRIVATE SLIP
Is Community Care 's ideological slip showing?
There is no single comment from the private sector in ‘Crock of fool's gold’(1 April).
No wonder the government sought to protect private sector interests transitionally.
MONITOR TO SHOW POSITIVE SUCCESSES
I was pleased the King's Fund has recognised the racism and blockages which prevent black staff moving into management (News, 11 March).
Its response — a programme of positive action training for black staff — is one of a range of possible responses and I hope it will monitor its effectiveness carefully.
Many local authorities have pioneered positive action training by running in-house programmes for black staff, as have external providers such as LBTC: Training for Care.
From our experience it has become clear that training black staff is not the only solution.
If it is seen in this way the burden for change rests with black staff and not with the white staff and institutions which perpetuate discrimination and racism.
The training programme undertaken by black staff should be validated so it can count towards formal management training.
Black staff should not have to train twice as hard as their white colleagues.
Support networks for black managers and staff should also be set up with existing networks and resources.
There must be proper recruitment and selection training procedures for white managers, and monitoring of the total positive action programme.
Purchasers and providers are now judged by performance indicators.
We can measure the success within this framework.
I suggest the King's Fund would be well placed to undertake a monitoring exercise to evaluate the success of programmes of positive action to date.
AN END TO INTERVIEWING
In Kendra Sone's article ‘Vetting equality’(16 February) we are warned that psychometric testing, when used for selecting candidates, should be used with care and that candidates could find themselves open to discrimination if such tests become part of tougher selection processes.
What the author doesn't say is that selection interviews, although the most commonly used method of assessing candidates, are in themselves prone to bias and prejudice.
They are unlikely to predict successful job performance and research suggests interviewers' performance is not helped significantly by training.
In this context job-related selection tests which have been properly validated can help obtain information from candidates and improve the objectivity of the recruitment process which will undoubtedly include interviews.
Reputable test publishers in conjunction with the Commission for Racial Equality and the Equal Opportunities Commission have issued guidance on the steps which should be taken to unsure that tests do not discriminate unfairly.
The message which must be drummed home is that tests and exercises must be relevant to the job and the results should never be used on their own.
The costs of a bad recruitment decision can be high.
We must do everything we can to improve the selection decision making process; inevitably this will mean moving away from relying on interviews.
A WORD BY ANY OTHER NAME…
I thoroughly concur with Derek Fearnside (Letters, 11 March) that words are tricky things.
Take our changing use of collective nouns to describe the groups of people we work with.
Elderly people become older people, handicapped people become disabled people, and difficulties become disabilities.
The new terminology will quickly become  pejorative .
The other day I came to work wearing a rather sharp tie and somebody said it looked as if it had been designed by somebody with ‘special needs’.
The Children Act is replete with new terminology.
‘Being in care’, becomes ‘looked after’, ‘access’ becomes ‘contact’, and ‘home on trial’becomes ‘placed at home’.
Why?
Did we have any difficulty with the old language?
It adequately expressed the eternal verities of social work.
Care versus control, genericism versus specialism, authority versus self-determination, which no matter how many innovative structures we construct and what we call them, are never adequately resolved.
EXCLUDING MEN IS ‘DRACONIAN’
Keith Pringle (‘Gender politics’, 4 March) concedes that ‘most sexual abuse remains undiscovered’.
Who is to say that if, miraculously, all sexual abuse could be discovered, the statistics would not reveal more involvement by women.
It is not beyond the bounds of possibility that sexual abuse by women invokes more secrecy than that already disclosed.
And why identify residential and foster care alone as areas to be staffed entirely by females?
Young students studying at his university could also be vulnerable emotionally.
Away from home, perhaps for the first time, intellectually challenged, in financial difficulty and in need of support, a student could find her or himself easy prey for a potentially abusing lecturer.
Sexual abuse in any circumstances is not to be tolerated, but denying men the opportunity to care is a particularly Draconian solution.
INFORMATION PLEASE
Social Work Education published three times a year, publishes reflective and critical articles, providing a forum for debate on important social care, social work education, training and staff development issues.
All contributions demonstrate and promote anti-discriminatory approaches to training and practice.
We invite potential authors to contact the editor, from whom details are also available about a workshop on writing for publication to be held in Manchester on 27 May.
The journal would be pleased to receive articles which contribute to the development of education, training and practice.
I have been asked to write an account of the social welfare programme of the Gulbenkian Foundation from 1964 to 1990 .
Would readers who have made applications to the foundation write with their experiences, successful or not.
We welcome letters for possible inclusion on this page.
They should be typed and double spaced, and include the full name and address of the author, which we can omit if requested.
Send to   Alternatively, you can dictate your letter to us over the telephone.
Ring  on Wednesdays or Fridays between 3.30pm and 4.30pm
COMMENT
No lip service
The cliché is true: April 1993 does herald the beginning and not the end of a process of change for social services.
For managers and staff, it may feel like an anti-climax after the frenzied run up to implementation.
The immediate pressure is off but the momentum for reform goes on.
The next step is to stop paying lip service to the theory and put into practice the long-held promise of meeting the needs and aspirations of users and carers.
The Community Care Support Force (see pages 18–19) has completed its mission and left a legacy that difficult issues must not be fudged and that no one agency or interest group will get far alone.
Much can be gained from the openness of communication and willingness to learn from others
Terry Butler, the force's co-leader, returned to Hampshire last week and was clear about the main ingredients for success: sharing and communicating a common vision; collaboration before competition; putting the customer first; project management; and project planning.
On project management, many SSDs seem to have struggled with the notion that the changes should be led by a dedicated manager and teams with specific responsibilities and timescales.
Exactly why this has been a difficulty is not clear and it is ironic considering the lead responsibility local authorities fought for and won.
Certainly, those used to project management and planning are finding it invaluable in breaking down tasks into manageable blocks, defining what can be realistically achieved, and as a tool for reviewing and progress-chasing.
These are skills which departments should be adept at developing.
Local authorities have been notoriously lax in projecting aims and policies and facing up to weaknesses.
Much can be gained from the openness of communication and willingness to learn from others.
The force is rightly stepping back from the limelight.
The challenge now rests with local authorities in partnership with others.
Professionals should take comfort that a helping hand is available if needed.
No one has all the right answers but there is now a willingness to share information.
Talking to colleagues in neighbouring authorities and agencies should be encouraged.
A database also exists as a national resource of innovative practice and ideas.
Funded jointly by the NHS Management Executive and the SSI, it will be run by the Nuffield Institute in Leeds and if used correctly will prevent the wheel being reinvented.
MANAGEMENT: JOINT PLANNING
LANCASHIRE HOTPOT
According to social services and health chiefs in the north-west, Monopoly and Trivial Pursuit are out and The X Factor is now flavour of the day.
Peter Hewitt explains how a new managers' toolkit proved to be more than just a game
Collaboration between health and social services is nothing new in the north-west.
A joint strategy for closing long stay hospitals and providing services in the community was in place five years before the phrase ‘caring for people’ emerged as the title of a White Paper.
The 19 district health authorities and 11 family health service authorities in the North Western Regional Health Authority, and the 11 SSDs in Greater Manchester and Lancashire, have achieved more than just the doling out of the joint finance budget.
With massive organisational changes in health and social services, came the consultants armed with games and simulations for managers to play to the new ground rules of collaboration.
It is not a simulation but a framework within which top health and social services managers can review progress on real life community care issues
The brave new world of the healthcare market has seen games such as Rubber Windmill and Yorkshire Jigsaw.
When the indivisibility of health care and community care became apparent, there followed the Care Kaleidoscope, and even a game called Caress.
AGREE ACTION PLANS
But rumour had it these simulations all delivered Armageddon in the form of a total system collapse by 1996 or earlier.
Then along came a new managers' tool for community care planning called The X Factor.
It was developed by North Tyneside Health Authority with assistance from Newcastle-based consultancy David Sheppard & Associates and the Health Services Management Unit of Newcastle University.
The X Factor is being marketed as a package to help managers clarify priorities, set benchmarks and agree action plans for community care.
It costs £17,000 and was bought by the North Western Regional Health Authority earlier this year.
So why should down-to-earth, hard-headed Lancastrians be convinced by the marketing of this toolkit?
It is not a simulation but a framework within which top health and social services managers can review progress on real life community care issues, within their own agencies as well as jointly.
Its design was clearly led by operational managers, with academics and consultants in a supporting role.
Most importantly, its key objective was to promote openness and trust at the top level, a refreshing contract to the dog-eat-dog approach being bred into far too many managers in this sado-masochistic age.
Salford was the first district to try out The X Factor.
Chief Officers of the DHA, FHSA and SSD met at Salford University.
With them were purchaser and provider managers from the DHA and SSD, while the SSD and FHSA also had planning and administration representatives.
The day began with health and social services managers meeting in their two separate groups.
To a series of 20 propositions, covering such headings as finance and capacity, assessment and care management, participation and monitoring and control, they had to rate their own organisation on a scale of one to five.
The two groups then came together to begin the real business of the day — finding a shared appreciation of the situation in which they were to operate.
The objectives were to help organisations assess their readiness to purchase and deliver services, individually and jointly; to plot relationships between agencies; and to set benchmarks for measuring progress; and to agree priorities for action.
The process of sharing perceptions of one another 's readiness produced varied results.
One finance and capacity issues there was a large degree of agreement.
All authorities faced tight financial constraints in the key areas for community care development.
PILOT SCHEMES UNDERWAY
Hospital discharge planning needed more work.
Broad agreement was also evident on issues of assessment and care management.
Well planned pilot schemes were under way, but more was needed on budgetary delegation and GP involvement.
The questions on participation produced widely divergent assessments.
Social services workers were more optimistic than health colleagues about the extent to which GPs and residential providers were actively involved in community care planning.
Social services staff gave both agencies bottom score on the involvement of service users in planning, and carer involvement scored little better.
Health members were more upbeat about the involvement of both groups.
The monitoring and control issues marked a return to consensus in the two groups' assessments of how matters stood.
Health departments had achieved a clearer separation of purchases and provider functions, and much more effective methods of needs assessment at the district-wide level.
Social services had a high degree of commitment to community care planning, which was diluted in the health agencies by other priorities.
To the enigmatic question: ‘Is your organisation shaping local politics — or do the politics shape the organisation?’, we answered: ‘Pass.’
In response to the final overview questions, we all felt the community care planning process was acting as a catalyst for joint solutions to shared problems.
We marked ourselves more harshly on whether we were making satisfactory progress, in other words showing a strong degree of optimism but no complacency.
Then came the tricky bit — the consultants plotted the scores for the four components along the four arms of a St George's cross.
A mixed picture emerged, characterised by a number of adverse external factors.
It was clear a formidable agenda still had to be tackled in Salford.
The most important part of the day was identifying priorities for action and agreeing how they would be handled.
The agenda included finance and its distribution; hospital discharging; identifying and costing continuing community health care; a joint strategic vision for the 1993/94 plan; interface with GPs; review of joint planning machinery and organisational SSD issues, such as the purchaser/provider split and budget delegation.
DRIVE FORWARD
Most of these were already being worked on, but three chief officers, together with the director of purchasing and three unit general managers decided to form The X Factor Group.
This meets informally each month to monitor progress and drive the agenda forward.
As well as overseeing community care implementation, the group is driving forward exploration of new areas which were only identified through The X Factor process of exchanging perceptions in a structured and candid way.
These include:
the need for the DHA purchaser to hold a contingency fund for problematic health-related community care placements;
assessing increased burdens on community health services arising from more people being supported at home;
developing a joint arbitration system to help resolve quickly any intractable disputes on the ground; and
establishing a provider presence on the new Joint Commissioning Forum (replacing the Joint Care Planning Team), which recognises the provider's contribution to commissioning.
So Care Kaleidoscope, Caress, The X Factor…what should we call it when a variety of different ingredients are brought together, blended, and receive a release of energy which makes the whole greater than the sum of its parts?
Around here, when we do that with meat, onions, potatoes and salt, we call it a Lancashire Hotpot.
PRACTICE: CHILD PROTECTION
MOTHERS' HELP
Mothers who have had no part in abuse are often neglected during child-protection work.
Kendra Sone reports on a project to establish self-help systems
For the non-abusing mothers of abused children, child protection procedures are distressing and sometimes damaging.
Investigations are, by their nature, adversarial , and no matter how sensitive the workers are, when all eyes are focused on the needs of the child, the mothers come second.
Newham SSD has recognised a child's future happiness can depend on how well the mother is supported through an investigation.
‘But we do have limitations.
It is unrealistic to expect social workers to empathise with the child, the mother and the abuser,’ says Bernadette Manning, head of child protection.
The borough's team hopes to maximise a mother's chances of continuing to care for her children by providing independent counselling and advocacy to help her survive the investigation intact.
‘Child protection is intrusive.
But we don't want the mothers destroyed by what we do.
We're doing this to try and make the mothers our allies in caring for their children,’ explains Manning.
The SSD is funding voluntary groups to provide counsellors and advocates to help women cope with child protection investigations.
As the Newham Independent Counselling Service the scheme is in its infancy, but eventually ‘we want a core of women who have been through the process to run a self-help group,’ says Manning.
Research shows non-abusing mothers need their partners most between 7–8pm — a time when statutory services provide little support.
A self-help organisation could provide the vital contact with the outside world which would enable the women to cope, with loneliness for example, she says.
Women are told about the service when they have contact with the child protection team.
In its first six months, the Newham Independent Counselling Service project has taken seven referrals from the SSD, two women referred themselves, and one came via her family.
They are offered an initial hour-long session when a counsellor assesses their needs.
‘We originally agreed to set up a group for mothers whose children were being dealt with in a child protection context,’ explains the counselling project co-ordinator Hazel Hickson.
But it soon emerged that a proportion of the women who came forward had been abused as children, ‘and this was their first chance to talk about it’.
For these women, coming to terms with the fact that their own children may also have been abused was torture, Hickson says, and they weren't ready to take part in a self-help group.
They wanted one-to-one sessions to focus on their own abuse.
Hickson says the women rejected the self-help group for complex reasons.
‘They felt their needs had never been dealt with and a group would take away attention from their problem,’ she says.
And if their own experiences are dealt with, ‘they feel they can offer something to their children’.
Three women are now ready for an informal support group to share their experiences of the child protection system.
Hickson hopes this will form the nucleus of a self-help group.
The SSD expected a demand for advocates to accompany mothers to child protection conferences.
Although the project can provide advocates, Hickson says it may be some time before mothers want this service, and even then, ‘we may have to keep the counselling and advocacy work separate’.
She says some of the women see the counselling service as a sanctuary.
‘They want a safe place not connected with the child protection process.’
Black and other ethnic communities make up 47 per cent of Newham's 220,000 population.
In another move to improve services for parents, principal child protection officer Evelyn Joseph is helping local voluntary organisations set up an advocacy project for black parents who come into contact with the child protection team.
This, too, will be developed and run by women.
Advocates will not act as interpreters as these are already available.
They will give counselling, support and advice.
Joseph says the advocates can help explain cultural practices and identify a mother's strengths.
She says: ‘We tend to concentrate on weaknesses.
And they [the mothers]fear that everything they say will be identified as evidence of abuse.’
Joseph expects the department to be involved in advocates' training, ‘to ensure they understand procedures and what child protection means.
But once it's up and running, they may want to develop their own skills and expertise’.
Many of Newham's communities are tightknit, and some mothers may be worried about confidentiality.
If they are, they can turn to the mainstream counselling service.
Manning also recognises a danger that the support groups will clash with the SSD over procedures.
‘It could develop that way, and if it does it's because we're not treating the parents properly.’
The counselling and advocacy projects are user-led and the SSD does not expect them to develop overnight.
Joseph says the black advocacy project is unlikely to be up and running before next year.
The procedures are in place for the independent counselling service to run the self-help group and supply advocates to meet demand.
The project's direction will depend on the women's needs.
Hazel Hickson hopes referrals will increase now Newham's strike is over and the department returns to normal.
MANAGEMENT: COMMUNITY CARE
MISSION ACCOMPLISHED
When the community care Support Force was inaugurated, many SSDs regarded it with the same amount of suspicion and distrust as a bird would a snake.
But their proved fears unfounded, says Jane King
The community care Support Force swung in on hard-pressed SSDs with as much subtlety as a ton of bricks.
But now its mission is accomplished, cynical professionals are reflecting on how the exercise turned out to be far more laudable than expected.
The Support Force was launched in September 1992 by the DoH in a disastrous public relations exercise.
It comprised 20 professionals from SSDs, voluntary organisations, private sector, health sector and after much campaigning, a couple of users.
Hampshire director Terry Butler and former NHS deputy chief executive Andrew Foster led the group to assist authorities struggling with some aspects of implementation.
The situation was urgent — a handful of SSDs had made barely any progress with less than a year to transform policies and practice.
Officially, the force was supposed to go in by invitation only; avoid looking like the heavy mob; and not humiliate authorities which felt they were hounded because they were struggling to cope on their own.
In reality, the approach seemed more like a polite version of gate crashing.
It wasn't long before the Support Force and Butler collected an array of nick-names with the hit-squad being the most polite
Once SSI and regional health authority monitoring has identified those authorities which were to slow to progress, the pressure was on to bring them up to scratch.
The authorities which made the list became hot gossip — Walsall, Avon, Haringey, Greenwich, Barking & Dagenham, North Tyneside, Newcastle, Manchester and Liverpool.
DoH attempts to secrecy only added to the mystique and it wasn't long before the Support Force and Butler collected an array of nicknames with the £hit-squad’ being the most polite.
Even now, the force is hampered by DoH dogma and defensiveness.
Ministers stopped the force contributing to this article, which suggests they are not as confident as they should be about its achievements.
Despite initial fears, agencies now speak highly of the effectiveness of the Support Force had in pushing forward the reforms.
The exercise, they say, was useful in concentrating the mind on what had to be done.
It offered clear advice, practical help and encouragement at a critical time.
Even those known to be dragging their feet due to political resistance have admitted that the Support Force was constructive.
Perhaps its most obvious success was its ability to prioritise community care among those local councils, health authorities, and FHSAs which historically had no inter-agency  collaboration .
Many professionals wish they had been given more detailed and honest feedback far sooner, perhaps as early as the SSI/RHA's initial monitoring.
It seems once the ice was broken and egos calmed, getting down to the eight key tasks with help from outsiders did not seem so bad after all.
Suddenly there was no need to dodge difficult issues any longer.
Everything was out in the open — political resistance, management failings and just sheer inertia.
The Support Force would usually arrange for a team of five or eight of its members with a mix of skills and background to spend one day fact-finding and give hard-hitting feedback.
A list of good points about the authority would be followed by a list of bad points, then recommendations about problem areas and ways the force could help.
This varied from the offer of consultancy Price Waterhouse to written materials, and link people.
STREET CRED
As one force member put it: Directors were encouraged to use this free resource to their own advantage in pushing it through with members.
The teams that went in had street cred.
Here were people from the field facing the same issues.
Authority were more likely to listen to them than to the DoH.’
For the SSDs concerned, one observer described it as: ‘A pretty sobering experience.
It gave everyone a bit of a fright.’
The approach was holistic — looking at the SSD's work with the health authority, the FHSA, and the private and voluntary sectors.
The most common blockages found were:
having an identified social services person in charge, not necessarily the director.
Often SSDs had a series of people leading different bits of  implementation or more than one person thought they were in charge;
implementation started too late.
Those authorities with paternalistic tendencies had delayed in the hope that the General Election would return a Labour government.
Some SSDs made no headway until the summer of 1992; and
relationships with the independent and voluntary sector were very weak.
Director of the National Care Homes Association Sheila Scott, who represented the private sector on the Support Force, says SSDs were ‘incredibly co-operative’ but there were obstacles.
DEFENSIVE ATTITUDES
‘Very few rolled over and said ‘Come and fix it’.
You cannot blame people for being defensive.
People were prepared to be honest not just about their authority but about themselves and whether they were actually capable of effecting change.
Of all the visits Scott can only recall one where the SSD would have delivered all eight key tasks in time for April regardless of the Support Force.
Newcastle's experience of the Support Force was positive, according to director Brian Roycroft.
A team of eight, led by Andrew Foster in his last days on the force, was invited in December.
Around 50 interviews were conducted with clients, staff and health officials and a detailed diagnosis followed.
Newcastle was under no illusions, having already been identified in monitoring as one of those labouring with targets.
‘We struggled badly last summer because the SSD had taken terrible cuts and lost management and closed services’, says Roycroft.
‘We were in a mess and were sinking.
The DHA was in a mess because there were big rows about amalgamation and the FHSA had management changes.’
Foster saw Newcastle's problems as an ideal situation to be resolved by project management.
Price Waterhouse consultancy was offered and a senior assistant director in the department appointed in charge to push the changes forward.
One of the key areas of weakness was information management.
Liverpool Health Authority took a different approach.
Paul Cronin, its executive director of community and mental health services, claims the Authority already knew that joint purchasing arrangements, information technology and developing links with GPs were the biggest areas of concern.
It invited the force to a two-day, multi-agency workshop to benefit from the varied background and experiences of its members.
‘The advantages was bringing together all these different people at one time.
Having access to the creative approaches to the reforms in other authorities was really useful.
We could have done this without the Support Force but it would have taken longer to do.’
When it comes to supporting the private sector, Scott is a vociferous and tough opponent.
She ended up in conflict with co-leader Terry Butler after being selected to join the force.
With hindsight, she says: ‘I wished I'd kept my mouth shut in the first three weeks.
I was bloody difficult because I came with my own agenda and I wasn't going to have a whitewash.
It was pretty nerve-racking for everyone.
We were thrown together and had to get on with it.’
She speaks volumes about the divisions which exited when she acknowledges that ‘Terry was more comfortable with his own kind’.
But even Butler has come to realise that in fulfilling the role of gamekeeper turned poacher he might not win friends but he could influence people.
The probing nature of his role, acting as an ‘expert’ on behalf of the government to push the reform stragglers along, has inevitably made him unpopular in some social services quarters.
The enthusiasm he first showed is visibly more jaded now but that's not surprising after eight months in the spotlight.
SHIFTING OPINION
Scott looks back at it as someone who has learned a great deal and contributed to shifting opinion about private and statutory sector relationships.
‘As a team, the Support Force worked incredibly well.
I have made lifelong friends and I have a lot more sympathy for social services now,’ she says.
Her message to proprietors of private homes is to avoid confrontation and be reasonable in co-operating with SSDs.
An important job for the force has been to collect and disseminate examples of good practice.
This work has been invaluable in giving authorities straight, non-jargonistic answers to difficult issues and in raising awareness of future demands through practice guidance, workshops, a newsletter and a helpline.
The only criticism is that it could have been made available earlier to complement the often impractical tomes which emerged from other quarters.
An evaluation of the Support Force is to be carried out.
A mark of success is that, to varying degrees, all SSDs achieved the eight key tasks to deadline.
Whether they would have done so without the force, is simply history.
A culture of sharing knowledge and experiences is also evolving and the Support Force has helped that development.
In future, ministers need not look far for a way to bridge working relationships between central and local government.
The Support Force crossed the great divide and for that the profession ought to be grateful.
PRACTICE: ELDERLY PEOPLE
CLEAN CHOICE
A voucher system operating in Kingston upon Thames SSD puts client choice at the forefront of its home care service.
Mike George reports
The gradual withdrawal of traditional home help services in favour of personal assistance is well documented and easily understood.
With tight budgets, most SSDs have naturally tended to concentrate on clients with higher levels of need.
On the other hand, surveys of clients' and carers' requirements usually reveal they would value quite modest levels of extra services — often of the old ‘home help’ variety.
For example, 20 per cent of disabled people over pension age say household cleaning is a particular problem.
A slightly smaller proportion need shopping help, but only 9 per cent receive this type of assistance.
And while two-thirds of older people get some form of home care assistance, dissatisfaction with restrictive services is common.
Yet, as reported in community Care (Politics, 4 March 1993) most SSDs have strict criteria for eligibility for services, and ‘only the most complex personal care needs can be met out of the money available.’
Kingston upon Thames SSD has taken a different route, targeting part of its homecare service on people with less complex or intensive needs, particularly clients needing household cleaning.
Local information from user and carer groups had revealed a basic home help cleaning service was highly valued by many clients.
Diane Chalmers, senior home care manager, says councillors and staff recognised that removing the service would be a false economy.
However, it was also realised that existing service provision did not always meet clients' needs.
There was dissatisfaction over times, hours worked, and being visited by several different staff.
Last June Kingston upon Thames set up[ what it  believed to be  a unique new system for running the service.
Clients who are assessed as needing a home cleaning service receive vouchers once a month, each representing one or two hours' worth of cleaning.
Clients then ‘spend’ the vouchers on their weekly cleaning.
The home care manager for voucher services keeps a register of home care assistants who have been interviewed by the authority, and clients choose who they want and when.
Most clients have moved to the voucher system, although some cannot use it.
It enables them to find a suitable assistant and agree with them the hours, times and tasks required.
If there is a problem the client or assistant can contact the manager who will mediate.
I Tried to get some cleaning help but all I was offered was a shopping service, so I paid privately for a helper.
She didn't really help me in the ways I needed
A client who has severe arthritis broke her hip.
‘At that time I tried to get some cleaning help, but all I was offered was a shopping service, so I paid privately for a helper.
She didn't really help me in the ways I needed,’ she says.
‘Now I'm in the voucher scheme I feel safer knowing that the council has looked at the people it employs, and if there's any difficulty I can go to Joan [the manager].’
The arthritis has affected her mobility and independence, which not only undermines her sense of her own ability, but also puts pressure on family members.
‘The service I get is very precious to me, and takes away pressure on my family.
It's really much more than a cleaning service because it has helped me emotionally,’ she says.
‘In a funny way it's helped to give me back my sense of independence, and I do more physically than I did before.
The voucher scheme also gets rid of the embarrassment of paying someone, and through Joan I've got a bit of flexibility about the amount of help I get.’
Sue Todd, principal manager of the home care service, explains that the scheme is designed to extend the client choice, and put the client more in control.
Each has a named assistant, with their address and phone number, plus direct recourse to the manager if times or other arrangements need to be changed.
Clients can also suggest neighbours and friends who may be suitable for employment.
‘This means we're developing an updated good neighbour scheme too,’ Todd says.
There are practical limits on flexibility, but clients can easily suspend the service if they go on holiday, or for respite care.
Clients can also buy extra vouchers for specific occasions, although regular extra vouchers would alert the service to the possibility of a new assessment of need.
Clients on income-related benefits get free vouchers, others pay a flat rate fee, though most will probably pay something in the future.
The scheme allows tight quality control and effective management of resources.
Regular contact with the manager enables problems to be picked up quickly, and questionnaires are routinely sent to clients who say they no longer need the service.
There are also annual reviews with clients.
The scheme's success has encouraged Todd to extend the system to other forms of care.
‘Although we started with cleaning services, we're now extending the voucher system to other personal care areas, like bathing, more intensive care services and especially to the provision of services at night, possibly using independent agencies.
It allows us to put client choice at the core of community care services,’ she says.
POLICY: THE MEDIA 2
MATTERS OF IMAGE
Can social work do anything to improve its image?
Terry Philpot, in the second of two articles, suggests how the situation could be changed for the better and the profession portrayed more positively
There is more than a hint of truth in what Alastair Hetherington, a former editor of The Guardian was told to explain how one defines news values: ‘It's like riding a bike; if you stop to think about it, you'll fall off.’
How does the press work?
How do news values shape coverage?
‘Gut instinct’ perhaps best describes news values.
Journalists are quickly caught up in pursuing the stories they generate, with an invigorating rush of adrenalin.
There is also a good argument that the media are obsessed with bad news.
As Ian Jacks of the Sunday Times has said: ‘Bad news is to journalism what dung is to rhubarb’.
One child's death through child abuse and the involvement of all the professionals is of much more interest, journalistically, than a thousand social work success stories.
Social work influences the lives of thousands of children and adults…yet many people will have no contact with social workers
Yet there still remains Peter Golding's interesting finding: in the past ten years (through such surveys as have been carried out, which are not many and with no great scientific basis), there has been a consistent public appreciation of social work, even though the public has equally consistently held social workers in low esteem, below teachers, doctors, and nurses.
Although there is confusion about exactly what social workers do, there is a belief that they ‘help people’.
This confusion about what social workers do is important.
Social work influences the lives of thousands of children and adults, sometimes critically, sometimes fleetingly.
Yet many people will never have any contact with social workers.
We have all been to school, and many have children at school.
Everyone will have some dealings with the medical profession.
Everyone will have had contact with the police, if only to ask directions.
However, social work is not visible in this way.
Fourteen years ago Barbara Wootton identified a problem for social workers when she surveyed their job advertising, and looked at the jargon and specialised language which described the task applicants would perform.
She referred to the confusion and ambivalence about what social workers do, writing: ‘Nor is this confusion dispelled by a study of the posts which regularly appear…
Thus one such asks for qualified applicants who are used to ‘statutory duties’, and have the ability to ‘act independently and take appropriate decisions’(about what?).
Another mentions that the successful applicant will be expected to ‘work with families and children’(on what?); and yet another asks for an ‘intake social worker’ to ‘join a team’which is ‘developing systems and methods useful to clients and staff’.
Lady Wootton added: ‘They layman may well be puzzled to visualise how the holders of these posts will spend their working hours.
Yet he would have no similar difficulty in describing a day in the life of, say, a doctor or school teacher.’
IMPROVING ITS IMAGE
That was then.
What would she say now, given the frequent replacement of the title social worker for ‘project leader’, ‘Key worker’, ‘outreach worker’ or ‘care manager’or a dozen other not-so-self-explanatory variants?
Are there any solutions within the power of the profession itself to improve its image?
On some fronts progress may require money, even if the will and the expertise are there.
There is a large poster which appears on the London underground and in some national newspapers.
It shows two attractive, well-dressed, professional women (one of them black) enjoying a drink in a fashionable wine bar.
We do not know from the photograph, but these are police officers.
The headline tells us: ‘They've saved over 300 women from abuse, beatings, humiliation, rape and murder.’
The advertisement has been placed by the Metropolitan Police.
It is  not there to prevent crime; it is there to promote the work of the police.
Another advertisement appears in the colour supplements aimed at recruiting people to mental health nursing.
It shows someone in obvious mental distress and gives a strong message that the nurse has a positive job to do.
But if the words ‘mental health nurse’ were changed to ‘social worker’would the message — that to help someone is a positive and worthwhile career — be any different?
Why don't we see positive advertisements about social work?
The Metropolitan Police are government-funded, but even local forces could probably launch such campaigns if necessary.
The nursing advertisement would have been paid for by the DoH.
But, again, the Royal College of Nursing is a wealthy body — unlike BASW or the ADSS — which could represent its members positively through advertising if necessary.
(Consider the vast sums spent by the BMA to oppose the government's NHS reforms.)
Such advertisements cost money, and it will not be the first thought of a local authority, which has many staff and functions outside the SSD, to pay for similar campaigns.
But it has been tried: Birmingham City Council ran billboard advertisements a few years ago imaginatively showing what the SSD actually did, how it positively affected old people, young people, and everyone in between.
The great pity is that social services organisations are split between the SCA, ADSS (the ADSW in Scotland), and BASW, and even their combined memberships are a minority of those in social work, let alone in social services.
As long as this situation continues, the resources for a concentrated attack on indifference and hostility may well prove elusive.
RAISED PROFILE
On a positive note, it is much more common now for local authorities to employ public relations staff, and one or two even have staff specifically attached to the SSD.
Bradford, in particular, has given a lead on this and there is ample evidence to show how the department's profile was raised considerably and more positively.
Every social worker has a responsibility to stand up for their own profession, to accept criticism humbly when it is due, and to explain why things are done in certain ways.
Why, for example, shouldn't individuals respond to a hostile report or misinformed letter in a local newspaper?
But there is another, very important matter social work can do something about, which, over time, will do more than anything to raise the profession's standing.
Of all the professions, social work remains unregulated.
More than ten years ago the Barclay report rejected the idea of a general social work council, as it could find no consensus in favour.
Now that consensus, through much hard work, has come about, favouring a general social services council to cover all staff in the statutory, private and voluntary sectors.
Such a council would benefit social work like nothing else: it is important that the public (and the press) knows there is regulatory control over a group of people who (quite rightly) hold substantial powers over some groups and who have a great influence over others.
Modern social work is still a new profession, despite the great upheavals of the past 20 years.
Much of what is now recognised as social work did not exist 30 or 40 years ago, and what did — child care work, work with mentally ill people and some other matters — was practised on a much smaller scale, away from the glare of the media.
Social workers work in an imperfect world.
They need to remember Mark Twain's words:
Truth is mighty and the truth will prevail.
There is nothing the matter with this, except that it ain't so.
This article is the second if two extracted from the Annual Violet Butler Lecture given by the author at Barnett House, Oxford.
PRACTICE: SECURE ACCOMMODATION
BACKS AGAINST THE WALL
No matter who carries the can for putting young people in secure accommodation, social workers should not forget they have a contribution to make, say Robert Harris and Noel Timms
Secure accommodation in child care us a chameleon-like provision: sometimes a last-ditch strategy to avoid custody for a child otherwise bound there.
The ambiguity of something so ill-defined argued for on such different, and sometimes contradictory grounds, needs serious analysis.
The received wisdoms that to restrict the use of secure accommodation we should concentrate on refining the relative legislative criteria must be challenged.
Simply ‘tightening the legislation’ will not have the results some imagine.
Section 25 of the Children Act 1989 requires local authorities to obtain a youth court order to hold a child in secure accommodation for more than 72 hours in any 28 day period.
Such an order permits a child to be held in secure accommodation for up to three months at a first hearing, and six months on renewal.
Our research was conducted before the Children Act, but little in the legislation makes us believe our findings to be significantly out of date.
It is still the case that social workers' reliance on the legislature or the courts to solve the problems posed by the varying use of secure accommodation is ineffective in improving the allocation process.
In our study we found:
many applications for secure orders are made with the child's consent;
accordingly, courts are under little pressure to test the evidence;
few magistrates have much experience of applications or confidence in turning them down.
With striking exceptions, social workers had a low opinion of the quality of court decision making;
many children's solicitors found it difficult to determine the child's competence to give instructions.
Some solicitors adopted a ‘welfare’ approach, acting against their client's instructions in the belief that for them to be released would not be in their interests; and
most courts were unwilling to turn down applications from expert professionals.
While many social workers told us they were relieved it was not they, but the courts, who would be arraigned in the tabloids if they ‘got it wrong’, this simply passed on the same worries to the courts.
The tensions between protecting children and protecting the community remain unresolved in the light of the mixed messages given by the Children Act and the Criminal Justice Act 1991.
Changing the wording of statute, therefore, may be surprisingly irrelevant to decisions.
Social workers and the courts are facing a problem which has defeated the best efforts of families and professionals; whatever the wording, few courts will be willing to gamble on children whom they refuse to commit to security not returning to prostitution, burning down a house, or injuring themselves.
Courts may be important less for what they do than for what they are: their existence makes social workers pause before they apply for an order.
Hence, they can minimise the likelihood of blatant injustice.
But beyond this their influence is limited.
So what should be done?
Any of the following options would effectively reduce inappropriate use than would any technical change in legislation.
They all focus on the social worker, and it is social workers who must understand that asking for an order usually means being granted one.
Social workers considering applying for an order should examine their agency's gatekeeping.
We found that the best were often child care experts who could suggest constructive alternatives, not so often the most senior people in the organisation.
An order need not always be for the maximum period.
The agency may be encouraged to negotiate this with the local court.
Social workers should always have as clear a plan as possible for the child, and implement it in a shorter time than normal.
Parkinson's Law applies decisively in residential care: time expands in accordance with the potentially limitless tasks which exist.
Rigorous departmental scrutiny should precede all renewal applications.
Many courts rubber stamp them and those children who like being in secure units may not press to leave.
Secure units are safety nets, for use when all else has failed.
If a child presents insuperable problems courts will interpret legislation in a commonsense way.
Social workers should not assume court hearings have removed practical (as opposed to formal) responsibility from them: their advice remains crucial.
Robert Harris is head of the department of social policy and professional studies, University of Hull.
Noel Timms is professor emeritus, University of Leicester.
Their book, Secure Accommodation in Child Care: Between Hospital and Prison or Thereabouts, was published by Routledge in March 1993.
BOOKS
Under the Children Act
CHILDREN, THEIR FAMILIES AND THE LAW
Michael Freeman's book on working with the Children Act is both erudite and readable.
It makes a welcome appearance in the vanguard of an anticipated second wave of further editions and new works on the Act.
Professor Freeman has produced an excellent guide to this massive and complex piece of legislation from his wealth of experience as a law lecturer and commentator on the legal context of child care practice.
It is written specifically for social workers.
The author's skill in tracing the influence of research studies, child abuse, inquiries, client group pressures and professional concerns on child care policy-making in the late 1980s, and the translation of that policy into legislative provision, is impressive.
But this book contains much more than an exposition on the background to the Children Act and an explanation of the principles on which it is founded.
These are merely an essential introduction.
The substance, cross referenced to the introduction, provides a full and detailed commentary on the private and public law provisions and their accompanying rules, regulations and guidance for those who practise within the child care arena.
The commentary is accompanied by detailed reference to relevant earlier case law, the few judicial decisions relating to the Act that emerged in the early months of implementation, and a wealth of literary sources.
The fact that Freeman is writing primarily for the social work profession is apparent, for instance, in the extent to which the legal regulation of substitute care is dealt with in depth.
This law is central to social work practice but of little significance to many lawyers.
On the other hand, the massive changes in the court structure and procedures introduced by the Act receive minimal, though for the intended readers, adequate, attention.
Though aimed at the social work profession, this book will no doubt also prove invaluable to lawyers, members of the medical and allied professions, and anyone needing an informed understanding of child care law under the Children Act.
In trouble
PROBLEM ADOLESCENTS: AN INTERNATIONAL VIEW
Few people in Britain have the author's range of knowledge relating to adolescents or his ability to evaluate and disseminate it.
But this book is a bit of a curate's egg.
It gives the brief papers to a conference on problem adolescents, held after a five year exchange of child care policy makers, practitioners and researchers from England and the Carolinas.
There are 19 offerings on offending, difficult behaviour, education, family work and abuse, planning advocacy, consumer views, and solutions.
But there is little room for a comprehensive view, though it gives the generalists a basis for comparisons which may not be at first apparent.
The UK's concern with issues of juvenile offending is brought out particularly well in the papers by Roger Bullock, Ira Schwartz and Michael Little.
Here at least, concision is not incompatible with quality.
Fight against discrimination
ANTI-DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICE
We live in a society riddled with discrimination and social workers are as likely to exhibit prejudice as any other group.
If they are ‘mediators between clients and the wider state apparatus’, as Neil Thompson puts it, then it is vital their prejudices are challenged.
This book, aimed at social workers and social work students, starts from the position that ‘good practice must be anti-discriminatory’.
Thompson explores a theoretical understanding of how prejudice works.
He then goes on in separate chapters to cover sexism, racism, ageism and disablism.
A further chapter looks at other sources of oppression such as‘sexual orientation’, language and religion.
Unfortunately, ‘mental illness’ and ‘mental impairment’are dealt with one chapter rather than in the chapter on disablism.
And it is not enough to devote four pages to ‘sexual orientation’ and then lamely say it deserves more attention.
Thompson aims to raise understanding of what prejudice is and how discrimination works.
The discussion remains largely on the theoretical level.
But his sections on ‘towards anti-discriminatory practice’ at the end of each chapter are useful summaries.
They sometimes contain concrete examples of changes which need to be made.
It is good to see ageism given the attention it deserves.
Older people are the largest group of consumers of community care services.
Those who assess their needs and deliver services must be aware of a tendency to treat older people as dependent, incapable and childlike.
The disability movement's challenge to the medicalisation of people with impairments is relevant to older people, as it is an understanding of how social and economic factors disable people.
This book is useful but could have been of more value if it had been more clearly grounded in practice.
Theoretical understanding is necessary but in a series entitled ‘Practical Social Work’ there is more room for concrete examples of what constitutes both bad and good practice.
Tackling poverty
POVERTY AND SOCIAL SECURITY
I started this book in the middle, with the chapter on ‘strategies for the relief of poverty’ and then worked my way forwards and backwards, drawn by the tasty contents list.
My memory was vaguely stirred when I saw the authors' name.
But I was not prepared for the raking over of academic arguments on defining poverty around when John Moore, then Secretary of State for Social Services, said poverty no longer existed.
Nor was I ready for the inconsistent treatment of the subject.
I say this with a heavy heart.
It appears a lot of research has gone into this book, especially into the work on comparative social security systems.
Yet the author labours under a self-imposed burden, aiming at ‘those studying social policy, sociology, politics and public administration, and…students of economics and philosophy.’
Take the topic of universal benefits versus selective benefits.
According to Spicker, this debate is ‘moribund and has been for years’.
He manages to assemble three arguments against selectivity; and stigmatisation (there are four if we allow the afterthought reference to the poverty trap).
However, one only needs to note how popular ‘targeting’ is in the rhetoric of social security ministers and the massive publicity budgets to see how overcoming ‘inefficiency’of selectivity dominates current policy.
Similar superficiality is found elsewhere.
For example, he stumbles into this howler on the question of social security as cash, rather than provision in kind: ‘Social security benefits have been introduced to make up for the withdrawal of more general provision: examples in the UK are free prescriptions (introduced because prescription charges were introduced ’(my italics).
For some reason, the book brings Don Quixote to mind, charging in from the right.
A European perspective
SOCIAL WORK AND EUROPE
This is a useful addition to a growing number of texts on social policy, social services, social work and Europe.
Here, ‘Europe’ refers to the EC, especially France and Germany.
The writers aim to place British social work within ‘social Europe’ and to identify emerging European issues, policies and trends.
They also try to draw lessons from other countries.
It is difficult to break new ground in this field.
For example, the first two chapters summarise the familiar subjects of EC social policy and programmes; disappointingly, ‘social Europe’ is mostly concerned with employment affairs.
This material can be found in earlier books.
Social workers are likely to be more interested in chapter three which contains good summaries of the development, organisation and training for social work in six EC countries.
Chapter four includes brief accounts of social work/services for the main client groups in several countries.
It provides interesting comparisons.
Arguably, the most valuable material is in the remaining three chapters where the authors discuss a European emphasis on preventive and social action which is less apparent here.
For example, they show how French governments in the 1980s challenged social workers to work with others to prevent crime, delinquency and exclusion.
In the UK, the term ‘social action’ has almost disappeared from social work.
But elsewhere in Europe it lives on and refers to new ways of working with groups, especially those on the margins.
Discussion of less traditional approaches and concerns continues with reference to social work and citizens' charters, citizenship and participation.
Overall, the writers are cautiously optimistic about social work's future in Europe.
By learning more about other systems and practices, our limited UK view is shaken.
Some services and practices could be improved as a result.
A diversity of purposes
MANAGING TO CARE, THE MANAGEMENT OF SERVICES FOR PEOPLE WITH LEARNING DIFFICULTIES
Managing to Care has an uncertain focus and an ambitious diversity of goals.
Is it primarily a handbook for managers or a review of developments in services for people with learning difficulties?
The book strives to do justice to both areas but suffers from the size of the undertaking.
The authors bring good credentials to their task, both as writers and experts on learning difficulties in SSDs, the health service and beyond.
This makes difficult to offer less then whole-hearted and enthusiastic endorsement of the final product.
On the positive side, the authors have assembled a wealth of material.
This ranges from the history of learning difficulties in the ancient world to general management issues today and from discussions of different service models to chapters on women in management and finance.
But therein lies the rub.
Will busy managers contemplate reading such a large amount of material?
And if they do, will they feel their times has been well rewarded?
Some chapters do provide a good reference resource while others trace the history of particular service models or provide an account of initiatives in particular areas.
But this is not a busy manager's ‘how to’ manage services for people with learning difficulties in the 1990s.
It is more of a walk through the literature and recent trends.
Even then, it is a difficult and uneven walk in places.
The book's structure is not always clear and the lack of index makes it difficult to pin-point where a section on, for example, challenging behaviour or services for black and ethnic minority people was located.
Thankfully, consumer views are not forgotten.
But, put in a few pages at the end of chapters, they are rather an ‘add-on’.
The inclusion of consumer views on each chapter topic might have worked better.
And a more detailed practical guide to involving users would have been good.
Great strides have been made in user-involvement over the last few years — in selecting and training staff, evaluating service quality and the more traditional fostering of self-advocacy groups.
These should all have been there.
And if a chapter on women and managers warranted the inclusion of an additional female contributor, why did the authors not include a chapter by People First on users' views?
Some readers will feel frustrated by the lack of detailed discussion of current issues such as the implications of care management for community teams for people with learning difficulties or the practicalities of disinvesting in day services and investing in supported employment.
There is much to read and, no doubt, learn here.
But some distillation of the authors' experience and wisdom would have been welcome.
The value of research
APPLIED RESEARCH FOR BETTER PRACTICE
The users of social services would greatly benefit from a much greater use of research — for decades this point has been made in reports, in meetings, and within research itself.
This new book by Angela Everitt and her colleagues perhaps indicates that a fresh start is being made, and that this state of affairs will begin to improve.
The book covers important ground, is not afraid of the difficult territory of epistemology and the fundamental questions of theorising about knowing but provides down-to-earth examples and advice.
It highlights the importance of theory (although it covers only Marx, Freud and feminist approaches in its brief summaries) and the argument is made that ‘positivism’ is the main reason for the rejection of research use by practioniers.
Interesting material here, though more evidence and wider analysis of the issues is needed.
One of the book's strengths is to link values and research in a forthright fashion, and it provides cogent arguments for the ways in which research can directly involve the subjects of the research in an emancipatory manner.
The methods a research-based practitioner can use and the techniques for handling the resulting data are outlined in a clear and usable way.
Finally, the authors argue for a new model of practitioner as evaluator and locate this argument in the new social services' world of inspection and performance review.
All in all, this is a welcome book, of relevance to both students and those in practice of management.
The importance of practitioners being research-minded has been stressed in the recent summary of research in child care (Patterns and Outcomes in Child Placement).
This book provides one base on which to develop this new practitioner role.
Power games
WOMEN, MANAGEMENT AND CARE
While sex segregation is endemic in the labour market, ‘SSDs stand at the top of the league table in the welfare state’, as Christine Hallett noted in 1989.
This book examines the gendered division of labour in SSDs and asks why women predominate in caring roles and men in management.
The authors identify the ideological constructs which have dichotomised some of the concepts.
Occasionally, they make unsubstantiated contentions: is it true that women in social work ‘are not aware of and are uncomfortable with, the control part of the work?
Unless women can stop feeling apologetic about wanting power, they will never be in sufficient numbers to change the male agenda.
Powerful riposte
STICKING UP FOR YOURSELF
The term ‘self-advocacy’ gathers worthy concepts like a politically correct snowball.
From ‘speaking up’ and ‘sticking up’for yourself, this report rolls onwards through representation and empowerment to IPPs and complaints procedures.
It is odd that this abstract term is applied, not to our lives, but to the activities of people who tend to have difficulty with abstract concepts.
It links different activities, yet it is remarkable that, as Simons puts it, self-advocacy proves ‘a very diverse and plural phenomenon’.
Whether they see the connections, the people with learning difficulties in Simons' study have important comments on aspects of their lives.
Some, who have learned the language of freedom from their oppressors, even have views on the meaning of ‘self-advocacy’.
The views of people with learning difficulties have been documented for the past 15 years, so this is not new territory — though sections on the attitudes of parents and staff throw light on neglected issues.
Most reports are based on comments from random, briefly assembled groups, Simons spent time in west-country day centres and self-advocacy groups, carefully researching user and staff views.
Although the research was mainly qualitative, the views cannot be dismissed as merely those of a ‘more able’ or of an ‘indoctrinated’minority.
Second, the author provides structure and clear analysis which highlights the issues without compromising the centrality of the users' own words.
As a discussion of the principles and problems of self-advocacy,Sticking Up For Yourself is readable and comprehensive without moving the leading edge.
However, as an act of self-advocacy it is both a very powerful and an excellent riposte to the ‘trailing edge’ of those professionals and parents who still insist that people with learning difficulties say nothing worth hearing.
Discovery in groups
A THEORY OF GROUPWORK PRACTICE
The final sentence of this book aptly summarises its core message: ‘The practice of groupwork is an exercise in the co-operative discovery and use of resources for the mutual benefit of all group members.’
Douglas stresses the common features of groupwork and has developed a useful, straightforward approach which can be applied to all groups and groupwork.
The book starts with the basic processes of affiliation and interaction, differentiating newly ‘created’ groups from those which already exist.
It then distinguishes ‘group-as-context’ which focuses on the individual, from ‘group-as-instrument’emphasising the collective.
The resources in the leader and the members are all-important.
But there are many obstacles which may prevent the potential being realised.
The core skill is the identifying and reducing these obstacles, freeing the group to reach its potential.
The key propositions of this ‘resource theory’ are usefully summarised, providing a valuable concept to inform groupwork.
The book lacks a structural perspective, exacerbated by the continuous use of the male pronoun (is this really acceptable to Macmillan in 1993?).
The power of the worker vis-a-vis the group members is acknowledged, but nowhere are the power differentials between members — attributable to race, gender, class and disability — recognised, or incorporated into the theory.
One of the greatest obstacles to realisating resource potential is the replication of social oppression of the less powerful members.
OFFLOAD
DEPRESSED UNDERVALUED, FRUSTRATED SCARED…
WELL ENOUGH ABOUT MY PROBLEMS, WHAT CAN WE DO FOR YOU?
BASW'S RIGHT ON SOCIAL SPEAK
In China they had the Democracy Wall.
At the BASW conference they had a flip chart marked: ‘Thoughts to share’.
At the end of the first day (a long day, which had our reporters still scribbling at 10.20 pm), the chart had acquired two heartfelt anonymous complaints: ‘Working with — not against’ and ‘Valuing everybody's contribution’.
If you're thinking that means people had started to feel they were being got at, you would be right.
The theme of the conference was ‘Women, men and social work’ so there were a lot of hierarchies of oppression to get over.
Incoming BASW chairperson Graham Thompson mused about language, confessing he had replaced his own references to ‘miners’ wives' with ‘women in mining communities’.
Looking serious, he told his audience: ‘I hope we can comfortably challenge each other’.
When Mad Carew was a lad/lass they called that oxymoron in English lessons.
There was also a lot of talk about ‘comfort zones’— not an euphemism for toilet areas in a motorway service station — but something we were all meant to feel guilty about (in an oddly comfortable sort of way).
But Great Malvern was worth visiting, if only for the best one-liner of the conference, from Joan Beck, chief inspector of Doncaster SSD: ‘Equal opportunities is all very well until someone else gets the job you wanted.’
A FRIEND IN NEED
It is aspiring to know that the Offload page can save a person's credibility — none other than BASW chairperson, Graham Thompson.
At a highbrow civic reception and buffet, courtesy of Hereford and Worcester County Council, I stumbled across Thompson clutching a copy of Community Care .
Not one to miss a plug, I asked him what he thought of our latest issue.
He smiled earnestly, surveyed the room and scribbled away on the Offload page.
Noticing my bewilderment, he revealed he was writing down the names of the ‘bigwigs’, as he was finding it difficult to remember them all.
Lets hope Community Care will be a constant companion and source of support to Thompson in the future.
A CASE OF MINDING YOUR Ns AND Qs
Politically correct language was the order of the day at the BASW conference as the debates centred on gender issues.
Quite right to be sensitive about languages (and yes maybe Mad Carew should be told off for saying ‘manning the office’.)
But it all got a bit too much at one late night plenary session when Graham Thompson was challenged about his language.
A speaker from the floor said Thompson should not be using the term ‘NVQ’(National Vocational Qualification) but in ‘VQ’ in case of offending the Scots at the conference, who of course have ‘SVQs’.
Perhaps one delegate had enough too.
LIVING UP TO THE MACHO IMAGE
The reader in men and masculinity from Bradford University conjured up images for me of a muscular man walking in with a few four-packs of larger under his arms ready to address BASW delegates.
Unfortunately (or perhaps fortunately) he was nothing of the kind.
But it gave an added attraction to the plenary session anyway.
MIDWINTER — THE FAIR WEATHER SOCIALIST
The ADSW's annual conference in Inverness proved to be the usual friendly affair with more than its fair share of memorable moments.
The conference kicked off with a swingeing attack on local government reform by Arthur Midwinter, professor of politics at Strathclyde University.
Midwinter is well known as a scourge of the establishment — retained as a consultant or commissioned to write articles on various government reforms.
But he had to reveal his true colours when asked by daughter how he would vote.
‘The Tories,’ he replied unashamedly, ‘I can't afford for them to lose’.
READY…
AND (STILL) WAITING
Could it be a sign?
At a recent meeting with the ADSW, the Scottish Offices's Social Work Services Group had tables an extensive agenda.
But under the heading ‘Community care: State of preparedness’ there was no supporting paper in sight.
In fact nothing at all.
The omission caused a momentary loss of composure for Niall Campbell, the normally unflappable under-secretary in charge of the group, and a Scottish Office flunky was immediately dispatched to fetch the paper.
But it was too late — the meeting was ill-prepared to discuss the item.
THE WAY WE WERE
Community Care
19 April 1978
The campaign to open membership of the British Association of Social Workers to non-qualified staff is being stepped up in preparation for a renewed debate on the issue at the association's annual general meeting in Birmingham.
The BASW ‘Ad hoc committee for open membership is currently drafting a motion for the conference.
And the committee has undertaken a small survey of non-BASW members to gauge how many non-qualified social workers would be interested in joining.