

LEADERS
Transatlantic rift
America can lead only if it knows where it is going
‘HAVE been sweating blood over the question of what is right and feasible to do.
It goes to pieces like quicksilver under my touch.’
Bill Clinton on Bosnia?
No; Woodrow Wilson, in 1917, on whether or not to intervene in Russia.
Wilson was caught up in one European war already: a war which, despite the puzzlement of most Americans, he had decided his countrymen should enter as ‘the disinterested champions of right’.
He felt no such certainty about Russia.
That was a civil war; Russians were killing each other.
Deeply unhappy about intervention, but pushed by Britain and France, Wilson in the end sent a token force that, far from doing any good, poisoned American-Soviet relations at the outset.
Scroll forward to this week, reverse the picture; and the world sees America pushing for intervention in the civil war in ex-Yugoslavia, while Europe nervously resists.
Europe clings to its peacekeeping and humanitarian-aid effort, the Vance-Owen peace plan and, according to America, the forlorn hope of the Bosnian Serb referendum; America talks of arming the Muslims and defending their enclaves with air strikes.
Wimps on one side, cowboys on the other.
The argument may seem to be about tactics; but it is also about leadership.
The cold war established America as the leader of the free world and the guardian of its values, while Europe was the timid child sheltering in its skirts.
But Wilson had already changed the map: with his unashamed talk of ‘right’ action and his lists of principles, he encouraged the world to look to America for a strong moral line.
Before his time, American presidents were not assumed, any more than other heads of state, to have a corner on principled and coherent reasons for intervention; the United States did its bit, muffled its complaints, tried — when pushed — to be a good ally.
Propelled into what looks very much like a 19th-century diplomatic morass, Mr Clinton is torn between the two styles; and America is driven mad by the imperatives, first, of leading and, second, of getting its nervous friends behind it.
Mr Clinton's nature is to take a cautious, collegial course.
His presidency is still young.
He has a lot piled on his plate.
And he did not promise government by principle; a politician to the core, Mr Clinton prefers to work by consensus and compromise.
This view extends to the outside world, too.
The essence of Mr Clinton's foreign policy has been deliberately fluffy and vague: recognise the interdependence of nations, encourage democracy, empathise, be a friend.
He enjoys the security of a group; like the fat boy in the school photograph, he does not want to push his way to the front.
But counter-pressures are at work, too.
Indecision in foreign policy adds another layer to the mound of public disappointment with him.
Another Desert Storm, even another Somalia — where the United Nations appeals for someone to help, and America steps up with the will and manpower to do so — might give Mr Clinton an aura of leadership that could help at home.
And although the voices from the heartland are reluctant to intervene anywhere, and Congress is at sea, the press keeps up the pressure, pointing to the moral responsibility of solo superpowers to act, and the shame of dragging feet.
Find one good reason
So America has been pushed towards action, but not the sort that Europe wants.
Three short months ago, when Warren Christopher, the secretary of state, announced America's backing for the Vance-Owen plan, he laid out his reasons.
Some came under the heading of national interest: the broader danger of an unstable Europe, the inviolability of recognised borders.
He also included ‘conscience’, and the need to deter aggressors.
Europe found all this heartening; these were principles for intervention that it could accept.
The glow has not lasted.
America has lost patience with the Vance-Owen plan, and now rattles the ‘lift and strike’ strategy as if it were the only weapon in its armoury.
For Mr Clinton, longing to be rid of the Bosnian distraction, this approach is tempting: take the lead, do something, keep niftily out of the swamp.
But two facts undercut him.
First, the Europeans, however flabby they may appear, already have some troops on the ground in ex-Yugoslavia: troops who might be greatly endangered by American air strikes.
And, second, if America wishes to take the lead unilaterally, it must know what it wants.
‘Doing what America feels is right’ is blurry talk.
America has to know precisely what it wants to achieve in Bosnia — not just, vaguely, an end to the horror.
Without a clear military objective, and a principle strong enough to hazard lives for, America cannot hope to lead by hassling.
Yet principles for action are within Mr Clinton's grasp; Mr Christopher's February list is as valid as ever.
So is the military objective of sending troops to insist on acceptance of the Vance-Owen plan.
If Mr Clinton believes in these things, no amount of European nervousness need hold him back; it is still in his power, as America's president and the world's leader, to bang heads together and move forward.
A proper focus and clarity of purpose, abroad as at home, are all that anyone asks of the man from Arkansas.
Bring drugs within the law
IN 1883, Benjamin Ward Richardson, a distinguished British doctor, denounced the evils of drinking tea.
He said it caused an ‘extremely nervous semi-hysterical condition’.
In 1936, an article in the American Journal of Nursing claimed that a marijuana taker ‘will suddenly turn with murderous violence upon whomever is nearest to him’.
Tea and marijuana have three things in common: they alter the moods of those who take them, they are regarded as tolerably safe, and they are addictive.
Attitudes to addiction are complicated and often contradictory.
Tea and marijuana are in themselves fairly harmless, yet tea is generally legal and marijuana not.
Tobacco and cocaine are harmful but, again, tobacco is almost universally allowed, whereas most readers of The Economist live in countries which may imprison you for possessing cocaine.
Throw in the joker of addictions which come not in syringes or cigarettes, but in casinos and computer cartridges, and you have a fine arena for combat between libertarians and puritans.
This battle, always lively, has just become hotter.
On April 28th Bill Clinton appointed Lee Brown, a former policeman, as America's new ‘drug tsar’, and thus leader of the world's toughest prohibition programme (see page 63).
Ten days before, Italians had voted to move in the other direction by scrapping the harshest measures of their drug laws.
Such boldness is rare.
The attitude of most electorates and governments is to deplore the problems that the illegal drug trade brings, view the whole matter with distaste, and sit on the status quo— a policy of sweeping prohibition.
Yet the problems cannot be ignored.
The crime to which some addicts resort to finance their habits, and in which the suppliers of illegal drugs habitually engage, exacts its price in victims' lives, not just money.
The illegal trade in drugs supports organised crime the world over.
It pulls drug-takers into a world of filthy needles, poisoned doses and pushers bent upon selling them more addictive and dangerous fixes.
Yet most people still balk at exploring ways in which a legal regime might undermine such effects.
Their refusal owes something to a distaste for addiction in itself.
This is an argument shot through with inconsistency.
The strongest disapproval often comes from those who scream about liberties if their own particular indulgences — for assault rifles, say — are attacked.
Addiction to cigarettes is reckoned to be the chief avoidable cause of death in the world.
Alcohol deprives boozers of their livers and their memories, and ends the lives of all too many innocents who get smashed on the roads by the inebriated.
Yet here the idea of dissuasion within the law is broadly accepted.
A much sounder basis for doubt is the worry that legalisation would increase drug-taking, and that rising consumption and addiction would overwhelm the gains to be had from getting drugs within the law.
Yet legalisation should not be taken to mean a lawless free-for-all, with no restraint on the supply or use of drugs.
Done properly, it would allow governments to take control of the distribution and quality of these substances away from criminals.
Quality control is decisive, because much of the damage done by drugs bought on street corners is caused by adulterated products; in much the same way, carelessly distilled hooch can cause blindness.
Supply would be regulated by a system of government licences analogous to those already in force for tobacco and alcohol (and which would serve, among other things, to keep drugs out of the hands of children), backed by strict policing and heavy penalties.
The toughness of the regime would rise with the addictiveness of the drug in question — a light touch for marijuana, an extremely dissuasive one for heroin.
Such legalisation would not magically dispense with the need for policemen, but it would make the needed policing more manageable.
Particularly in the business of softer drugs, where the taxes can be lower and the restrictions less onerous, and where the first trial steps towards legalisation should take place, it would undermine the ‘risk premium’ that provides drug cartels with their profits.
Taxes raised on what is reckoned to be the world's largest untaxed industry would help governments spend money on treatment and education, which would do more good than the billions currently spent on attempting to throttle the criminal supply of drugs of all sorts.
The quest for Soma
There is another consideration, one for the future.
The illegality of drugs, coupled with distaste for pleasurable addiction, is skewing research.
Progress is being made by scientists in understanding both what causes the pleasure of drugs and what makes the pleasure so hard to give up (see page 123).
Currently such research is obliged to have only one aim — unhooking existing addicts.
It might have another.
In many areas of pharmacology, researchers are exploring the idea of ‘designer drugs’, chemicals tailored to fit harmlessly into human biochemistry.
Addiction research should be encouraged to do the same: to move beyond devising better therapies for those who wish to kick the drug habit, into the invention of safer, more effective and less habit-forming highs.
At the moment it cannot, for a safe drug equals a ‘substance abuse’ equals a crime.
The fact remains that any legal regime which lowers the economic incentive for drugs-crime will surely boost drug consumption.
The question is by how much.
One possible pointer is that, when asked, people say it will not rise a lot.
In opinion polls, Americans generally insist that they would not be persuaded by legalisation to try drugs they are not taking now.
There is some reason to believe them, despite the first instinct to be sceptical, since they already have access to plenty of mind-bending substances, from alcohol and tobacco to diet pills.
Then there is reassurance from experiments.
The American states that decriminalised marijuana during the 1970s saw no divergence in the consumption of the drug from that in neighbouring states which continued to prohibit it.
Extensive experience with decriminalisation in Holland shows that not only is there no accompanying surge in consumption — allowing for the inrush of addicts from more restrictive countries — but related crime falls when drugs are legalised.
One further argument is used by defenders of the status quo.
They say that, even if the case for exploring legalisation were conceded by governments, public resistance would doom the idea.
This is hardly surprising, given the way governments the world over have for decades hammered home the dogma of prohibition.
A more rational discussion could do much to change public opinion.
Only a few years before alcohol prohibition was repealed in the United States in 1933, public sentiment was similarly dominated by the opinions of the country's prohibitionist leaders.
There are signs that public instincts are changing.
In recent months a growing number of federal judges and lawyers have voiced their exasperation with America's approach to drugs.
Their objections led politicians in Washington to hold a meeting earlier this month to rethink the country's failed drugs policies.
Janet Reno, the attorney-general, started the day by describing her doubts about America's current approach.
It ended, significantly, with a discussion of the merits of legalisation.
Neither Mr Brown nor Ms Reno, and certainly not their boss Mr Clinton, has so far supported legalisation.
But they have done what no American administration has dared do in living memory — set the scene for a proper debate.
Ban the tests?
It is still too soon to ask the nuclear powers that question
TWENTY-FIVE years ago, a bargain was struck between nuclear haves and have-nots.
The have-nots promised not to acquire nuclear weapons.
In return they got help with civilian nuclear power.
They also got a promise from all the haves who were ready to sign the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT)— which now means all five declared nuclear powers — that they would pursue nuclear disarmament.
Everyone promised to try to win ‘general and complete disarmament’.
The NPT thus repeated a pledge first made by America, Russia and Britain to work towards an end to nuclear testing ‘for all time’.
General disarmament was, and remains, a pipedream.
But all the nuclear powers except China have suspended nuclear testing for the time being.
Might this not be the moment to give nuclear disarmament a push, by keeping the test-ban promise?
Talks started this week on whether to renew the NPT in 1995.
Three years ago a group of have-nots, led by Mexico, blocked agreement on stiffer NPT rules for trade in nuclear materials because the nuclear powers would not agree to ban tests.
Some people worry that this argument, along with cheating by Iraq, North Korea and others, could fatally undermine the NPT, and with it the global effort to halt the spread of nuclear weapons.
A test ban, it is argued, would end the nuclear-arms race, deter would-be proliferators, contribute to general nuclear disarmament — and give the NPT a boost.
Unfortunately, none of these arguments is necessarily sound.
A test ban is not a short-cut to a nuclear-free world.
Of the seven or so countries that secretly have (in South Africa's case, had) nuclear weapons or are close to having them, only three are thought to have conducted a test.
Without a test, a renegade bomb-builder could not be sure that his bomb would go off.
But no country threatened with it could be sure that it would not.
The essential part of bomb-building is collecting enough weapons-grade uranium or plutonium.
That is why blocking stiffer rules on the nuclear trade in order to push for a test ban simply makes no sense.
Nor would a test ban drive the declared nuclear powers out of business.
It would make it harder to develop new weapons, but not impossible.
What is more, by 2003, if their arms-cutting promises are kept, America and Russia will still have about 3,000 strategic nuclear warheads each (down from 11,000 or so in 1990).
The lower they go, the closer they get to the point where even a small amount of cheating could upset the balance alarmingly.
The aim is to find the most stable balance achievable, at the lowest possible level.
But that level may never be zero.
If forced to stop testing, the nuclear powers could probably get by without further testing for safety and reliability of the weapons they keep, though that would add to the nuclear risks, especially in less safety-conscious Russia and China.
But if testing is not absolutely essential to the modern bomb-builder, why not abandon it anyway — as a gesture of goodwill to the have-nots?
One answer is that testing makes nuclear weapons safer, a desirable aim.
The other is verification.
Small nuclear explosions underground (they are already banned everywhere else) are just about impossible to distinguish reliably from other sorts of man-made bangs or earthquakes.
A test ban that could not inspire confidence would undermine stability and might even provoke a new arms race.
Which is not to say that the nuclear powers should simply bang away at will.
Or that a comprehensive test ban might not be possible — even desirable — at some point in the future.
But other measures need to be taken first.
Think small
One such should be to lower the limits on the size and frequency of nuclear tests.
Russia, America and Britain (though not France and China) already test with a yield of no more than 150 kilotons.
Arms cuts, improved verification and clever scaling techniques (for guessing what a bigger bang would do) mean that this limit could easily be dropped to 20 kilotons.
That would still need more intrusive and co-operative checking than the nuclear powers are used to.
But it would give them much-needed practice in monitoring lower limits in future.
When the bang is smaller than five kilotons, measuring it gets much harder.
That may change, along with technology.
If it does, a test ban might be a part of some new, more stable nuclear bargain worth having, though it will surely never be the answer to all the world's nuclear worries.
For the moment, the demand to make of the nuclear powers is not for a test ban but for five-power talks and joint research to explore more defensible ways of going about their testing business.
Not for turning
France's new government has announced its first budget.
It was tough
‘THE art of taxation’, wrote Colbert, Louis XIV's finance minister, ‘consists in so plucking the goose as to obtain the largest amount of feathers with the smallest possible amount of hissing.’
It is an art that Edouard Balladur, the prime minister of France's new centre-right government, has mastered.
On May 10th he unveiled a budget that will pluck an extra FFr68 billion ($12.8 billion) a year.
Despite the budget's eye-catching austerity, and a recession in France that continues to deepen, complaints from unions and opposition parties alike have so far been muted.
The silence may not last — but for as long as it does, the government has a chance to strengthen France's macroeconomic foundations.
It can do this because during the recent election campaign, there was no great disagreement about economic policy among the parties.
Most of France remains loyal to the franc fort — the commitment to keep the currency strong within Europe's exchange-rate mechanism and to guard against any rise in inflation.
The policy has already paid handsome economic dividends: low inflation and a competitive economy.
It deserves its popularity.
Soon, however, these self-imposed disciplines are going to seem increasingly troublesome.
It is to the new government's credit that, in its first budget, it has not sought to loosen the constraints, but to carry on living within them.
This may change.
A bold start
Much will depend on Mr Balladur's political savvy, on the boldness with which he pursues reform and on the timing of an international economic recovery.
So far Mr Balladur has managed to pin the blame for France's current malaise squarely on the Socialists' legacy (see page 49).
The snag is that with a presidential election due in 1995, this excuse will soon wear thin and right-wing challengers for the presidency will demand proof that the French economy is improving.
It is unclear whether Mr Balladur's five-year plan to knock the government's finances into shape, reducing the budget deficit to 2.5% of GDP, can produce results that quickly.
Lower interest rates would help.
Since Mr Balladur took office, French banks have trimmed their base rates to 9%.
The government is betting this trend will boost business confidence, and thus investment and jobs.
A further drop in rates may have to await action by Germany's Bundesbank.
In the meantime, however, the new government should press ahead with making the Bank of France truly independent.
The draft law unveiled on May 11th is a step in the right direction, but the small print raises questions about just how autonomous the bank would really be (see page 112).
Even if rates do fall again, unemployment may not fall with them.
Many big firms face a worldwide drop in demand.
Those that depend on recession-battered Germany, France's biggest export market, have been hit hardest; they will think twice before hiring and investing again.
Those that have lost a share of their markets to cheap competition from Britain and Italy, whose currencies have fallen since leaving the ERM, will think three times.
Officials already say they are willing to discuss more flexible ways of operating the ERM, in order to bring sterling and the lira back into the fold.
If Mr Balladur is determined to plug the holes in France's public finances, he should consider other, wider-ranging reforms too.
By simplifying France's ridiculously complex social-security arrangements, which encompass (on one estimate) 538 distinct systems, he could make their cost more transparent and thus easier to control.
By broadening the tax base, he could raise more revenues while at the same time trimming France's high marginal tax rates.
(At present, loopholes and exemptions mean that only half of French households pay tax, compared with three-quarters in most industrialised countries.)
And by forging ahead with privatisation, he could raise much-needed cash for the government's coffers.
Though these measures can help, the best possible pick-me-up for France's ailing economy would be recovery in the rest of Europe.
Much depends on Germany — but not everything.
A rapid deal on the Uruguay round of GATT talks could help to spur incomes worldwide.
Mr Balladur and his ministers may have made soothing noises abroad over GATT, but they show no signs at home of abandoning the previous government's intransigence.
In France, as everywhere, there are limits to what is politically possible.
If a successful Uruguay round turns out to exceed them, the French economy — and Mr Balladur's government — will be among the losers.
The wealth of nations
The gap between rich and poor countries is smaller than is generally thought
‘WE ARE not concerned with the very poor.
They are unthinkable, and only to be approached by the statistician or the poet,’ wrote E.M.
Forster in Howards End.
Most of the 15% of the world's population who live in rich industrial countries have similar feelings about the 85% who live in poor ones: the ‘poor’ may be more numerous, but they do not produce much.
The rich industrial nations dominate the global economy, they believe.
Not for much longer, however, thanks to those statisticians.
The industrial economies now produce barely half of total world output.
The International Monetary Fund has just revised its estimates of the relative size of economies (see page 95).
Instead of converting each country's GDP into dollars using market exchange rates, it now uses purchasing-power parities (PPP), which take account of what money actually buys in each country.
The results are dramatic: the share of world output produced by the rich industrial economies drops to 54%, from 73% on the old method.
Since the developing world is growing faster, it is almost certain that by the turn of the century industrial countries will account for less than half of global output.
What recession?
Such figures make a mockery of talk during the past couple of years about the ‘world economic recession’.
True, industrial economies' output was flat in 1991 and grew by only 1.5% in 1992, while Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union suffered a serious slump, but in the developing world output has grown by an average of no less than 5% in the past two years, as many economies in Asia and Latin America have boomed.
Total world output (measured correctly) has therefore continued to expand throughout the so-called ‘world’ recession.
Now the poor economies are known to be not so poor as had generally been supposed, more of them should be invited to join the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (whose membership is currently confined to the 24 ‘industrial’ countries) or to attend the annual economic summit of the leaders of the G7.
With GDP measured on a PPP basis, China is already the world's third (if not second) biggest economy; India, Brazil and Mexico are all bigger than Canada, the seventh member of the top nations' club.
True, the industrial economies still account for 76% of world exports and their currencies dominate international financial markets — so the economic policies of the old industrial giants do have a disproportionately large influence on the world economy as a whole.
But it is starting to look silly to exclude from economic summits representatives from countries that produce half the world's output.
The news that developing economies, whose costs are low, are bigger than previously thought will cause some Americans and Europeans to fear still more the threat they pose to local output and jobs, and to demand higher trade barriers to check the intrusion of these nouveaux riches.
That would only hasten the rich countries' relative decline.
Instead, businessmen should cheer the fact that the rapidly growing developing economies are richer than they thought: a bigger economy is a bigger market for rich-country exports, after all.
No company can call itself truly global if it neglects such potential customers.
So the message for rich countries is this: only by opening their borders to developing-country producers can they create customers for their own goods in the world's fastest-expanding markets.
John Major's last year?
Forget Norman Lamont, if you can.
Focus on his boss
TO SACK Norman Lamont now, eight months after he should have done the honourable thing for failing to keep sterling within Europe's exchange-rate mechanism, would smack of prime-ministerial panic and cheap populism.
Perhaps, if he went, the financial markets would blip approvingly.
Perhaps, if he stays, he will never regain the confidence of the City.
But his replacement could change little.
There is no reason to believe that a new chancellor would make Britain richer.
The real question-mark hangs over John Major.
The swerves in economic management have been as much his as Mr Lamont's.
While he has staked his reputation on the tangled European question, his government has behaved dismally, using legalistic chicanery rather than sustained argument to force its case through parliament.
It goes on flouting the popular will by refusing a referendum on the Maastricht treaty.
If the Danes say Yes next week, and yet — after all this — the treaty fails in parliament or the courts, Mr Major should resign.
The press has been clamouring for ‘new faces and new measures’.
The Conservative government smacks of fatigue and arrogance after 14 years in power.
It won the last election by default.
Since then, it has made a number of startling errors of judgment.
A cabinet reshuffle will probably happen this summer.
But by themselves neither ‘new faces’ nor concessions, gestures and fancy phrases dressed up as ‘new measures’will impress.
The policies in train are on the right lines.
It would be particularly depressing if Mr Major were to strive to ‘move to the centre’ ideologically to show sensitivity to the voters who snubbed him so roundly across the country in the recent council elections.
They did not snub him because he is too right-wing, but because his government has been incompetent.
What is needed is a period of steady law-making on the back of the economic recovery now unfolding.
The chief agent for infusing ministerial faces with enthusiasm and for making policies stick must be the prime minister himself.
Is he up to it?
He is decent and competent.
He has obvious managerial qualities, a clear head and quick feet.
But he must belatedly develop three crucial talents.
The first is the ability to communicate: to find a theme, to focus on an agenda.
The reforms in education are broadly right, but badly sold to teachers and the public.
Privatisation and deregulation become harder as the candidates become trickier and less obvious, but they still need doing — and explaining.
Crime and the justice system need tackling, all the while keeping — and articulating — the balance between individual liberties and crime-busting ruthlessness.
Mr Major's hobby-horse, the Citizen's Charter, needs to bite someone, hard.
The prime minister should be readier to wade into the battles of his ministers: a confused public wants complex issues crystallised by the man at the top.
Above all, he should persuade Britain that he can champion ideas.
Lady Thatcher liked nothing better than a good old ding-dong, whether her opponent was François Mitterrand or Mikhail Gorbachev or King Kong.
That isn't Mr Major's style.
But he needs to be seen grappling with arguments and displaying mastery in public, not just biffing John Smith at parliamentary question time.
Second, nice Mr Major must show he can be nasty.
The hardest reforms will involve means-testing, challenging the assumptions of the welfare state, and cutting public expenditure.
He must be unafraid of unpopularity.
Third, he must ‘lighten up’ and enjoy his job.
He has complained that the past year had been ‘the worst of his life’.
Leaders thrive on adversity.
People do not want to be led by someone moaning that the press is unfair.
For sure, it is devilish hard for a prime minister to look good in the trough of recession, with a divided party and a wafer-thin majority.
Besides, Britain is still not sure what sort of country it ought to be.
When Mr Major waxes philosophical, he comes over as a strange mix of nostalgia and modernism.
So far, he has not quite told us who he is or why he is there.
He should be less modest.
TINA, Mark II
It is touch and go whether Mr Major can grow these qualities in time.
But it is still premature to write him off.
For a start, there is no clear alternative.
The Labour Party is not yet adequately reformed.
John Smith is still moving crabwise towards modernity.
Tory alternatives to Mr Major are not yet ready either.
Kenneth Clarke is probably the best bet, but the party shrinks from the trauma of more internecine strife.
It bodes ill that Mr Major, two-and-a-half years into office, still feels on trial.
Calls for his resignation are pointless.
It is not going to happen; not yet.
Tory MPs are not ready for it, even though both his party and the country feel queasy about him.
Yet it is also too much to hope that an improved economy will miraculously turn this prime minister into a leader.
Crises will strew his path to test his mettle.
The country cries out for leadership.
Mr Major has about a year to display it.
Then the knives will glint, understandably.
The peseta's fall
Renewed turmoil in the ERM poses questions that Europe's governments must no longer ignore
OVER the past few weeks Spain's government has spared no effort to defend the peseta within Europe's battered exchange-rate mechanism.
With an election looming on June 6th, the Socialist government had every reason to postpone the embarrassment of a third successive devaluation.
But effort and reason were to no avail.
On May 13th, after days of heavy selling by the markets — and heavy buying by Spain's central bank — the government suspended its obligation to defend the peseta, and asked for another realignment of the system.
Almost immediately, Portugal's government said it would cease defending the escudo, and that it, too, wanted to see its currency devalued.
As The Economist went to press, the terms of the realignment were being discussed in Brussels.
Forced realignments of the ERM have lately become almost tiresomely familiar: they cause nothing like the excitement of last September's startling breakdown, when Spain devalued for the first time since joining, and Britain and Italy decided, until further notice, to leave the system altogether.
The two main sides in the debate about the ERM's future have become accustomed to devaluations — and have learnt to like them.
ERM critics regard each upset as bringing the eventual collapse of the system closer.
In their view, that cannot happen too soon.
Europe's governments, and most of the system's other defenders, take refuge in saying that the ERM needs devaluations.
The system had become too rigid before last September, you understand; if events have forced it to become more flexible since then, it is no bad thing.
Start thinking
Both sides spare themselves awkward questions that badly need to be answered.
The system's triumphant enemies need to ask how a Europe without trade barriers (which, one presumes, they favour) can survive a large and persistent increase in exchange-rate volatility.
Or how, if governments are to use movable exchange-rates to keep their economies competitive, the Community as a whole can avoid a race to devalue that merely fuels inflation.
The defenders need to ask whether the system that once gave Europe stable currencies and helped many of its original members to bring down their rates of inflation can continue to serve those ends.
And, if not, what they think should be done about it.
The enemies' questions are the easy ones, though the answers will not go down too well.
The Community is an association of mainly small economies, exceptionally open to trade with each other.
It needs some sort of collective arrangement on exchange rates.
Without the ERM (or something like it) competitive devaluation and exchange-rate volatility would put trade in danger and stable prices out of reach.
The defenders' questions are much more difficult — but they should no longer be evaded.
The system's recent flexibility is too much like that of a tent in a hurricane, and about as reassuring.
Some say diffidently that the ERM has been assaulted by an extraordinary and unrepeatable event (German unification); or that the underlying imbalances which caused last September's breakdown (the pound and some other currencies were over-valued against the D-mark) have now been sorted out.
On either view, stability will return in due course — especially now that German interest rates are edging down.
Even if the analysis is correct, the prediction is likely to be proved wrong.
New shocks big enough to disturb the system can never be ruled out.
And it is striking that this week's pressure on the peseta did not reflect a fundamental misalignment of the currency: on most estimates, the Spanish currency was not at all over-valued.
The markets forced it down because they doubted the government's willingness to keep interest rates high in a sagging economy — and who can blame them?
Then it came to a contest between the government (with reserves of less than $10 billion, on some estimates) and the currency market (with its turnover of $1 trillion a day).
That is, no contest.
It comes down to this: can the ERM be modified to preserve some of the benefits of exchange-rate stability, while allowing governments greater freedom to change monetary policy according to domestic economic circumstances?
The answer, it must be admitted, is no better than ‘Maybe’.
A variety of reforms to build greater flexibility into the system are feasible, but they involve a balance of advantages and disadvantages.
For some countries, including Britain and Spain, it seems likely that a softer, more automatic ERM would be better than both the existing ERM and no ERM at all.
There can no longer be any excuse for refusing to discuss such possibilities.
LETTERS
Europe's war
I resent, as a tax-paying American, your suggestion (April 24th) that the ‘rescue’ of Bosnia involve both European and American ‘cash and blood and political will’.
The prevailing European attitude towards America and Americans is insulting.
For decades, the United States spent trillions of dollars defending European (and, yes, admittedly, American) interests in the European continent.
Meanwhile, Germany, France and other forward-looking countries of Europe forged ahead, improving public education, modernising the physical infrastructure and implementing wise social policies to improve the standard of living.
It is now time for the United States to do likewise.
America has many battles to fight on its own soil — poverty, illiteracy, teenage pregnancy, public health.
Europe is now rich enough to deal with its tribal, idiotic hatreds and appallingly violent racism on its own.
It is shocking that Europe has produced the most horrifying ethno-racism in the world during the 20th century.
Americans ought not to shed one more drop of blood in a continent that has shown them precious little gratitude (at least outside Germany).
President Clinton must uphold his election promise to focus on (and solve) America's problems first, not Europe's.
‘The Serbs, brutal as they are,’ you write, ‘are not exterminating Muslims as the Nazis exterminated the Jews.’
You continue, later, ‘When the next act of aggression comes along, and it is not a part of a tangled civil war in the mountains, it will be doubly important to resist it.’
It is true that, literally, the Serbs are not out to exterminate the Muslims.
But more than any other imitators of Nazi atrocities, they have borrowed from Himmler-Eichmann techniques: death marches; the programmed rape of Muslim women by Serbs to dilute Muslim blood or genes or whatever other ‘scientific’ madness they may be imagining (Mengele); the levelling of towns and villages in Croatia and Bosnia as punishment and as weapons of terror (Lidice, Oradour-sur-Glane).
And the entire concept of ethnic cleansing is a Serb imitation of Hitler's Judenrein policy.
And now we are to wait for the next ethnic war to intervene to salve our pitifully insensitive consciences and our failure to shape and conduct an effective policy: a neat one, no complications, allowing intervention with few, possibly no, losses.
The only argument for your policy is that the West also did nothing to interrupt the transports to, or the operations in, Auschwitz, Treblinka, etc.
The question that should be asked at this point is not whether the West should intervene militarily, but what does it want out of such an exploit?
Intervening militarily may make the world feel better for doing something, but it will not bring peace.
There seems to be only one feasible solution that could bring lasting peace.
The West must, unfortunately, be prepared to see the carve-up of Bosnia and come to terms with a far smaller country.
Half measures like intervention will, as in Lebanon, just postpone peace.
Lifting arms embargoes and bombing Serbs will cause more resentment, intransigence and suffering.
The Bosnians will have to look to the lesson the Palestinians have learnt to their cost.
This is that a homeland with secure borders, however small, is better than nothing at all.
Not just Italians
Your review of two books on crime (April 3rd) makes the brazen statement that Italy ‘can perhaps be forgiven for producing so many American gangsters.’
The review goes on to suggest that Italians are responsible for the introduction of organised crime into the United States.
This is nothing but rank stereotyping without any basis in historical fact.
We would argue that a close review of leading gangsters and organised-crime figures would reveal quite a degree of ethnic diversity.
CS First Boston
Your article of April 10th about the CS First Boston Group states that it has been kept out of the league of top-flight American investment banks.
It also says that the group is not confident of winning new-issue mandates outside the United States.
The facts challenge these characterisations.
The most recent quarterly rankings and 1992 industry rankings prepared by respected third-party sources show the CS First Boston Group in the top tier of all investment banks.
We lead-managed a number of transactions noteworthy for their size, structure, or both.
These include $1 billion-plus mandates for Hanson Overseas BV, Chrysler, IBM, Tele-Communications Inc (in two issues), the World Bank, and a number of governments around the world.
As a point of interest, the $1.65 billion financing for IBM was the largest ever investment-grade corporate-bond issue.
In addition, the CS First Boston Group was first in 1992 in worldwide privatisations and in announced merger-and-acquisition transactions.
Last, your comment on our Latin American mandates fails to recognise our role as sole adviser on the $12 billion privatisation of 18 Mexican banks, and leader on the $1.1 billion effort for SEGBA in Argentina.
Further, we have recently been awarded the lead position in the privatisation of YPF, the Argentine state oil company, which will be one of the largest privatisations ever done in Latin America.
These results are irrefutable.
They show that the CS First Boston Group continues to be regarded as a leading firm by informed industry sources and, most importantly, by clients.
Steer clear
In ‘The logic of Waco’(April 24th) you state ‘If a man has anti-tank weapons, you may as well bring in tanks.’
I'm not sure I follow your logic.
If one's opponent has anti-tank weapons I should have thought the last thing to send in would be tanks.
BOOKS AND ARTS
A few sparks over the Scheldt
ANTWERP
VISITORS to Belgium often sneer at the scruffy appearance of the country's towns, farms and people, and pointedly note how much neater everything is as soon as you cross the border into Holland.
Antwerp, Belgium's second city, finds this most hurtful.
As Europe's ‘cultural capital’ this year, it has followed Glasgow's 1990 lead and cleaned its fine array of distinguished but dingy buildings.
Antwerp offers both the Renaissance architecture of a Bruges or a Ghent and the café culture of a Paris or a Barcelona.
It also has another side.
In Belgium's 1991 election 23% of Antwerpers voted for the Vlaams Blok, an anti-immigrant party that wants an independent Flanders (Antwerp is home to 25,000 Muslims from Turkey and North Africa, and 15,000 Jews).
Eric Antonis, director of Antwerp 93, the city's current celebration, has met this xenophobia head-on: he has made the city's openness to the world the festival's main theme.
He argues that, just as Antwerp's golden age depended on openness, so will its future.
In the 16th century, when Antwerp had a population of 100,000, it became the world's busiest port because it welcomed merchants from England, Germany, Portugal and Spain.
A showpiece of Antwerp 93 is ‘The Ark’, a barge 77 metres (84 yards) long with a theatre, a café and accommodation for guest artists.
Fourteen cities around the world are sending teams of young artists to perform in The Ark — designed by bOb (sic) van Reeth, the city's leading architect — during the course of the year.
The opening play of Antwerp 93, ‘Sarajevo’, about Sarajevans huddled in an underground cellar, repeated that appeal for openness and charity.
It was the first play staged at Antwerp's Bourla Theatre since the inadequacy of the theatre's defences against fire made it close in 1980.
In the intervening years the theatre (named after its architect, one of Napoleon's engineers) was threatened with demolition.
The Flemish regional government and the city of Antwerp stumped up most of the BFr600m ($18m) needed to restore the building to its ornate, late-classical grandeur.
Much else in the city centre has been cleaned and restored: the neo-Romanesque Central Station of 1905, in whose gilded ticket hall contemporary music is played; the Gothic cathedral, the largest and most impressive in the Low Countries; and the Grote Markt, an irregular triangle of 16th-century guild houses (Antwerp is a town of asymmetry: one of the cathedral's twin towers is only half-built).
Several historic houses are now museums, including the home of Christophe Plantin, who established Europe's first truly commercial printing press in the 16th century, and the baroque mansion that Rubens built in the early 17th century.
Antwerp 93's big art show is devoted to Jacob Jordaens, who was born 400 years ago to the year, and lived in Antwerp at the same time as Rubens and Van Dyck.
Alas, he was not quite of their standard.
If Rubens's women are ample, Jordaens's are dropsical.
His colours are often gaudy, his compositions cluttered.
Does he deserve a retrospective of 200 works?
Leaders of the Vlaams Blok say they approve of the exhibition, for Jordaens did not leave Flanders to work abroad, as did Rubens and Van Dyck.
The show is in the Fine Arts Museum, one of several grandiose public buildings put up about 100 years ago, when the Congo trade brought Antwerp new wealth.
The Fine Arts Museum is south of the city's centre, in an area known simply as the Zuid, where dilapidated warehouses and quays once dominated the scene.
The port has since migrated down the river Scheldt towards the sea; galleries of contemporary art have moved in, nestling around new museums of photography and modern art.
‘Brussels has more galleries, but not so many interesting ones as Antwerp,’ says Wendolien van Oldenborgh, a local artist.
She says that flat paintings hung on walls are outmoded.
She herself paints abstract designs on an L- or U-shaped canvas, and leaves them on the floor or wraps them round a pillar.
The cafés of the Zuid hum late into the night as the young and fashionable regard each other 's clothes and sip De Koninck, the chestnut-coloured local ale.
The free and easy atmosphere of these cafés is more like Amsterdam than Brussels.
But for the military prowess of the Duke of Parma, a Spanish general who overcame the city's resistance in the 1580s, Antwerp would have ended up in the United Provinces (today's Holland) rather than the Spanish Netherlands (today's Belgium).
Brussels had a river but buried it in the 19th century when it began to stink.
Antwerp neglected the river Scheldt but is now making amends.
The waterfront is dotted with avant-garde architecture, including the Zuiderterras, a steel-and-glass café and restaurant in the form of a ship — designed, again, by bOb van Reeth.
The 460,000 Antwerpers think of themselves as the liveliest and most sociable of Belgians.
They keep 2,500 cafés and 600 restaurants going.
But they are also — as bOb's name suggests — inclined to be pretentious.
They combine this with occasional épater-les-bourgeois outbreaks.
The ‘Antwerp Six’, a group of fashion designers who graduated from Antwerp's Royal Academy of Fine Arts, has won international acclaim since the mid-1980s.
The six, who include Anne Demeulemeester and Dirk Bikkembergs, are known for a free and direct style that shocks some people.
Antwerpers are so convinced that their city is best that other Belgians think them chauvinist.
But without this pride Antwerp might never have escaped the  depredations suffered by Brussels.
The capital's problem is that, as a largely French-speaking enclave in Flanders, it belongs to nobody; few objected, when, in the 1960s, property developers replaced parts of its historic centre with concrete boxes.
Mr Antonis is having a hard time getting his message of openness across to all the citizens of Antwerp.
Bob Cools, the town's socialist mayor (who spells his first name the ordinary way), complained about a show of Antwerp as seen by foreign photographers; he said locals could have done the job better.
The fireworks display that heralded the opening of Antwerp 93 went off like a damp squib.
Most of the 400,000 people who turned out to watch saw little more than a few sparks over the Scheldt.
At a press conference afterwards Mr Cools blamed Mr Antonis for choosing Pierre-Alain Hubert, a Frenchman, rather than Eugeen Hendrickz, a local pyrotechnician, to run the fireworks display.
‘That sounds a little like Eigen Volk Eerst [Our People First, the slogan of the Vlaams Blok],’ retorted Mr Antonis.
In some ways, Europe's 1993 cultural capital remains sadly provincial.
Counter-tenors
High and mighty
PARIS
IT SEEMS only yesterday that falsetto singing was such an oddity that mention of it surfaced in a Marx Brothers film in order to give Chico Marx a chance to observe, ‘My aunt, she got-a falsetto teeth’.
But since the post-1945 rebound of the counter-tenor's art, led by Alfred Deller, a majestic British musician, the male alto has achieved an unprecedented level of musical acceptance.
Unprecedented because counter-tenors today sing not only music historically meant for their voices but also branch out into new adventures of their own.
A case in point is Jochen Kowalski, a German singer whose series of CD recordings for Capriccio has been capped recently with a performance of Schumann's song cycle, ‘A Poet's Love’(Capriccio CD 10 359).
Intended for tenor voice, the romantic ‘Dichterliebe’ texts by Heine translate curiously well for higher voice.
But Mr Kowalski trips up when he tries to get a bit too popular, as in another Capriccio release, ‘Plaisir d'amour,’ in which he sings clichéd salon music (CD 10 324).
Some counter-tenors benefit from modern composers' new interest in their voices.
After Benjamin Britten wrote the role of Oberon in the opera ‘A Midsummer Night's Dream’ for Alfred Deller, he wrote a role for the young James Bowman in his final opera, ‘Death in Venice’.
Mr Bowman is still singing both parts, to much acclaim.
Singers are also exploring an older repertoire, with rewarding results.
Drew Minter, an American, has recorded a choice of arias intended for one of Handel's castrati, ‘Arias for Senesino’(Harmonia Mundi CD HMU 905183), as well as‘Ayres’ by Thomas Campion (HMU 907023).
He is an appealing young artist, with the occasional fault of seeming a bit too ladylike.
This is a criticism that cannot be levelled at Dominique Visse, a raucously joyful Frenchman who leads the Ensemble Clément Jannequin.
Mr Visse's squally tone, like a Parisian street urchin's, is perfect for his Renaissance songs, some with frankly obscene texts (Harmonia Mundi HMC 901271 and HMA 1901174).
Another squally young French counter-tenor, Gérard Lesne, often appears in works by Purcell and Handel but with unfortunate overtones of Ethel Merman belting out a razzmatazz show tune.
Of course, such judgments of taste are relative: the new Dent ‘Companion to Medieval and Renaissance Music’ throws up its hands and declares: ‘We do not know, and can never know, what the difference between a modern counter-tenor and his Tudor equivalent really was.’
Perhaps the finest current exponent of the counter-tenor's art is Michael Chance, an Englishman whose recordings of Bach (St Matthew Passion on Deutsche Grammophon 427 648–2, St John Passion on DG 419 324–2, and the B Minor Mass on DG 415 514–2) are marked by a purity of tone that recalls the best of Deller.
Unlike some too-polite British singers, such as Charles Brett, Mr Chance never sounds emotionally uninvolved.
The cleanness of his musicianship marks him as the Apollo of the new singing school.
A Belgian singer, René Jacobs, has long been admired as one of the most emotionally expressive of counter-tenors, but his exuberance is more in the line of Maria Callas than of Ethel Merman.
As both soloist and conductor, Mr Jacobs is responsible for a rich catalogue of recordings for Harmonia Mundi in a vast repertoire that includes Buxtehude, Carissimi, Cavalli, Cesti, Marenzio, Monteverdi, Pergolesi and Schütz.
Some of these composers need every bit of Mr Jacobs's energy if listeners are not to be put to sleep.
The frizzy-haired, bespectacled Mr Jacobs brings dramatic immediacy even to familiar classics.
Which would seem to suggest that old-fashioned good singing is good, no matter what register it happens to be in.
By any standard, performers like Messrs Kowalski, Chance and Jacobs would be outstanding.
But had not Deller opened the door to a professional career for higher voices, they might all have been singing baritone today.
Eudora Welty
To the bone
JACKSON, MISSISSIPPI
FOR a writer who was put in the ‘Garbage School of Literature’ along with Tennessee Williams and William Faulkner by the editor of the Jackson Daily News, Eudora Welty has done well for herself.
Before arthritis put a recent stop to her writing, she had won near-universal acclaim as one of the great interpreters of the deep South.
She has no truck with the usual literary clichés of the region — glorious magnolias, elegant tea parties, Confederates by moonlight.
Her novels have the same honest sensitivity as the photographs she has been taking since the 1930s — photographs of rural poverty in Mississippi, of back streets with laundry drying on a line, of proud school teachers, of plum-pickers with their tin buckets.
She calls the photographs ‘snapshots’, unpretentious statements of courage that she tried unsuccessfully for years to sell (they sell well now).
Miss Welty, who has just turned 84, has her own way of writing.
The indirectness of her novels is deliberate but their meaning is clear to those who make an effort to understand them.
She wants her readers to think out for themselves what she is saying.
Her language is not indirect at all.
When her mother was ill and ‘country ladies’ helped in the house, she asked if one of them liked pork.
The answer was: ‘I got a gnawin' and a cravin' for it.’
Another lady would come outside and look up a tree and say, sadly, ‘All them squirrels goin' to waste.’
Welty stored those gems for later use.
She creates her own phrases, too, not least memorably in her mood-spinning 1983 autobiography, ‘One Writer's Beginnings’.
What does she read?
Just about everything.
Her front room on azalea-blossomed Pinehurst Street is a comfortable mess: books in several languages, magazines, newspapers, mail piled high on the sofa, chairs, tables and floor.
She says it is hard to tell who has influenced her, but she loves Henry Green and Peter Taylor, Chekhov and E.M.
Forster, Katherine Anne Porter and Elizabeth Bowen, and of course V.S. Pritchett, ‘the best short-story writer living’.
A few years ago she re-read all of Willa Cather.
Jane Austen is ‘irresistible — the swiftness of everything in her novels — the celebrity…
I love that word but I'm not sure how you pronounce it.’
Miss Welty does not take up causes and has never been involved in any movement.
She was accused of not taking a stand on feminism or civil rights, but thinks she was always clear about those issues.
Her stories are about fairness and relations between people.
She feels that exhortations are fine but the real purpose of a writer should not be dissolved in the political ideas of the time.
‘A short-story writer is really a dramatic writer.
I wasn't writing about the situation editorially, it's not my part.’
The night Medgar Evers was murdered, she wrote the assassin's story, climbing into his skin and interpreting his thinking.
That was a powerful, though indirect, contribution to the civil-rights cause.
She belongs to the South; some say she personifies the best of it.
She loves the place for its pace, the quality of its light, the softness and delicacy of much of its thinking, its acceptance of whatever comes.
She believes that what makes the South different from the rest of America is not just a matter of perception but almost a physical phenomenon.
‘Mississippi’, she says, ‘goes clear through to the bone.’
Pornography and the arts
The dragon recast as St George
LEAVING TOWN ALIVE.
By John Frohnmayer.
Houghton Mifflin; 342 pages; $14.95
YOU have to wonder what the Bush administration was looking for when it set out, in early 1989, to find a new chairman for the National Endowment for the Arts.
Knowing what the Bushmen knew then — that the NEA was unpopular with conservative legislators and already the target of fundamentalist Christians for subsidising offensive art — they can hardly have seen this as a plum they could hand to a big contributor or a rising political star or, indeed, to anybody aiming to leave town alive.
The man they chose, John Frohnmayer, feels he managed to do at least that.
He probably appeared, in the minds of the presidential staff, the perfect choice.
He came on the scene as a mild-mannered lawyer from Oregon with reasonable Republican credentials (his brother was a former Republican state attorney-general), a degree in Christian ethics, art commission experience and a taste for performing choral music.
He looked good enough to pass muster, but not so valuable that his inevitable sacrifice to the god of political expediency on the altar of high culture was likely to bring tears.
He was, in a word, expendable.
Naive to the ways of Washington, he stepped into a war for which his experience had not equipped him.
He would, for the next 2.5 years, dodge missiles from right, left and centre, and in the end please almost nobody.
He now wears his wounded pride as a revolutionary might flaunt his bloodstained fatigues.
Another appointee might have seen the ideological struggle about money for the arts as politics-as-usual.
It is Mr Frohnmayer's very innocence, and his willingness to reveal it when a larger point is to be made, that make this book interesting.
The issue that dominated his chairmanship was always simple: ‘Do you want your tax dollars spent on pornography?’
It struck an easy mark — an America already unsettled and confused by rapid cultural changes.
The case for the prosecution was made by such organisations of the Christian right as the Reverend Donald Wildmon's American Family Association, by such members of Congress as Senator Jesse Helms, and by Republican fund-raisers and candidates.
They paid no heed to the inconvenient fact that only 40 of the 90,000 grants made by the NEA were identified as ‘difficult’.
Besides those grants taken out of context or distorted, the endowment was blamed for many things it had nothing to do with.
As Mr Frohnmayer writes: ‘Few, it seems, are willing to take on those who cloak themselves in the mantle of religion, no matter how far they stray from religious doctrine or behaviour.’
Certainly not, he adds, administration officials, who capitulated to the religious right, or most journalists, few of whom delved beyond the obvious in their coverage.
Nor did he find much useful support among artists, in part because he began his tenure with the blessing of the agency's chief congressional foe, Senator Helms.
Mr Frohnmayer's standing at the White House fell rapidly as he began to understand what was at stake, and came to appreciate some of the challenging yet easily misrepresented art the NEA had subsidised.
His agency was stacked with political appointees who took their orders from elsewhere.
He was offered little support as he walked the edge between the endowment, its critics, the art world and Congress, where even supporters of the arts were reluctant to go on record as voting ‘for tax-funded pornography’.
When, in the Republican Party's presidential primaries, Patrick Buchanan took up the endowment as a weapon to wield against George Bush, Mr Frohnmayer's stay was over.
The endowment was not without fault.
Mr Frohnmayer's serious critics could point to favouritism, conflicts of interest in grant-making, organisational and procedural flaws, and occasional bad judgment.
But much more serious to Mr Frohnmayer's cause was his reluctance publicly to discredit his opponents by pointing out inaccuracies and misrepresentations in their charges; to defend the endowment's choices when defence was appropriate (as in many cases it was); and to mount a solid campaign on the agency's behalf before the American people.
Instead he chose to hunker down and play back-room political games.
It was a mistake.
Mr Frohnmayer leaves out much and inserts, one suspects, what he hopes will be a flattering version of other events — such as the ‘loyalty oath’ grant recipients had to sign before getting their money.
This clause, committing its signatories not to create offensive work, was, he says, intended to elicit a lawsuit to test its constitutionality.
It did, and free expression won.
There were not many heroes in the wars over Andres Serrano's ‘Piss Christ’ photograph, Robert Mapplethorpe's homoerotic images, Karen Finlay's chocolate and bean-sprout performance pieces.
But there were a few, and Mr Frohnmayer would like to be counted among them.
His efforts, near the end of his term in office, to educate America on the endowment's purpose would serve him well were he to take the job now.
Alas, they came too late to do the wounded agency, or the arts, much good.
Black trash
TO MARK Black History Month in America, Giant Food stores kept leaflets explaining the lives of black leaders, and African storytellers haunted the clothing department at Macy's.
This sort of black consciousness — and with it black textbooks, black English and black studies — has barely raised its head in Britain.
Yet for almost 20 years a black-owned company, Writers and Readers, has been putting out a line of books in Britain and America, called ‘the Beginners Series’, designed to tell black children and students about history, culture and famous people.
Five new volumes have just appeared.
Read carefully.
The books are highly readable, lively and cheap (selling for £5.99 or £6.99 in Britain, $1.95 or $1.95 in America).
Every page bursts with pop-art pictures.
They give a proud account of black cultures and kingdoms; but they also have an agenda — to promote black civilisation as nobler, purer and better than white.
From ‘African History for Beginners’ we learn that Cain was the first white man; he turned pale, and his features shrivelled up, when God shouted at him for killing Abel.
The ancient Egyptians, with the help of under-exposed photographs, are revealed as black, and Cleopatra definitely ‘tawny’.
Hannibal is simply ‘brilliant’, Rhodes an ‘infamous imperialist’.
(Echoes of Evelyn Waugh's Ishmaelite consul-general begin to flutter in the ear: ‘As that great Negro, Karl Marx, has so nobly written…‘)
The drum-beating can be more subtle.
In ‘Malcolm X for Beginners’ we learn that black men and women ‘were brutalised by the police and other racist groups.’
Such remarks are irrefutable; but, quite deliberately, they are also propaganda.
Fair enough, some will say; for generations, history has been written by whites for whites, and the black experience has been omitted.
Why not redress the balance?
Fine, if the balance is redressed.
But little or no modern history is written as white imperialist polemic; any historian worth his salt gives every race its due.
Black polemic therefore stands alone, an unbalanced curiosity.
It would be good to have more distinctively black voices engaged in the telling of history.
But they must speak true.
As ‘Black History for Beginners’ recognises, ‘the only way to help abolish stereotypes is to present a more complete picture of black people in history.’
Yet completeness is worth nothing, if it gives admittance to a crowd of lies.
The pity of these books is that, in their jaunty way, they tell a story that should cause real shame and horror to whites; but by telling it false, they allow whites to laugh and walk away.
Intellectuals and war
Beyond their ken
WAR MACHINE.
By Daniel Pick.
Yale University Press; 292 pages; £19.95 and $10
EGGED on by a committee of the League of Nations for literature and the arts, Albert Einstein in 1932 asked Sigmund Freud the unanswerable question: ‘Why war?’.
Freud was at a disadvantage; the master of private motivations was vague about collective aberrations, and had confessed in 1914: ‘All my libido is given to Austro-Hungary.’
But Freud's side-swipes were always worth watching.
He pondered whether the highly educated are better than common folk at resisting ‘disastrous collective suggestions’(Naziism, anti-Semitism, belligerence).
He decided they are not, ‘since the intellectual has no direct contact with life in the raw, but encounters it in its easiest synthetic form — upon the printed page.’
Daniel Pick's curious book is rich in such synthetic nuggets.
Precisely in Freud's sense he is an intellectual, interested not in what soldiers say about fighting, nor in the history, technology or economics of war.
He studies what other culture-vultures wrote about what ‘war’ signified, up to the mid-1930s.
(Apart from admiring ‘Doctor Strangelove’, he skips the nuclear dilemmas.)
He represents, perhaps, the abstraction with which the fashionable intelligentsia of the capitalist West can contemplate warfare, towards what may be the end of almost half a century of unprecedented peace in their part of the world.
War, in this brainy discussion, is an aberration characteristic of late-capitalist European states, with Germany (or maybe Prussia) mainly to blame.
It would spoil the flow to point out that everybody has been at it since the start of recorded time, or that much of the world has been fighting keenly away in these recent decades, while Western Europe was trying to invent the political structures that would make sure its nations never fight each other again.
Rather than contemplate the real world, Mr Pick prefers to bustle off in pursuit of symbols that have little to do with war itself, like the Channel tunnel, or the Nazi Holocaust, or time-and-motion studies in industry.
He seems thrilled to stumble across the notion that war has a technological impetus of its own; others will recognise in it the familiar railway-timetable explanation of why the first world war proved so unstoppably disastrous.
His sources do not help him grasp the inconvenient fact that many young men actually enjoy warfare.
Clausewitz, distantly pursued by Mr Pick, thought war was always subordinate to political will.
But post-modern war has no need of politics, or states, or disciplined armies, or high-tech weapons.
Crazy children in Liberia, brigands in Somalia, mass-murderers in Cambodia, drunk peasants in ex-Yugoslavia — all these have moved war past the hellfire shelling of the Somme, past the fireball of Hiroshima, into a DIY mode whose only requirements are a rifle, a death-wish and hatred of the people next door.
A way to stop the spear
To westerners the martial arts may look aggressive.
To easterners they are really about consensus
WESTERN notions of the martial arts have been heavily influenced by the film industry.
Brick-breaking and surreal acrobatic feats make a good spectacle, and Bruce Lee and Jean-Claude van Damme achieved stardom by exploiting it.
But western audiences know next to nothing about the martial arts.
So Jigoro Kano, the founding father of modern judo, learned to his cost when he gave demonstrations in Japan and America.
The Japanese were impressed by the gracefulness of his art; in America his audiences were bored.
Only when extroverts began breaking bricks in public, and demonstrating full-contact karate, did Americans sit up and take notice.
Yet there is far more to the martial arts than the aggression of karate.
They cover a whole range of things from Japanese archery, with its emphasis on Zen Buddhism, through the slow dance-like movements of Chinese tai chi to the combative kicking of Korean taekwondo.
Apart from the obvious distinction between weapons-wielding and empty-hand disciplines, the martial arts can be separated broadly into those that are ‘hard’ and those that are ‘soft’.
The soft ones include tai chi and aikido.
They stress the development of ki (the Chinese qi), ‘internal spirit’, and are characterised by smooth, gentle movements.
Those that are hard include karate and kung fu.
They put more stress upon physical development and fast, violent movements.
It is the hard arts that excite westerners.
So much so that taekwondo and karate are now the most popular styles in the world, practised by perhaps 30m enthusiasts in 120 different countries.
Like judo, both taekwondo and karate seem likely to be accepted as Olympic sports.
They will probably move even further away from their origins in the martial arts and closer to western ideals of sporting conflict.
That would be a pity.
It may seem odd, but the martial arts, even the hard ones, are not about conflict.
Consider the Japanese word for the martial arts as a whole: budo.
It means, literally, ‘the way to stop the spear’.
Less esoterically, it means ‘to stop fighting’, as does the Chinese word for the martial arts, wushu.
The true aim of the martial arts is to avoid conflict; it is best summed up in one commentator's description of aikido as ‘the honourable art of getting the hell out of the way’.
The aggression, if there is any, is controlled.
In the eyes of good practitioners self-control allows them to find a path around conflict.
To some westerners this seems pseudo-philosophical bunkum, but East Asians take it seriously.
Most, if not all, of the martial arts are inextricably linked to the three main East Asian religions, Buddhism, Taoism and Confucianism.
They started as self-defence systems, but more than 2,000 years of refinement have turned them into a way of life.
In recognition of this, the Japanese masters of the early 20th century put the character for ‘way of life’(do) into the name of their disciplines.
Ju-jitsu (‘the art of giving way’) became judo (‘the gentle way’), karate became karatedo, aiki-jitsu became aikido.
For martial artists it mattered less what form you studied than that you made it a way of life.
All the martial arts, hard and soft, aim at a non-aggressive state of harmony.
For westerners this may seem odd: in karate, you will see people in starched white uniforms fighting each other and letting out the odd blood-curdling scream.
‘Harmony’?
But the aggression is (or should be) carefully controlled.
Psychological studies have confirmed this: the more advanced students have much less aggressive personalities than the average person.
Nor are injuries commonplace: out of 250,000 judo practitioners in America, only around 70 (0.03%) a year report any serious injuries, much fewer than in most active sports.
This is because, along with the physical activity, comes an education in East Asian philosophy.
That is not everybody's idea of fulfilment, not least because a westerner needs a lot of patience to absorb all the alien notions of unity and consensus.
The award of a black belt comes near the start of an education in a martial art, not the end.
Yet qualifying for a black belt usually takes at least three years (see table)— long enough to put most westerners off.
East Asians find the traditional ideals of the martial arts far more compatible with their outlook on life (even though it was the Japanese who encouraged the development of judo as a sport and the Chinese who encouraged kung fu in the film industry).
Struggle up at 5am in China, for instance, and you will find the parks and roads crowded with people practising the flowing forms of tai chi .
To find out if there is anything for them in this, many westerners have turned to ‘The Art of War’(Delta; $1.95) by Sun Tzu, a 2,000-year-old best-seller.
The Japanese equivalent, Miyamoto Musashi's ‘Book of Five Rings’(Bantam, $1.50), has been marketed as the Japanese version of the Harvard MBA.
The growing interest in such books is a belated acknowledgment by westerners that the philosophical side of martial arts may not be tosh after all.
Many East Asians say it is no coincidence that their countries, home to the martial arts, have achieved greater economic success than other Asian countries.
The more chauvinist describe Japan's extraordinary economic success as aikido in action (the aggressor being America).
But economic success may not be the only benefit of a martial-arts way of life: Yukiso Yamamoto, a famous aikidoist, found it helped his marriage too.
ASIA
The price of Thailand's prosperity
FROM OUR SOUTH-EAST ASIA CORRESPONDENT
BANGKOK
FOR the past five years, Thailand has been intoxicated by its success.
In the late 1980s, the economy was growing at more than 10% a year.
Even now, with the world economy slack and poorer Asian countries emerging as rivals for foreign investment, Thailand is likely to grow at 7–8% a year for the next few years.
But some Thais are wondering whether they have gone about things in the right way.
The fire at the Buddha Monthon toy factory on May 10th which killed more than 200 workers was the worst factory fire in history, and will provoke gloomy introspection in a country whose unofficial slogan is mai pen rai — never mind.
Thailand prides itself on being one of the easiest places in Asia to do business in.
Some foreigners even see benefits in widespread corruption.
‘It makes the system more flexible,’ argues a Japanese businessman.
But flexibility has its price.
Brothels flourish because the police are paid off.
Forests get hacked down because nobody stands up to the logging industry.
And toy factories with pitifully inadequate fire precautions stay open.
The present Thai government, one of the least corrupt in recent memory, is trying to make the rule of law a theme of its administration.
Chuan Leekpai, the prime minister, is a lawyer by training.
He insists that Thailand now intends to get serious about enforcing the law on a range of issues, from child prostitution to copyright piracy to safety in the workplace.
But changing entrenched ways of doing things and challenging powerful financial interests will be difficult, whatever the intentions of the government.
Some are inclined to shrug their shoulders and say that Thailand, like an unruly adolescent, is just ‘going through a phase’.
The early stages of industrialisation are often rough.
Britain's industrial revolution made ample use of child labour.
Some Americans still recall the terrible fire at the Triangle shirt factory in New York in 1911 that killed 145 people.
Britain and America were able to afford better laws and safer workplaces as they got richer.
Yet it is not clear that Thailand is well-placed to move on to the next stage of economic development.
Despite the rapid growth of recent years, poverty is proving stubbornly hard to eradicate.
A recent World Bank study of six East Asian countries concluded that Thailand was the only one that had failed to make significant inroads into poverty during the 1980s (see table).
As the bank noted, ‘in 1990 Thailand's incidence [of poverty]was as high as Indonesia's, even though its average GNP per capita was 2.5 times higher.’
World Bank officials have no pat answers for why there has been so little trickle-down in Thailand.
Some people think it is because the boom has concentrated on Bangkok.
Only 15% of the population of Thailand lives in the Bangkok area, which accounts for half of GDP.
Income levels in Bangkok are nine times higher than in the north-eastern part of Thailand, where one-third of the population lives.
Another version blames the education system.
Although Thailand has a relatively high rate of literacy and primary school enrolment, the secondary system is weak.
Many Thais have no chance of turning themselves into anything but sweatshop labour.
As Chalongphob Sussangkarn of Thailand's Development Research Institute points out, even if all primary-school pupils go on to secondary school from now on, ‘there will still be 70% of Thailand's workforce in the year 2000 who will have only primary education or less.’
The plight of the rural poor does not tend to loom large in the minds of businessmen, but even they need to pay attention to Thailand's educational shortcomings.
Skill shortages are already a problem.
The country produces some 3,500 engineering graduates a year, only about half as many as private industry needs.
Computer scientists are also in short supply.
The government talks as much about the distribution of wealth as about its creation.
It is encouraging banks and factories to set up outside Bangkok, and is expected to bolster the price of rice to increase farmers' incomes.
It is planning to increase the education budget by 20% — though, with employers crying out for trained manpower, it is difficult to recruit teachers.
The government's social conscience inevitably raises questions about the balance between growth and welfare.
The minimum wage, for instance, increased by 50% in 1989–92, thus raising the cost of doing business in Thailand.
Some critics link this with the sharp drop in foreign investment last year, though foreigners may also have been put off by the army's killing of civilian demonstrators in Bangkok last May.
A slowdown in investment may not hit growth for a while.
Many of the factories started in the late 1980s are only just beginning to produce.
Exports are still growing fast.
The government has a list of long-promised infrastructure projects that could make up for the fall in private investment, though a bitter dispute in progress between the government and foreign banks that have lent 20 billion baht ($187m) for an elevated motorway in Bangkok may make finance for future projects harder to come by.
In the longer run, if Thailand is to sustain its growth rate it will need to create more jobs in higher-value-added industries.
The departure of sweatshops to China, Vietnam or Indonesia will be good news for Thailand only if better jobs replace them.
Wine, women and trouble
FROM OUR INDIA CORRESPONDENT
THAT wives should complain about their husbands spending the housekeeping money on drink is hardly new, but Indian women are taking the argument further.
A new temperance movement is spreading from state to state, to the alarm of brewers and distillers, and of some in government.
The movement started last year in Andhra Pradesh, in the village of Dubagunta.
Fed up with male drunkenness, local women held anti-booze demonstrations, then stormed bars and shops that sell arrack — a fiery spirit, popular in India — breaking bottles and setting the stuff ablaze.
Within a few months, 240 arrack shops in 200 villages had been forced to close.
Last month a shaken state government banned the sale of booze in the district, and promised to extend the ban to neighbouring areas.
The temperance movement has spread to several other states.
In Haryana, women have devised a novel form of protest.
They hang a traditional village skirt outside the arrack shop, saying that any man patronising it will be made to wear the skirt.
The men stay away.
India is ill at ease with alcohol.
Well-behaved high-caste Hindus do not touch the stuff, and the constitution enshrines prohibition as a public goal.
But when states have tried an outright ban, as some have, the result has been illicit stills, producing deadly brews that have blinded and killed thousands over the years.
Legal alcohol has important friends, too.
Alcohol taxes constitute the biggest single item of revenue in many states, which would find it difficult to pay their bills if prohibition were imposed.
And the booze business is among the most powerful in India, partly because in order to evade duty the manufacturers need the complicity of crooked politicians.
In at least one state, Karnataka, the drink lobby makes and unmakes chief ministers.
The women may close down the village boozer, but they will not shut down the business altogether.
A goddess defiled
IF EVEREST were a person — and Tibetans call it the Goddess Mother of the World — it might feel a bit put upon.
On May 10th, 38 people tottered to the top, took a quick look at the view and scrambled down again.
They included climbers from America, Britain, India, Australia, New Zealand and South Korea.
This was the highest number reaching the summit of the world's highest mountain in one day, beating the previous record, of 32, set in May last year.
Until 40 years ago the only record worth having was being the first person to climb Everest.
The goddess had repelled at least ten attempts on her virginity, but the success of Edmund Hillary and Sherpa Tenzing in 1953 created a demand that is still not satisfied.
At least 400 people have climbed Everest and dozens more are ready with their oxygen tanks.
Looking after them is a nice little earner for Nepal, the preferred base.
But in their hurry to get off the mountain, exhausted climbers have discarded tons of rubbish.
Even normally perishable stuff is preserved in the cold.
These days, climbers are supposed to keep the mountain tidy.
But it is not always possible.
On the slopes of Everest there are believed to be at least a dozen bodies of climbers who could not get to the top, or could not get down again.
The goddess is still not to be taken for granted.
Uzbekistan
Return of the emirs
FROM OUR MOSCOW CORRESPONDENT
DURING one of his many interrogations by the police, Mikhail Ardzinov, the deputy chairman of Uzbekistan's Human Rights Society, was asked to fill in a form with basic information about himself, including his address.
On August 27th of last year, a bomb wrecked the nearby apartment of an elderly Crimean Tatar couple.
Two nights later the bombers came back, this time with the right address.
Mr Ardzinov is still alive only because he was sleeping on his balcony to escape the heat.
When he asked a police colonel who came to the scene why the elderly couple's flat had been blown up, the officer replied: ‘You should have given us your correct address, Comrade Ardzinov.’
A report by Helsinki Watch, an international human-rights monitoring group, shows that what happened to Mr Ardzinov is not unusual in Uzbekistan.
Under President Islam Karimov, the government seems intent on returning to the ways of the Soviet Union, or to even worse models in the country's more distant past: the emirs of Bukhara, whose lands are now part of Uzbekistan, once maintained a minaret of death, from which prisoners were flung alive on market days.
Article 62 of the constitution forbids ‘organised activities leading to the perpetration of particularly serious state crimes and participation in an anti-government organisation’.
Eight people have been charged under the article in the past six months; the maximum penalty is death.
Others have been charged under Articles 191 (which protects the honour and dignity of the president) and 204 (aimed at ‘malicious delinquency’).
Censorship is back.
Izvestia, the most authoritative of Moscow's newspapers, used to sell 160,000 copies in Uzbekistan.
Now it is banned.
Local papers sometimes appear with white spaces where stories should have been.
The government also orders, or turns a blind eye to, more violent methods of keeping opponents quiet.
On May 5th the co-chairman of the Birlik (Unity) Popular Movement was hit on the head with an iron bar in the street.
Birlik, which was originally known as the Democratic Party of Uzbekistan, claimed 54,000 members at the end of last year.
Despite this level of support, and a direct request from James Baker when he was still secretary of state, Mr Karimov has refused to register Birlik as a political party.
Perhaps the best that can be said of Mr Karimov's treatment of dissidents is that it has been consistent.
In December 1991 he refused to sign those parts of the founding charter of the Commonwealth of Independent States that guarantee respect for human rights.
In July last year he announced that ‘we are prepared to set straight the brains of hundreds’ in order to maintain stability.
Mr Karimov justifies his hard line by pointing to the chaos in neighbouring Tajikistan, where a war between rival clans has left about 20,000 dead and displaced some 600,000 people from their homes.
Yet at the same time the government sends Uzbek troops to Tajikistan, escalating the war it says it fears.
Japan logs on to reform
FROM OUR TOKYO CORRESPONDENT
VOTERS in Japan have put up with rotten politics for decades, but some have had enough.
In the past six months, 65,000 people have joined the Reform of Heisei, a pressure group set up in the wake of the Sagawa Kyubin scandal by Kenichi Ohmae, the Tokyo head of the management consultancy, McKinsey.
Almost everything about the Reform of Heisei is unJapanese.
It spurns modest restraint: Heisei is the name given to the reign of the current emperor, so Reform of Heisei means the reform of contemporary Japan.
It rejects pragmatic gradualism in favour of grand design: its ideas are described as a Vision of 2005.
Its language is of market-driven populism.
The group demands, for instance, a reduction in subsidies and trade barriers in the interests of consumers, and decentralisation to cut the power of Tokyo's bureaucracy.
The style of the group is as foreign to Japan as is its appetite for argument.
Whereas traditional politicians offer visitors green tea, the Reform of Heisei serves black coffee.
Politicians in Japan are generally promoted according to their age; James Kondo, a Heisei reformer still in his 20s, goes by the title of ‘senior policy analyst’.
Members of the Diet prove their worth by attending constituents' weddings and sitting through endless meetings with colleagues.
The Reform of Heisei prefers computer interfacing.
The reformers claim to have the biggest tele-conference system in Japan: 30 people can speak to each other, and another 300 can listen.
This gives regional activists the chance to confer with colleagues in other areas; two-way calls would mean they spoke mostly to head office.
Mr Kondo hopes tele-conferencing will foster self-confidence in the rank and file, whose deference stifles debate in mainstream Japanese politics.
The Reform of Heisei also holds policy discussions by computer.
Members are invited to log on to their computers and call up the Heisei menu.
They can select the seminar option, which displays on their screens the text of the discussion in progress, and tap in their own ideas.
Mr Ohmae reads the debates and dispatches herograms (by E-mail, naturally) to those who offer good ideas.
Another option on the menu enables members to inspect the group's accounts.
As well as generating ideas, the Reform of Heisei hopes to influence elections.
It has adopted the technique used by American lobby groups of rating politicians in the same way that companies are rated for their credit-worthiness.
The vote-worthiness of candidates for the Diet will be rated according to their commitment to reformist ideas.
Fancy technology costs money, and the group needs more, despite the ¥10,000 ($10) membership fee.
Unless membership jumps before the next election, which must be held within a year, there seems little chance that candidates deemed vote-worthy will be rewarded with campaign funds.
Why, then, should Japan's venal politicians care how they are rated?
Because the mood in Japan is changing, and candidates want to identify themselves with reform.
China
Silver spoons, silver classrooms
FROM OUR BEIJING CORRESPONDENT
AS CHINA tries to cut state spending, parents seeking an education for their children are bearing some of the brunt.
The fees for sending a child to school can come to a quarter of the parents' cash income.
Even in the days of hard communism, parents had to pay a few yuan a term.
But fees have gone up.
On top of the official fee of up to 10 yuan (about $1) a term, many schools add on other charges, for repairing crumbling school buildings, topping up teachers' meagre pay or buying books, which can easily add up to the equivalent of $10 a month.
For the poor, the burden can be too great, and some parents cannot afford to send their offspring to school.
The rich, as everywhere, are prepared to invest in their children's future, so fees for good schools are going up and education is a growing business.
Schools that have a reputation for good teaching prefer to take only bright children.
But the not-so-bright can sometimes secure a place if the parents stump up a large entrance fee.
A middle school in Beijing admired for its teaching of English will admit a dunce for the equivalent of $1,750.
Many teachers frown on such practices.
‘I have one pupil who shows off how rich her parents are by wearing a huge silk flower in her hair,’ says one teacher.
‘I tell her to sit at the back of the class, otherwise nobody can see over her head.’
Some schools have started up businesses to raise money.
The Fengtai school, in a suburb of Beijing, has set up a factory that makes hydraulic cylinders for use in the steel industry.
It employs 600 people, and in 1992 made a profit of $140,000.
When the school opened in 1989, the government provided ‘just enough to buy some blackboards’, says the headmistress, Li Xuelan.
The state still provides only 30–40% of the school's running costs.
The rest, including wages of the 135 staff, comes from factory profits.
Ms Li is now trying to find a foreign partner who will invest in the school.
She would like money to buy equipment and build smart dormitories and classrooms to create a two-tier school.
‘Of course the fees will be much higher for the children in the higher tier, probably around $1,000 a year,’ she says.
‘Local children can still come here and pay the low fees, but they will be in separate classes.
They will not be allowed to use the new equipment or the new buildings.
It will be one school, two systems.’
She expects that entrepreneurs and high-ranking government officials will pay for such a privileged education for their children.
Ms Li dismisses any suggestion that anyone will feel like a second-class citizen: ‘Everyone understands the changes our country is going through.
They will accept it.’
Schools that charge such high fees are often criticised in Chinese newspapers.
Not all Chinese believe that education should be part of the market economy.
But no one dares to say that the parents are paying the price of schooling because the government has neglected education.
Golf in Asia
Greens against the greens
FROM OUR SOUTH-EAST ASIA CORRESPONDENT
ONCE upon a time, the enemies of South-East Asia's environment were overpopulation and poverty, but now prosperity must also be considered a foe.
Environmentalists have declared war on the golf course.
At a meeting in Penang last month, a coalition of environmental groups formed the Global Anti-Golf Movement to campaign against the spread of golf courses in Asia.
The group's organisers are aghast that South-East Asians have caught the Japanese love of driving and putting.
According to Chee Yoke Ling, a Malaysian environmentalist who held the gathering in Penang, golf courses are threatening to take over Malaysia.
At present the country has 150 courses, but 50 more will open by the year 2000.
Ms Chee has spotted five new golf courses being built beside the road between Kuala Lumpur and its airport.
As courses proliferate, they promote themselves with ever more exotic gimmicks.
Templer's Park, outside Kuala Lumpur, boasts that all its caddies are women, and new recruits are sent to Japan for etiquette training.
Membership of Templer's Park costs 75,000 ringiit ($10,000).
The newly opened Glenmarie course has planted pine trees to create a Scottish atmosphere, which gives a curious effect in tropical Kuala Lumpur.
Golf courses may look green, but anti-golfers claim their appearance is deceptive.
Ms Chee says they waste water and spread chemical pollutants: one golf course uses as much water as 2,000 households.
In areas like southern Thailand, home to many new courses, farmers are losing crops for lack of water.
Chemicals used on golf courses run off the greens and fairways and pollute local water supplies.
Golf courses, according to Ms Chee, are often ‘reservoirs of toxic chemicals’.
The anti-golfers may yet find their campaign bunkered.
For the upwardly mobile Thai or Malaysian businessman, the golf course is the place to win friends and influence people.
The smartest new housing developments in Malaysia, Thailand and Indonesia often come with golf courses attached.
Malaysia's deputy prime minister relaxes by designing golf courses, and the Indonesian president's family is in the business of building them.
Still, Ms Chee and her allies have already won a victory.
Last year environmentalists managed to stop a plan by a Japanese group to build a retirement home with a golf course attached on the top of Penang Hill, one of the few untouched areas on a fast developing island.
Ms Chee may have won a battle, but the war goes on: ‘The developers have targeted every hill in the country,’ she says grimly.
AMERICAN SURVEY
New Jersey
Florio's leap
NEW YORK
AS IT searches round, somewhat forlornly, for things it can take credit for, the Clinton administration might light on the changing fortunes of the Democratic governor of New Jersey.
Not so long ago, James Florio, youngish, intense and policy-obsessed, was the focus of a virulent grassroots campaign to dump him.
His chances of re-election in November are now brightening, thanks, it is said, to the Clinton coat-tail effect.
But who has been clutching whom?
It was Mr Florio, elected in 1989, who floated himself as a trial balloon for Clintonomics.
Although he ran for office saying that he saw no need to raise taxes, he put them up by $1.8 billion in 1990, the biggest increase ever seen in his largely affluent, suburban state.
He angered even the faithful by doing it in the middle of the night, announcing he would slash spending to close a gaping budget deficit and promising to use the new tax revenue to bolster poor school districts.
A disgruntled postman rang up a radio chat show to complain, and found himself spearheading an anti-Florio movement that culminated in 50,000 people marching on the state capitol.
But Mr Florio, a former boxer who earned his high school diploma in the navy, was undaunted by the opposition.
Indeed, he met it head-on: first infuriating the powerful gun lobby by signing a law banning assault weapons, then reforming New Jersey's nearly bankrupt car-insurance programme, then fighting to change an absurdly generous teachers' pension plan.
By autumn 1990, his approval rating stood at 18%.
Since then, however, Mr Florio's hard-taxing rhetoric has started to be heard from the White House; and the opposition movement has quietly lost strength.
After two years, the governor's numbers are improving.
Fate, too, has been on his side.
His top opponents were snagged by the Zoe Baird affair; they too had hired illegal immigrants to care for their children.
His ban on assault weapons was helped no end by the fact that in February, in the midst of the floor fight in the legislature, a terrorist's bomb exploded in the World Trade Centre in New York.
With his approval ratings now up to 40%, Mr Florio leads the Republican candidate, Christine Todd Whitman (who almost upset Senator Bill Bradley in November), by nine points.
A hot political product once again, he has hired James Carville, the Ragin' Cajun strategist of Mr Clinton's campaign, as his chief consultant.
Mrs Whitman, for her part, has hired Ed Rollins, who created the 1984 ‘Morning in America’ theme for Ronald Reagan.
Mr Carville will doubtless publicise the $1.7m that Mrs Whitman and her husband earned last year; Mr Rollins will try to link Mr Florio with the struggling president.
But taxes, earlier considered the incendiary device of the race, may no longer be so.
Already, both the top Republican contenders have backed down from their original pledge to rescind Mr Florio's tax increases the minute they take office.
Mrs Whitman says now that it might not happen ‘in six months or six years’.
Whatever happens, the Florio legacy looks safe.
California
Green shoots
LOS ANGELES
HAS California's economy finally turned the corner?
In April the notoriously unreliable official figure for the state's unemployment rate dropped for the second month running — to 8.6%.
Economists reckon that the slightly less unreliable figure for payroll employment may have bottomed out in December at some 800,000 less than the (soon to be revised) high-point in 1990.
The Department of Finance guesses that retail sales crawled up by 1% in the first three months of 1993 — after falling for eight successive quarters.
In the best traditions of the state's statistics, a truthful answer will not be known for several years (ie, when it is of little practical use).
However, it seems likely that the world's seventh-biggest economy has put the worst behind it.
Even Pete Wilson, the state's usually pessimistic governor, has recently taken to making speeches about ‘the California comeback’.
Unfortunately for Mr Wilson, that comeback will be tepid — and probably hardly noticeable until after next year's gubernatorial election.
Carolyn Sherwood-Call at the Federal Reserve Bank in San Francisco reckons the state will ‘bump along’ at the bottom for a good while yet.
Lynn Reaser, the chief economist at First Interstate, expects northern and central California to pull out of recession later this year, but southern California to lag behind.
By some counts, Los Angeles accounted for 29% of the jobs lost in America between June 1990 and December 1992.
There are good reasons for caution.
One is the sluggish construction industry.
Despite the fact that interest rates have halved since 1989, only around 85,000 houses will be started this year — a third of the number before the recession.
Thanks to Mr Clinton's proposed defence cuts, California's aerospace firms and military bases may be shedding jobs until 1998.
The state's biggest banks may still be standing tall; but they are not lending freely.
And, despite a lot of political chatter, the state's hated workers' compensation scheme still remains unreformed.
But what of the longer term?
On May 12th, the Centre for the Continuing Study of the Californian Economy (CCSCE) released an optimistic study, arguing that two-thirds of the state's economic base is built on four sectors that are thriving: foreign trade, high technology, professional services and entertainment/tourism.
The CCSCE confidently predicts that this dream-team of industries will take advantage of the state's position on the Pacific Rim and its fast-growing population to produce 4m new jobs by 2005.
These futuristic service industries need both a well-educated workforce and good public infrastructure.
The CCSCE points out that, since 1961, public investment has grown less in California than in any other state.
Recently money has been thrown at physical infrastructure.
But the state's shabby and dangerous schools look less and less like breeding grounds for the biotechnologists and virtual-reality scriptwriters of the future.
The CCSCE report thus underlines what wise men have said all along: California's problems are political and social, not economic.
Logging
Dark doings in forests
SEATTLE
TO sell your timber at a loss to logging companies, who then earn millions from sawing it, makes no sense.
Hence the interest when Dale Robertson, the head of the federal Forest Service, sent a memorandum in late April to the managers of the regional forests.
Mr Robertson suggested the possible end of timber-cutting in 62 out of 156 national forests, covering 24m hectares (59m acres) of land, where cutting has been costing more to administer than the Forest Service has been able to recoup from sales.
Savings, the agency thinks, could be $100m or more a year.
When news of the memo appeared on April 30th in a story in the New York Times, greens cheered and deficit-cutters rejoiced.
Then the plot thickened.
That same day, several timber-industry groups mounted well-staged press conferences condemning the proposal.
In Oregon, which has one forest on Mr Robertson's list, loggers suggested that the forest would be swamped with insects if harvesting stopped.
Such events led greens to suspect that the Forest Service and timber industry people had been in cahoots, trying to determine not only how best to make the plan public, but also how best to ensure its demise.
Although the Forest Service may offer — and withdraw — timber sales without consulting anyone, it gets close attention from members of Congress with forests in their constituencies.
Recent economic doldrums have hurt the rural west.
So the memo was also bound to stir up lobbyists from all the region's timber towns, and to spread frightful tales of lost jobs.
Randal O'Toole, a forest economist based in Portland, Oregon, is quick to point out the disingenuous parts in the Forest Service proposal.
To begin with, says Mr O'Toole, actual losses from federal timber sales are closer to $100m a year, a figure hidden by creative accounting, such as adding road-building costs to the capital value of a forest.
In fact, only 12 national forests make any money at all, and a paltry $10m at that.
Second, according to Mr O'Toole, the draft proposal ignores the fact that the Forest Service has been encouraged to lose money for years, in order (in the time-honoured manner) to increase its appropriations.
Rather than suggesting a different incentive system, which would enable the agency to maintain at least some timber harvesting in many of the forests on the list, the agency is deliberately limiting its options.
If that is true, Mr Robertson's proposal can be seen as part of a grander drama: the battle for control of the Forest Service's soul.
When it was founded early in this century, the agency took its ideas of land management from European Social Democratic models.
That example was tossed out during the 1950s, when McCarthyites took issue with it.
Industry then took over, turning the Forest Service into an extension of itself.
During the past decade greens have launched their own assault, forcing the Forest Service — reluctantly — to return to its roots.
Mr Robertson's list fits into this picture: a trial balloon, ostensibly pleasing to greens, which was sent up almost in the hope that it would be quickly shot down.
Timber workers, meanwhile, wonder whether these political excursions will in fact end by hurting them.
Doug Mood, co-owner of a sawmill in the little Montana town of Seeley Lake, faces losing access to timber from three of the four national forests near his mill.
His 44-year-old mill, with 110 employees, is the economic foundation of the town.
‘We're a community that exists because the Forest Service has a timber programme,’ he says.
Decades ago, the first Forest Service timber sale took place near Mr Mood's mill.
Educating Ira
EVEN the most jaded Washingtonians have never seen anything quite like it.
The health-care task force, which is due to deliver its report to the president any day now, has outdone all previous committees on every imaginable measure: size (it had 500 full-time members and innumerable hangers-on), complexity (it was divided into 15 ‘cluster groups’ and 34 working groups), rigour (the heads of the working-groups are now having their work reassessed by ‘auditors’and ‘contrarians’); and, not least, ambition.
And the Great Panjandrum of this extraordinary enterprise — the man who dreamt up the task force, who drives its proceedings, and who keeps President Bill Clinton informed about its deliberations — is a student-radical-turned-management-consultant, Ira Magaziner.
If the essential qualities needed for reinventing health care under Mr Clinton are three — willingness to go back to first principles, faith in political action, and above all, a superhuman command of detail — then Mr Magaziner has spent his whole life in training for his current job.
He first demonstrated his taste for going back to first principles as a student at Brown University in the late 1960s.
Three years into his undergraduate degree he concluded that the curriculum was too narrow, too rigid, and too dominated by grades.
After a year of agitation and argument, he persuaded the faculty to accept his own much more permissive course.
It survives to this day.
In reforming Brown, Mr Magaziner pioneered a number of techniques seen later on the task force: studying the problem exhaustively (his report on the curriculum was 425 pages long); building a consensus (he organised fashionable dances, admitting only those who had helped with the report); coming up with breathtakingly bold proposals; and hinting that dire consequences might follow if the establishment resisted his ideas.
Mr Magaziner tested his faith in political activism in two rather unusual laboratories: Brockton, a decaying industrial town southwest of Boston; and Rhode Island, one of the most Mafia-infested states in the country.
In Brockton, he turned up with a dozen fellow-students to revitalise local politics from the bottom up.
In Rhode Island, a decade later, he accepted a commission from the local elites to turn the state into a showpiece of private-public partnership and high-technology-driven growth.
The bridge from student firebrand to policy wonk was a new career as a management consultant.
Starting out with the Boston Consultancy Group, and eventually forming his own firm, Telesis (Greek for well-planned progress), Mr Magaziner specialised in advising large companies (Ford and General Electric) and small countries (Sweden) on why things cost as much as they do, and how they can be made to cost less.
Management consultancy not only made him rich (he sold Telesis for $1m and has just forked out $1.25m for a Washington house); it also convinced him that America's ludicrously wasteful health-care system was undermining the nation's competitiveness abroad.
Ira (as he is universally known in Washington) inspires limitless loyalty among his subordinates.
When not trying to match his 15-hour days, they regale each other with endless stories about his idiosyncrasies and absent-mindedness.
Sadly, this affection is not universal.
He has upset many influential Democrats, partly because he has blundered into their territory, partly because he is congenitally blind to status distinctions, judging everyone from the loftiest senator to the lowliest staffer on the basis of the quality of their arguments.
A consummate rationalist, he prefers facts to innuendo, originality to soundness; in other words, he remains an outsider in Washington.
To conservatives Mr Magaziner is the archetypical know-it-all, a Beatrice Webb with flow charts; and his behemoth task force, with its appetite for paper and addiction to jargon, is just a foretaste of what is to come, when the rednecks are subjected to the rule of the pointyheads.
More damagingly, the right points out that many of his schemes have flopped.
Thanks to his curriculum, Brown is a paradise for airheads and idlers.
The Brockton and Rhode Island experiments ended in ignominy.
He persuaded General Electric to waste millions developing a rotary compressor, almost persuaded Utah to jump on to the cold-fusion bandwagon, and failed to rescue Wang laboratories from bankruptcy.
Many of these criticisms are overdone; but even his acolytes admit that the task force was too large and its procedures too elaborate.
The force wasted an enormous amount of energy producing a plan which looks remarkably like the one sketched out in Mr Clinton's campaign manifesto.
Many of the 500 bodies simply got in the way.
Hardly anybody read the endless folders which the task forces produced.
Hardly anyone except Ira, that is.
Arguably, the whole point of the exercise was to educate Ira about health care.
Mr Magaziner started out as a fan of the Canadian ‘single-payer’ model and a supporter of price controls.
Thanks to his three months of briefings, he is as eloquent about managed competition as anyone, and as cautious about price controls.
Surprisingly, the most pressing ‘Magaziner problem’ for the administration stems neither from his eccentricity, nor from his love of details, but from his superhuman efficiency.
With most members of the task force now dismissed, Mr Magaziner is putting the finishing touches to his report.
But the administration, worried that health-care reform will kill jobs and raise taxes, is keen to delay unveiling the plan until mid-June, or even mid-July.
Mr Magaziner churns on regardless.
A package for Cuba
MIAMI
THE advertisements in Miami newspapers offered ready-made food baskets for $175: canned meat, sardines, soup, coffee, milk, chocolates.
The company, Cuba Paquetes, sends out more than a ton of goods each week; last week, it sent nearly two tons of medicine and clothing.
‘We've had a lot of interest,’ says Milton Serret, who runs the company.
The parcels are going to Cuba.
Under a complicated series of exemptions from the 30-year-old American embargo, exiles can send monthly packages of medicine and clothing, up to a value of $100, to relatives there.
America also lets exiles send money to Cuba in lots of $100 a household, delivered in Cuban pesos at the official exchange rate of two pesos to the dollar.
(In Havana, the black market rate for pesos is 60 to the dollar).
And last week, for the first time, the Cuban government began allowing Miami exiles to send food parcels too.
Some exile groups think the parcels should not be sent.
If they help to make conditions in Cuba less awful, Fidel Castro may stay longer in power.
Hard-line exiles under the umbrella of Unidad Cubana, a group that includes the powerful Cuban American National Foundation, want all postal aid stopped and the embargo tightened.
When a group of anti-embargo Americans organised a flotilla of 13 boats carrying aid to church organisations in Cuba from the Florida Keys on April 24th, right-wing groups were convinced that the stuff would end up in the hands of Mr Castro and the armed forces.
Most people, however, think of the well-being of their relatives first.
When reports came in of the spread of an eye disease in Cuba that was caused by malnutrition, they rushed to send packets of vitamins.
Groups across America are sending more and more humanitarian aid, deliberately setting out to challenge official American policy.
A group based in Minneapolis, Pastors for Peace, is planning to send a shipment of aid to Cuba on July 16th from 11 American cities, including Miami.
As conditions deteriorate in Cuba, some observers believe Mr Castro may relax controls still further.
But the potential financial boost is a double-edged sword.
The last time Cuban exiles were allowed back in large numbers, during a goodwill period in the late 1970s, the country nearly collapsed in shock at the wealth they brought in their luggage.
Drugs policy
The enemy within
A QUIET revolt has been taking place in courtrooms across America.
It has been led by judges disillusioned with the country's war on drugs.
On April 29th Harold Greene, a prominent federal judge in Washington, ruled that important elements of the mandatory sentencing laws for drugs offenders were unconstitutional.
Less than two weeks earlier, two senior federal judges, Jack Weinstein and Whitman Knapp, of New York, had announced that they would no longer preside over drugs cases.
In recent months, a number of federal judges have taken such a stance.
It might be a sign, much further down the road, of a change in policy.
Lee Brown, the former New York police chief who was appointed as ‘drug tsar’ by Bill Clinton on April 28th, is thought to be a good appointment.
Apart from that, Mr Clinton has not done much with drugs policy.
Granted, he has been in office a short while, and has had much to occupy him.
But his drug-policy staff has been cut, and the budget request he has sent to Congress looks just like the one sent by George Bush.
He has asked for much the same amount of money, divided up in the same way: two-thirds of the money to criminal-enforcement efforts, one-third to treatment.
Some had hoped for a change of emphasis.
Although the ‘war on drugs’ was first promoted by Richard Nixon in 1972, it was not until George Bush's term that the war began in earnest.
Mr Bush appointed tough-talking drug tsars and spent $10 billion to attack traffickers abroad and punish pushers and users at home.
The result has been disappointing.
Cocaine is available about as freely and cheaply today as in 1989.
Drug-related violence in the cities is still high.
The most praiseworthy part of the Bush policy was a drop in overall cocaine-taking.
But hard-core addicts, who account for four-fifths of all consumption, are taking as much as ever.
Mark Kleiman, of Harvard University, argues that Mr Bush's policies, put in place soon after the peak in cocaine's popularity, did little to affect a decline already under way.
Changing fashion (including the recent surge in heroin-taking) probably deserves the credit for that.
If casual consumption of cocaine is down, it may well be the result of education and treatment programmes rather than criminal enforcement.
But enforcement has been, and remains, the core of American policy.
Presidents, naturally, do not want to be seen to condone the taking of drugs; the public temper is for stiff penalties and the locking up of offenders, not tender care.
But the effect of the policy, as the American Bar Association pointed out in a recent report, is that the country's prisons are filled not only with drug-handlers but also with drug-takers, and cannot cope with the numbers.
Neal Sonnett, the head of the ABA's criminal-justice section, notes with particular alarm the sharp rise in incarceration of low-level drug offenders, which has hindered efforts to fight more serious, and violent, crime.
He thinks the criminal-justice system may be ‘on the point of collapse’.
If it is, it will be for reasons to do with overall levels of sentencing for many sorts of crimes, not merely those related to drugs.
But such arguments livened up a drugs meeting held in Washington on May 7th to rethink America's policies.
At the start of the day Janet Reno, the attorney-general, admitted dissatisfaction with the present emphasis on enforcement efforts, and suggested the mandatory sentencing guidelines might be reviewed.
The speech confirmed hints from Mr Clinton that, despite his status-quo budget, he plans to cut back on enforcement efforts, especially overseas, in favour of trying to reduce demand at home.
Another significant aspect of the meeting was the openness of debate.
Prohibition was not unquestioningly supported.
Ethan Nadelmann, a drugs expert who heads the Princeton Working Group, which is developing alternative ideas to prohibition, notes that legalisation of drugs was given a serious hearing.
The way forward, he believes, is towards ‘harm reduction’.
Such efforts, like the one supported by Kurt Schmoke, the mayor of Baltimore, build on programmes from parts of Europe and Australia which treat drug-taking not as a criminal matter, but more as an issue of personal choice and public health.
A small chorus has applauded such a shift in resources, arguing that prohibition of drugs will always fail so long as Americans remain so determined to get hold of them.
Mr Clinton, who got himself in plenty of trouble during the campaign for not inhaling marijuana, is unlikely to go that far.
Cover-up uncovered
WASHINGTON, DC
REVISIONISTS are already at work on April 24th's gay march on Washington.
At the time, the television networks served up images of Gap-wearing middle-managers having a day out.
Those who went down to the Mall to look also noticed bare-breasted lesbians, some with rings through their nipples; men in leather trousers and studded harnesses; and T-shirts proclaiming ‘Every tenth Jesus is a queer.’
Some of the speeches were less than soothing, too.
Whatever happened to those unsettling scenes?
The networks did not report them, nor did the press.
The Washington Times and Accuracy in Media, both avowedly right-wing, were quick to point that out; but on May 9th Howard Kurtz, media correspondent for the Washington Post, also accused the networks of producing a ‘bleached’ account of the march.
It was not for lack of space.
Most newspapers devoted pages to the subject.
But they did not want to offend the public; and, most important, they had billed the march as a civil-rights story.
Journalists tended to march with the gays in spirit, believing that they had a case and were an important constituency (as they are) for the Democratic Party.
They did not want to confuse their audience with images of pacifists, masochists or the self-proclaimed ‘fierce dykes’ who screamed that they wanted to make love to the first lady.
Niceness was all.
Into Bosnia?
WASHINGTON, DC
IN THE unattractive language of official Washington, Bosnian policy went ‘on hold’ when Warren Christopher, the secretary of state, returned from his trip to Europe's capitals in the first week in May.
Bill Clinton's administration, unable to persuade its European allies to endorse what it thought it wanted to do, and unsure of congressional or country-wide support for any American military involvement in the Balkans, took an unhappy breather.
Mr Christopher's proposal, heavily influenced by staffers at the National Security Council (NSC), who have the most hawkish instincts in the administration, went by the shorthand ‘lift and strike’.
The idea was that the United Nations arms embargo on ex-Yugoslavia should be lifted to enable the Bosnian Muslims to get the heavy weapons they need.
But, to avoid an immediate and pre-emptive Serb offensive, allied aircraft would at the same time bomb Serb artillery positions and supply lines.
The idea seems to have been that this bombing would last only until the Bosnian government had the armaments it wanted to fight its own war.
This proposal found no support in Europe.
America's difficulty in persuading its allies was immeasurably increased by the absence of any American troops with the UN humanitarian mission in ex-Yugoslavia.
Lord Owen, the EC's envoy to the area who pops up regularly on American television, has made a call for American troops his watchword.
A meeting of EC foreign ministers on May 10th added its voice, politely requesting all relevant parties — the Russians as well as the Americans — to contribute to the UN operation on the ground.
The careful diplomacy with which this point has been made was undermined when the New York Times reported an off-the-record comment at the Brussels meeting suggesting that Mr Clinton ‘feels the compulsion to do something but does not actually want to get involved.’
This caused bad feeling both in the administration and in Congress.
On May 11th, Joe Biden, a Democratic senator who chairs the European sub-committee of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, indulged in an outburst against Europe, castigating its response as a ‘mosaic of indifference, timidity, self-delusion and hypocrisy’.
An opponent of the Vance-Owen peace plan, Mr Biden called on the Europeans to remove their troops from Bosnia, if they were going to use their presence as an excuse to prevent the Bosnians from defending themselves.
European diplomats say that Mr Biden's reaction misreads what actually happened.
They say that if Mr Christopher had gone to Europe with nothing but the ‘strike’ part of his strategy, he would have found agreement (no great enthusiasm, but agreement) in Paris and London, notwithstanding the inevitable dangers to troops on the ground.
But while the Europeans were prepared to go along with an ultimatum to the Serbs that threatened bombing if there were more belligerency, they would not countenance lifting the arms embargo, which they believe would do more harm than good.
People in the administration see it differently.
Some argue that lifting the embargo would add a ‘moral’ component to American policy.
Any use of force, according to this view, had to do more than hold the lines on the battlefield; it had also to allow the Bosnian government the chance to fight and retake territory it had lost.
Whether this view commends itself to many more people than staffers in the NSC and the self-confessed zealots working for Mr Biden is debatable.
Support matters.
Virtually everyone agrees that if there is to be any military action in Bosnia it must be accompanied by a congressional resolution.
Mr Clinton cannot run the risk of sending Americans into a war that has never engaged much public attention without congressional cover.
Would he be given it?
Tom Foley, the speaker of the House of Representatives, has said that if the president were to ask for the authority to use force, there is a presumption that he would get it.
On the other hand, there is a firmly held view on Capitol Hill that America cannot take unilateral action in a European theatre.
‘Lift and strike’ may be dead but ‘strike’alone is not.
Few doubt that if Mr Clinton asked for congressional approval for air strikes, he would get it.
Meanwhile, the president is filling the time with less provocative suggestions.
As he set off from Washington to campaign in Cleveland, Chicago and New York, he hinted strongly that he might be prepared to send American ground troops to join the UN peacekeepers who have gone to Macedonia to try to stop the Balkans war from spreading.
The United States may also help to seal the Bosnian-Serb border.
The French and British are trying to persuade the Americans to take active steps to create ‘safe havens’ in Bosnia.
But such appeals run into the one constant of American policy: Mr Clinton's determination not to put American ground troops in Bosnia unless to enforce a peace treaty.
Despite an outpouring of editorials and television programmes, he is under virtually no pressure to change his mind on that decision.
So the administration watches and waits.
The economy
Sell in May and go away
WASHINGTON, DC
THE pace could not be sustained.
In the fourth quarter of 1992, the economy grew at an annual rate of 4.7%, which gave a roseate glow to Bill Clinton's first few weeks in office but always looked too good to last.
So it proved.
At an annual rate, GDP grew by just 1.8% in the first quarter of the year; most commentators expect growth for the year to be no more than 2.5%, if that.
The pattern for most of the past 18 months — a slow, steady recovery from a shallow recession — has reasserted itself.
Inflation remains low although, on the back of poor weather in farm districts, wholesale prices went up by 0.6% in April, their fastest rise since October 1990.
Unemployment is remarkably steady at 7%; enough to cause localised pain, but not enough to save Mr Clinton's $16 billion stimulus package.
In other words, the economy continues to show modest, non-inflationary growth.
Nothing to be ashamed of.
Yet many Americans sense that the recovery is fragile.
Their unease has two distinct components.
Some say that this is still a ‘jobless’ recovery; or at least, as Dick Gephardt, the leader of the Democratic majority in the House of Representatives, argued on May 11th, a recovery with no good jobs.
The claim is not limited to Democrats.
Ross Perot, the billionaire-populist who won 19% of the vote in the presidential election, is riding the ‘no-good-jobs’ horse hard.
The flipside is that American productivity is enjoying sustained growth.
The WEFA Group, an economic consultancy, points out that output per man-hour rose by 2.7% in 1992, the best performance for nearly 20 years.
The level of productivity since 1991, according to WEFA, is 1.5% higher than the average for all recoveries since 1975.
For a variety of reasons — better statistics, better management of information technology, less regulation — the puzzlingly weak growth of productivity in the service sector is ending.
Hence a proper line for the president and his advisers to take would be that as productivity increases, so will corporate profits, investment, and the creation of new jobs.
But that case is not being made.
Indeed — and this is the second component of unease — there is no quiet pleasure in Washington that the economy is ticking along; it is an agitated city.
In the first week of May, Congress cleared its decks to start work on the details of Mr Clinton's economic package.
That will keep everybody busy until the July 4th break.
And when they get back from their parades and their barbecues, the scions of Washington will head straight for the president's health-care package, which Mr Clinton would like to sign into law at Christmas.
Put like that, the unease is understandable.
In the next few months, Washington is going to try to transform the economic and regulatory environment of health care (13% of the economy), enact the most sweeping changes in the tax code since 1986, lock into place a substantial reduction of the deficit and enact a five-year $165 billion ‘investment’ package in education, health care and infrastructure.
The administration's success or failure may be clear at the end of the summer; very little is clear now.
For most businessmen, the central questions during the summer will turn on taxation.
Mr Clinton had proposed raising the top rate of corporate income tax to 36%, and would have given business an investment tax credit weighted to benefit small companies rather than big ones.
Dan Rostenkowski, chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee and one of the heroes of the 1986 tax reform, will have none of it.
He thinks that the tax credit encourages creative accounting and will provide less benefit than the administration imagines; instead, he would like to see the corporate income-tax increase held to 35%.
The betting is that he will get his way.
It seems likely, too, that there will be changes in the president's proposed energy tax (intended to bring in $18.2 billion over five years).
Mr Clinton wanted energy producers to absorb the tax; after strenuous lobbying, it now looks as if it will be fully passed on to consumers.
And all this is but a prelude.
Or rather it will be if the health-care proposals come with a price tag that requires the taxpayer to finance an extra $100 billion or so of government spending a year.
How will that money be found?
With taxes on which kinds of company or person?
With what effect on investment patterns?
With all that to wait for, rarely has the old stockmarket adage to ‘sell in May and go away’ been more apposite.
Hence the general economic unease this spring.
INTERNATIONAL
The wagons circle
ONE by one, the people who would have governed a post-apartheid South Africa have been selected for murder.
Chris Hani, secretary-general of the Communist Party, was assassinated a month ago.
Next week, if the plot had not been uncovered, it would apparently have been the turn of his white comrade, Joe Slovo.
Later, Winnie Mandela and Peter Mokaba, the president of the African National Congress's Youth League, would have been the targets.
Ever since Mr Hani's murder, the spectre of the white right has dominated headlines in South Africa.
But nobody is sure of the white extremists' power.
To be sure, they have the power to kill.
Mr Hani's murder was allegedly part of a conspiracy: a white member of Parliament and his wife, Clive and Gaye Derby-Lewis, have been arrested along with Janusz Walus, the man said to have pulled the trigger.
But the power to assassinate is not political power.
Mr Slovo, who learnt about the plan to kill him from the Johannesburg Star, not from the police, attributed the plot to the right's desperation.
Despite the riots caused by Mr Hani's murder, multi-party talks on a new constitution have plodded on.
Indeed, far from destroying the agreement between the ANC and the government of President F.W. de Klerk on the broad shape of a power-sharing future, the Hani murder may have brought closer the date of the election for a constitutional assembly to replace the present parliament.
This election, now promised within 12 months, will mark South Africa's first clean break with its racist past.
Since citizens of all colours will for the first time be allowed to vote together, it will produce a legislature dominated by blacks.
And although the ANC has promised to share power in the subsequent government, the country will then be a short hop from the full-blown majority rule that has always been anathema to many Afrikaners.
Hence a rare attempt by the white right to end its chronic divisions.
On May 7th farmers, politicians and ex-generals who oppose majority rule met in Pretoria to launch a new alliance calling itself the Afrikaner Volksfront, or Afrikaner People's Front.
It brings together, behind the slogan of Afrikaner ‘self-determination’, the Conservative Party and various other parties aghast at Mr de Klerk's actions.
The Front draws its core support from the one-third of whites who opposed Mr de Klerk in last year's referendum on reform.
Most whites likely to sympathise with it flounced out of his National Party long ago.
But the involvement of several former generals, notably Constand Viljoen, who headed the armed forces until 1985, has added a sinister flavour.
A few days after Mr Hani's murder, while riots swept the country, he and four comrades met secretly to form a ‘Committee of Generals’ whose aim would be to resist majority rule.
The committee's existence was not disclosed until last week.
One of the generals, Tienie Groenewald, made a splash by boasting of his ability to mobilise 500,000 whites willing to fight for secession if peaceful resistance to black rule failed.
But, again, the committee's power is hard to assess.
Together, Mr Groenewald, who ran military intelligence in the mid-1980s, and Mr Viljoen, a hero of South Africa's Angolan war, make a formidable pair.
Even so, their threats contain a measure of bluster.
These are retired generals, not serving ones.
Mr Groenewald's boast about hundreds of thousands of white soldiers assumes rather too blithely that ex-conscripts will rally to the cause.
Several thousand gun-carrying Afrikaner farmers gathered to listen to Mr Viljoen last week in a sports stadium in Potchefstroom; they called for war if militant blacks did not stop killing white farmers.
But it was good television rather than a convincing display of military might.
Mr Groenewald admits that the use of force is merely a ‘hypothetical option’.
He and the Volksfront prefer political means.
By overcoming old divisions, and filling a leadership gap created by the death last month of Andries Treurnicht, the Conservatives' leader, the Volksfront has stiffened nerves on the right.
Mr Viljoen, in particular, gives the Volksfront an authoritative voice.
His association with one of the more moderate right-wing parties, the Afrikaner Volksunie, lends the new alliance an aura of relative respectability.
So does the decision of the neo-fascist Afrikaner Resistance Movement to shun it.
Yet these are small gains to set against the many reverses the right has suffered since Mr de Klerk started to undo apartheid.
Though the generals have tried to give the right the coherent policy that it lacked until recently — an Afrikaner state and self-determination rather than apartheid and white supremacy — the right is still hampered by the implausibility of its programme.
Mr Groenewald claims to have discovered an area — mainly in the Transvaal and the Orange Free State — where whites are a majority, and which could become an Afrikaner homeland.
But the claim demands heroic cartography.
To get his majority, the general must allocate big chunks of land inside his putative homeland to ‘black nations’.
It would, in other words, be a replica of apartheid, with all of apartheid's familiar problems.
Mr de Klerk has responded to the formation of the Volksfront by denouncing the participation of the ex-generals as an attempt to politicise the security forces.
Outright sedition is, however, a pretty remote outcome.
In the short run, the chief impact of the Volksfront will be to strengthen the hand of the white right — and of its quasi-secessionist ally, Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi's Natal-based Inkatha Freedom Party — in the continuing constitutional negotiations.
Although this alliance may not last for long, both sides have an interest in sticking together while negotiations continue.
The Volksfront is vague on whether ‘self-determination’ means fully fledged nationhood, or whether regional autonomy would do.
So is Mr Buthelezi.
Apart, Inkatha and the Afrikaner right-wing parties represent significant but relatively small groups.
Together, their demands for self-determination to be guaranteed before an election will be harder for Mr de Klerk to ignore.
Oil in Latin America
A sacred limping cow
Latin America's new free-market orthodoxy has stopped short of the politically sensitive state-controlled oil companies.
Until now
THE people of Latin America are famously resentful of the foreign fruit growers who operate in their countries.
But the sentiment against foreign oil barons is stronger still.
For much of this century, international oil companies have been reviled as symbols of imperialist exploitation.
Outrage at what they saw as the pillaging of their resources led many Latin countries to nationalise oil firms.
Some governments rewrote their constitutions to restrict, or prohibit altogether, private or foreign participation in their oil industries.
This makes all the more remarkable the eagerness with which Argentina is now proposing to sell Yacimientos Petroliferos Fiscales, its state-owned oil firm.
President Carlos Menem, keen on getting his hands on the proceeds of the privatisation before elections in the autumn, indicated last month that he will push the sale well ahead of schedule.
At only $1 billion or so for a 50% stake, the price strikes some industry observers as a steal.
This readiness to see a company that has been in state hands since 1922 pass into private, maybe foreign, ownership is rare.
Elsewhere in Latin America, even enthusiastic privatisers have drawn the line at selling off oil firms.
But the fall in world oil prices in recent years has squeezed revenues and made the inefficiencies of these coddled monopolies painfully obvious.
Slowly, states are beginning to relinquish control of their energy industries.
Mexico is an example.
On the face of things, President Carlos Salinas continues to treat energy as a special case, a no-go area for the free-market reforms he has applied to other parts of the economy.
In a country with bitter memories of gringo exploitation, this is only prudent.
Lazaro Cardenas, the president who nationalised foreign oil firms in 1938, is revered as a national hero, and his son, Cuauhtemoc Cardenas, leads the left-wing opposition party.
So the state oil firm, Petroleos Mexicanos (Pemex), is not for sale.
Recently Mr Salinas vowed that ‘oil ownership and control will remain permanently in Mexican hands’.
Yet there may be less to this unambiguous declaration than meets the eye.
Pemex paid some $10 billion in taxes last year and was Mexico's main foreign-currency earner.
But Mr Salinas's people are acutely aware that lack of competition and cosiness with the state have resulted in the squandering of billions and led to insufficient capital investment.
Quietly, therefore, Mr Salinas has allowed foreign firms to compete for drilling-service contracts, and Pemex is now working together with American petrochemical companies in joint ventures.
Like Mr Salinas, Venezuela's troubled president, Carlos Andres Perez, is a free-market reformer.
Unlike Mexico, his country does not have a constitutional ban on foreign and private investment in energy industries.
But politicians, bolstered by popular sentiment in favour of state ownership, have ensured since the nationalisation of the oil industry in 1975 that the state-run Petroleos de Venezuela (PDVSA) has kept an iron grip on the energy sector.
Though more efficient than its Mexican counterpart, it has had to operate under perverse conditions.
The government sets the local price of petrol absurdly low while imposing taxes of over 80% on the company's revenues.
So PDVSA is chronically short of cash.
This revenue crunch is particularly awkward for Venezuela.
Because much of its crude is of a variety that is expensive to refine and bring to market, it is trying to lure back the foreigners who were kicked out of the business two decades ago.
The problem is that all energy deals must be approved by Congress.
One deal with Shell and Exxon to develop a $1 billion liquid-natural-gas project was put in doubt when the foreign partners, wary of the politicians, insisted that an independent arbitrator, not Congress, must settle disputes.
Even where there is general agreement on the need to ease state control of their energy industries, Latin countries do not always do so.
A good example is a proposed 2,200-kilometre (1,370-mile) natural-gas pipeline from Bolivia to Brazil.
Bolivia would certainly benefit from selling its natural-gas supplies to the energy-hungry industrial south of Brazil.
And investors, from Brazil and abroad, have lined up to buy a stake.
Since the pipeline will cost $1 billion, such private capital is essential if the project is to go ahead.
But there is a catch.
Brazil says its constitution forbids the private ownership of energy assets.
For the moment, therefore, the government insists that its state-owned energy firm, Petrobras, must hold a controlling interest.
In the longer run, Brazil may find it easier to change its constitution than the minds of investors.
Even in Cuba, long isolated from its neighbours, a prostrate economy has led the government to reconsider the dominant role of the state.
Setting aside his disdain for capitalism, Fidel Castro has recently urged executives of Cubapetroleo, the state-run energy firm, to seek foreign investment more energetically.
To reassure hesitant businessmen, Cuba went so far last year as to amend its constitution in order to provide greater protection for property owned by foreigners.
With even Marxist Cuba now hungry for foreign investment, say optimists, rigid state control of energy industries in other parts of Latin America cannot last long.
But the steps taken so far have been tentative ones, forced by bitter economic realities.
If world oil prices were to soar, Latin American governments might well revert to their monopolistic ways.
Quebec
English is fine if French is bigger
FROM OUR CANADA CORRESPONDENT
IN GENERAL, nothing is surer to rally Quebeckers into the trenches than the sniff of new legislation on language.Lurid headlines did indeed greet the introduction on May 6th of Bill 86, which makes it legal again to use English on shopfronts in this militantly French-speaking province.
‘If this law passes,’ thundered Camille Laurin, a former minister of the nationalist Parti Québécois, ‘Quebeckers can say goodbye to a French-speaking nation.’
But so few people take such words seriously that the nationalists have had to set their main protest for June 24th, Quebec's national day, to be sure of a good turnout.
Quebec's Liberal premier, Robert Bourassa, introduced the new law partly in response to a ruling from the United Nations Human-Rights Committee.
His previous piece of language law (Bill 178 in 1988) prompted a barrage of protest from English Canada — and an answering volley from Quebec — because he had resorted to an obscure constitutional loophole in order to override a Supreme Court decision on freedom of expression.
By contrast, his present legislation is expected to sail through with little more than some scattered shots from the Parti Québécois.
The significance of this comparative quiet will not be lost on party leaders as they prepare for provincial elections in the next 18 months.
Voters, it would seem, care more about jobs and salaries than the old fights on language.
But Bill 86, admittedly, is mostly a bit of fine-tuning.
After a 16-year ban, shops will now be allowed to display English (or Italian or other language) signs outside, so long as an accompanying French sign is ‘markedly predominant’— that is, twice as big.
It leaves most other parts of Quebec's strict language laws unchanged.
For example, signs on billboards and in buses must still be in French only.
Immigrants will be required, as before, to send their children to French schools, and officials do not expect a significant increase in exceptions being allowed.
At present, about 900 immigrant children are allowed each year into English-language schools, if the families prove they are temporary residents and will leave within five years.
The new law removes two irritants.
First, it will abolish the ‘language police’ of the Commission for the Protection of the French Language, who deal with offending English signs.
Last year, at a cost of C$1.4m ($1.9m), the commission investigated about 1,800 complaints, four-fifths of which were made by just four zealous citoyens.
The other irritant was the discovery by hundreds of English-speaking Quebeckers, who had courageously chosen to send their children to schools where the teaching is in French, that they had thereby deprived their grandchildren of the right to be taught in English if they wished.
Bill 86 scraps that rule.
The main reason for the relative quiet over Bill 86 may be that the French-speakers of Quebec no longer believe their language to be in serious peril.
The bigger threat is to the province's rapidly shrinking English-speaking community, and to social cohesion generally.
In Quebec as a whole, the birthrate has fallen below replacement level, which means that total numbers are maintained by immigrants.
Administratively if not formally, Quebec favours French-speaking immigrants.
But though Algerians and Haitians may speak good French, they find difficulty in being accepted as real Quebeckers.
However, these are not Mr Bourassa's immediate concerns.
He has just emerged from four months of experimental treatment for skin cancer with assurances of remission.
Twenty-three years after becoming premier for the first time, he shows every indication of wanting to lead the Liberals against the Parti Québécois in another election.
Bill 86 is a carefully calculated device to pull businessmen and minority groups firmly behind his party in that fight.
Egypt
The insurgency that will not stop
FROM OUR CAIRO CORRESPONDENT
A LONG line of pharaohs, pashas, kings and presidents has ignored public opinion in Egypt.
President Husni Mubarak would be unwise to follow suit.
Egypt's problems are chronic.
It has too many people — 58m today, growing to 72m by the year 2000 — on too little arable land.
Illiteracy remains stubbornly at 70%.
Unemployment among graduates runs as high as 85% in many cities.
Official corruption is rampant and the scandals provide an inviting target for Islamic fundamentalists.
Those are just the old problems.
Despite a crackdown, Islamic militants have stepped up their hit-and-run insurgency, turning swathes of southern Egypt into battle zones through which foreigners may travel only with lorryloads of nervous police escorts.
Co-ordinated attacks on security officials and politicians over the past few weeks indicate that the once-bumbling extremists are growing more sophisticated.
In the stinking slums of Cairo, places where few well-heeled officials would dare set foot, the once-popular Mr Mubarak is regularly pilloried by previously docile people on the street.
Thousands of men have been rounded up and jailed.
The Egyptian Organisation for Human Rights says that women, and children as young as eight, have been detained as bait to lure wanted relations to turn themselves in.
Security officials claim that no more than 1,000 of the jailed Egyptians are charged with crimes.
The rest, they say, are merely detained for questioning under Egypt's emergency law and then released after a month.
Many Egyptians do not believe it.
‘Oppression, oppression, oppression,’ grumbled a veiled and outspoken woman named Fatiya Abdel-Aziz, whose brother Ibrahim was swept up by police in February in the slum of Dar es-Salaam and has not been heard from since.
‘We feel we're going to explode from all this oppression.’
Gradually the discontent is spreading into the government itself.
Mr Mubarak's hand-picked Shura Council, hitherto an obedient advisory board, has publicly blamed Islamic radicalism on Egypt's yawning social and economic inequalities, on corruption, and on perpetual rule by a single party.
Mr Mubarak's cautiousness used to be welcomed as an antidote to the histrionics of Nasser and Sadat.
It seems increasingly inadequate.
‘He gives out limited doses — limited liberalisation, limited Islamisation, limited oppression,’ says Mona Makram-Ebeid, a member of parliament.
Like others, she describes Egypt as static, rather than stable.
Repeated calls for Mr Mubarak to change his long-serving and mediocre cast of ministers have so far been ignored.
Last month Mr Mubarak dumped his interior minister of seven years, Abdel Halim Moussa, and replaced him with Assiut's governor, Hassan Alfi.
The ostensible reason was Mr Moussa's supposedly unauthorised dialogue with representatives of the main radical religious group, the Jamaat Islamiya.
But many Egyptians believe the switch in the ministry was designed to boost the dangerously low morale of the police.
Mr Mubarak certainly needs the loyalty of the police and security forces.
His alternative is to call in the army, as he did in 1986 when low-paid police rioted in Cairo.
The Islamic militants, by hitting Egypt's tourist revenues, would dearly love to force his hand.
Military intervention would raise serious questions about the stability of the regime.
Some Jamaat activists hope that the army will decide that Mr Mubarak himself is the source of instability.
In this fundamentalist dream, the generals would then depose the president and, lacking public support, would seek to legitimise their coup by making Egypt a theocracy like Iran.
The army's thinking is unknown.
Many western diplomats in Cairo believe that Mr Mubarak, though weakened, has weathered the worst and is capable of handling what could become a drawn-out war with Islamic extremists.
They argue that Egyptians are too passive to revolt on their own.
As for the army, it is a proud and privileged, secretive and insulated institution.
Mr Mubarak felt confident enough about its loyalty to oust one of its most popular members earlier this year.
Mohammed Abdel-Halim Abu-Ghazala, a former defence minister and imperious political rival to Mr Mubarak, was eased out of his job as presidential adviser when his role in a sex-and-bribery scandal was conveniently leaked to the press.
With his rival gone, the president is alone on top of the pyramid.
In his 12 years in power, he has resisted naming a deputy who would step in were he to die in office.
This disregard for the succession could turn out to be the most destabilising factor in Egyptian life.
After devoting much of the first ten years of his presidency to slow development of the institutions of democracy, Mr Mubarak has spent the past two in regression.
He has expanded police powers, limited the formation of new parties, marginalised the old opposition and criminalised some types of political dissent.
If something should happen to him, there might be no institution prepared to take over.
Other than the army.
Israel
Rabin and his rabbis
FROM OUR ISRAEL CORRESPONDENT
Many secular Israelis believe they face two enemies: the Arabs without and the ultra-orthodox within.
In his latest cabinet tussle, Yitzhak Rabin bowed to the orthodox to save his peace talks with the Arabs
‘THE struggle for democracy, pluralism and the rule of law in Israel.’
This is how Shulamit Aloni, minister of education and leader of the left-liberal Meretz party, describes her continuing confrontation with Shas, the ultra-orthodox party of Sephardic (oriental) Israelis that is Yitzhak Rabin's other partner in his Labour-led coalition government.
Nonetheless, she has lost the latest round.
At Shas's insistence, Ms Aloni has agreed to leave her education job.
Now the haggling is over what portfolio she should have instead, and whether any replacement from her strongly secular party will be acceptable to the rabbis who run Shas.
Mr Rabin, moreover, is trying to draw yet another ultra-orthodox party, the United Torah Front, into his coalition.
The sages who lay down the law in this party have always said that if Ms Aloni left education, where she was ‘poisoning the innocent souls of Israel's children’, they could contemplate joining Mr Rabin.
Ms Aloni's discomfiture is remarkable considering that Meretz has 12 seats in the Knesset (parliament) to Shas's six.
At a pinch, indeed, Labour and Meretz could rule on their own: the automatic support of two small Arab factions in the Knesset gives them 61 votes in the 120-seat chamber.
Nevertheless, when the controversial Shas leader and interior minister, Arye Deri, brought his conflict with Ms Aloni to a head by submitting his resignation on May 9th, it was Meretz that had to give way.
After 47 cliff-hanging hours, both ministers agreed to ‘deposit their portfolios with the prime minister’ for a week, while negotiations over a reshuffle and possible enlargement of the cabinet proceed.
But Mr Deri will probably get his job back.
Ms Aloni will have to move elsewhere.
Mr Deri has accused Ms Aloni of being ‘provocative’ ever since the new coalition was formed after Israel's general election 11 months ago.
The last straw, he maintained, was the education minister's criticism of Mr Rabin for reciting the Jewish affirmation of faith, ‘Hear O Israel’, at a Holocaust memorial ceremony at the site of the Warsaw ghetto.
Ms Aloni felt the choice of words evoked fatalism and blind faith rather than struggle.
Mr Deri said that her remarks disgusted every believing Jew.
That claim is arguable.
For a lot of secular Israelis, Shas and the United Torah Front represent a benighted and repressive Judaism.
Many sympathise with Ms Aloni's efforts to counter the ultra-orthodox interpretation of Holocaust history.
Besides, Shas itself is widely resented, not least because of its constant scrapes with the law.
One of its Knesset members is in prison for stealing from its own coffers, another has been charged with cooking the books and Mr Deri himself has been under police investigation for suspected financial irregularities for more than two years.
So why was it Ms Aloni and not Mr Deri who came off worse in the latest scuffle?
Mainly because her own colleagues deserted her.
They accepted — and ultimately so did she — that they would have to retreat in their domestic fight for secularism if they were to keep alive the hope of making peace with the Arabs.
For without Shas, Mr Rabin's ability to deliver the territorial compromise upon which a peace would be based could be fatally weakened.
A coalition consisting only of Labour and a party to its left would have immense trouble foisting the trauma of withdrawal on Israel.
Having a religious party on board could make all the difference.
Many orthodox Israelis — such as those represented in the Knesset by the National Religious Party — are firmly in the rightist-nationalist camp, close to the opposition Likud.
But Rabbi Ovadia Yosef, the paramount spiritual leader of Shas, is committed to peace.
He has issued a religious ruling sanctioning the exchange of parts of the Biblical homeland for the chance of peace and security.
Hence the importance of keeping Shas.
In the words of a Labour Knesset member, Avraham Burg, ‘Neither Rabin nor Aloni can sell peace to two key sectors of the Israeli public — the Sephardim and the orthodox.
Only Rabbi Yosef can do that.’
Secular Israel and religious Israel still have scores to settle.
The hope is that Shas and Meretz, divided on almost everything, except on the need to negotiate peace with the Arabs, will somehow defer their showdown till the day after peace comes.
Gaza Strip
Inside the trap
FROM A SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT IN GAZA
FOUR suspects were said to be sheltering there; as it turned out, they were not.
But in a few minutes Israeli troops, armed with anti-tank rockets and machine-guns, had turned the place into rubble and 22 families, 140 people, had lost their homes and all their possessions.
This was a routine dawn incident that happened in Tuffah last month.
It could have been anywhere, at any time, in the Gaza Strip.
With its beaches and palm trees, Gaza could be lovely.
It is, instead, squalid and frightening.
Some 800,000 people are caught there, many of them still living as refugees, from a war fought nearly half a century ago, in camps without space or hope.
Israel used the Gazans as a reservoir of cheap labour; 30,000 travelled daily to Israel to work.
Then what was bad got worse.
When violence followed Israel's deportation of 415 Palestinians to Lebanon in December, Israel started to close its borders to workers from the occupied territories.
Unemployment in Gaza, normally just under 50%, soared to 95%.
Most families lost what was virtually their only source of income.
Since December, the strip has not known a day of quiet: the clashes between the Israeli army and Palestinian demonstrators are fought in towns and villages as well as in the eight refugee camps.
Yitzhak Rabin, Israel's prime minister, has responded to the riots with brutal firmness.
But the protests continue.
Although most Gazans — 70% of whom are under 35 — have known nothing but the Israeli occupation that started in 1967, the young are fired with the idea of resistance, however futile.
What keeps happening, time and again, is that children burn tyres or throw stones and Israeli troops shoot back — and sometimes kill.
Most of the children still go to school, but not all of them are always at their desks.
A warning system of whistles tells them when soldiers enter the camp.
The girls usually ignore the soldiers, though some have been killed by random bullets.
The boys run out to throw their stones, their teachers unable to stop them.
‘We throw stones to avenge Palestine,’ boasted a ten-year-old.
Many children, some as young as five or six, have been killed or badly wounded, some on their way to or from school and kindergarten.
Parents are helpless; their authority nil.
Some children despise their fathers because they work, or used to work, for the Israeli occupier.
For Gaza's children, the heroes are the masked teenagers who challenge Israel's soldiers or settlers more seriously — or promise such challenge from every available wall.
There is no wall throughout the strip that is not covered with black or red painted inscriptions that call for action and revenge, and denounce the peace-seekers in Washington.
Some claim credit for murdering or stabbing Israeli settlers, 4,000 of whom live in the strip.
Many are signed by Ezzedin al Qassam, the military branch of the Muslim fundamentalist group, Hamas.
Hamas is a secretive organisation.
Its teenage members, wearing masks and carrying Karl-Gustav guns (an obsolete, Egyptian-made version of the Kalashnikov), usually appear at sunset — painting inscriptions, calling for a strike — and then vanish.
Some do not bother to hide their faces.
They are the mutaradin or wanted ones, who are known to Israel's security services.
They are pursued by Israeli undercover squads, dressed as Palestinians and driving cars with Palestinian number-plates.
Yet it would be wrong to believe that Hamas controls hearts and minds in the strip.
Lawyers and political scientists living in Gaza suggest that the organisation controls no more than 30% or 40% of the 60% of Gazans who are politically involved.
One way to check the popularity of the respective groups is through the political affiliation of prisoners.
This shows that 70% of prisoners are loyal to Fatah, the main bit of the Palestine Liberation Organisation, whereas only 10–12% say they belong to Hamas.
But Hamas is recruiting.
Thanks to the money that used to come from Saudi Arabia, and now comes from Iran, it is able to finance schools, universities and clinics.
It has won control of a number of trade unions, including the accountants' union and the committee of local United Nations employees.
It is trying to assert itself politically, offering money the PLO cannot match to young, educated Gazans to join the Islamist movement.
Many of the young feel alienated from old PLO hands, such as Haider Abdul Shafi, the prominent Gazan doctor who negotiates for the Palestinians in far-away Washington.
Gazans find it hard to be enthusiastic about the talks.
They are geographically isolated, and they are grossly under-represented — two out of 400 — in the committees that are supposed to be the nucleus of a future Palestinian self-governing authority.
And, a terrible irony, the worst of all possible news for Gaza would be a sudden Israeli withdrawal.
Since it has never been allowed to develop any outlets, what is left of the economy would collapse.
There are signs that Israel may now, at the 11th hour, be allowing foreign investors to help the Gazans build an economy for themselves.
But for this to work, if it happens, Gaza needs time, money and freedom from violence.
BRITAIN
Council elections
Tories out
SPOKESMEN for the Conservative Party are normally adept at explaining away bad local-election results.
They have had plenty of practice.
But as he inspected the size of the Tories' losses on May 6th even the home secretary, Kenneth Clarke, usually a man to find a silver lining in the blackest cloud, admitted that the government was in ‘a dreadful hole’.
Was it really that bad?
In terms of seats won and councils held, yes.
The Tories have never before been reduced to control of one county council: Buckinghamshire is now the sole jewel in their crown.
They won more than 400 fewer seats than Labour and nearly 400 fewer than in 1985, their worst previous county poll performance.
But the worst local-election result ever?
The Tory performance was in fact one and a half percentage points better in The Economist's regular sample of provincial English districts than it was three years ago, at the height of the rebellion against Mrs Thatcher's poll tax (see table 1).
However, in 1990 there was a silver lining.
Disaster in the provinces was then turned into a public-relations triumph by a dramatic swing in the Tories' favour in their flagship London councils, Wandsworth and Westminster.
This year there were no London elections.
There was, however, a parliamentary by-election, in Newbury, where the party suffered its largest-ever fall in support (29 percentage points).
Based on that result the Tories will easily lose the by-election at Christchurch precipitated by the death on May 13th of Robert Adley.
The British electoral system did the Tories no favours.
They got more votes than Labour in the county elections, but they won fewer seats.
Why?
Partly because of regional variations in voting.
Compared with the previous county elections in 1989, the Liberal Democrats' vote rose most in the south of England — where they were generally better placed to win seats.
Labour did best in the north, where it is the stronger challenge to the Tories.
This concentration of the opposition vote began in 1992's general election.
This still does not explain why the Conservatives fared so much worse than in 1985.
For although the Tory vote has fallen since then, so has the Liberal Democrats'.
In our sample, in the south both have lost virtually the same amount of ground; yet the Lib Dems have won seats by the handful.
Tactical voting is given as one explanation.
In their eagerness to give the government a ‘bloody nose’, opposition voters supposedly flocked to the candidate best placed to defeat the incumbent Conservative.
But the evidence for tactical voting is patchy.
On average, Labour's vote rose by only 3% more in Tory wards where Labour started off second to the Conservatives than in seats where it was third.
The Liberal Democrats did only 1% better in seats where they were second than where they were third.
What was really decisive was the behaviour of normally loyal middle-class Tories.
Conservative support fell more than twice as much in wards that the party was defending as in Labour territory (see table 2).
The more Tory a ward, the more the party's vote fell: hence the stunning loss of seats.
The government's calamities over the past 12 months have rocked the Tory faithful.
As many as one in three of those who supported the Conservatives last year refused to do so last week.
Disenchanted Conservatives did not simply stay at home.
They went out and voted Liberal Democrat.
Turnout held up best in Tory wards.
And the swing from Tory to Liberal Democrat was highest where turnout was highest.
The Liberal Democrats' success unleashed speculation about pacts, deals or at least closer co-operation between the two opposition parties.
In two-thirds of English county councils no single party now has control by itself.
This provides a dress rehearsal for what could happen nationally after the next general election: a hung parliament in which Labour needs the support of the Liberal Democrats in order to form a government.
John Smith tried to kill off such speculation by emphasising that in a general election last week's results would have given Labour a majority of 87.
With the results showing Labour ten points up on the Tories, he is statistically right.
But Labour's performance was below its current opinion-poll standing (which shows a lead of 14–17%).
Most tellingly, Labour's vote was well down on its 1990 performance in the provinces.
Three years ago Labour was the preferred vehicle for anti-poll tax, anti-government sentiment.
Now the Liberal Democrats have re-emerged as an effective party of protest.
The electorate may loathe the Tories, but it has yet to learn to love Labour.
Singing the blues
In a bar deep in the Commons, two Tory backbenchers debate the future of a party rocked by last week's dreadful election results
‘STIFF upper lip, old boy,’ said Sir Pangloss Broadbum, reinforcing his seasoned nerves with a gulp of scotch and soda.
‘Seen it all before.
Happened to Harold Macmillan at Torrington in ‘58: swing to the Liberals of 32.8% there, bigger than last week's at Newbury, but it didn't stop us winning the general election in ‘59.
Maggie too.
It was just as bad in 1980 and 1985, but she won all the same.’
‘Trouble with you, Pangloss, is you've been around too long,’ retorted Peter Panic, staring gloomily into his Perrier-with-a-twist-of-lime.
‘We young ones look to Europe, and, believe me, when voters turn against governments these days, they do it good and proper.
Look at Italy.
Look at France.
They're fed up with us.
They'll sack us.
Full stop, end.’
‘Rubbish.
As John Major said, they've given us a bloody nose.
Or rather they've given our county councillors a bloody nose by throwing them out, and the councillors are taking it out on us.
But give them a solid economic recovery and they'll forget it ever happened.’
‘That's old politics again.
It was because of the recession that we won in 1992.
People were too scared to vote Labour in case they made things even worse.
But if we get a bit of growth, they'll be ready to take the risk.
Especially since we're going to have to stick up their taxes to deal with that confounded public-borrowing requirement which Norman Lamont ran up to bribe them to vote for us last time.’
‘They'll never vote Labour.
They don't trust them even now.
The Liberal Democrats are another matter: tricky targets, the Lib Dems.
Between you and me and that barstool, I can't really tell the difference between their policies and ours.
Best thing is to tell the voters that a Liberal Democrat vote is a vote for a Labour government.
It worked last time…
‘Last time, last time’: there you go again.
Last time, Labour was led by Neil Kinnock.
John Smith doesn't scare people anything like as much.
Anyway, haven't you seen how canny Labour and the Liberal Democrats are playing it on a pact between the two of them?
Nothing you can put your finger on, nothing you can really attack, but it worries me.
Paddy Ashdown, the Liberal leader, talks of ‘a culture of co-operation’ between Labour and his lot.
Down my way, I beat the Lib Dems by 8,000 but Labour scored 12,000.
If those Labour voters work out that ‘culture of co-operation’ means they ought to vote tactically for the Liberal Democrats — and they do seem to have worked it out at Newbury last week — it's curtains for yours truly.’
‘Well, Panic, we've certainly got to get our act together.
Get rid of Norman for a start; you can't have a chancellor who goes round telling the voters ‘Je ne regrette rien’, when lots of them have lost their jobs and their homes because of what he doesn't regret.
And Douglas will retire soon, I think, so we can have new blood at the foreign office.
I'd like to see the back of that whipper-snapper, John Patten.
Judging by the polls, the parents agree with the teachers, not Patten, and watching him shouting all the time, I can't say I blame them.’
‘But who have we got who's better?
Don't tell me John Major is going to make Kenneth Clarke chancellor and have him sitting next door poised to pinch his job.
Or Michael Heseltine either, for that matter.
Michael Howard's too smarmy, and he's achieved nothing at environment.
John MacGregor's too grey, and he's terrified my voters over rail privatisation.
Norman Fowler?
All dither, and Tory central office is in chaos.
That leaves Michael Portillo: fine, and he's at the Treasury already, but he's only 39.
As for new people for the cabinet…
The papers are saying it's between John Redwood, George Young and Stephen Dorrell.
Doesn't exactly make the heart leap, does it?’
‘When things are going badly, no-one looks good.
With luck, this beastly Maastricht treaty will be out of the way, come the summer.
And we've got a nice quiet legislative programme next year, now the cabinet has shelved the idea of privatising the post office, which had all our sub-postmasters up in arms.
Now Kenneth has started talking tough on crime, and if Gillian Shephard gets really nasty with people trying to claim unemployment benefit, things will start to look up.’
‘Don't be so sure, Broadbum.
The Maastricht rebels aren't giving up.
They're taking the government to court — their own Conservative government, for God's sake — to try to get the treaty chucked out.
The rebels have got zero prospects of jobs while John's PM, so why should they come into line?
And don't forget that plan of Portillo's to slash state spending.
My pensioners were pretty damn cross this time, what with council tax and VAT on their fuel, and lower interest rates on their savings.
Just wait until we propose to abolish their pensions to save money.
And there's another thing.’
‘Another thing?’
Panic stared into his Perrier.
He cast a furtive glance to left and to right.
His voice fell to a conspiratorial whisper.
‘You know…him in Number 10.
I voted for him, all right: not a toff like Hurd, not a party-wrecker like Heseltine.
But I didn't know that he was, well, a wimp.’
‘Panic, I'm surprised at you.
This is the Conservative Party.
We can't go round sacking our leaders every couple of years just because the voters don't like them, can we?
Can we?’
Bleeding heartlands
WINCHESTER, a town of twee shops and plummy vowels, used to be a Tory fortress.
The Conservatives had dominated Hampshire county politics for over a century.
Yet in the elections of May 6th they lost almost half their seats in the county council, which has its home in Winchester.
‘People were apologising for having to vote against us,’ sighed Freddie Emery-Wallis, the Tory leader of the council for 17 years.
He pins the blame firmly on foul-ups by certain other Tories — the ones in Westminster.
Certainly the local Tory record does not explain the loss.
Hampshire County Council has the lowest council tax of any county, and one of the smallest levels of debt per head.
The Liberal Democrats complained that too many schools have outside lavatories; that the Tories were profligate in setting up a chair of maritime history at a local university; and that they had spent too much on a ceremonial mace.
But John Major's government provided meatier complaints.
Defence cuts have hit the county hard.
The Royal Navy's base in Portsmouth, and a cluster of high-tech defence firms, had helped keep south Hampshire prosperous.
But in the past 2.5 years over 30,000 jobs have gone from the defence industry.
Local authorities want the government to make the region an assisted area.
The Tories say they campaigned harder in this election than ever before.
But on countless doorsteps Tory voters pushed aside local issues and turned on the government.
The rich fumed about the council tax, the poor about Norman Lamont's decision to raise VAT on fuel.
There were worries about the teachers and even about the miners.
Everyone snarled at Maastricht.
The beaten Tories are themselves fuming.
‘I feel very angry with the whole government,’ says Eleanor Greenwood, who put in nine years as a councillor, serving long hours on Hampshire's education committee.
And, says Bobbie Jones, another defeated Tory, ‘the cabinet should go on a public-relations course.
They're totally out of touch.’
Testing, testing
ON THE morning of May 11th, John Patten, the education secretary, was said to be ‘incandescent’ at reports that John Major had bounced him into a climbdown on his plan for school tests for children aged seven and 14.
In the afternoon, he announced the climbdown to the Commons after Mr Major had assured MPs that he stood ‘four square’ behind the beleaguered Mr Patten.
The climbdown is partial.
The government will plough ahead with tests this year, despite a boycott by teachers, who say they are too narrow and onerous.
Mr Patten had been shaken by a (to him) unexpected decision by the courts not to declare the teachers' action illegal, and by an NOP opinion poll showing that parents back the boycott.
But he has made standing up to the teaching unions his thing.
Unconditional surrender was more than his fragile ego could bear.
Standing up to voters in the run-up to the general election is another matter.
So, even before the current review of tests by Sir Ron Dearing, a former head of the post office who now runs the government's Schools Curriculum and Assessment Authority, Mr Patten began his U-turn.
The tests will be simplified.
Only the core subjects of English, maths, science, Welsh in Wales (and perhaps technology for 14 year-olds) will be tested.
Testing will be revised so as to add less to teachers' workloads.
External examiners may be used more.
Row defused?
Watch this space.
Leeds
Pinstripe city
IN THE early 1980s, the morning train from Leeds to London was full of manufacturers going south to see their bankers, lawyers and accountants.
These days it is full of Leeds solicitors and accountants going to see their London clients.
Once a northern manufacturing city, Leeds has suddenly become a financial-services centre.
Financial employment rose by 41% in the 1980s, faster than in any English city except Bristol, and six times as fast as non-financial employment.
The contrast with its neighbour, Sheffield, is stark: similar cities ten years ago, they are now on different planets.
Leeds is now the place to rediscover a lost British civilisation — the go-go 1980s.
In new restaurants housed in converted warehouses, you will find the last yuppies on earth chatting happily, clutching Filofaxes and mobile phones, their flashy cars parked outside.
The champagne may be warm, and the waitresses clueless.
But so what?
Sophistication is in the air.
The emergence of finance (and to a lesser extent the media) as the engine of Leeds's revival has surprised the city's leaders as much as anyone.
Being solid wool merchants at heart, they are not sure what to make of an engine that runs on paper.
Many still believe that finance can only be as strong as local manufacturing.
The reverse is becoming ever truer in Leeds.
The main source of Leeds's success in finance has been the building-society industry.
‘The city of London does us no favours now.
If they want to talk to me they come here,’ says Roger Boyes, executive director of the Leeds Permanent Building Society, delivering a northerner's ultimate boast.
He adds that at the other end of his society's new building — a pink neo-classical palace — there are men in braces and loud shirts dealing on the Tokyo capital markets as they order pizzas.
The Leeds has a full treasury dealing room.
More mortgages are probably lent from within 30 miles of this city centre than anywhere else in the country.
West Yorkshire (‘Greater Leeds,’ as one citizen calls it, ‘but I wouldn't dare call it that in Bradford or Sheffield’) is the source and spiritual home of the thrift movement.
Six of the top 20 building societies are based around Leeds: the Halifax (see page 120), the Leeds Permanent, the National and Provincial, the Bradford and Bingley, the Leeds and Holbeck, and the Yorkshire.
There is also a big provincial bank, Yorkshire Bank, now owned by National Australia Bank.
Unleashed by the deregulation of 1986, building societies have spread their tentacles across the country and attracted a flock of satellite industries, especially in legal services, accountancy and financial consulting.
And they have by and large survived the recession intact.
Even the decision of Midland Bank in 1989 to set up First Direct, its branchless telephone-banking arm, just outside Leeds owes an indirect debt to the tradition of Yorkshire thrift — market researchers found that people trust Yorkshire accents on the telephone.
As back-office banking fled London's high costs in the 1980s, far more went up the M1 to Leeds than up the M6 to Manchester.
Leeds is not an all-round finance centre.
It has little of Edinburgh's fund management, Bristol's big insurance business or Birmingham's corporate banking.
Peter Roberts, of Leeds Metropolitan University, nonetheless believes that Leeds is close to acquiring the critical mass in finance that would be able to support financial software specialists or niche banks.
He cites Bank Leumi, a Tel Aviv bank, which has a big branch in Leeds.
A new programme, called the Leeds Financial Sector Initiative, is soon to be launched to see how Leeds can capitalise on its new lead.
In common with regional centres on the continent, the city presents its ambitions in a European rather than national frame.
Tony Grant, of Coopers and Lybrand, who chairs the initiative, hopes to take advantage of the deregulation of German, French and other European financial sectors that he is sure is coming.
Leeds is negotiating to join the Association of European Regional Financial Centres, a group of six provincial cities (Edinburgh/Glasgow, Turin, Barcelona, Bilbao, Stuttgart and Lyons) with strong finance sectors.
As Britain's trading emphasis shifts steadily away from its old dominions and towards the continent of Europe, the Humber ports are booming while those on the Mersey stagnate.
Leeds, in the middle of a big metropolis and with an unemployment rate below the national average, can now justifiably day-dream of challenging its western neighbour, Manchester, for the title ‘commercial capital of the north’.
Teachers
The master race
LIKE journalists, plumbers and the Royals, teachers have an image problem.
They want to be loved but find themselves mistrusted.
They consider themselves hard-working, dedicated and badly-paid.
But they know that many regard them as bearded, half-educated lefties, who only teach to fill in the gaps between long holidays in sunnier climes.
One thing is for sure: they are not bearded.
Of 450,000 teachers working in 32,300 state schools in the country, 64% are women.
In primary schools for younger children, the figure is 82%.
Most teachers are graduates who have taken a one-year Postgraduate Certificate of Education course.
Whether you think them poor or well-paid depends on whom you are comparing them with.
Average earnings for maintained-school teachers are £20,500 ($11,570) a year, against £29,850 for the average manager in industry and £17,300 for a police constable.
Headteachers are paid from £23,000 to £50,000.
Most teachers think this is not much.
As for holidays, true, teachers enjoy 13 weeks off, compared with a British norm of four to six weeks.
But they hasten to point out that many spend them taking their charges to exotic educational destinations.
Is it true that teachers vote Labour and read the Guardian?
The caricature is crude, but recognisable.
Last year, before the general election, a Gallup poll showed that 48% of teachers intended to vote Labour; 22% Liberal Democrat and only 17% Conservative.
As for newspapers, a poll by The Times Educational Supplement among its readers showed that only 40% of teachers ‘always or fairly regularly’ read The Guardian.
30% prefer the Independent; 20%, the Daily Telegraph; and 10% each The Times and the Daily Mail.
The unsatisfying truth is that teachers resist simple stereotyping.
Robert Gifford, recruitment officer for the National Union of Teachers, has devised his own ‘teacher photofits’ of five types of people who go into teaching.
They are:
The radical teacher who wants social change.
The what's-in-it-for-me teacher who does his job adequately, but is less concerned with the standard of education.
The competent, professional teacher, keen on his job, but with no wider political aims.
The young teacher who enjoys his work but also sees it as an attractive life style.
The conservative teacher who is looking only for a reasonable salary and a peaceful life.
Too many Tories think all teachers are radicals.
In reality, too many teachers are conservatives.
Most parents, meanwhile, will count themselves lucky to get a competent professional for their beloved offspring.
Single mothers
Home alone
UNMARRIED mothers are by far the fastest growing group of one-parent families in Britain.
In 1991 their numbers overtook the number of divorced mothers for the first time.
This rapid increase worries Whitehall, because most single mothers rely on the state for their home and income.
Why the increase?
It clearly relates to the decline of marriage.
Between 1981 and 1991, the number of first marriages fell for both sexes by over a quarter.
Many of those who did not marry chose to live together instead.
The recent General Household Survey shows that the proportion of women cohabiting doubled in the course of the 1980s.
Many divorced and separated women moved in with a new partner.
But the fastest increase took place among women who had never been married.
In 1979 only 3% of unmarried women lived with their boyfriend.
By 1991 that had risen to a quarter.
Early marriages have always been more likely to break down.
Kathleen Kiernan of the London School of Economics, author of a report on cohabitation for the Joseph Rowntree Foundation, reckons that many single mothers lived with boyfriends who later walked out.
A rapidly rising proportion of births to single mothers are registered by both parents, usually from the same address but sometimes from different ones (see chart).
But even when both parents register a birth, they may not stay together long.
Ms Kiernan finds that unmarried women cohabit, on average, for less than two years.
Left holding the baby, single mothers find it hard to fend for themselves.
Ms Kiernan's study shows that fewer than half of all single mothers living alone have access to a telephone, and a mere 15% to that essential tool of modern motherhood, a car.
Research by Louie Burghes of the Family Policy Studies Centre finds that single mothers tend to be younger (half are under 24) than other lone parents and to have younger children.
Two out of five are under 10 years old.
Partly because they are younger than other lone parents, single mothers tend to be uneducated and unemployed.
Over 40% of single mothers have no educational qualifications at all.
Only a quarter are employed, half the proportion among married mothers.
Even when their children go to school, single mothers are more likely to go on living on welfare benefits than other lone parents.
Social-security ministers, increasingly worried about the growth in single motherhood, find it hard to know what to do about it.
Some suspect that the availability of welfare benefits, more generous to single mothers than married ones, may be an incentive.
A large minority of women feel better off when their partner walks out leaving them to rely on welfare benefits; even if the household receives less cash, the mother has more control over it when her boyfriend is gone.
But cutting benefits to single mothers would hurt their children.
For the moment, the government pins its hopes on the new Child Support Agency.
Its job is to chase fathers, whether married or not, for maintenance money.
In 1989 only 13% of single mothers received any maintenance, and average payments were lower, at £14.94 ($13) a week, than the average of £26.81 for all lone parents.
Encouraging men to associate babies with bills may not have much impact on single parenthood.
Single mothers and their boyfriends come from a range of social backgrounds, but most are poor.
The worse a woman's education, the less she has to lose by dropping out of the jobs market to have a child.
The worse her boyfriend's employment prospects, the less she loses if he moves out and leaves her to raise his child alone.
The best cure, for both women and men, would be better education and more jobs for the not-very-bright.
Keepers of the cloth cap
JOHN MAJOR may rue the fickleness of his local Huntingdon constituents, who helped to deliver Cambridgeshire County Council to Labour last week.
But John Smith has to live with a running sore in his own constituency, just beyond the depressed eastern fringe of Glasgow.
Not that Monklands District Council, which embraces the parliamentary constituency of the Labour leader and his Scottish spokesman, Tom Clarke, is about to go Tory.
It is one of the most conservative areas in the country.
But in that part of the world ‘conservative’ means rock-solid, old-school, cloth-cap Labour: high-spending, undemocratic, insular, sectarian, nepotistic.
Mr Smith's locals have yet to absorb such fancy notions as glasnost, Clintonisation, market forces, breaking the link with the trade unions, wooing the middle-class voter or making Labour electable.
Their influence helps explain Mr Smith's oh-so-cautious approach to the modernisation of his party.
The local council contains what is known as ‘the Monklands mafia’.
The crusading Airdrie and Coatbridge Advertiser assails this almost weekly for its alleged distribution of ‘jobs for the boys’— and girls, many from the councillors' own families.
Sectarian-cum-geographic rivalry adds spice.
Of the two former mining-and-steel towns that dominate the district, Coatbridge, which Mr Clarke represents, is more Catholic; next-door Airdrie, the heart of Mr Smith's constituency, is more Protestant.
Of Monklands's 20 councillors, 17 are Catholic and Labour, three are Protestant and Scottish Nationalist.
‘Pure coincidence’, says Hugh Lucas, a Labour councillor.
Several of these men happen to be the chief organisers of Mr Smith's constituency party.
One is the local chairman; another, the council leader, was recently nominated by Mr Smith as a director of the local hospital trust.
This appointment was rejected by the secretary of state for Scotland.
Scottish Enterprise, a state-financed development agency, has been reviewing its business dealings with the council leader's company.
Mr Smith ‘hasn't sided with one side or the other,’ says Jim Logue, a rebel Labour councillor.
But, as one ex-councillor puts it, ‘If he can't manage to present the Labour Party in new colours in his own constituency, what hope has he of doing it in the country?’
Exposed
The Sun, a tabloid, claimed that MI5 had bugged a marital tiff between the Prince and Princess of Wales in the privacy of their home.
A political row followed.
Labour MPs called for the security services to be put under the control of a Commons committee, and barraged John Major with questions.
The home secretary said the Sun's claim was ‘nonsense’.
Independent?
Newpaper Publishing, owner of the Independent, having failed to buy the rival Observer, decided to raise extra capital.
Spanish and Italian newspaper groups, which already own 39% of the company, may now increase their stake.
The Independent's founders promised a newspaper free from proprietors.
Squeezed
Having fallen below 3%, pay deals are set to fall further still provided the public sector keeps to its 1.5% limit.
Unhealthy Hospitals are losing equipment like ‘supermarkets without tills’, a crime prevention team warned.
According to one estimate, the NHS loses over £180m ($177m) a year from pilfering.
The government boasted that the number of patients waiting for hospital treatment for over a year has fallen to a ‘new record low’.
Never mind that numbers waiting for less than a year have risen, bringing the total number on waiting lists to almost a million — a new record high.
Overmanning
Women dons at Oxford complained about ‘sexism’ in university appointments.
Only three of the 87 academics promoted to the posts of professor or reader since 1990 have been women.
Holy wars
Roman Catholic priests protested at the special treatment given to Anglicans who want to convert now that women are entering their ranks.
An Anglican, meanwhile, accused those opposed to women priests of ‘flouncing around like two-year-olds having tantrums in Tesco.’
Bad egg
Vegans demanded an end to school egg-and-spoon races.
Using eggs for any purpose, they say, exploits hens.
Lords in waiting
WE CERTAINLY can't take the Lords for granted,’ says an adviser to John Major, thinking gloomily of the battered Maastricht bill now poised to stagger, under the baleful glare of Lady Thatcher and Lord Tebbit, through the Upper House.
‘You can never tell quite how the Lords will vote’, says a nervous Majorite Tory peer.
That, of course, is the whole point of them — and not just on Maastricht.
Despite their Tory bent, the Lords are fiercely independent.
On democratic grounds their existence cannot be justified.
But most of them answer to nobody.
That is what they are for.
The Euro-sceptics think they have a small chance of ambushing the government with snap divisions on any of the hundreds of amendments already put down.
They also have a slim but slightly better chance of winning a vote for a referendum.
The odds are against either.
But Maastricht is a legislative minefield, wherever it is debated.
The arithmetic in the Lords is messier than in the Commons.
These days, about 100–110 peers usually vote against the government, 120–140 in favour.
On Maastricht, a score of Tory regulars are sounding doubtful or downright anti.
A few more, like Lord Blake, favour the treaty but want a referendum.
Lord Hesketh, the government's chief whip, knows that backwoodsmen need delicate handling.
Unlike their wimpish, ambitious colleagues in the Lower House, they cannot be reduced to tears or submission by bullying whips.
Hector them too much and a lot might end up turning sceptic.
The paradox of today's Lords is that it is this weird and undemocratic assortment of characters, largely there by freak of birth, that is more inclined to call for the will of the people to be tested.
It is the democratic Commons which has denied Britons what three-quarters of them want, according to the polls — a referendum.
Further, it is on the most undemocratic element of the Lords — the bloody-minded hereditary peers — that the Euro-sceptics are banking.
The Lords are a famously rum bunch.
Their in-built Tory majority, which from time to time(ie, during a Labour government) plainly puts them at odds with the nation, tends to be exaggerated.
At Bagehot's count, out of 1,205 voting peers, including 26 Lords spiritual, four royal peers and 385 life peers, nearly 40% — 477, to be exact — take the Conservative whip.
There are 272 crossbenchers, 111 Labour and 59 Liberal Democrat peers — a potential opposition of 442.
Of the 775 hereditary peers, the proportions are much the same: 334 (43%) say they are Tory, 164 (21%) are crossbenchers, 27 (3%) are Liberal Democrats and half that number are aristocratic Labour.
Until his party's death, a hereditary peer, Lord Milford, was the sole Communist in parliament.
The remaining 275 hereditary peers state no preference, though they would mostly vote Tory if pushed.
But they rarely bother to come.
The biggest vote in two decades was on the first Common Market bill in 1974, when 509 voted (and more turned out).
In 1988 the Poll Tax debate drew 501 votes.
Since the Conservatives took power in 1979, the Lords have defeated the government 179 times.
The Lords quite freely use their modest powers to scrutinise and amend non-financial bills sent to them by Tories in the Commons.
What all this means is that if non-Tories get the bit between their teeth, they have a chance.
Yet, ironically, while the hereditary Lords try to restrain the elected dictatorship of a Tory government, the Labour party is gearing up to do away with the strange mechanisms underpinning this power to check.
Two reports, one from Lord Plant's commission on constitutional reform, the other from a committee under Tony Blair, the shadow home secretary, are about to land on John Smith's desk.
Classless Mr Major, one might guess, would also be against hereditary powers.
But, being pragmatists as well as traditionalists, most Tories are content to leave alone what seems to work.
Labour is more straightforward.
Hereditary voting is wrong.
It must go.
Both committees are likely to propose a smaller Upper House of some 300 members, all elected on party regional lists by proportional representation, with a threshold to win any seats of, say, 5%.
The rump of hereditary and life peers may, in a transitional stage, elect a small number from among themselves — perhaps 50 — who could speak in the chamber and serve on committees, but not vote.
But what of the spirit of lordly independence?
There's the constitutional rub.
The crossbenches, whose ethos infects many of the party peers, are the key to the Upper House, holding the balance on a huge range of controversial issues, especially ones like Maastricht that transcend party loyalty.
These floaters would have to apply to be put on one of the regional lists, suggests a member of the Plant commission.
‘Like everyone else, they should have to choose their political values.’
Yet the whole point of crossbenchers is that their values are unpigeonholeable.
Their life tenure means they defy patronage.
Unlike American senators, they dole out no pork.
They have no constituents and no party, save their consciences and what remains of their fortunes.
One Labour peer admits that, if the abolition of the life and hereditary peerage removes the independent crossbencher, you enter a ‘constitutional quagmire’.
As they are, the lords are far more civilised, diverse and distinguished — and a lot less pompous — than their elected counterparts, partly because of the admixture of life peers outstanding in fields beyond politics.
Debates are less partisan.
‘If the country were governed from here, we'd be far better off,’ says a Tory peer who sat for three decades in the Commons.
As for Labour peers, ‘most of them just love it — the ante-room of heaven, one calls it’.
Even Richard Crossman, who tried to abolish the House of Lords in the 1960s, was finally seduced: ‘A fascinating place…undoubtedly the best club in London…
I must admit I like it more and more and the Commons less and less.’
‘It's a typical British animal,’ says Lord Hesketh.
‘It's illogical, but it works better than if you had an elected house.’
Perhaps there should be a referendum on the Lords too.
If the tinkerers cannot find a way of preserving the non-party aspect of the Upper House, people might vote to keep it roughly the way it is.
If they can stomach this quirk of undemocracy to keep their MPs in line, why not?
EUROPE
France
Painfully prudent
FROM OUR PARIS CORRESPONDENT
THE French had been forewarned.
As soon as Edouard Balladur was appointed head of the new conservative government in March, he told them that he would be asking for sacrifices to clean up what he claimed was the worst economic mess France had known since 1945.
An independent audit, published on May 6th, showed the budget deficit spinning out of control and the country moving into recession.
The government had to act swiftly, Mr Balladur argued, before it was obliged to take yet tougher measures — and before it lost the chance of blaming its Socialist predecessors for their legacy.
On May 10th Mr Balladur unveiled the first part of what he described as ‘an ambitious recovery plan’.
Priority went to plugging the government's public-sector deficit which (according to the audit) was heading for FFr410 billion ($16 billion) this year, 5.8% of GDP.
This was double the deficit forecast by the Socialist government last autumn.
Revenues will be boosted by FFr68 billion a year by increasing income-tax surcharges and duties on petrol and alcohol.
Central-government spending is to be cut by FFr21 billion.
And economies of FFr25 billion a year are to be found in the health-care system (meaning patients will have to pay more).
Workers will also be required to work longer (40 years instead of 37.5) to be eligible for a full (but lower) state pension.
Public-sector wages are to be frozen until the end of December.
As a gesture, government ministers' own salaries will be cut by 10%.
To sweeten the pill, the government will try to boost the flagging economy in various ways.
FFr10 billion will be put into building; farmers will get an extra FFr1.5 billion of aid; small businesses will get all sorts of help.
At the same time the government is rushing ahead with non-economic reforms which it knows will be popular, such as tightening up the conditions for acquiring French citizenship and clamping down on illegal immigration.
The proposals have been surprisingly well received.
Opposition from the Socialists and Communists has been muted.
Only one union, the Communist-led Confédération Générale du Travail, plans any protest (a day of strikes and demonstrations on May 27th).
Polls suggest that over two-thirds of the population accept that the measures are necessary.
After six weeks in the job, Mr Balladur continues to enjoy the confidence of over 70% of the electorate — a record for any prime minister under the Fifth Republic.
How long this support can last, though, is a doubt.
Admittedly, France enjoys an inflation rate more than two percentage points lower than Germany's, has another nice trade surplus in prospect and can now count five reductions in short-term interest rates since the right came to power.
Yet GDP, originally forecast to grow 2.6% in 1993, is now expected to fall by 0.4%.
Unemployment, already over 3m (10.7% of the workforce), is expected to rise by a further 150,000–200,000 this year.
Private investment is likely to fall by a further 11% in real terms in 1993, having fallen 13% last year.
Bankruptcies are running at a record rate of 800,000 a year.
It would be unfair to lay all the blame for France's economic difficulties on the Socialists, as some have done.
Mr Balladur, aware that these accusations may have contributed to the suicide on May 1st of the former prime minister, Pierre Bérégovoy, has been careful not to repeat them.
But he has been right in saying that urgent measures have been put off for too long.
Bérégovoy had let the budget deficit rise alarmingly rather than raise taxes, which he feared would have cut both demand and the Socialists' vote.
Mr Balladur has taken a gamble that the deflationary effect of higher taxes will be offset by a restoration of public confidence and a continuing fall in interest rates.
At the moment, that gamble seems to be paying off.
But he knows that his political honeymoon will be short-lived and that his change of policy must show benefits before the next presidential election due in two years.
Time is already running out.
Denmark
Second thoughts
FROM OUR COPENHAGEN CORRESPONDENT
THE spokesman for the convicts in a squeaky-clean Danish jail says he will vote No: he fears he may be sent to do his sentence in less salubrious surroundings elsewhere in the European Community if the Maastricht treaty is ratified.
Thousands of pensioners will probably vote No, after being bombarded with groundless warnings of cuts in their high pensions if the treaty survives.
The fierce campaign by several anti-Maastricht movements has been gaining ground.
But as May 18th and Denmark's second referendum on the treaty approach, it seems likely that Maastricht will be approved this time.
All the members of the EC except Britain and Denmark have voted to ratify the treaty (although in Germany the president's signature has been held up by challenges in the constitutional court).
A second Danish No (the first was last June) would spell the end of the treaty as it stands.
It would boost anti-Maastricht campaigners in Britain.
In the earlier referendum, Denmark said No by 50.7% to 49.3%.
If the opinion polls are right, at least 55% of those who have made up their minds will say Yes this time, which would be a larger share than in France's referendum last year.
The treaty is being put to the vote again because last December's EC summit in Edinburgh allowed Denmark to opt out of the treaty's terms on defence co-operation, a common currency, supranational co-operation on police and legal matters, and ‘union citizenship’.
The anti-Maastricht forces are an odd coalition of extreme left and right — as in both France, during its referendum campaign, and in Britain.
The right-wing populist Progress Party is the only one of the eight parliamentary parties opposed to the treaty.
It argues, as do Britain's Conservative sceptics, that the EC does not need the political super-structure that the treaty provides to make its single market work.
In the same camp are several largely left-wing popular movements that portray Maastricht as the first step towards a European superpower and the end of Denmark as an independent state.
Critics also claim that the referendum is a fraud, since not a comma has been changed in the treaty itself (the opt-outs are tacked on separately).
Nonetheless the opt-outs have changed public opinion.
Many Danes, swayed last year by a strong if vague feeling that the treaty threatened their national identity, are now much less worried.
Their political leaders, horrified by the isolation to which the electorate had consigned the country, have rallied behind the treaty.
The left-wing Socialist People's Party, which campaigned against Maastricht last year, just as earlier it had campaigned against NATO and against EC membership, has changed its mind.
Its leader, Holger Nielsen, says he now thinks that a chance to influence Europe's future is better than dependence on the EC without influence.
His reversal has encouraged political parties, backed by 167 of the 179 members of parliament, to cobble together a ‘national compromise’.
This was the basis for the opt-outs arranged at the EC's Edinburgh summit.
The Yes camp has also been helped by the collapse of the ten-year-old centre-right coalition in January.
It was replaced by a four-party coalition under the Social Democratic leader, Poul Nyrup Rasmussen.
Social Democrats, frustrated by long years out of power, voted by more than three-to-two against the treaty last June.
This time, their leaders are back in office and are promising lower income taxes to give domestic spending a boost if the country votes Yes.
Most of them are therefore likely to give their assent.
Spain's election
The arbiters
FROM OUR MADRID CORRESPONDENT
THE two minorities in Spain that matter most to politicians are the Catalans and the Basques.
They have much in common.
They live near the coast, at each end of the Pyrenees, and they both have cousins in France.
They both produced nationalist movements in the 19th century, perhaps because they inhabited almost the only two parts of Spain to have an industrial revolution then.
Since the late 1970s both have enjoyed a more generous helping of autonomy than any other Spanish region.
There the similarities end.
It is not just a tourist's generalisation to say that the Basques, with their deep, narrow valleys, are stubbornly provincial and to describe the Catalans, whose forebears ruled a Mediterranean empire, as cosmopolitans.
The difference between a Basque and a Catalan nationalist politician, it is said, is that the Catalan hopes to be prime minister of Spain but the Basque dreams of becoming the leader of an independent state.
No wonder the main Basque and Catalan nationalist parties have different approaches to Spain's election on June 6th.
Together or separately, the two of them may hold the key to power after the election.
The opinion polls suggest a gap of less than one percentage point between the ruling Socialists and the conservatives of the opposition People's Party.
The Basque nationalists are currently expected to win half a dozen of the 350 seats in the lower house of the Cortes; the two-party Catalan nationalist alliance, Convergence and Union, could get 17 to 19.
If these figures hold up, Basques and/or Catalans could tilt the outcome one way or the other.
For the Catalan lot, this is la gran oportunitat.
A government in Madrid dependent on the support of Convergence and Union could be arm-twisted into giving the Catalan country a still bigger slice of autonomy.
The Catalan nationalists want, in particular, to be able to collect their own taxes and then pass on to the central government a share based on the services it provides.
The Basques already have this privilege; the Catalans want it too.
The Basque nationalists, on the other hand, profess to see only pain and difficulty in going into government.
They are under far greater pressure than their Catalan counterparts to be anti-Madrid.
In the Basque country's regional election three years ago, friends of the terrorist group ETA, which wants a complete break with Madrid, won over 18% of the vote.
This is why the head of the Basque government, Jose Antonio Ardanza, after saying recently that the Basque nationalists wanted to keep Spain governable, nevertheless added that ‘our political reason for existence begins and ends in Euskadi,’ the Basque land.
Taking part in a coalition would cause the party a ‘very serious internal problem’.
Where Basque and Catalan nationalists agree, at least in private, is in preferring a deal with the Socialists to one with the People's Party, even though both are themselves fairly conservative.
They know that in 20th-century Spain, the right has consistently been more centralist than the left.
They can get more, they reckon, out of the Socialists.
It is not yet certain that they will get the chance.
If one of the big parties wins something close to a majority of seats, it may have two ways of avoiding dependence on either Catalans or Basques.
One is to settle for being a minority government, and hope to collect enough support each time a parliamentary vote comes up to win the day and stay in office.
The other is to go into coalition with some of the other regional parties that may also hold some seats in parliament.
Under Spain's system of proportional representation, regionalists stand a chance of winning seats in Valencia, Aragon, the Canary Islands and Andalusia.
They will make fewer awkward demands than either the Catalans or the Basques.
Every vote is going to count on June 6th.
Slobo's slide
FROM OUR BELGRADE CORRESPONDENT
SERBIA'S president, Slobodan Milosevic, has long been regarded as the artful dodger of Balkan politics.
His party is the only one in Europe to have switched from communism to nationalism via socialism and to have stayed in power.
From the workers' state to ‘all Serbs in one state’ was his boast — and threat, if Yugoslavia disintegrated.
But the rejection of the Vance-Owen peace plan (which he supported) by Bosnia's Serb ‘parliament’ is taxing even his skills.
Mr Milosevic tried to persuade the Bosnian Serbs that, if they rejected the Vance-Owen plan, they would risk losing their territorial gains.
The Bosnian Serbs turned up their noses.
An enraged Mr Milosevic imposed his own sanctions: nothing but humanitarian supplies, he vowed, would cross the border between Serbia and Serb-controlled Bosnia.
He also asked the Bosnian Serbs to attend a special pan-Serb parliamentary session in Belgrade saying that the Vance-Owen plan was too important to be left to the Bosnian Serbs alone.
Officially, Serbia says the plan is acceptable.
Unofficially, it is unavoidable: Mr Milosevic is worried about the slump in Serbia's economy caused by sanctions, the threat of American and European air strikes and the failure of pro-Serb nationalists in Russia to oust Boris Yeltsin in the referendum on April 25th.
At home in Belgrade, the Serb capital, Mr Milosevic is promoting the Vance-Owen plan in the face of opposition from extreme nationalists, who say he is betraying the Bosnian Serbs, and democrats, who say his nationalism has landed the country in a disastrous mess.
The nationalists, led by Vojislav Seselj (a Bosnian Serb), are more powerful than the democrats: Mr Seselj won a third of the vote in Serbia's election last year.
But he lacks a solid party organisation.
The democrats are, as usual, muddled.
One moment they denounce the war and claim Mr Milosevic's U-turn shows they were right all along.
The next they are recruiting militias to join the fighting.
Most despise Mr Milosevic as a former communist, but find themselves agreeing with him on the Vance-Owen plan.
Fortunately for Mr Milosevic, public opinion in Serbia is easier to manipulate than the Bosnian Serb parliament.
As he has shifted from opposition to support for the Vance-Owen plan, so has Serbian television.
No longer is Mr Seselj given the freedom of the airwaves to denounce it.
The result is a striking testimony to the power of television's evening news.
On April 9th an opinion poll showed that 70% of Serbs in Serbia opposed the plan.
On April 27th only 20% opposed it and 39% were for signing.
The most recent poll shows 61.7% in favour.
Mr Milosevic has also been tapping the emotions of ordinary Serbs who are suffering because of sanctions.
‘Serbia has helped the Bosnian Serbs enormously and now it must look after itself,’ he claims.
‘Serbia has suffered enormously under sanctions.
It is time to begin the reconstruction.’
He must be chuckling at his new image.
No longer portrayed as the ‘butcher of the Balkans’, he is now praised by Lord Owen for his peacemaking skills.
These skills, however, are being applied to support the Vance-Owen peace plan on the ground that it contains a concession which Lord Owen says he has not made.
Mr Milosevic is urging the Bosnian Serbs to sign the plan because, he says, it would allow them to hold on to almost all the territory they have won by force.
It would do this because under the plan Muslim and Croat forces could not move into areas conquered by the Serbs when Serb forces withdrew; UN forces would replace the retreating Serbs.
Not so, says Lord Owen.
He says these forces will move into areas where the retreating Serbs (or Croats or Muslims)‘have been protecting villages and towns where their own constituent people are in the majority.’
This means, he says, it will be possible to avoid what happened in Croatia where UN forces have ended up patrolling Serb gains.
A crucial difference of interpretation lies here.
To Mr Milosevic, UN forces will protect places where Serbs are in a majority by virtue of ethnic cleansing as a result of the war.
Lord Owen rejects the idea that the Bosnian Serbs can hold on to all the territories they now occupy.
Such ambiguities only add to the difficulties of a plan that has still to win the approval of the Bosnian Serbs.
Russia
Hard pounding
FROM OUR MOSCOW CORRESPONDENT
‘NEXT to a battle lost, the greatest misery is a battle gained,’ the Duke of Wellington once remarked.
Albeit for different reasons, Boris Yeltsin knows what the duke meant.
He won a handsome victory in the referendum on April 25th.
But that does not mean he has yet won a conclusive victory in the debilitating war between president and parliament.
To do that, he has to get a new constitution adopted which would abolish the existing parliament.
Unfortunately, under present rules, such a constitutional change needs parliament's consent.
To win the war, Mr Yeltsin must not dissipate the initiative he won on April 25th.
The early signs are worrying.
Despite huffing and puffing about a series of decrees to be issued immediately after the referendum, a fortnight passed before the first measures were announced.
On May 11th, Mr Yeltsin sacked two opponents of reform within his government.
Georgi Khizha was one of three industrialists brought into government in May 1992 as part of an attempt to buy off conservative opposition to the reformist government of Yegor Gaidar.
The other two are still there.
Mr Khizha's going will change little.
But the sacking of Yuri Skokov as secretary of Russia's Security Council is more significant.
As head of that body, set up in June 1992, Mr Skokov oversaw the work of the defence, security, interior and foreign ministries.
As head of the Council of the Heads of Republics, he had power to influence the debate over the powers of the federal and local governments and, by extension, over the new constitution.
Mr Skokov has rarely spoken in public(in his three years in parliament, he did not make a single speech), yet he has been one of Russia's most influential politicians.
Until March he was assumed to be a reliable, if conservative, servant of the president.
In that month, however, he broke with the president by refusing to back Mr Yeltsin's temporary assumption of special powers.
Getting rid of him achieves two things.
It allows Mr Yeltsin to put a reformer into this influential position.
And it sends a clear message to the heads of the regions that, when Mr Yeltsin talked about sacking opponents of reform at all levels of government, he meant it.
The regions will decide whether the strategy Mr Yeltsin has chosen to get a new constitution adopted will succeed or fail.
He has told each of Russia's 88 regions and autonomous republics to chose two representatives and send them to Moscow on June 5th.
They will form a constituent assembly, which will discuss the president's draft of the new constitution and, if all goes to plan, adopt those parts of it needed to elect a new parliament.
The president's men hope the assembly will make few changes to the draft, which already grants the regions wide powers.
Its members may hope automatically to become members of the Federal Council, the upper house of the proposed new Federal Assembly.
Elections will then have to be held to chose the 300 members of the lower house, to be called the State Duma.
The problem remains of how to get the existing parliament to connive at its own demise.
Surprisingly, this task may not be as hopeless as it seems.
Nikolai Ryabov, the deputy chairman of parliament and a leading conservative, told Russian television at the beginning of May that, though the president's draft of a new constitution was not acceptable in its current form, ‘these obstacles are not insurmountable’.
On May 11th Mr Ryabov appeared to give his blessing to Mr Yeltsin's plan, when he said ‘it would be nice if parliament gave its blessing’ to the constitution adopted by the constituent assembly.
The real danger facing Russia is not so much that Mr Yeltsin will lose the constitutional war.
It is that Russia will pay too high an economic price for winning it.
While the president kicks conservatives opposed to his constitution out of the government's front door, conservatives opposed to his economic reforms are creeping in through the back.
April saw the appointment of two more deputy prime ministers: Oleg Lobov, who will control the economics ministry; and Oleg Soskovets, who takes the industry portfolio.
At 8.30am on his first day on the job, Mr Lobov summoned senior officials in his ministry and told them to draw up a plan for re-establishing state control over the economy.
To make sure that the job was done properly, Mr Lobov appointed three new deputy ministers, two of whom are former deputy chairmen of Gosplan, the Soviet central-planning agency.
Viktor Chernomyrdin, the prime minister, is cut from similar cloth.
Despite the vote in favour of more free-market reform in the referendum, Mr Chernomyrdin continues to say things like, ‘If we don't set up barriers to technology purchases from abroad, we will never survive.’
He also suggests that inflation should be brought under control, not by tight monetary policies, but by ‘flooding the market with goods’.
Mr Yeltsin's understanding of economics is almost as primitive.
The elegant constitutional structure he is trying to create could rest on shifting economic foundations.
Ex-Yugoslavia
Rivals in greed and hatred
FROM OUR BELGRADE CORRESPONDENT
WHO are the more villainous, the Serbs or the Croats?
For most of the past few months, few would hesitate to answer, the Serbs.
The Serbs have done most of the killing, and the rejection of the Vance-Owen plan by the self-proclaimed Serb parliament in Bosnia, to be followed by a referendum on May 15th, confirms the judgment that they are the main aggressors.
Increasingly, though, it is becoming clear that the Croats, through their hopes of a Greater Croatia, are no less of a problem.
Long before the war, western Hercegovina had already become, de facto, Greater Croatia.
Its population was largely Croat; it used Croatian money; its men, steeped in a warrior tradition, flocked to join the Croatian army.
As the Bosnian war began, the local Croats announced they had founded the ‘Croatian Community of Herceg-Bosna’.
This, they claimed, was not the same as the self-declared Bosnian Serb state, it was just a temporary wartime measure.
Nobody believed them.
Mate Boban, the Croatian Serb leader, unlike his Bosnian Serb counterpart, Radovan Karadzic, has never shown any interest in his tinpot territory's independence from the mother state.
Though some Croat extremists dream of a Croatian state that swallows the whole of Bosnia, the aims of most Croats are more limited.
They encompass the area designated as autonomous Croatia in an agreement made with the federal government in Belgrade in 1939.
Because of the second world war, this never came to pass, but its generous boundaries have always been dear to the heart of Croatia's president, Franjo Tudjman.
It is no surprise that they look remarkably similar to the boundaries claimed today by the Croats.
Under the Vance-Owen plan, which the Croats have signed, Bosnia is to be divided into ten autonomous provinces, and local provincial governments are supposed to reflect the ethnic proportions of the populations before the Bosnian war.
Muslim minorities would remain in Croat-governed provinces if the plan were carried out.
But the Croats show no sign of accepting this.
From the start, Serbs in Bosnia have been unequivocal in saying: ‘We cannot live with the Muslims anymore.
They are trying to force us to live in a fundamentalist state.’
Now the special envoy of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, Jose-Maria Mendiluce, says he is revolted to hear those words from Mr Boban.
The world, says Mr Mendiluce, does not appreciate the gravity of the problems building up in central Bosnia.
Aid trucks have been stopped from reaching Muslim areas there for a month by the Bosnian Croats who control the roads; 1.3m people have been cut off from aid.
War between Croats and Muslims has long looked inevitable; low-level conflict has simmered for months.
The Croats are trying to carve out as much of central Bosnia as they can get.
The fighting in Mostar and central Bosnia has forced the UN Security Council to condemn the Bosnian Croats, despite their claims that they are on the defensive.
And if the Bosnian Croats, dependent on Croatia for support, are now being caught ethnically cleansing Mostar of Muslims, then many people, not just the Serbs, may want to know why there are sanctions on Serbia and not on Croatia.
Gypsy kings
FROM OUR CORRESPONDENT ON LAKE SNAGOV
IN SIBIU, a town in Transylvania, on May 8th, Iulian Radulescu was crowned Emperor of all Gypsies and Ion Cioaba, his brother-in-law, King of the Gypsies.
Their offices are bogus, their elevation self-proclaimed.
Yet they have a use: as spokesmen for a people under threat.
Ethnic conflict in the Balkans is not always caused by a scramble for territory.
The gypsies are without a homeland or a fixed seat of government — and they are falling victim to a strain of virulent nationalism which, since 1990, has claimed dozens of lives and left hundreds homeless.
Two-thirds of Europe's 8m gypsies live in Central and Eastern Europe.
They are largely illiterate, often unemployed, have families more than twice the size of their non-gypsy neighbours' and live in cement slums without running water.
Despite vicious policies by the region's former communist governments (sterilisation in Slovakia, the banning of their language and forced name-changing in Bulgaria), many gypsies mourn the passing of the old regimes.
Two years ago a Romanian government commission on the razing of gypsy villages concluded that violence had been provoked by ‘persons [ie, gypsies]who have acquired vast possessions by illicit means.’
Hundreds of Romanian gypsies have been homeless since villagers, unimpeded by local authorities, set fire to their settlements.
The Czech Republic gives citizenship only to those who have been resident for five years and (a point still under discussion) who can show competence in Czech.
Gypsies forcibly resettled in the Czech Lands in the 1960s and who speak Romany or Slovak worry that this law is a device to evict them.
Revealingly, government representatives at a recent meeting of gypsy leaders from 14 Central and East European countries at a palace on Lake Snagov were mainly immigration officials.
But their idea of gypsies as a border nuisance may be changing.
The Romanian government sponsored the meeting with an American outfit, the Project on Ethnic Relations.
This, said one of the Americans involved, is the first time that any European government has recognised gypsies as a ‘transnational non-territorial minority’.
Europe's sceptical south
IN THE run-up to Denmark's referendum on the Maastricht treaty on May 18th, enthusiasts for a united Europe have been paralysed by fear of offending Danish voters.
The work of the European Commission has all but come to a halt.
Its often volatile president, Jacques Delors, seems to be switching his interest to domestic French politics.
As Spain and Portugal stopped supporting their currencies within the European exchange-rate mechanism (ERM), gloom deepened in the European Community.
Those in favour of a Europe à la Maastricht are right to be concerned.
For even if the Danes say Yes to the treaty (see next article), worries about it are growing in three European countries that have hitherto been staunchly pro-European.
France, Spain and Italy have all been stalwarts of the EC.
With Germany, France has been the prime mover behind closer European integration.
Spain is a Euro-enthusiast partly because the EC gives it lots of regional aid, and partly because its policy of ‘convergence’ reassures foreign investors that Spain will get richer and continue to be a good home for investment.
In Italy, membership of the Community has always been associated with growth and better government than its own non-government.
In opinion polls last year, 55% of Italians supported the treaty; that was 85% if the don't-knows were excluded, the highest level of approval in Europe (see table).
So it is all the more remarkable that in France, Spain and Italy, where politicians hesitate before being less than wholeheartedly Europhile, parties have either come into government, or may soon do so, that are less enthusiastic about European union than those they replaced.
In France, according to Libération, 133 of the parliamentary deputies of the Gaullist part of the new coalition government voted against Maastricht in the referendum last September, compared with only 89 in favour.
In Spain, the party that might hold the balance of power after the general election on June 6th, the Communist-dominated United Left, has reservations about the treaty, though it has dressed them up as criticism of the government for refusing to call a referendum on it.
The leaders of the party that might win the election, the People's Party, are also doubtful, at least in private.
Though the party's election manifesto is a model of federalist Euro-fervour, the party's leader caused a storm earlier this year when he said his ‘his pulse would not waver’ if the peseta were taken out of the ERM.
Meanwhile, in Italy, some of the old gang of discredited politicians who used to support closer European co-operation have suddenly swung round to oppose it.
They now hope that Danish or British opposition will scuttle the Maastricht treaty, because they know that the economic austerity required by ‘convergence’ will be unpopular — and they, Italy's least popular politicians, will never be returned to power.
All this does not mean, of course, that France, Spain and Italy have gone anti-European.
Far from it.
In both Italy and Spain, parliamentary approval of the Maastricht treaty went though on the nod.
In the lower house of the Spanish Cortes the only No votes in the two-hour debate came from Herri Batasuna, the political arm of the Basque separatist group ETA.
When the United Left urged its deputies to abstain, eight of the 17 voted Yes.
Similarly, in France, though a majority of neo-Gaullist deputies were anti-Maastricht, the total number of deputies who had voted Yes in the referendum (363) outnumbered those voting No (174) by two to one.
And though the new government came to power threatening to precipitate a European crisis over a detested farm deal that had been negotiated between America and the EC, only three of the 29 ministers of the new government are anti-Maastricht.
The prime minister, Edouard Balladur, the finance minister, Edmond Alphandéry, and the defence minister, François Léotard, are strong supporters.
In his speech to parliament on April 8th outlining his policies, Mr Balladur said he would continue ‘to take part fully in the construction of Europe’.
He has presented plans to give the central bank a form of independence, though not without last-minute wobbles (independence is a prerequisite for monetary union, which he favours).
And he says he wants to reinforce the Community's ‘military and political cohesion’.
For all that, the doubters in France may have an effect.
The reason is that for several years to be pro-European meant to be pro-Maastricht.
During the French referendum, those urging the French to vote Yes argued that the alternative was a Europe that would revert to nationalism and division.
In these circumstances, that anyone in Europe's Maastricht-friendly regions should voice reservations is significant, because Maastricht has to be accepted in full(British and Danish opt-outs excepted) by everyone.
The French government remains committed to the treaty, true.
But the Euro-phoria of the ruling Socialists has gone, as has talk of an ultimately federal Europe.
And on April 29th France suddenly decided not to lift its border controls, despite promises that it would do so on July 1st under the Schengen agreement that aims to abolish passport controls for citizens of nine of the 12 members states.
It justified this decision by citing fears that the agreement would lead to more drug trafficking (because of Holland's liberal drug laws), more illegal immigrants and more terrorism (because of leaky Italian and Greek frontiers).
These worries are not new.
The British have been voicing them for years.
The French decision — which infuriated the Dutch — shows that Europe-wide policy can be changed even by a pro-European government.
The EC's tectonic plates shift
There are three reasons why more such changes may follow.
One is the reaction to Europe's disastrous foreign policy in Bosnia.
Some advocates of European union argue that the Bosnian shambles merely underlines the need for a single foreign policy.
So it does.
But it also underlines the impossibility, so far, of achieving one.
The second reason for thinking there will be more back-pedalling reflects shifts in what might be called the strategic and historical experience of some of the EC's members.
Spain's pro-Europeanism has long been based on the belief that Europe was needed to defend Spain's fledgling democracy.
With democracy secure, that is no longer an issue.
Spain can afford the luxury of a more critical look at the EC.
Italy's pro-Europeanism has been partly based on the belief that Italy does not have a real state, just corrupt politicians, and that the EC will provide one.
And, as Italians have little sense of obligation to the state, relinquishing sovereignty to Brussels is no sacrifice.
But if electoral reform gives them a state they can respect, popular enthusiasm for all things European may ebb.
The third factor is that recession is bringing home to all three countries the cost of European unity.
In France and Spain, conservatives are worried by the high interest rates required to keep their currencies in the ERM.
Spain's government, after swearing to maintain the peseta's parity within the ERM, was forced to devalue.
The French budget deficit was heading towards 6% of GDP this year before the latest austerity measures, not 3% as formerly thought.
Larger-than-expected spending cuts are being imposed to keep the franc stable.
The same, but even more so, applies in Italy.
Forced out of the ERM, like Britain last September, Italy, even more than Britain, is burdened with a huge public debt and is contravening EC law on subsidies to the steel industry and other collapsing state-owned industries.
To stabilise its currency and comply with EC law will require big sacrifices (possibly 10,000 jobs will go in the Italian steel industry, the biggest in Europe after Germany's).
It is almost certain that unpopular new taxes and spending cuts will be imposed over the next few months ‘in order to stay in Europe’.
As the new prime minister has said, Italy's public finances are not sound enough to fulfil the Maastricht criteria for adoption of a common European currency.
But then, as the chart above shows, nor is anyone's.
Countries with a huge public debt (Holland 82% of GDP, Ireland 98%, Italy 108%, Belgium 134%) have no chance of complying with the Maastricht criterion on debt.
Nor can they reduce the burden of government debt by inflation, as they could in the 1970s, because the abolition of capital controls prevents it.
When Europe's northern debtors get to grips with the task of reducing their government debt, it is possible that worries about Maastricht will start to spread from the three southern former stalwarts of the Community.
BUSINESS
Japanese technology
Bright sparks
OSAKA
MOVABLE skills are Japan's curse.
As the yen has climbed against the dollar over the past year, the country's competitiveness has suffered.
Those Japanese firms that can are moving factories overseas where it is cheaper.
Because the country's traditional strength is in manufacturing, which can be done anywhere, such migration is turning out to be alarmingly common.
Thailand and Malaysia already make more colour televisions between them than Japan does.
To replace all those lost factories, Japan needs to come up with firms strong in high-technology and services.
Some persist in doubting that the Japanese, whose famous discipline led to excellence in manufacturing, are creative enough to be excellent innovators too.
Keyence, a smallish company from Osaka with sales in the year to March of ¥30.5 billion ($174m), helps to prove them wrong.
The firm designs and sells magnetic and optical sensors for use on factory production lines.
But it deliberately avoids making them: 80% of its manufacturing work is subcontracted, and the company's president, Takemitsu Takizaki, says he aims to raise that figure to 85%.
Only those manufacturing steps that involve trade secrets are kept in-house.
Of the company's 900 staff only 60 are engaged in manufacturing, or in overseeing manufacturing suppliers.
This unJapanese disdain for making things has paid off.
In the five years to March 1992, operating profits grew three-fold (though they temporarily fell, by 15% last year, because of a collapse in industrial investment).
Keyence's achievement depends upon its concentration on non-manufacturing skills like research and sales.
To excel in these areas, Keyence has had to cultivate an individualist meritocracy unlike that found in most Japanese companies.
Big Japanese firms like to recruit graduates straight from university, then train them in their own image.
Mr Takizaki prefers to poach from other firms, saying that people of varying backgrounds help his company to be creative.
He also promotes his staff according to merit, rather than by pursuing the traditional path of steady, age-linked advancement.
One board director is just 41 — startling in Japan.
These approaches are complementary.
Bright young engineers from rival firms are attracted to Keyence by the chance to do their own research, rather than labouring for years under grey-haired supervisors.
They are also attracted by the pay: because it reflects performance, precocious types can earn more than their elders.
Keyence employees eschew the titles (division chief, section chief) that most salarymen use when addressing each other.
Keyence workers are also spared the compulsory evenings of booze and karaoke that many firms use to cement group loyalty.
Other Japanese firms house their young executives in dormitories, and lay on facilities such as sports clubs.
Mr Takizaki believes in payment in cash, not kind.
Most of Japan's manufacturers distribute their products through separate wholesale companies.
Keyence turns this convention on its head: not only does it subcontract manufacturing, but it has an in-house sales team that accounts for fully half its workforce.
This is partly because Keyence's complex technology requires expert attention.
Direct contact with customers also brings benefits of its own.
Keyence's salesmen report back to the research department on what new machines their customers would find useful.
They also tell the production department about demand for existing products: this helps Keyence to regulate its output and reduce inventories.
Elsewhere, the principle of ‘just-in-time’ usually applies to the buying of components.
At Keyence, it applies to production of the finished goods as well.
However much the yen goes up, Keyence is unlikely to move offshore.
Like Japan's economic future, it does not depend on basic manufacturing: assembly costs account for just 5% of its sales.
Overseas, where the high yen threatens to be most damaging, Keyence is booming, with exports up 30% in the year to March.
Might the continued strength of the yen put a stop to this?
Mr Takizaki is unconcerned.
His chief competitors overseas are also Japanese.
Cruise baby, cruise
LOS ANGELES
THOUGH it has been more than 30 years since Jim Chilchutt last cut a rug at a high-school dance, he recaptures his lost youth every weekend, cruising the streets of Ventura behind the wheel of a 1948 Studebaker.
His is not just a lovingly maintained and highly polished old car.
Painted in sunburst yellow, it has a huge engine gurgling inside.
When it roars away from a traffic light, its burning tyres leave a patch of smoking rubber on the road behind.
Forget the Ferrari.
Since the bottom fell out of the market for supercars and classic cars, hot-rods have taken over.
Hot-rodding was born when young men souped up vehicles and raced along the black-top roads and dry lake beds around Los Angeles in the 1940s and 1950s.
These makeshifts are now attracting the serious collectors who once paid huge sums for classics that have now gone the way of brown polyester suits.
People spend anything from $1,000 to $150,000 to buy a hot-rod and join this reborn cult.
As Noel Blanc, who has a collection of 20 classic cars, explains: ‘When I'm driving down the street in my hot-rod, people are waving at me and giving me the thumbs up.
When I drive down the same street in my Ferrari they extend a finger.’
Hot-rods have become so fashionable that America's Chrysler is now toying with putting one of its own into production.
Chrysler is gaining a reputation for designing Detroit's snazziest cars.
The company unveiled a prototype hot-rod called the Plymouth Prowler earlier this year.
Although it is based on a mudane Chrysler Concorde saloon, the two-seater version looks like it has been driven straight off the set of ‘American Graffiti’.
Whenever the Prowler appears at car shows, Chrysler has a queue of people wanting to put down their deposits to buy one.
Most people think of hot-rods as modified production cars.
Typically, they tend to be based on American-made cars from the 1930s and 1940s.
Many collectors are happy to stretch the definition beyond the 1960s.
Mr Chilchutt started by welding a different nose on to his Studebaker before squeezing a 400 horse-power Chevrolet V8 under the bonnet.
The hot-rod's flexible definition means that even a car straight from Chrysler's factory might appeal to the fashion-conscious.
At the other extreme, Andy Cohen, president of Beverley Hills Motoring Accessories, says that firms now make so many hot-rod components that would-be hot-rodders no longer need even the skeleton of a Studebaker to begin work.
Chinese puzzles
Developing countries are less poor than official figures suggest
FOREIGNERS wishing to do business in developing countries need to know how big these potential markets are.
Yet the most commonly used GDP figures for the third-world countries are misleading: they understate the true size of their economies relative to rich ones.
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has at last faced up to this in its latest World Economic Outlook.
To add up different countries' output, the IMF used to convert local-currency GDPs into dollars at market exchange rates.
Now it has decided to use purchasing-power parities (PPP), which take account of international differences in prices.
The result is a sharp jump in developing countries' share of world output, to 34% from 18% on the old method.
The share of Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union has edged up from 9% to 11%.
By contrast, the share of industrial economies has dropped from 73% to 54%.
Perhaps the best proof that the previous figures were flawed is that they suggested that Asia's weight in world output had fallen from 7.9% in 1985 to 7.2% in 1990, although it was by far the fastest growing region.
This was due to a sharp decline in some Asian countries' exchange rates against the dollar.
Why do market exchange rates give such misleading results?
Their volatility is troublesome, but that by itself does not cause a persistent bias one way or the other.
The trouble is that they do not fluctuate around the ‘right’ average if ‘right’is to be measured by purchasing power.
Even if it were true (as some economists argue) that exchange rates tend, over time, to equalise the prices of internationally traded goods, big differences would remain in the prices of non-traded goods and services, such as housing and domestic transport.
If the prices of traded goods were equal everywhere, then wages in each country would depend on the productivity of its traded-goods industries.
Countries with low productivity would have low wages.
In these countries, producers of non-traded goods would also tend to get lower wages than their counterparts in more productive economies.
However, productivity differs less from country to country for non-traded goods than for tradables.
So developing countries tend to have cheaper services.
Also, third-world governments often keep housing and energy artificially cheap.
Converting these countries' GDPs with market exchange rates therefore systematically understates their real output.
The UN's International Comparison Program (ICP) is the most ambitious effort to revalue developing countries' output at international prices.
It attempts to estimate PPPs every five years on the basis of a detailed comparison of prices in each country.
The IMF has used the ICP estimates for its new weightings for all countries except China, where the Fund used its own more modest estimate, thinking the ICPs unrealistically high.
Even so, the IMF's new figures still lift China's share in world output to 6% — three times its previous weight, making it the world's third-biggest economy behind America (22.5%) and Japan (7.6%).
As a result, Asia's share in world output has jumped from 7% to 18%.
China's GDP has been a cause of controversy for years.
Converting China's GDP in 1992 into dollars at the  official exchange rate yields $140 billion, or $170 per head.
That is an economy smaller than Canada's, and an income per head only slightly higher than India's — hard to square with China's high life expectancy and daily food consumption, not to mention household ownership of consumer durables.
(Nearly 70% of Chinese urban households now have colour televisions and 81% have washing-machines.)
The IMF's new country weights seem to suggest a GDP of almost $1,000 billion for China in 1992 ($1,700 per head).
The World Bank estimates that China's GDP was $1,210 billion in 1990 on a PPP basis.
Adding two years of 10% growth and dollar inflation, this implies a GDP of $1,870 billion in 1992 (or $1,460 per head).
That makes China the world's second-biggest economy.
Unlike the IMF, the World Bank publishes GDP figures, also based on the ICP estimates, for all developing countries.
The table compares GDP per head using market exchange rates with those on a PPP basis for a selection of countries in 1992.
(The PPP figures have been scaled up from the World Bank's 1990 figures.)
China is by no means the only country whose output has been understated.
Egypt, Malaysia and Thailand also look a lot less poor on a PPP basis.
Thailand's GDP per head, for example, is lifted from $1,780 to $1,580.
Only in one case, Argentina, is GDP smaller on a PPP basis.
When GDPs are converted at market exchange rates, no developing country outranks any of the G7 industrial economies.
The PPP figures, however, tell a very different story (see chart).
Besides China in second place, India comes in at fifth place in the league, and Mexico and Brazil are also both bigger than Canada, currently the G7's seventh man.
Although most economists agree that PPPs give a more accurate measure of the relative size of economies than market exchange rates, this still leaves a problem: the original local-currency figures may themselves be unreliable.
For example, poor-country governments may have an incentive to report GDP as low as possible to qualify for soft loans from international financial institutions, or to get favourable trade treatment.
And it is likely that poor countries have bigger ‘informal’ economies than do rich ones.
Taking all this into account, some developing countries may be even higher up the world GDP league.
The industrial economies' share of world output may already have dropped below half.
Japan says No
TOKYO
America wants Japan to meet import targets for some American goods.
An unwilling Japan has decided to draw the line
ONCE, when Japan faced pressure from abroad, it would either give in reluctantly or keep quiet and hope that the fuss would die down.
No longer, it seems.
The Clinton administration strongly believes in exerting such pressure.
Its policy is to open some Japanese markets (which it deems to be closed) by setting import targets — an approach to trade policy that supporters call ‘results-oriented’.
This ugly term foreshadows uncertain consequences.
Far from capitulating to this new thrust of American trade policy, Japan is taking a stand that could lead to a trans-Pacific confrontation.
Japan's government is deeply opposed to what America's trade representative, Mickey Kantor, has called a new policy geared to ‘quantifiable results’ for some products.
It fears that the demands and threats which are part of any such policy are bound to spread — both within product groups and to new areas of trade.
At the summit meeting last month between Bill Clinton and Japan's prime minister, Kiichi Miyazawa, America insisted that Japan should come up with specific measures that would enable it to meet new import targets.
Japan's government will refuse.
Instead, Japan is undertaking a detailed defence of its record on trade.
This will first appear in the annual white paper on trade developments, due to be published on May 21st by the Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI)— its definitive statement on trade matters.
In addition to the customary dry analysis, this year's edition will put Japan's side of an argument that has, until now, been dominated by American and European critiques.
It follows another MITI report, published this week, that takes America, the European Community and other large trading partners to task for their ‘unfair trading practices’.
Both reports argue for trade governed by multilateral rules and call for the completion of the Uruguay round of trade talks.
Besides making worthy free-trade noises, MITI's defence will also tackle American criticism head on.
Naoyuki Haraoka, director of MITI's international trade research office, is at pains to point out that Japan is in fact more open than other countries.
Japan's average tariff on mining and manufactured goods is 2.7%, compared with 4.2% in America and 4.6% in the European Community.
The report will also reject the argument that Japan needs special trade sanctions because it operates a different sort of capitalism.
It will try to do so by explaining the nature and future of the country's trade surplus.
It is this persistent surplus, more than anything, that has provoked anger in Washington — and Mr Clinton's remark that ‘the possibility of obtaining real, even access to the Japanese market is somewhat remote’.
This year the surplus has been growing fast.
Jesper Koll, a Tokyo-based economist at S.G. Warburg, estimates that Japan's trade surplus could reach $100 billion if the yen stays at current levels.
That is $18 billion more than last year's figure.
Moreover, the bilateral surplus with America is also growing rapidly.
Mr Koll reckons it will climb from $14 billion in 1992 to $18 billion this year, an all-time high.
With the economy still barely growing, despite two fiscal packages in the past nine months, Japan's critics say that the country is once more exporting its way out of recession.
One defence the ministry will make is that most trade statistics ignore services.
MITI estimates, using data from the Bank of Japan, that if Japan's imports of services had been included in its trade statistics, then the trade surplus would have been $14 billion, $18 billion lower than reported.
Exclusive attention to trade in goods is therefore misleading.
MITI wants to see better collection of statistics for trade in services by international bodies such as the OECD.
Surplus, what surplus?
Analysis by Mr Haraoka's office explains the recent rise in Japan's trade surplus as follows: because of the recession at home, Japan has seen a decline in expensive imports of luxuries, which were enormously fashionable during the second half of the 1980s.
This effect has been compounded, thanks to slow growth elsewhere, by low prices for the international commodities that Japanese industry depends upon.
Exports of Japanese machinery, on the other hand, withstood the downturn quite well because the Asian economies that buy them continued to boom.
Also, the American and Japanese economies have been out of kilter.
America's strengthening economy caused an increase in American demand for Japanese imports, while Japanese demand for foreign goods declined.
The effect is amplified, MITI argues, because 35% of American exports to Japan are industrial commodities, which are highly sensitive to the business cycle.
Having argued that criticism of the trade surplus in Washington is misconceived, MITI's forthcoming paper goes on to predict that the surplus will, of its own accord, gradually diminish in size and relevance:
When Japanese demand picks up again, imports will grow more quickly than in past recoveries.
This is because the volume of Japanese imports has become more sensitive to the domestic economic cycle.
Parts and components account for a growing share of Japan's exports; 28% of total exports and 36% of machinery exports in 1992 compared with 19% and 28% respectively in 1981.
MITI believes that such exports should be of less concern to advocates of managed trade than consumer goods, because components increase the competitiveness — and therefore the export potential — of the industries that buy them.
(Advocates of managed trade would doubtless dispute that.)
From now on, MITI argues, Japan's overseas plants will increasingly export their output back to Japan.
Before, they bought Japanese exports of equipment and parts.
Three years of declining profits have followed the over-investment of the late 1980s.
Mr Haraoka predicts that Japanese managers will henceforth act more like Western managers, putting profits before their firms' market share.
In the past, that is, Japanese firms have been export-driven; in future they will be less likely to export their way out of trouble.
For these reasons, MITI argues, Japan's trade surplus will fall in due course.
However, it says, a persistent surplus (albeit a smaller one) is inevitable as long as Japanese households save more than American ones, and America's budget deficit remains untamed.
This is a familiar point: trade balances are determined by macroeconomic factors, not by trade policy.
To this, a sophisticated advocate of the import-target approach could reply that the balance is not the issue.
What matters is access to Japan's markets; America would be content if Japan increased its imports and exports by the same amount (leaving the trade balance, and the associated accounting identities, undisturbed).
This reply is disingenuous.
American public opinion demands, in its unsophisticated way, a smaller trade deficit.
On trade and other issues, Japan has caved in to outside pressure countless times before, and may do so again.
The White House seems to be counting on this.
It, and Congress, would be better advised to concentrate on reducing America's budget deficit.
That would reduce the trade deficit regardless of Japan's trade policies.
Threats of trade reprisals, even if they force Japan to give way, will not.
Environmental marketing
Soap opera
WHEN shoppers buy a bottle of shampoo or a pair of shoes, they spare few thoughts for the environmental consequences.
Washing powder is different.
Right from environmentalism's origins as a force in marketing, the companies that make detergents have had to cope with green-minded consumers.
No other industry has such a long history of coming up with environment-friendly selling points that are profit-friendly too.
First, the manufacturers abandoned phosphates.
They were led by Henkel, a German household-goods giant, which came up with an alternative called zeolite.
The phosphate manufacturers are now vainly trying to reverse this by publicising research which shows that zeolite forms a nasty sludge in sewage works, while phosphates, soluble in water, flush through.
Since the soapers — as they call themselves — began to move away from phosphates, they have adopted other environmental sales pitches.
In the early 1980s they learnt to make concentrated powders.
These were also sufficiently condensed to be poured into a flexible plastic ‘dosing’ ball.
This breakthrough, still regarded with awe in the detergent trade, was achieved by a technician at Procter & Gamble's French division.
It has two merits: it stops detergent from getting stuck in the dispenser and therefore wasted, and it allows a highly concentrated washing solution to engulf the clothes for the first ten minutes of a wash.
Customers in Europe and America were unimpressed.
They thought small boxes meant short shrift.
Then Kao, Japan's detergent giant, found that Japanese households could be sold space-saving packs of ‘compact’ powder.
Worried that Kao would try the same tactic in other markets, Procter & Gamble and Lever, its main rivals, turned Japanese space-saving into a European environmental theme.
Both explained that small packs of products were not only more convenient but also meant less wasted packaging.
Compacts now account for almost all the Dutch market, four-fifths in Sweden and about 30% in Europe overall.
Next, a similar pitch was applied to concentrated liquid detergents.
These are sold in containers made of plastic, a material which environmentalists dislike.
But they want more plastic to be recycled.
So the detergent companies have been careful to use lots of recycled plastic in their containers.
They also hit on the refillable container: for a little less money, customers buy a pouch of liquid and decant it into a used container.
At Procter & Gamble, the decision to sell its fabric softener, Lenor, in a pouch for refilling helped to revive sales; the discussion leading to the decision is now a Harvard Business School case-study.
Concentrated liquid detergents are rapidly increasing their market share (see chart).
Beside having a green image, they are particularly popular with supermarkets: on some calculations, they take up a quarter as much shelf space per wash as even concentrated powders.
For recession-weary washers, lower bills may sound just as attractive as greener laundry — as it were.
In Britain, proprietary detergent makers have watched with alarm the success of a cut-price compact detergent called ‘Novon’, launched in November by Sainsbury, a big supermarket chain.
Novon already takes about 40% of the store's sales of compact powders.
It has succeeded without any of the marketing hype, environmental or otherwise, that rival firms use to soft-soap their customers.
The German wage war
BERLIN
EASTERN GERMANY'S bitter labour dispute seems to be escalating.
On May 12th engineering workers voted to extend their strikes to three new states: Thuringia, Saxony-Anhalt and Brandenburg-Berlin.
Yet, though the battle is widening, a truce may be near.
IG Metall, which represents the striking workers, is more interested in principle than in money.
Engineering and steel employers provoked the strike by reneging on contracts to boost eastern wages to western levels by 1994.
Unless the deed is undone, the union believes, no German labour contract will ever be sacred again.
The employers care more about money.
Unit labour costs in eastern Germany are already 60% higher than those in the west; markets for some eastern products have dried up.
The engineering and steel employers' federations say most of their members cannot afford to stick to the original schedule for boosting eastern wages.
Earlier, they had promised to raise wages on April 1st by 26% for engineers and 21% for steel workers.
Though both sides vow to fight on, they are becoming keener to compromise.
So far, about 40,000 workers have gone on strike in roughly 80 steel and engineering companies, most of them owned by western German firms or the Treuhand, the agency privatising east German industry.
The engineering employers' federation reckons the strikes cut its members' output by DM10m ($1.2m) a day in Saxony alone.
The unions face a grimmer prospect: that the strike will drive capital and jobs out of eastern Germany.
Though the conflict is spreading, the outlines of a compromise are emerging.
The employers can afford to bow on principle; IG Metall says it might accept less money.
The union's basic demand, that employers honour the breached contract, can be fudged.
The engineering employers may be willing to reinstate the contract as a prelude to revising it.
Compromise on IG Metall's second demand will be trickier.
The union wants employers to agree to a specific date for equalising eastern and western wages, though it is willing to wait beyond 1994.
Employers say wage parity must be linked to productivity and economic growth.
If those hurdles are cleared, the union and employers can haggle over the size of the hikes in basic wages and the conditions under which unprofitable firms can wriggle out of paying them.
For their part, employers want a low wage rise and ‘opening clauses’ that would allow individual firms to negotiate lower pay settlements.
IG Metall, however, will insist on a bigger pay hike.
To opt out, it wants companies to prove their need for an ‘emergency solution’ and negotiate with the union rather than directly with workers.
Kurt Biedenkopf, premier of Saxony, and Germany's irrepressible Mr Fixit, was to convene formal talks among the combatants on May 13th.
He hopes a Saxon solution will be the model for a settlement in other east German states.
If battle fatigue sets in, Mr Biedenkopf may have reason for optimism.
South African conglomerates
The unbundling begins
JOHANNESBURG
AFTER three years of hinting about it, Gencor, one of South Africa's biggest conglomerates, finally announced on May 11th that it will break itself up.
The company's fortunes are founded on its minerals business, with mining assets worth 8 billion rand ($1.5 billion).
But, in true South African style, it also owns large stakes in other subsidiaries outside mining, which are worth another 9 billion rand.
The firm has a whimsically wide range of businesses from paper milling and food retailing to oil refining and drugs.
Gencor's decision is the first of its kind by a big South African firm.
The pressure — both economic and political — is now on the country's other conglomerates, such as Anglo American-De Beers, to explain why they should remain in one piece.
Many of these conglomerates also defy industrial logic (or, if not, make up for their inefficiencies by dominating and manipulating markets).
With South Africa moving away from  apartheid , such firms will face a hostile environment in which to make their case.
There is a familiar line of business thought behind Gencor's break-up, in which shares in the four non-mining subsidiaries will be returned to the conglomerate's shareholders.
One gain might come from the elimination of the discount in Gencor's share price as compared with the total value of its subsidiaries — a discount that has recently been as high as 4 billion rand.
The real benefits, however, will emerge gradually as each of the subsidiaries is freed from the burden of interference — and cost — of a head office.
Already, Gencor's mining arm is seeking to expand internationally with an offer probably worth more than $1.8 billion for Billiton, a metals subsidiary of Royal Dutch/Shell.
Gencor's chairman, Brian Gilbertson, put it bluntly: ‘If the present Gencor did not already exist, no-one would dream of joining Engen, Genbel, Malbak, Sappi and the mining business into a single conglomerate.’
He could have gone further.
Had profitable South African firms not been constrained by sanctions and exchange controls, they would have taken the profits they made from gold, platinum and diamonds and invested them overseas.
Instead Gencor and the rest scoured every corner of the South African economy for bargains.
Unhindered by the country's lax competition rules, they built up complex webs of cross-shareholdings across an astonishing array of businesses.
Anglo American controls a quarter of the quoted South African market.
The political thinking behind the break-up is less predictable.
The African National Congress is opposed to the big firms' concentrated economic power.
Once its remedy was nationalisation.
Now the ANC has announced that it will instead ‘curb monopolies’ continued domination of the economy by a minority within the white minority and promote greater efficiency in the private sector.’
One law would eliminate cross-directorships, through which competing companies share directors.
Gencor has now lent weight to the ANC's programme.
Whether others will follow depends upon how the ANC pursues its anti-trust policy if it comes to power.
Like many conglomerates before them, South African giants, such as Anglo American, Rembrandt and Anglovaal, want to stay in one piece.
Subsidiaries benefit from the parent company's financial  strength , they argue; there are obscure synergies to be had; and the only buyers for broken-up conglomerates in South Africa's isolated market would be other conglomerates.
That last argument points to gradual sales.
The others were long ago tested and found wanting.
Britain's music business
The sound barrier
Are CD buyers being ripped off?
Yes, but there is more than one culprit
SEE that fellow skulking through the green channel at Heathrow airport?
See that stuffed bag in his hand and that guilty look on his face?
That's a music lover, that is — a music lover returning from a trip to America, where he hoarded a vast stash of compact discs.
The CDs are readily available in Britain: the same artists, marketed by the same companies.
But not for anything close to the same price.
At Tower Records in New York, the latest disc by Annie Lennox sells for $11.99; at Tower in London, for £10.99 ($16.95).
In Britain and elsewhere in Europe, CDs commonly cost much more than in America.
Why is that?
Over the past few weeks the British parliament's National Heritage Committee has conducted a public inquiry to find an answer.
On May 11th it produced one.
‘The major record companies and the retailers are effectively cartels, and indeed partly interlocking cartels.’
They have created a CD market in which there is ‘no serious price competition’.
The committee said that the government should examine copyright law, which restricts the import of cheaper CDs from abroad, to see whether it helps sustain a ‘complex monopoly’ in Britain's £1.2 billion music industry.
The Office of Fair Trading is now expected to refer that question to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission (MMC).
An MMC investigation is likely to be sweeping, controversial and loud (judging from the shrieks of the record business).
It will need to cut through the rhetoric and irrelevance that have cluttered the debate so far.
Gerald Kaufman, the committee's chairman, emotes risibly on behalf of the consumer, then issues a report fraught with absurdities.
The music firms respond with a Chinese menu of good and bad arguments — which, taken all at once(as the companies say they must be) induce only dizziness and nausea.
The committee addressed itself to three issues: the absolute price-level of CDs; the price difference between CDs and cassettes; and the price difference between CDs in America and Britain.
The first of these is meaningless.
In isolation, there is no such thing as a price that is ‘too high’.
Firms have a right to charge what the market will bear — as long as it is a competitive market.
Like ‘excessive profit’, ‘over-priced’ is merely another way of saying that a market is failing.
Nor is the comparison with cassettes particularly useful.
Cassettes cost about the same to manufacture as CDs, but are sold to retailers for a third less.
The record companies say the price premium is justified because CDs are more durable and sound far better than tapes.
The committee admits this, but disapproves of the size of the mark-up.
Yet firms in many industries market premium product-lines; the manufacturing costs are irrelevant.
Convincing consumers to pay more for premium products is not evidence of a cartel: it is good marketing.
The relevant — and revealing — comparison is not between CDs and cassettes, but between Britain and America.
Consider the table.
Wholesale prices (ie, before anomalies in tax or retail systems) are a good deal lower in America for the ‘full line’ and ‘superstar’CDs that account for 70% of sales.
Why are these cheaper discs not flooding the British market?
Because of copyright law, which lets rights-holders ban ‘parallel imports’ into their markets.
The big six record companies are multinational, and thus can segment the world market into national ones.
With the monopolistic nature of the industry (all works are unique; the Beatles are no substitute for Bach, or the Beastie Boys), market segmentation is what shields record companies from price competition, even if they do not form a cartel.
The obvious answer would be to end the ban on parallel imports of CDs.
Anthony Smith, a lawyer at the Consumers' Association, says it would be ‘incredibly simple’ to amend copyright law to allow in CDs from countries with copyright protection comparable to Britain's.
The record companies think this would be a disaster.
They argue that lifting the ban would make policing piracy harder, and that consumers would not see much benefit anyway.
Because stores need to restock hot CDs quickly, the savings from buying abroad would not be worth the delay in delivery.
And suppose the savings were indeed worth the delay: that would be even worse.
With more sales flowing to parent companies overseas, British music subsidiaries would be starved of cash to invest in new talent; and they would have to cut their lists, which are bigger than those in America.
The consumer might get cheaper CDs, but he would also get less choice.
If it sounds like the industry is trying to argue all sides at once— it is.
But assume for a moment that an influx of American CDs did push down prices.
Would the parent companies of music multinationals — two of which, Polygram and Thorn EMI, are based in London — really stop investing in British talent?
Is it not the pride of the industry that although sales in Britain account for only 8% of the world total, British recordings account for 22%?
And it is no defence of restrictive trade to argue, in effect, that it taxes the Top-40 masses to satisfy the cravings of a few sophisticates.
Where the record companies may be right, however, is in arguing that ending the import ban might not affect prices much anyway.
Look at the table again.
The disparities at the retail level are much bigger than those at the wholesale one.
In America, where the top ten music chains control 30%, competition is intense.
In Britain, where the top three control 50%, it is not — and gross profit margins are half as big again.
In past, cuts in wholesale prices have been absorbed by big retailers; CD price wars are unheard of in Britain.
If and when the MMC starts its investigation, it should pay close attention to the committee's notion of ‘interlocking cartels’.
Latin American trade
Patchwork
IN 1990 George Bush proclaimed his dream of a free-trade area ‘from Anchorage to Tierra del Fuego’.
Latin America has taken his words to heart.
While America, Canada and Mexico equivocate over the North American Free Trade Agreement, there is a new enthusiasm about open trade among countries to the south.
A hotch-potch of alliances that were once little more than symbols of neighbourly intent suddenly matter.
Since the mid-1980s Latin America has pursued economic reform and rediscovered democracy.
From the beginning, trade liberalisation — cutting import tariffs and abolishing import licences — has had a central place in most Latin reform programmes.
Trade agreements are a natural extension of this approach.
Prosperous Chile, the region's star performer, has built its growth on exports — and has signed a raft of trade agreements.
A treaty with Mexico doubled the (admittedly modest) trade between the two.
Chile has also signed mutual tariff-cutting agreements with Argentina and Bolivia, last year doubling its exports to one and increasing them by a third to the other.
The transformation is affecting the whole region — though the results are not always quite so striking.
‘We have experienced a 180 degrees turn in our mentality,’ says Colombia's trade minister, Juan Manuel Santos.
Colombia used to hide isolated behind high tariffs; a former president compared his country to Tibet.
Now Colombia is rushing to open its markets.
Last year it broadened an earlier agreement with Venezuela and Ecuador.
These countries once welcomed only each other's goods, while imports from non-members were severely discouraged.
Now, any product can be sold whatever its origin; the only barrier is a common external tariff ranging between 5% and 20%.
As a result of open borders, trade between Colombia and Venezuela increased from $125m in 1990 to $132m last year.
Trade between Colombia and Ecuador, which joined the agreement last September, increased by about 30% in the fourth quarter.
Trade is helping the three economies to grow closer together.
Venezuela recently issued $100m-worth of government bonds in the Colombian stockmarkets.
They were sold in minutes.
Colombia and Venezuela are jointly negotiating a free-trade agreement with the three Central American countries.
They are also talking to Mexico.
The prospect of such a deal may have helped to boost Colombian exports to Mexico by 27% last year.
An enthusiastic Mr Santos claims that, of all the developing countries, Colombia will soon be the ‘best positioned, commercially’.
Hyperbole, of course.
But it is a sign of the times that a Latin American minister even wishes to make such a boast.
Whether the region's liking for liberal trade will last remains to be seen.
One reason to think it may is that the new agreements have turned national tariff-cutting programmes into international commitments.
These should be harder to reverse than purely domestic initiatives.
The evidence for this is that, in the past, such agreements helped to entrench protectionist policies.
For instance, in the 1960s a common market of five Central American countries sheltered over-priced local goods behind high tariffs, putting an international stamp on import substitution.
This year four of them agreed to set a low common external tariff instead.
For the moment international collaboration is on the side of liberal trade.
Despite their success in boosting trade within the continent, these deals have drawbacks.
They have created genuinely new trading opportunities, but they have also diverted trade from established patterns with Europe and the United States.
(How much is not known, and trade with Europe and North America may still be growing in overall terms.)
When regional deals divert more trade than they create, economists regard them as harmful overall: such arrangements tend to shift production to less efficient producers.
There is also the danger that small, local agreements spin out of control as trade imbalances grow among their signatories.
An expanding Colombian trade surplus with Venezuela and Ecuador threatens to cause an upset.
Brazil's surplus with its partners in Mercosur (Argentina, Uruguay and Paraguay) already has.
Although Brazil is wallowing in stagflation, Brazilian exports to its partners have risen from $1.3 billion in 1989 to $1.1 billion in 1992, while imports were unchanged at $1.2 billion.
The imbalance is mostly due to the vigour of Brazil's export industries, its sickly demand for imports and, with respect to Argentina, an under-valued exchange rate.
Recently Argentina's economics minister went to Brazil and asked the Brazilians to buy more Argentine wheat to help restore balance.
Even in the new Latin America, it seems, the commitment to free trade goes only so far.
FINANCE
Halifax Building Society
All method, no madness
The Halifax is Britain's biggest mortgage and savings institution.
In time it is likely to repeat its success in mainland Europe
ADULTS wept, children sobbed.
On May 8th Halifax Town ignominiously plunged out of the Football League and will now play soccer in the minor leagues.
Though loved, the club has a remarkably undistinguished 82-year history.
Not so the town's other prominent institution.
Older than the club and much more successful, the Halifax Building Society, were it a football team, would vie with the best in Britain.
Consider its recent record.
Mortgage-lending accounts for the bulk of the Halifax's business, as it does at other building societies (thrifts).
Despite tumbling house prices, the Halifax has more than doubled its after-tax profits since 1988, to £458m ($198m), and its assets, to £63 billion.
Last year it made more profit than any of the clearing (commercial) banks against which it increasingly competes.
It attracted more retail savings than even the government, which spares no effort to tap the market.
The Halifax has achieved a level of efficiency that shames competitors.
Its ratio of costs to income was a miserly 40% last year, good even for a thrift; most banks would be proud of a figure below 60%.
Last October it persuaded Moody's to maintain the credit rating on its long-term debt.
It remains Britain's highest-rated credit institution.
How has a humble mortgage-lender reached such pre-eminence at home?
And can it repeat its success in Europe?
Jim Birrell, who retires in August, has been the society's chief executive since 1988.
He says the key to the Halifax's success has been an unthrilling combination of caution and vision.
Like other building societies, the Halifax entered the 1980s unprepared for deregulation and competition.
As those forces gathered pace, its bosses reacted with a narrow, but precise, strategy.
The society would concentrate on its strengths — mortgage lending and garnering personal savings — but expand its market share by gradually offering a bigger range of products.
To this end, the Halifax allied itself with Standard Life, an insurer, and now earns commissions on sales of unit trusts and life insurance through its branches.
It managed to avoid some of its rivals' mistakes.
Freed to do commercial lending, it singed its fingers in 1989 and has been wary since.
Rather than invest hugely in technology, the Halifax used cheap and cheerful computer systems to centralise information-gathering and to design easy-to-administer products.
Might the Halifax expand in Britain?
Not, it seems, through big acquisitions.
Senior managers would love to take on other societies' mortgage books, but not the associated hassle of brands and branches.
And there is a more pressing issue in its tie with Standard Life.
The Halifax reckons there is more money to be made from acting as a principal than as an agent.
Just as it dislikes the thought of securitising its mortgage assets —‘why give away margin?’ asks Jon Foulds, its chairman since 1990 — so it also knows that underwriting the insurance it sells would eventually be more profitable than taking commissions from Standard Life.
But any decision to do so will be made, like the others, slowly and deliberately.
The Halifax's strategic approach is most clearly shown in two big steps it did not take.
In 1988 the society decided not to follow its rival, Abbey National, and abandon its mutually-owned status for that of a public company.
And it decided not to plunge into Europe, as some competitors did.
To remain a mutual society was perhaps the harder choice.
The Halifax still chafes, occasionally, at the restrictions which the 1986 Building Societies Act imposes on the mutually-owned thrifts.
But top managers say the advantages more than offset any frustration.
The society pays no dividends, so after-tax profits can be retained as capital.
And Mr Birrell claims that because the Halifax is mutual, it can afford to take a longer-term view of its strategic options.
As a case in point, Mr Foulds cites — perhaps optimistically — its £200m, so far unprofitable, investment in building a national chain of estate agents.
For once the Halifax was following others; it admits that it paid too much at the wrong time.
But while Abbey National and Prudential, a large insurer, have pulled out of similar chains, the Halifax has not.
‘We believed in the wisdom of being there at the beginning when customers most need financial advice, and we still do,’ says Mr Foulds.
More than 10% of its mortgages now spring from its estate agencies.
As sales of houses recover, profits should flow.
As for expanding in Europe, the board accepts that the Halifax must diversify abroad, just as it diversified geographically within Britain earlier in its history.
‘We know we are a competitive provider of mortgages and savings products,’ says David Gilchrist, head of corporate strategy.
‘The problem is that we are a retailer, and our skills may not be easily exported.
We look at Europe as a series of very different market conditions and risks.’
The society's approach has been typically methodical.
Later this year the Halifax will open its first European office.
A Spanish operation will start as a one-branch savings outlet in Madrid, offering mortgages only when the local managers are satisfied that they understand their market.
To speed things up, Mr Gilchrist agrees that a few acquisitions may be needed.
The Halifax continues to ponder the wisdom of buying, say, a mortgage bank in Germany or France.
But it is proud that it eschewed the now-or-never mentality that drove others to make acquisitions in the run-up to Europe's single market in financial services.
‘The way markets are changing, there will always be opportunities for deals,’ says Mr Gilchrist.
He also points to promising markets outside Europe, including far-flung Australia.
The Halifax down under?
Perhaps.
By that time, the footballers of Halifax Town may have climbed back into the big league.
Up to their old tricks
TOKYO
ANYONE who thought that naughty fun-and-games in the Japanese stockmarket had ended with the wave of securities scandals two years ago needs to think again.
The arrest on May 13th of Mitsuhiro Yanagitani, formerly branch manager for Daiwa Securities at Kunitachi, in west Tokyo, and Ueki Kenjiro, of its Nagoya branch, makes it clear that they have not.
Some executives may resign at a Daiwa board meeting that is due to be held on May 18th.
The news is unlikely to be linked publicly to this still rather murky affair.
Mr Yanagitani had been one of Daiwa's highest-flyers.
In the 1980s he was head of the securities firm's staff union for two years, which in Japan is traditionally a position held by employees considered to be destined for top positions in the company.
Yet it turns out that Mr Yanagitani, who was dismissed from Daiwa last month, had in recent years turned into an aspiring George Soros.
He had been running his own freelance investment fund with a few billion yen in assets.
He promised his (and, in effect, Daiwa's) investment clients guaranteed returns of up to 10% a year.
Daiwa suspected that something was amiss only at the beginning of this year, when it uncovered evidence that attempts had been made to forge security depositary receipts.
These are documents sent to clients to confirm the purchase of shares or bonds that are held in custody.
The suspicion is that Mr Yanagitani hoped to use these forgeries as collateral for loans.
If so, he must have been desperate.
Technically, such receipts, unlike share certificates, have no value as collateral, though a layman could perhaps have been duped.
But by the end of last year Mr Yanagitani had lost so much money that he was unable to honour the investment guarantees he had given to his clients.
Subsequent investigation by Daiwa revealed that securities certificates belonging to three of its corporate clients had been removed from custody in its Kunitachi branch safe to be used as collateral.
Daiwa says it will reimburse the losses of those who invested in Mr Yanagitani's scheme because of his position as branch manager.
However, it will be less generous to those who, the firm suspects, were aware of the dodgy nature of the guarantees.
The affair has left many young turks at Daiwa demoralised and insecure.
Mr Yanagitani had a wide following among ambitious younger employees, who fear they have ruined their prospects by backing the wrong horse.
One who may have done so is Tamotsu Ushida, the manager of Daiwa's Omori branch in Tokyo.
After complaints by clients, Daiwa is investigating this branch.
Mr Ushida became the youngest branch manager in Daiwa's history when, at 31, he was appointed to run the Omori branch in 1990.
Though still the branch manager, he has been in hospital for nearly two months — in other words, since about the time the Kunitachi scandal surfaced.
A bear in bull's clothing
TOKYO
Tokyo's newly rising share prices are likely to prove as fickle as the foreigners who are their main support
AS AN example of crowd psychology, it is instructive.
Barely three months ago, deep gloom prevailed in Tokyo.
Now, in a dramatic shift in sentiment, investors seem to have turned almost universally bullish on the Japanese stockmarket.
Some investors, anyway.
Foreign fund managers and Japanese retail investors buying on margin have made most of the net share purchases in recent months (along with government-controlled savings institutions).
They have one thing in common: they are playing with other people's money.
This new confidence rests on the now widely held assumption that the Japanese government will do whatever it must to support share prices until company earnings rebound.
Many foreign investors profess far-fetched hopes that profits will double in the year to March 1995, though there is minimal evidence yet of any pick-up in the Japanese economy.
Most people concede that the current fiscal year (to March 1994) will see the fourth annual decline in earnings in a row.
While firms wait for their luck to turn, investors are doing their best to ignore both the horrible results which companies have just begun to announce for last year and the recent sharp decline in bond prices.
Government bonds now yield 4.5%, not a bad return given that inflation is just over 1% and the yield on shares just under it.
The stockmarket bulls looked more plausible a couple of months ago.
Then, the government's determination to support the equity market became clear.
Managed press leaks about a pending increase in telephone charges doubled the price of shares in NTT, the Tokyo market's leading company.
This lifted investors' spirits immensely, as well as filling well-informed politicians' campaign coffers.
Since early March, however, the Nikkei share average has risen by more than 3,600 points, to 20,533 on May 13th.
The stockmarket is now extremely expensive; shares are selling at almost 90 times prospective earnings for the year to March 1994.
Those bidding up share prices these days must believe in an endless supply of future suckers.
That is seldom wise.
Yet the Japanese government does, at last, seem to have fixed on supporting the stockmarket as an important way to revive the economy.
This makes some sense.
As the market rises, so does banks' capital, for it includes part of the unrealised gains on banks' shareholdings; up, too, goes banks' ability to lend.
And higher share prices should also help companies, now suffering from a cash-flow squeeze, to raise money — both by selling the shares they own in other companies and by issuing more shares of their own.
New equity issues have been suspended in Japan since the spring of 1990, in an attempt to prevent new supply from depressing prices further.
The informal ban will need to be lifted — perhaps after the sale of state-owned Japan Tobacco and JR East.
The government's bet seems to be that by rigging the stockmarket it can lure in enough suckers to help companies raise massive amounts of equity, rather as America's bull market has helped companies to do there.
Who will these suckers be?
Japanese banks and life insurers remain bearish.
They are keen on neither the market's fundamentals nor the prospect of adding to their equity exposure at current giddy prices.
Only last autumn big life insurance companies were looking at net losses on their long-term shareholdings.
Neither they nor finance-ministry officials want to see a repeat of that scary event.
Japanese companies too will remain net sellers of shares.
The deterioration in their cash flow is one of the biggest problems now facing Japan's stockmarket, along with more familiar woes like banks' bad debts and distress in the property market.
Firms' financing needs are greater than at any time since the 1974 oil shock.
Smithers & Co, a research boutique, estimates that this year the corporate sector, excluding banks, will have to find new net external capital of ¥40 trillion ($15 billion), equal to around 8% of GNP.
In 1987 firms' financing needs amounted to only 2.2% of GNP.
So far, firms have dealt with the problem partly by drawing down their cash reserves.
Their cash holdings declined at an annual rate of 7% in the last three months of 1992.
Meanwhile, another source of cash — bank borrowing — has become steadily less attractive.
In recent years, desperate to boost their operating profits and absorb bad loans, banks have begun charging corporate borrowers the full whack.
Their lending rates have not fallen in line with their funding costs; banks' margins have widened by about two percentage points since early 1991.
Smithers calculates that to finance a corporate-sector deficit of ¥40 trillion at the current high corporate-borrowing rate of 5% (almost 4% after inflation) would cost ¥2 trillion a year.
With cash reserves dwindling and bank credit expensive, companies will accelerate their already steady selling of shares.
Equities yield about 3.5 percentage points less than bonds.
And the higher the stockmarket rises, the more attractive it will become to dump shares.
The continued pressure on companies' cash flow may well accelerate the gradual unwinding of Japan's complex web of cross-shareholdings.
In the meantime, since companies, banks and life insurers own about two-thirds of the Tokyo stockmarket, share prices are supported almost entirely by fickle foreigners, margin investors and, of course, the government.
Perversely, by attempting to boost shares in so crude a fashion, Japan's finance ministry may have succeeded only in prolonging the bear market.
Had the stockmarket been left to its own devices and allowed to find a clearing price, it might well be on its genuine way up now.
As it is, the thundering herd is likely to prove a skittish lot.
Zeneca/ICI
Grey matters
PRICING an equity issue is always tricky.
In Britain it has seldom been more controversial than for Zeneca, a drugs firm being spun off from ICI on June 1st.
On May 12th Zeneca announced that a £1.3 billion ($1 billion) five-for-16 rights issue accompanying its market debut would be priced at 600p.
Most analysts consider this high: it is a discount to the expected market price of just over 10%, not the 15% often expected by underwriters.
The after-market in Zeneca may be gloomy.
ICI had once hoped to price the Zeneca rights issue much higher, at 650–675p.
Its hopes were dashed by the sudden tumble of once-fashionable drug shares.
And a more realistic price was revealed by the short-lived ‘grey’ market (the popular term for trading in a security before it is issued) in Zeneca that was begun by Salomon Brothers in mid-April.
When the London Stock Exchange asked Salomon on April 30th to stop trading, the shares had edged down by 4–5%.
The grey market resumed on May 12th, after the rights issue was priced; the shares slid further.
Some underwriters were said to be selling to hedge their commitment.
The stock exchange's ostensible reason for stopping the grey market was that investors did not have enough information about the Zeneca issue for trading to be ‘fair’.
Yet a draft prospectus had been published and research analysts had produced fat tomes.
One market-maker says there was more public information about Zeneca than about most other equities.
All that was missing was the terms of the rights issue.
Grey markets are common for other financial instruments like eurobonds and government bonds.
They are standard in America, after a new share issue is registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
The stock exchange has even allowed them in the past in Britain.
Examples include Vodafone before it was floated by Racal; Euro Disney before the company was formally launched; and SmithKline Beecham before the two firms merged.
The London Stock Exchange is reviewing its rules about when members can make grey markets; it will probably allow them more readily in future.
A question it could ask is what would be wrong with letting a market instead of a clique of investment banks determine a share's correct price.
Nobody is forced to trade in it.
Investment bankers say that grey markets allow short-selling that drives down a new issue's price.
But prices reflect buyers and sellers; if a grey market price drifts too low, buyers will spring up to correct it.
What many merchant-bank objectors most dislike is that a grey market limits their freedom to price an issue as they want.
But more openness would help to avoid the mispricings that often disfigure British equity issues.
And dispelling some of the mystery about equity pricing would surely reassure most investors.
Too many gilts for comfort
The Bank of England is struggling to finance a budget deficit running at 8% of GDP.
Its biggest test will come this autumn
HOWEVER you manipulate them, the figures still look frightening.
The Treasury reckons that Britain's public-sector borrowing requirement (PSBR) will be £50 billion ($12 billion) in 1993–94.
Adding in refinancing of maturing debt (and allowing for individuals' national savings), that means that £1 billion of gilt-edged debt must be sold per week.
Who will buy?
Any amount of debt can be sold, but at the cost of driving interest rates uncomfortably high.
There are plenty of other calls on savers' cash.
Investing institutions expect a net cash inflow of £30 billion-40 billion this year.
New equity and rights issues are currently running at nearly £1 billion a month, almost double last year's rate.
The government's BT-3 share issue in July will absorb another £5 billion.
Nor is there much to hope for from other domestic buyers.
After a rule change in the March budget, sales of gilts to banks count towards PSBR financing.
But the present gap of two or three percentage points between the short rates they pay for money and long yields on gilts may not be enough to tempt them.
The Bank is wooing retail investors; it has just published a booklet on the virtues of gilts.
Yet retail demand is small.
And if it is diverted from national savings, it does not help anyway.
That leaves overseas investors.
It has become a gilt-edged truism that the government needs foreign investors to finance its PSBR.
They have to be persuaded, above all on the exchange rate.
In 1991 and 1992 sterling's membership of Europe's exchange-rate mechanism (ERM) made that easier.
Foreign investors looked at the higher yield of gilts over German government bonds without worrying about exchange risk.
After the pound's exit from the ERM last September, foreign investment in gilts dried up.
In both February and March, foreigners bought £1 billion of gilts.
But sterling's recent weakness has disappointed those who expected it to rise sharply against the D-mark this year.
The Bank of England remains calm.
It easily financed the 1992–93 PSBR, though two factors will not be repeated — the huge demand for gilts after the Tories unexpectedly won the April 1992 election and the boost to sterling funding from the massive sale of foreign-currency reserves during the ERM crisis.
Helped by calls on partly paid gilts sold last year, the Bank is ahead of the game this year.
Midland Montagu, the biggest gilt market-maker, reckons that it has financed nearly a quarter of its needs already, with just six weeks of the financial year gone.
The Bank is pulling out the stops to make the market more attractive.
It is currently holding a gilt auction of around £3 billion on the last Wednesday of every month.
After a long (20-year) gilt in March and a short (five-year) one in April, the market expects a medium-term issue in May.
The Bank is looking at other options: a variable-rate gilt that might interest banks, or more index-linked gilts.
There have been calls for the Bank to issue more debt at the short end, to take advantage of lower short rates.
The American Treasury has recently made such a switch.
Proponents argue that if the government keeps inflation to 2% or so, 8% debt is too expensive.
Yet 8% (the lowest long-term yield for 20 years) is what the market now demands — and in the past it has been more correct than governments about future inflation.
Moreover, short-term money creates a horrific refinancing task when the debt falls due.
The Bank will not, therefore, stop issuing long-term gilts.
Nor will it be tied to a fixed programme of auctions.
But it is considering other changes to please the market.
It may look again at relaxing restrictions on a repurchase market in gilts and on stock lending, both of which flourish in America.
The Bank is also talking to the international clearing-houses, Euroclear and Cedel, about settling gilt bargains through them as well as through its own central gilts office.
And it has eased its capital rules to enable market-makers to bid for more of each issue.
New market-makers are emerging, too.
Deutsche Bank and Nikko joined in 1992.
Yamaichi is expected to become the 20th market-maker this summer; it has recruited two of S.G. Warburg's best analysts.
Others said to be in the wings include Merrill Lynch and Morgan Stanley.
They may be piqued by the performance of fellow-American Salomon Brothers, which has become the biggest single bidder at most gilt auctions.
They are also tempted by the returns: market-makers notched up £65m of profits in 1992, a return on capital of 15%.
Many think that such profits will continue as long as big borrowers run the government.
The Bank has to butter up both investors and intermediaries because it is in a fiercely competitive international market.
Public borrowing is high everywhere.
In Europe, budget deficits average 5% of GDP, their highest level since 1975.
Competition has forced all government-bond markets to modernise.
Free movement of capital means that investors now have a wider choice of what to buy.
That gives the Bank of England one crumb of comfort, and one big worry.
The comfort is that thanks to continental Europe's recession and the Bundesbank's slow trimming of interest rates, most European bond yields should fall over the next year, increasing the appeal of gilts.
The worry is inflation, the single biggest determinant of gilt prices.
Several other European countries look better than Britain, either because they are in the ERM or because they are trimming budget deficits (or both).
Though prices in Britain are barely rising, investors still doubt the country's anti-inflation credentials.
This autumn's public-spending round will be a moment of truth.
For it will show whether John Major's government is serious about reining in the PSBR.
Woe betide gilts prices if investors conclude that it is not.
Kuwait Investment Office
Sharp suits
BARCELONA, LONDON AND MADRID
SHADES of BCCI and Robert Maxwell?
As authorities in Spain and Kuwait try to unravel how billions of dollars slipped through the fingers of the Kuwait Investment Office (KIO), the foreign-investment arm of the Kuwaiti government, they claim to have exposed dealings as murky and complex as anything now pinned on 1991's most notorious crooks.
The ingredients are all there: an in-house bank; a string of obscure firms (including the appropriately named Croesus International) based in loosely-regulated offshore financial centres; and blocks of money winging electronically around the world.
The long-running saga took a new twist this week in Spain.
With an eye on the general election on June 6th, the Popular Party (PP), the main opposition party, claimed on May 10th it had proof that the Socialist government bore some responsibility for last year's dramatic collapse of KIO's Spanish business empire.
The PP called for the resignation of several politicians, including Carlos Solchaga, the finance minister.
Elsewhere, lawyers were already doing good business.
On April 14th the Kuwaitis used Grupo Torras, their bankrupt Spanish holding company, to launch a civil suit in Britain.
No fewer than 22 defendants are named in a writ running to more than 140 pages.
It gives copious detail on four cases where a total of $100m is alleged to have been misappropriated through a complex web of transactions around the world.
Among the accused: Fahd Mohammed al-Sabah, a former chairman of KIO and Torras, and a distant cousin of the Emir of Kuwait; Fouad Jaffar, the KIO's former general manager; and Javier de la Rosa, a Catalan who used to head Torras.
Sources close to the KIO say the civil suit in Britain has no bearing on separate, and so far unsuccessful, criminal cases against many of the same defendants in Spain.
Directors of Torras have a legal duty to pursue the missing funds, they add.
The litigation will probably drag on for years.
So, too, may the political wrangling in Spain.
Critics have taxed the government with failing to vet KIO's investments properly.
A letter produced by the PP and dated June 27th 1988 suggests that a rule requiring the cabinet to approve sovereign investments was ignored.
The letter was sent to Mr Solchaga's top aide by Manuel Conthe, then in charge of foreign transactions and since promoted to head of the Treasury.
The government has said in the past that if it was less than gimlet-eyed where KIO was concerned, it was because Spain needed foreign investment.
Unfortunately, KIO seems to have cost jobs, rather than created them.
In December 1992 Grupo Torras filed for protection from its creditors, with a net loss for the previous fiscal year of Ptas51 billion ($190m).
Almost all the Spanish companies in which the Grupo Torras has stakes are in trouble, threatening some 30,000 jobs directly.
The central issue concerns the role of KIO's former managers, in London as well as Spain.
Some of them have blamed the fallout from Iraq's invasion of Kuwait and the economic downturn in Spain for the demise of the Torras companies.
And they dispute the claim that Kuwait has lost $1 billion in Spain, alleging in their turn that $1.5 billion was spirited back to Kuwait through a network of offshore funds held by Kuwaiti citizens.
The KIO says that no evidence has been produced to substantiate this.
Some of the wilder allegations involve the colourful Mr De la Rosa, who resigned from Torras in May 1992, with, he says, glowing praise from KIO for a job well done.
Those who run KIO today point out that some of his former fans are now among his co-defendants in the British courts.
His own lawyers have tried to gag Mr De la Rosa, pending resolution of the various cases.
Expect more tales from both sides, regardless.
What bank for the franc?
PARIS
ON MAY 11th Edmond Alphandéry, France's economy minister, unveiled his long-awaited draft law to make the Banque de France independent.
The text, which is due to go before parliament shortly, charges the central bank with ensuring price stability ‘in the framework of the government's general economic policy’.
This wording has raised doubts about just how independent the bank will really be.
Such quibbling over semantics may seem petty stuff more worthy of the Académie Française, but it matters.
Even Mr Alphandéry worries lest ‘in the framework of’ imply that French monetary policy will still be subjugated to politicians' general economic objectives.
He would have preferred the phrase ‘taking into account’ instead.
So why not use it?
The snag is the French constitution.
Article 20 gives the government responsibility for determining and conducting national policy.
France's president, François Mitterrand, is among those who have pointed out that transferring the power to make monetary policy to an independent body would be at odds with the clause.
Maastricht could simplify things.
Last year the French constitution was modified so that if the treaty on European economic and monetary union is eventually ratified, the government can delegate monetary policy to a supranational body.
Once the treaty is signed, an independent Banque de France is a first step, for Maastricht requires central banks to be given independence by 1999.
The government says it simply wants to make an early start to convince the markets of its attachment to the strong franc.
And if Maastricht fails?
Mr Alphandéry claims the draft law's provisions will still ensure the central bank's independence.
Its 12-member Monetary Policy Committee (MPC), modelled on the Federal Reserve's Open Market Committee, will be a ‘sanctuary’ at the heart of the bank, he says, forbidden — along with other senior bank officials — from seeking or accepting instructions from the government or any other body.
Fixed six-year terms for the bank's governor and two deputy-governors, plus nine-year terms for the MPC's other nine members, are also supposed to protect their autonomy.
But there are fears that the MPC could wind up staffed by members of France's closely knit financial elite, whose pals roam the corridors of political power.
If a monetary mafia is allowed to run the show, it will be a case of plus ça change…
German insurance
AMB revisited
BERLIN
NOT long ago Germany's insurance industry seemed to be sinking under a Gallic invasion.
Victoire owns Colonia, the second-biggest insurer.
In December Assurances Générales de France (AGF) won a long battle to vote its 25% stake in Aachener und Münchener (AMB), Germany's third-largest insurance firm.
But Europe's most famously clubby financial establishment has now, it seems, blunted the French attack.
On May 11th a group of German financial institutions bought from Fondiaria, an Italian insurer, its 21% of AMB.
The deal gives about 28% of AMB to Allianz, Germany's biggest insurer, and institutions closely linked to it.
That is bigger than the stake held by AMB's new French partner and more than enough to block important decisions.
In the DM985m ($112m) deal, Allianz acquired 5% of AMB; Munich Re, which is linked to Allianz through a large cross-shareholding, bought about 3%, bringing its total stake to 8.6%; and Dresdner Bank, itself partly owned by Allianz, took another 3%, raising its share of AMB to 14%.
Unrelated Deutsche Bank bought Fondiaria's remaining 10% of AMB.
The new owners claim the deal is innocuous.
Their only interest, they say, is in ‘stabilising AMB's share structure’ and making a profit on their investment.
Though Allianz may be friends with Dresdner and Munich Re, they do not act in unison.
God forbid that they should seek to exercise control over AMB.
For its part, AGF claims to be content with its 25% stake, though observers had assumed the French insurer would try to consolidate its control of AMB.
It says it rejected earlier offers of Fondiaria's shares as too expensive.
But AGF's profession of delight rings hollow.
Its FFr3 billion ($150m) investment in AMB has brought it a meagre financial return so far.
That will be harder to bear if there is little hope of a controlling interest in the near future.
To some independent insurance-watchers the deal looks like a way to stifle competition.
The large stake held by Allianz and its friends will at the least make Michel Albert, AGF's chairman, think twice about offending Germany's insurance establishment.
And cut-throat rivalry, especially after the market is deregulated in 1994, would indeed cause offence.
AGF may eventually gain at least part of Fondiaria's stake.
But it is a safe bet that the current owners will not sell if the French insurer misbehaves.
Willingly or not, Mr Albert has become part of Germany's insurance club.
American insurers
Surer
AFTER several dreadful years, America's insurance companies are showing signs of turning the corner.
They need to.
Since the late 1980s, fierce competition has driven down rates.
There have been unexpectedly large claims (especially on catastrophe policies), and poor investment returns on assets such as real estate.
Profits have plunged, and worse: 105 life insurers (out of a total of around 2,600 firms) and 74 property-casualty general insurers (out of 3,800) have gone bust since the start of 1990.
As the industry edges into better times, insurance regulators are trying to ensure that it stays there by laying down tough new risk-based capital-adequacy rules.
These set the minimum amount of capital (free assets, or the amount by which an insurers' assets exceed the actuarial calculation of its liabilities) that an insurer must have to reassure customers and regulators that it can meet its liabilities.
The capital required reflects how much risk a firm is taking: the bigger a firm's risks, the more capital it must have.
New rules for life insurers were announced by the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC), the body through which state insurance regulators set nationwide standards, in December 1992.
Rules for property-casualty insurers are due next month, but are still being hotly debated.
The new approach — using a complex mathematical formula to measure the risks reflected in each firm's assets, liabilities, underwriting, size and past performance — is a big advance on the old state-by-state capital requirements.
These typically called for minimum capital of $1m-3m, however big the firm's liabilities.
More important, in practice, but still faulty were the ratios applied by credit-rating firms in deciding how to grade insurers' claims-paying ability.
Under the new rules, failures may well be rarer.
But, as with most regulatory changes, greater safety comes at a price.
The rules set for life insurance firms, and proposed for general insurers, strongly favour insurers investing in low-risk assets, such as bonds, rather than higher-risk ones like equities.
Life insurers, for instance, need provide no capital against holdings of government bonds, and just 0.5% against residential mortgages.
But they must provide 100% of the value of stakes in subsidiaries and 30% of the value of their equities.
So the easiest way for insurers to win regulatory bouquets is to sell equities and buy bonds.
But, insurers point out, this may make them less able to compete against other financial institutions.
Over the long term equities generate much higher returns than bonds, and allow investors to spread risk by diversifying their assets.
Financial firms with less constricting regulatory shackles than insurers (banks, for instance, must hold capital equivalent to just 8% of the value of their equities) will be able to earn higher returns, without taking much greater risks, than their insurance rivals.
Such claims involve a large pinch of special pleading, especially by the property-casualty firms which are lobbying hard for concessions before their rules are released in June.
The NAIC measure is not arbitrary; it is based on the past riskiness — default and volatility — of different assets and liabilities.
Indeed, according to a new study by Salomon Brothers, it is one of the most complete risk measures yet devised by any regulator*.
If others copy it, insurers' loss of competitiveness will be short-lived.
Life insurers may not need to change course much, anyway, as most already meet the NAIC minimum capital standard, reckons Larry Mayewski of A.M. Best, a specialist insurance firm.
Of the 10% or so that do not measure up, many are as likely to merge with stronger firms as to alter their investment strategies.
The Salomon study is less sanguine.
Though the NAIC wants firms only to reach its minimum capital requirement, not to compete on the degree by which they exceed it, insurers are sure to do the latter, the study says.
That has certainly been true of banks since the Basle capital standards were set in 1988.
And the NAIC formula throws up a very different ranking from current widely-used measures.
For instance, many of the life insurance firms to which Standard & Poor's awards a triple-A are ranked feeble by the regulators (see chart).
Two triple-A firms are among the weakest 10% of all life insurers when the NAIC measure is used.
To beef up their image, insurers will indeed invest differently, reckons Salomon.
The bond market will see more of their money.
Now, three-fifths of insurers' assets are bonds — a quarter of them government bonds.
Another $1 trillion is deployed otherwise, $150 billion of it in equities.
Shorter-maturity bonds will be especially popular, thanks to two other recent regulatory changes.
Life insurers used to be able to show any profit from selling a bond in the year in which they traded it.
Now, through the just-introduced ‘interest-maintenance reserve’, they must spread profits equally over the remaining years to maturity of the traded bond.
Short-term bonds have fewer years over which the spoils have to be spread.
Last month the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) announced it would soon require insurers (along with banks and some other financial firms) to show financial assets in their accounts at current market value, rather than at original cost.
This has generated howls of protest from the firms.
They reckon investors and customers might worry needlessly about a firm's balance sheet if, say, asset values plunged while liabilities, which will not be shown at current values, were unchanged.
Such fears go too far.
The FASB rule applies only to assets held for trading; the bulk of insurers' assets are long-term investments, and so will continue to be shown at their historic value.
And regulators, investors and customers will quickly learn to be cautious when they interpret volatile asset values.
Even so, insurers are likely to become more conservative.
As long-term bond prices are far more volatile than short-term ones, they may prefer the latter.
America's federal government recently said it will rely far more on short-term debt to fund its huge deficit than it did in the past.
Its timing could hardly have been better.
GPA
Belts still fastened
LIKE a stunt pilot, Tony Ryan appears to have pulled GPA, his troubled Irish aircraft-leasing company, out of a spectacular dive.
Only hours before a meeting in New York on May 13th with holders of GPA's unsecured bonds and medium-term notes (MTNs), he clinched a deal in which GE Capital (the finance arm of America's General Electric) stands eventually to acquire the bulk of GPA's equity.
Without this rescue, GPA could have landed in the hands of examiners under Irish law (a tougher version of America's chapter 11 bankruptcy proceedings).
It still might.
In return for investing $1.35 billion, GE Capital is taking some of GPA's juiciest assets: 45 of the firm's newest jets.
It will also receive a four-year option to buy at an undisclosed price 65% of GPA's equity, with the possibility of extending that to 80%.
The proposed alliance with GE, which is already in aircraft leasing through its Polaris subsidiary, might save GPA.
Mr Ryan is confident of success.
He says that some bank lenders and creditors have already indicated they are prepared to lend more money to the company.
Some of them may accept equity as part of the necessary restructuring of GPA's debts.
Mr Ryan says GPA now intends to meet all its financial obligations, including payments of interest and principal due on bonds maturing in May and June.
As The Economist went to press, it was not clear exactly what would be offered to the bondholders.
But secured creditors may not be too happy to see GE's money spent on unsecured creditors while they lose control of the firm's smart new jets.
Some secured creditors might yet prefer to gamble on a better deal with GPA in examination.
Some of GPA's creditors have already lost their nerve.
In recent weeks at least six banks have sold all or part of their secured loans, for 61–65% of their face value.
Debt nominally worth about $150m has changed hands, say market sources.
American investors were the big buyers, mainly sophisticated funds prepared to gamble that GPA would cling to life or prove to be worth a substantial sum broken up.
Tony Tucker, a director of syndications and asset trading at Continental Bank in London, reckons that GPA's woes have set off new competition among brokers of distressed bank debt.
Old hands in the market include Continental and Bankers Trust.
Now firms based in New York — including investment banks such as Bear Sterns and Goldman Sachs as well as specialist brokers like MJ Whitman — have been calling banks in London, quoting prices at which they want to buy banks' loans to GPA.
Six trades in GPA debt may not sound like a ground swell, but deciding to sell is not easy for secured creditors.
They have first claim on the debtor's assets in the event that it is wound up.
If they sell, they acknowledge a loss which may exceed the discount that secured creditors eventually have to accept.
So many banks prefer to provide against their loans and pray for recovery.
Yet if they wait while a complex corporate empire is unwound, the value of their loans can shrivel almost to nothing.
Shareholders face a similar dilemma.
On May 7th Air Canada, distracted by troubles of its own, wrote off its 10% equity stake in GPA.
Such calculations have been complicated by the scale and mix of GPA's debts.
In addition to $1.75 billion of secured debts spread among three groups of bank lenders, GPA has nearly $1 billion of unsecured debts.
These range in maturity from May 17th, when $10m is due to MTN holders, to 1998.
That different creditors should play at brinkmanship is understandable.
Investors in soon-to-mature MTNs could be first in line for payment if the deal with GE Capital can be pushed through in time.
As the negotiations swung to and fro, so did the price of GPA's unsecured debt.
When the leasing firm last year promised $100m of fresh equity, its loans and MTNs were trading at about half of face value, with higher prices for the shorter maturities due for repayment soon.
But when that new equity fell through, all prices collapsed to around 20%.
The GE deal has raised the hopes of unsecured creditors.
But it could yet fall through.
If it does, GPA's unsecured debt is likely to be jostling all claims on Polly Peck International at roughly one half of one percentage point.
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
High and hooked
A better understanding of how addictions work could provide benefits for science, for medicine and for recreation
IN 1964 Aryeh Routtenberg stuck electrodes into the brains of his experimental rats.
The electrodes were so positioned that current flowing through them caused a particular pleasure.
For one hour a day, each rat could control this current by means of a lever in its cage.
Another lever, which also worked for just that one hour, controlled the food supply.
There was no contest between the levers.
The rats, too busy mainlining current to stop for food, wasted away to ecstatic death.
The link between pleasure and addiction is not always so extreme, but more mundane addictions have brought about millions of less dramatic deaths outside the laboratory, and caused untold misery and pain.
The substances to which people get addicted, though, also bring great pleasure to billions — some addicted, some not.
They are the basis of several multi-billion dollar industries around the world.
Some 60m Americans smoke tobacco; three-quarters of West European adults drink alcohol; no one knows how many people around the world consume caffeine in tea, coffee or cola.
Figures for illegal drugs are harder to come by, but around 2m Americans are thought to take cocaine, and many more than that have smoked marijuana.
Not all the people who indulge in these tastes are addicts — that is, they do not depend on their habit in a way that seems clearly abnormal to the bulk of people who do not share their tastes.
Though almost everyone who smokes tobacco is hooked, drinkers are not necessarily alcoholics and not all heroin users are hopeless junkies.
Pleasure and the addiction need not come together — either can be present without the other.
Yet the two are obviously connected.
Neuroscientists are now using the tools of molecular biology to find the links between them, deep in the recesses of the brain.
The kick from cocaine
The cerebral nooks and crannies of interest are those between nerve cells — synapses.
To jump over the gap between two cells, a nerve impulse has to be translated from electricity to chemicals and back.
The first cell releases a chemical called a neurotransmitter into the synaptic gap.
These molecules are then picked up by receptor proteins on the surface of the second cell.
The neurotransmitter fits the receptor as a key fits a lock.
The unlocking of the receptor leads to the creation or suppression of a nerve impulse in the second cell.
There are many different types of neurotransmitter, and thus of synapse; different pathways in the brain need their different properties.
It is by subverting some of these synapses, and thus some of the brain's pathways, that drugs produce pleasure.
It is through changing them in a more fundamental way that the drugs cause addiction.
The first evidence for this is almost 20 years old.
Recently it has started to pile up quite quickly.
In 1975 Solomon Snyder, at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, Hans Kosterlitz of the University of Aberdeen in Scotland and John Hughes of Parke-Davis, an English pharmaceuticals company, found out how heroin, then drug-du-jour for worried policy-makers, works.
Dr Snyder discovered there was a receptor protein in mammalian brains which heroin would stick to.
Dr Kosterlitz and Dr Hughes reasoned that nature was unlikely to have produced such a lock without also evolving a key.
Working independently, they found a chemical in the body that fitted into the same receptor as heroin; Dr Kosterlitz named it ‘endorphin’.
This type of neurotransmitter (there are, it turns out, at least three different endorphins) damps down pain by suppressing the signals which transmit it; it also provides feelings of well-being.
Heroin acts as an ill-fitting key which can open the lock but cannot then be withdrawn.
The synapse is over-stimulated.
Unusually pleasurable sensations result.
If you replace heroin and endorphins with nicotine and the neurotransmitter acetylcholine, or with caffeine and adenosine, or Valium and gamma-amino butyric acid, or marijuana and anadamide, the same story can be told.
Other drugs work in slightly more subtle ways.
Alcohol does not mimic a neurotransmitter, but at least some of its effects come from messing up the same synapses that heroin works on.
Cocaine, which has replaced heroin as the drug of concern in America, and has thus been extensively researched, works on nerves that use the neurotransmitter dopamine.
These nerves are found in, among other places, the mesolimbic system — the part of the brain which seems to generate emotion.
Cocaine subverts the pathway not by binding to dopamine receptors, but by sticking to a molecule called, inelegantly, the dopamine re-uptake transporter.
Nerve cells, canny little things, recycle their neurotransmitters.
Receptor molecules spit out their neurotransmitters once they have served their purpose, and the cell whence they came mops them up for reuse.
Block this re-uptake, and the transmitters will just sit in the synaptic gap, stimulating the receptors again and again and again.
Another strategy is to jam the re-uptake system open, so that dopamine flows through it the wrong way all the time, keeping the gap suffused with the neurotransmitter.
That is what amphetamines do.
The fact that amphetamines and cocaine work in similar ways will come as no surprise to anyone who has tried both.
The nature of the high a drug provides depends on the type of neurotransmitter it interferes with.
But the brain is a complex place; the separate systems within it that use different neurotransmitters all interact.
A drug acting on one set of synapses can have secondary and tertiary effects all over the place.
That is why drug experiences are so varied.
The range of things that can be addictive, though, is wider even than the range of available drugs.
Foreign bodies in the synapses are not an absolute prerequisite for an addiction.
Something as straightforward as healthy exercise can, in the extreme, hook.
In the case of exercise it appears that the body becomes addicted to the endorphins it produces to ameliorate the pain and stress.
Other behaviours that carry an intensity with them — and thus presumably overstimulate some parts of the brain's wiring — can produce similar effects, though the synapses involved have yet to be charted.
Gambling has many of the characteristics of drug taking — a euphoric high, and a craving in the addict.
Some people believe themselves addicted to sex; lawyers in England recently convinced a jury that a teenage hacker was addicted to computing.
It is easy to see some such ‘addictions’ as excuses, especially as the term resists strict definition.
But addiction to chemicals is clearly real, and there seems no reason to believe that compulsive chemical-taking is necessarily in a different class from other acquired compulsive habits.
Anyway, chemical dependency is easier to study than other sorts.
That is why it has been possible to locate the roots of pleasure in the synapses — and why it has been possible to find the roots of withdrawal there, too.
Cold turkey
Clinically, addiction can be characterised by two things: craving and withdrawal.
Craving is still the subject of a certain amount of scientific handwaving.
The best the psychologists can do is describe the process as one of positive re-inforcement — which means that if you like something, you will tend to do it again.
Having their receptors overstimulated is something people tend to like a lot.
How this ‘liking’ translates into neural circuitry is not yet clear.
Withdrawal, the physical and mental turmoil that follows when an addiction is interrupted, is proving more tractable to experimental analysis.
A suggestive picture of how it works can be pieced together, as long as you do not mind taking the pieces from different studies of different drugs: work on cocaine by Nora Volcow at Brookhaven National Laboratory, among others; on cocaine and amphetamines by Bruce Cohen of McLean Hospital in Boston; on heroin by Zvi Vogel at the Weizmann Institute in Rehovot in Israel and Anton Shofelmeer at the Free University in Amsterdam; and on benzodiazepines (such as Valium) by Erick Sigel at the University of Berne.
Again, the synapse is the scene of the action.
Most biological systems have feedback mechanisms that help smooth out the little fluctuations that life throws at them.
Synapses are no exception.
The receiving cell can adjust itself to changes in the behaviour of the transmitting cell in two ways.
It can fine-tune the signal the receptors pass on, and it can change the number of receptors.
The receptor molecules are conduits for information, with one end outside the cell and the other inside.
When a neurotransmitter attaches itself outside, the part on the inside changes its shape.
In this new shape, it can accommodate molecules called G-proteins, which hang around inside the cell.
These G-proteins are, themselves, also shape-changers.
Interacting with the receptor activates the G-proteins; these then head off to spread the word via yet more molecules, called second messengers.
The second messengers tell the cell about the signal from the neurotransmitters.
One part of the cell that listens is the system which sends out and suppresses nerve impulses.
Another avid audience is made up of the enzymes which add phosphate groups to proteins, some of which help in the production of impulses.
More messages make them more active, and more likely to add phosphate to receptor molecules.
A phosphorylated receptor is an unhappy receptor.
It is reluctant to accommodate G-proteins and thus to bring information in from the outside.
The nucleus, which controls the production of proteins, also listens to the second messengers.
Lots of chatter from them suggests to the nucleus that there are too many receptors at the synapse, so it brings their manufacture to a halt.
Insert an addictive drug into the system and the din from the second messengers becomes deafening.
The result is fewer receptor molecules.
Both the phosphorylation of receptors and their absence means that it takes more of the drug to obtain the same effect.
Those higher doses, in turn, lead to even less sensitive synapses.
And they also lead to synapses that can no longer function without the drug.
The cell gets used to damming the flood of drug-induced noise in order to be able to deal with the faint whispers of reality that float on top of it.
Remove the drug, and the normal signals can no longer get over the barrier that has been erected.
The system goes from getting too much of the neurotransmitter's effects to not enough; heaven turns to hell.
Put this way, the molecular picture seems obvious.
It fits with a common experience of addiction, that of needing to do more and more of the drug just to keep from feeling bad.
Of course, it cannot be that simple — after all drugs that work on the same neurotransmitter may vary in their addictiveness.
And people vary, too, in their susceptibility to addiction.
Then again, addictions to substances that affect different types of synapse can be quite similar — and some people seem to be prone to addiction per se, rather than just to have a weakness for a particular substance.
And the fact that addiction remains after withdrawal has ended — a fact attested to at Alcoholics Anonymous every day — suggests there is a more general problem to look at.
Dopamine heads
For more evidence that addictions have something in common in the way they act on the brain as a whole, no matter which pathways they stimulate, look at the pictures on this page.
Edythe London, who works at America's National Institute on Drug Abuse, studies glucose metabolism in the brains of people with addictions.
Glucose is the body's principal fuel, so its use is a good index of how active an area is.
Dr London's pictures show that, in certain parts of the brain, addicts use less glucose than non-addicts do.
The difference applies regardless of what drug is being used, and it is still visible when they are not under the influence.
Other clues to a general theory of addiction have led researchers to focus on the dopamine system — even when looking at drugs which do not affect dopamine receptors.
There is evidence that many, and possibly all, addictions affect the dopamine cells in the brain's mesolimbic system.
In the case of cocaine this effect is direct, which may account for the drug's peculiar potency.
For other drugs it seems to be indirect, brought about by connections between the dopamine system and the other neurotransmitter systems.
Inside the dopamine system, the researchers' attention has lighted on D2.
It should come as no surprise by now to hear that D2 is a protein found in synapses, one of the three different receptor proteins for dopamine.
The detailed make-up of these proteins can vary from person to person — variation that comes from differences in the gene which describes the protein.
So the different variants of D2 are inherited.
It was inheritance that led the researchers to D2.
In the 1970s a series of Danish studies compared the children and step-children of alcoholic fathers.
The former proved more likely to succumb to the same addiction.
This, and the evidence that identical twins are more likely to share an alcoholic fate than are non-identical twins, suggested that genes were playing a role.
In 1990, to great excitement, Kenneth Blum of the University of Texas at San Antonio, and Ernest Noble of the University of California, Los Angeles, announced that they had found a gene peculiarly common among alcoholics.
It described a form of the D2 receptor known as A1.
This was challenged by several researchers, most notably Kenneth Kidd, of Yale.
Dr Kidd points out that different ethnic groups have different frequencies of A1, which could confuse the statistics.
Others, convinced by Dr Blum, Dr Noble and subsequent work, have suggested that A1 frequencies may actually explain differences in alcoholism between ethnic groups, though this is far from certain.
In 1992 George Uhl, of Johns Hopkins, found that a second variant of D2, known as B1, seemed peculiarly common in people addicted to tobacco, cocaine, heroin, tranquillisers, marijuana and amphetamines as well as alcohol — almost the whole list of commonly addictive substances.
This is at least as controversial as the original finding; its meaning is not clear, nor is the nature of the difference between the different D2s.
To link small variations in a single protein with the existence of an all-purpose ‘addictive personality’ is to go a long way too far.
But there is evidence in one case for a link between personality and withdrawal symptoms — and to link withdrawal symptoms to specific molecules is not too far-fetched.
About 40% of people prescribed courses of benzodiazepines to treat anxiety or insomnia can suffer some withdrawal symptoms — souped-up versions of the symptoms the drugs are used to treat — after the course of medication is finished.
Peter Tyrer, who works at St Charles' Hospital in London, has found that the people who suffer withdrawal share not a specific protein, but rather specific personality traits: insecurity, inability to make decisions, an over-reliance on the opinions of others.
Spot them, and you can save people from withdrawal.
Better living through chemistry
The links between proteins, the lowly building blocks of the brain, and personalities, the high abstractions of the mind, are undoubtedly going to be convoluted — but evidence from both ends suggests they are there to be found.
What are the pharmaceutical companies, to which this should be of interest, doing about it?
Some work is going into drugs to treat drug addiction.
Naltrexone keeps heroin from activating endorphin receptors, without activating them itself.
Methadone works in the same way as heroin, but less effectively; it thus provides a way off heroin that minimises withdrawal symptoms.
Similar approaches to cocaine are being tried.
Drugs which act on dopamine pathways in general may have widespread effects on addiction.
But drugs to defeat dependence are not the only possibilities.
Some of the damage that comes from drug addiction, especially the physical damage, comes from secondary aspects of the drug.
Lung cancer, for example, is caused by the substances that accompany nicotine in tobacco smoke, not by nicotine itself.
It might be possible to get rid of some of these problems without getting rid of the pleasure, even if it is not possible to get rid of the addictions.
Another option is to develop tests which could tell people if they were at risk of falling under a particular spell so that they could choose their pleasures wisely.
Eventually, an understanding of neurotransmitters, receptors, G-proteins and second messengers might allow pleasure and addiction to be decoupled — or at least allow withdrawal to be suppressed.
Though, on the face of it, the effects that cause pleasure in the short term are those that cause addiction in the long term, there is a lot of variability in the system that might be exploited.
Techniques like those used to target specific dopamine receptors in the treatment of Parkinson's disease, might, at least in principle, be used to fine tune a drug's effects at the synapse and produce low-addiction highs.
And pure substances tailored to neurotransmitter sites would have a good chance of being free of unpleasant side effects elsewhere in the body.
That would not create a brave new world; it might, perhaps, create a slightly happier one.
SPECIAL
You'd be nervous living next to a bear
FROM OUR KIEV CORRESPONDENT
Newly independent Ukraine is angering the West by its reluctance to give up nuclear weapons.
Ukrainians feel the West has ignored their security needs.
The western attitude is changing.
Will Ukraine's?
UKRAINE means borderland.
It is an appropriate name for a land that lies on the edge of Europe, at the threshold of Asia and along the northern coast of the Black Sea.
For the past 400 years, this geography has put one question at the top of Ukraine's national agenda: should it look east or west?
In the 17th century, a Ukrainian leader, Bohdan Khmelnytsky, chose the East, forming an alliance with Russia against his country's former Polish overlords.
As the tsars slowly transformed Ukraine from ally into colony, later generations of Ukrainians came to agree with their national poet's assessment of him as ‘the unwise son’.
Since their overwhelming vote for independence in a 1991 referendum, the Ukrainians have been trying to choose the West.
They thought that sovereignty in itself would take Ukraine out of Russia's sphere of influence and, in time, allow it to join the European mainstream.
‘A new country has appeared on the map of Europe,’ said President Leonid Kravchuk shortly after the vote.
The subsequent 18 months have brought mutual disenchantment.
Ukrainian leaders have become wont to echo the bitter words of the prime minister, Leonid Kuchma, that ‘on the maps of world leaders, Ukraine does not even exist.
They are indifferent whether Ukraine is independent or not.’
In many western capitals, notably Washington, the feeling is in fact stronger than indifference.
The Americans have begun to see Ukraine as an interloper threatening the post-cold-war world order, above all by its reluctance to ratify nuclear-arms treaties, which might unravel the carefully negotiated global web of arms-control accords.
An increasingly sour relationship with the West has in turn pushed Ukraine both to strengthen its own forces and to look south.
Ukrainian links with the Muslim world have grown, raising the nightmare of a nuclear Ukraine, on friendly terms with countries like Iran and hostile toward the West.
A visit to the Ukrainian capital, Kiev, last weekend by Strobe Talbott, America's ambassador-at-large to the former Soviet countries, brought hope that the rift could be mended.
That would benefit both sides.
Ukraine needs help (and plenty of prodding) to reform its still largely Soviet-style economy.
In turn, a westward-looking Ukraine, democratic, prosperous, strong and strongly independent, could be a useful plank in western Ostpolitik.
It would give Russia an additional incentive to abandon lingering imperial aspirations and focus on improvements at home.
At the worst, if hard-liners were to come to power in Moscow, Ukraine could be a buffer for the young democracies of Eastern Europe.
Nukraine
What stands in the way?
The biggest obstacle has been and is the nuclear weapons on Ukrainian territory.
When the Soviet Union collapsed, Ukraine inherited 176 inter-continental missiles, armed with 1,240 warheads, and 41 strategic bombers, with 328 warheads.
Of the ICBMs, 130 were due to be dismantled under the first Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START 1) negotiated by Presidents Bush and Gorbachev.
Ukraine — like Belorussia and Kazakhstan, the other two ex-Soviet states where nuclear weapons were stationed — was brought into the START 1 process.
All three signed the Lisbon protocol, which obliges them to become non-nuclear.
But Ukraine, though it renounced nuclear weapons when it became independent in 1991, is now hesitating to ratify START 1 and the Lisbon protocol, and to accede as a non-nuclear state to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT).
This foot-dragging — due largely to the growth of a pro-nuclear lobby in the Ukrainian parliament — could have wide repercussions.
Not only could Ukraine's failure to accede to the NPT encourage other nascent nuclear powers, but Russian leaders have said that, until the Ukrainian parliament ratifies START 1, they will not ratify the January 1993 START 2 treaty, which provides for a further large reduction in the American and Russian nuclear arsenals.
The Americans fear the whole structure of arms control could be brought to the ground.
‘START 2 is not going anywhere until START 1 is ratified by everyone and everyone joins the NPT as a non-nuclear state,’ laments an American official.
The Ukrainian example, he suggests, might even encourage Kazakhstan to follow suit.
Ministers say yes
It is not that Ukraine's rulers are devoted to nuclear status.
The ministries both of foreign affairs and of defence are lobbying parliament hard to ratify START 1 and the Lisbon protocol, and to accept accession to the NPT.
Even Mr Kravchuk, a skilled and habitual fence-sitter, has unequivocally urged parliament to reject nuclear weapons.
These people share the view of western experts that the nuclear missiles now on Ukraine's territory do not increase its security.
For a start, Ukraine does not even control them.
In theory, they belong to the Commonwealth of Independent States, the ever-more-shadowy grouping of ex-Soviet countries, and are guarded by KGB special troops on its behalf.
In reality, as General Konstantyn Morozov, Ukraine's capable minister of defence, admitted recently, control of them lies with Russia.
Western and local specialists believe Ukraine probably has the technical means to break the codes to the missiles.
The defence ministry is pursuing what it calls ‘administrative’ control over them, and is trying to win the loyalty of the troops serving at the missile sites.
But even were Ukraine to get real control, its nuclear weapons would still be a questionable means of defence.
For the time being, arguably an unneeded one anyway.
It is not two years since a rag-tag group of about 200 men, few of them daring to wear their Soviet uniforms, gathered in the Kiev building that housed a short-lived nationalist government in 1917–18, to found the Ukrainian Officers Union.
Today those men run an army of hundreds of thousands — and, thanks to the way the Soviet Union's forces were deployed against the West, the best tanks in its armoury.
A British expert on Ukrainian military matters, Roy Allison, from Birmingham university, says that, if Ukraine faced only the three military districts in European Russia, the balance of equipment and weapons would be three-to one in Ukraine's favour.
To launch an attack, the Russians would have to bring troops from beyond the Urals — which would mean a serious breach of the East-West treaty on the stationing of conventional forces in Europe.
Nor is motivation lacking.
Those soldiers on Ukraine's territory who would not swear allegiance to it were shipped off home.
And Ukraine's new army, even while it honours, with much fanfare, those who died fighting Hitler's invasion, holds up also as a model to its recruits the Ukrainian insurgent army of the epoch, which fought Germans and Russians alike.
Parliamentarians say no
The government's view, though, is widely and increasingly disputed.
Last year, opinion polls found only 10% of Ukrainians wanting their country to be nuclear-armed.
Today's figure is 40%.
Pro-nuclear sentiment is growing fast in the parliament.
Of its 450 members, 162 last month signed a letter arguing that for the time being Ukraine should hold on to its nuclear weapons.
Nor can the government simply override opposition.
Ukraine has so far escaped the bitter division between presidency and parliament seen in Russia, partly because Mr Kravchuk is by no means the reformer that Boris Yeltsin likes to appear.
Power rests on a broad coalition of nationalists and (not-so-very) ex-communists, formed when the country first began its drive for independence in 1991.
At the top, President Kravchuk runs foreign policy; Mr Kuchma, a former missile-maker, runs the economy; and both look to Ivan Pliushch, the former collective-farm head who is now chairman of the parliament, to keep it out of their hair.
Until now, he had managed that, with a heavy hand and crude peasant humour.
Not on nuclear weapons, though.
The members of parliament cannot push Ukraine into genuine nuclear status.
But they can delay ratification of the treaties.
And they have made it clear they are ready to do so.
If the nuclear missiles are militarily useless, why risk alienating the West by hanging on to them?
One reason is money.
Having realised how crucial START 1 and NPT ratification are to the West, many Ukrainians — 90%, according to the latest opinion polls — believe their country should hold out for financial compensation; the current price tag, described as covering the costs of dismantling the warheads, is $1 billion.
But simple greed is a secondary motive.
The over-riding reason goes back to Bohdan Khmelnytsky.
The fundamental political objective in Ukraine today is to undo Khmelnytsky's alliance with Russia, and some politicians are beginning to think that the nuclear weapons will help.
These include even Dmytro Pavlychko, chairman of the parliamentary committee on foreign affairs, who was one architect of Ukraine's declaration of non-nuclear status in 1991.
He accepts that the weapons are of no military value; indeed, he thinks they should be taken out of readiness, even partially dismantled.
Yet he still sees symbolic value in them, as a demonstration of Ukraine's independence and readiness to defend it.
His conclusion, probably acceptable to most parliamentarians, is that Ukraine should ratify START 1 now, but should hold on to the 46 missiles which that treaty does not cover (though the Lisbon protocol does), and delay accession to the NPT.
Till when?
Mr Pavlychko, a poet turned politician, knows enough of both trades to leave that answer up in the air.
American arm-twisting
The notion that some parliament in Kiev might upset the entire international disarmament process has inspired understandable irritation in the West.
Until this month, the American response was, very largely, to apply pressure.
President Clinton made it clear that until the treaties were ratified he would be unlikely to find time to meet Mr Kravchuk or Mr Kuchma.
His officials threatened to withhold future financial aid, or even to freeze existing programmes.
In recent months they have even hinted at getting the Russians — who supply much of Ukraine's oil dirt-cheap — to raise economic barriers that would force it to give way.
However justifiable its aims, this American arm-twisting did not get far.
The first reason was that America has little leverage in Ukraine.
Its aid to the new country has been paltry, and threats to withdraw it have had correspondingly little impact.
Secondly, the Americans, sensitive enough to Mr Yeltsin's political difficulties in Russia, were overlooking the complexity of Ukrainian politics.
Mr Kravchuk and his government face an uphill battle to push the arms treaties through parliament.
Crude pressure has antagonised many of its members.
Third and most important, for many Ukrainians the nuclear issue is inseparably linked with their security concerns — their fear, that is, of Russia.
Without taking those concerns seriously — and it did not seem to — the West stood little chance of persuading (or even bullying) them rapidly to give their nuclear weapons up.
Growls from brother bear
Ukrainian fears that the Russians may seek to reimpose control over what was once their richest province have been generally dismissed in the West.
After all, Mr Yeltsin and Mr Gorbachev before him have made more concessions to the western powers than any Russian leader since Lenin in 1918 accepted the Russo-German treaty of Brest-Litovsk.
But the Ukrainians have good reasons to worry.
The first is the historical reluctance of empires to give up their colonies.
Britain's withdrawal from India or France's loss of Algeria, painful though they were, were easy in comparison with the profound political and psychological implications that Ukrainian independence has for Russians.
The two countries are contiguous.
They have been united for more than 350 years, for much of which time Russians have perceived Ukrainians as ethnically identical to themselves.
Neither country has more than the sketchiest experience of democracy.
Moreover, even under Mr Yeltsin, Russia has not been coy about its hope that the Ukrainians will come back to the fold.
It has repeatedly urged them to enter into a close political and military alliance, and has countered their steadfast rejection of its overtures by voicing territorial claims.
Despite repeated Ukrainian urgings, Russia, unlike most of Ukraine's East European neighbours, has refused to sign a treaty in which the two Slav states would recognise each other 's borders.
Earlier this year, one of Mr Yeltsin's senior advisers warned East European countries not to develop close ties with Ukraine, because it falls within Russia's sphere of influence.
The Russian ambassador in Kiev has described Ukrainian independence to other diplomats there as a temporary phenomenon, unlikely to last more than another year and a half.
These expressions of opinion may not represent overt Russian policy — indeed top men in Moscow now deny they were ever made; but there is good evidence that they were, and certainly the Ukrainians take them seriously.
And this, Ukrainians remark, is the moderate Russia of Boris Yeltsin.
Imagine a Russia ruled by Alexander Rutskoi or Ruslan Khasbulatov.
Errors of judgment
The western response to these fears can be generously described as indifferent.
George Bush set the tone in his notorious ‘chicken Kiev’ speech, urging Ukrainians to stick with the Soviet Union just four months before they voted massively for independence.
Since then, the Americans until now have at best ignored Ukrainian efforts to achieve real independence, and the Russians' occasional attempts to thwart them.
At worst, the Americans' attitude has suggested — at least in Ukrainian eyes — that they would not really mind much if Russia got its way.
Not all western reactions have been as chilly.
The Germans have been quietly content to see America lose business opportunities by refusing aid.
France has shown some sympathy; an independent nuclear power, it has never accepted the notion that Russians and Americans between them should run the nuclear affairs of the world, let alone the post-Soviet world.
Even in America Ukraine has found friends: Zbigniew Brzezinski, once President Carter's national security adviser, has argued that a strong and independent Ukraine would be a powerful bulwark for the West against the re-emergence of an expansionist Russia.
It is not the views of Mr Brzezinski, France or even Germany that count, however, but those of the American government.
And it, till now, has been unrelentingly firm: Ukraine must formally and finally reject nuclear status, and that was that.
Seen from Kiev, this always looked a miscalculation.
It did not work, for the reasons set out above, and it was not going to, because it sprang from a basic error.
The West, Ukrainians feel, has been slow — just like Russia — to realise that they are serious about independence.
They are.
At a press conference before the 1991 referendum, Mr Kravchuck was asked to assess the legacy of Mykhailo Hrushevsky, president of the short-lived Ukrainian republic established in 1917.
His predecessor made two cardinal mistakes, replied Mr Kravchuk: he formed a political alliance with Russia, and he failed to build up an independent army.
However inept it may be at pursuing other stated goals, such as economic reform, Mr Kravchuk's government is determined not to repeat those errors.
The Americans seem now to have taken this aboard.
Instead of pressure, Mr Talbott tried persuasion.
No longer is the United States saying, ‘Nuclear treaties first, economic deals later’.
Mr Talbott talked of building up a relationship, of advocacy at the IMF, of encouraging private-sector capital and helping with privatisation.
Most important, the Americans have accepted the reality of the Ukrainians' security fears and — say the latter — are readying proposals to meet them, though it is not yet clear how.
From signatures to deeds
Fine, if that is so — and if it works.
Mr Kravchuk's trouble is that the world does not revolve round Kiev.
The United States has global interests, and keeping the present far-from-stable nuclear balance in the world from getting less stable still is one of them.
The Ukrainians put their signatures to the Lisbon protocol.
There may be a new flexibility in Washington, but the United States still expects them to perform.
BUSINESS THIS WEEK
Fall out
Relations between America and Europe worsened over Bosnia.
America complained that Europe wanted to postpone any action until after a referendum called by the Bosnian-Serb ‘parliament’ for May 15th and 16th.
Europe asked America and Russia to send troops to protect the UN-sponsored ‘safe areas’.
In Italy, Mario Segni, the country's leading political reformer, announced the formation of a new centrist party.
The latest Italians to be arrested on corruption charges included Franco Nobili, head of IRI, the country's biggest state holding company, and a senior ex-member of the relatively untainted Democratic Party of the Left (formerly the Communist Party).
Labour unrest in Germany grew as 300,000 workers, east and west, walked out in support of striking east German engineering workers.
The new conservative prime minister of France, Edouard Balladur, announced tax increases designed to hold the budget deficit this year to 4.5% of GDP.
Forecasts had put the figure at 5.8%.
The Big Five's moratorium on vetoes at the UN Security Council was broken by Russia, which blocked a resolution that would have shared the expenses of peacekeeping in Cyprus.
Russia already owes the UN more than $100m in peacekeeping dues.
President Yeltsin summoned a special assembly of regional leaders to draft a new Russian constitution, setting up a presidential form of government.
In Sibiu, Transylvania, the emperor of all the gypsies was crowned.
His brother-in-law was crowned king.
Opinion polls in Denmark suggested that those planning to vote Yes in the referendum on the Maastricht treaty were extending their lead again after a narrowing of the gap.
Firetrap
More than 200 people, mostly women, were killed by a fire in a Thai toy factory, the worst industrial fire in history.
The factory had no fire escapes or alarm system.
The United Nations Security Council passed a resolution asking North Korea to reconsider its withdrawal from the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and to comply fully with nuclear inspections.
China, which in the past had taken North Korea's part, abstained.
North Korea said it rejected the resolution, and would regard sanctions as a declaration of war.
Guerrilla forces pounded the Afghan capital, Kabul, with rockets, killing at least 15 people.
The attack came from positions held by an Iranian-backed Shia group and a Sunni fundamentalist group led by Gulbuddin Hikmatyar, prime minister-designate.
Mr Hikmatyar is trying to wrest control of the capital from the defence minister, Ahmad Shah Masood.
New Zealand's quarrel with France over the Rainbow Warrior incident was formally ended when a French naval ship docked at Auckland for the first time in almost six years.
New Zealand had been outraged by the French sabotage of the Greenpeace ship, which had planned to monitor France's nuclear tests in the Pacific.
Clinton cruises
Bill Clinton went on the road to sell his domestic agenda, hoping for more favourable coverage from the local press than he has found in Washington.
Hearings continued in Washington on the subject of allowing open homosexuals in the armed forces.
General Norman Schwarzkopf said he was against it.
Paraguay has its first civilian president in nearly half a century.
In a close race, Juan Carlos Wasmosy, the candidate of the long-dominant Colorado Party, edged out two opposition candidates.
Eliseu Resende, Brazil's third finance minister this year, was under pressure to resign for allegedly favouring a company he once worked for.
His departure would further unsettle negotiations over loan guarantees with the IMF, already jittery about Brazil's new economic plan.
Around Africa
A senior American official said Bill Clinton planned to write off half the debts owed to the United States by Africa's 18 poorest countries.
More right-wing plots to assassinate leaders of the African National Congress, including Joe Slovo and Winnie Mandela, were reported.
Meanwhile, retired army generals helped launch an ‘Afrikaner Volksfront’ to demand a white Afrikaner homeland.
Zaire, which has two rival prime ministers, sent two representatives to the World Health Organisation's annual assembly.
The WHO settled for the one sent by President Mobutu Sese Seko.
Hassan Gouled Aptidon was re-elected President of Djibouti for the fourth time.
Less than half the electorate voted in a poll boycotted by the opposition.
For the first time, the World Health Organisation's annual assembly passed a resolution condemning female circumcision.
Girls who have been circumcised are twice as likely to die in childbirth.
Free fall
The peseta plunged in hectic trading as Spain's government requested a devaluation of its currency within the ERM.
The Bank of Portugal also stopped supporting its currency.
This latest crisis did not stop the Bank of France cutting its key interest rates.
Separately, the French government released plans to make the Bank almost independent.
Countries with the greatest monetary stability, it admitted, keep their central banks free of political control.
The Japanese government fired back at critics with a report accusing its biggest trading partners of unfair trade practices.
America's unilateral actions and the EC's definition of ‘dumping’ were particular targets.
Japan's huge trade surplus, the report said, was not due to inadequate access to its markets.
The committee charged with looking into the habits of the EBRD, which last year spent more on itself than on helping ex-communist countries, has set strict standards for the inquiry.
Four firms of auditors unconnected with the bank will vie for the job of adviser, and relations between the bank and the committee will be at ‘arm's length’ until the report is delivered in July.
EC telecommunications ministers said they hoped to reach agreement next month on the Community's plans for high-definition television.
But despite further cost-reductions, Britain (alone) still objects to the level of spending on the project, and wants any subsidies to be matched by commercial spending.
The rights stuff
The terms of the rights issue for Zeneca, ICI's bioscience business that is to be demerged, were changed.
The issue is still expected to raise £1.3 billion ($1 billion).
At 600p a share, the price remains ambitious.
Third-quarter net profits at News Corp more than doubled to A$191m ($140m), compared with the same period a year ago; net profit for the nine months to the end of March increased to A$144m.
BT, Britain's main telephone company, announced a 36% fall in pre-tax profits for the year to March.
It blamed increasing competition and the costs of its redundancy programme.
It raised its dividend 8% nevertheless.
Sir James Goldsmith sold another chunk of Newmont Mining, the biggest gold-mining group in North America.
A consortium of Morgan Stanley, Barclays de Zoete Wedd and Gordon Capital bought a 9.5% stake and were offering the 6.5m shares for sale at $15.50 each.
Last month George Soros bought a 10% stake at $19.50 a share, a deal that gave a boost to the price of gold.
Reed Elsevier, the world's biggest publisher and owner of ABC airlines guides, bid $125m for Official Airlines Guides.
Five years ago OAG cost Robert Maxwell $150m.
Microsoft's Bill Gates and the new boss of IBM, Lou Gerstner, are planning a reconciliation.
They will meet later this month to discuss ways of repairing links damaged for more than a year by a row over software.
South Africa's second-largest mining group, Gencor, is to unbundle its non-mining interests, perhaps halving its market capitalisation of 16 billion rand ($1 billion) in the process.
In a country of powerful conglomerates, unbundling is supported by the African National Congress.
Fiat, which has lost a few employees in Italy's corruption scandals, issued a ‘code of business ethics’.
It forbids bribery or kickbacks in any form to anyone in the public sector.
Bold demands.
Separately, Franco Nobili, chairman of Iri, Italy's biggest state holding company, was arrested on corruption charges.
Mogul moves
As debts mount in his fast-growing Fininvest media group, Italy's Silvio Berlusconi is getting ready for a big stockmarket flotation of the group's publishing businesses, to raise capital.
Kerry Packer sold an 8% stake in Westpac, Australia's largest bank, to Lend Lease Corporation for A$190m ($143m), at a profit of A$100m.
Mr Packer took a 10% stake in the bank last year, joined the board, and then resigned.
Denmark suffered its biggest-ever bankruptcy when Hafnia Holding, which once controlled the country's second-largest insurance group, filed for  bankruptcy with debts of DKr6.3 billion ($1 billion).
One of America's largest leveraged buy-out fund operators, Merrill Lynch, is planning to pull out of the business.
Nose dive
Ireland's aircraft-leasing firm, GPA, pulled off a deal with GE Capital, the finance arm of America's General Electric, that could save it from going bust.
GE Capital will buy 45 of GPA's newest jets for $1.35 billion and receive an option to buy up to 80% of the company.
In America, McDonnell Douglas received its strongest warning yet from the Pentagon that unless management of the C-17 transport-aircraft programme, worth around $10 billion, was not immediately improved, the whole deal could be scrapped.
The Eurofighter is now expected to cost up to £32 billion ($19 billion)— 50% more than the original 1988 estimate.
At £45m per plane, that is twice as much as McDonnell Douglas's most recent version of the F/A-18, which was rejected by Germany, Britain, Italy and Spain.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL INDICATORS
ASIAN COMPETITIVENESS
A country's real effective exchange rate is calculated by adjusting the nominal, trade-weighted exchange rate for differences in inflation at home and abroad.
It provides a measure of a country's export competitiveness: a rise in the index implies a fall in competitiveness, and vice versa.
Since the end of March all five Asian economies in the chart have become more competitive, albeit not by much.
Hong Kong remains almost as uncompetitive as it has been at anytime since 1986, and is far less competitive than a year ago.
Malaysia's competitiveness has increased most since 1986; its real effective exchange rate has fallen by 12%.
South Korea's rate has become just 2% more competitive since 1986, but is a hefty 22% better than in mid-1989.
Singapore's rate is 7% less competitive than in 1986, and Taiwan's 3%.
TRADE, EXCHANGE RATES AND RESERVES
Japan's visible-trade surplus rose to $12.5 billion in March, lifting its 12-month surplus to $137.1 billion; its current-account surplus widened to $126.7 billion.
Spain's 12-month visible-trade deficit narrowed to $11.2 billion in March.
In trade-weighted terms the dollar gained 1.4% during the week and the D-mark lost 0.5%.
The table shows new figures for reserves in March.
WORLD BOURSES
Tokyo rose above 21,000 for the first time since March last year, but it finished the week only 0.1% up.
Disappointment about the French government's budget knocked 2.6% off share prices in Paris during the week.
London saw a gain of 0.8%.
MONEY AND INTEREST RATES
Germany's Bundesbank eased its monetary policy again; its securities repurchase rate fell from 7.71% to 7.6%.
Canada's broad-money growth edged down to 7.2% in the year to April.
French banks cut their prime lending rate to 9%.