

NATIONALISATION: THE PROBLEMS OF TRANSITION (1947–9)
CITRINE'S WAY
Within a few months of Labour's election victory, Herbert Morrison, who had overall charge of labour's nationalisation programme, confirmed the Government's intention of nationalising electricity and other fuel industries.
Emmanuel Shinwell, the Minister of Fuel and Power, started on the legislation for nationalising coal, and electricity nationalisation was relegated to the 1946/7 session of parliament.
The Electricity Bill then introduced followed in broad outline the plans foreshadowed by wartime working parties on the future of the industry, and, to the relief of the industry, confirmed that it would remain independent of coal and gas, and not be part of a National Fuel and Power Board.
The 200 companies and 369 local authority undertakings, together with the Central Electricity Board and the nearly 300 power stations owned and operated by these organisations, were to be transferred to a new public body, the British Electricity Authority.
(The industry unsuccessfully requested that ‘Supply’ should be included in the title to avoid confusion with the other ‘BEA’, British European Airways.)
Within the BEA, a Central Authority would be responsible for running the power stations and the Grid transmission system, but the distribution and sales functions to the eleven million consumers were to be decentralised to fourteen Area Electricity Boards, each with their own local board appointed by the Minister.
This assuaged some of the fears expressed by managers and engineers in the existing supply undertakings about possible over-centralisation of power in a nationalised undertaking.
Even so the proposed reorganisation did, of course, represent a  substantial concentration of power into fewer decision-making organisations.
The Government had initially aimed at a 1 January 1948 vesting day for the new Central Authority and Area Boards to take over, though eventually a date three months later was agreed.
Emmanuel Shinwell was helped in piloting the Bill through Parliament by his able young Parliamentary Secretary, Hugh Gaitskell.
Shinwell, always a better politician than administrator, was widely felt to be doing a poor job in this crucial economic ministry.
Thus, shortly after the Electricity Act received the royal assent, in September 1947, Attlee appointed Gaitskell as Minister in his place, and it therefore fell to him to carry through the Government's work of nationalisation by completing the appointments to the Boards and the working out of the new relationship of Ministry and BEA.
Some years later both Shinwell and Reuben Kelf-Cohen (the civil servant who then headed the Electricity and Gas Division in the Ministry of Fuel and Power) suggested that the Labour Government's nationalisation plans had generally been ill-prepared, but in retrospect their complaints of the absence of nationalisation ‘blue-prints’ seem wide of the mark, at least in the case of electricity.
For more than a decade there had been detailed debate in the industry on the best form of securing greater coordination of distribution.
Several wartime reconstruction working parties in the Ministry had outlined plans for reorganisation very similar to those adopted by the Labour Government.
Moreover the whole point of the form of the public corporation favoured by moderate opinion in all parties (and represented in the Labour Party by the Morrisonian conception) was that it was up to the management (and not the politicians or civil servants) to develop the details of policy and organisation within only very broad guidelines.
Indeed, Lord Plowden (who was at the time a civil servant engaged in economic planning and subsequently the chairman of a public corporation) has recently suggested that the blueprint laid down in the Act was arguably too detailed, and that questions such as the division of powers between the centre and Area Boards could rationally be placed within the purview of nationalised industry management rather than of Parliament.
Be that as it may, the major work of planning for the change to public ownership was certainly delegated to the men the Labour Government intended to appoint to the Central Authority.
Lord Citrine, the chairman-designate, began work in the offices of the Ministry of Fuel and Power early in 1947, and, after the Bill had  passed its second reading in the Lords in May 1947, he was assisted by an Organising Committee.
Five members of this Committee joined the Central Authority under Citrine's chairmanship when the Bill received the royal assent in September of the same year.
At the regional level, there were delays in the appointment of Area Board members.
The Ministers had as many as 140 appointments to make to the Area Boards and Central Authority (43 of them full-time).
All the chairmen were appointed by November 1947, and all Boards were functioning by the beginning of 1948.
Most of the recruits to the senior positions were from within the industry and in the months up to the planned vesting day — 1 April 1948 — most retained their old jobs in the pre-vesting undertakings as well as carrying out their new responsibilities of planning for the change.
The two major exceptions to appointment from among existing managers were the chairman, Lord Citrine (a trade unionist), and his deputy, Sir Henry Self (a civil servant).
Both of these appointments caused some discontent among the senior men of the industry, who resented the appointment of outsiders.
Harold Hobson, the chairman of the Central Electricity Board (who had expected the top job in the new organisation himself), pointedly refused to work as Citrine's deputy and resigned from the CEB prematurely.
Several senior men on the private company side were fundamentally opposed to nationalisation, and preferred to seek a career elsewhere in the private sector.
There were inevitably accusations of political jobbery — four of the twelve members of the Central Authority had distinct left-wing sympathies — but both Shinwell and Gaitskell (though determined not to appoint anyone bent on making nationalisation a failure) were open to suggestions for appointing qualified candidates of any political persuasion.
Thus, although W. R. T. Skinner of the Yorkshire Electric Power Company was tarred with the company's extreme anti-union reputation (and not wanted by Citrine or the new Yorkshire Board) the chairman-designate of the South Eastern Area Board was able to persuade Gaitskell to make him his deputy chairman, a position in which Skinner served loyally and efficiently for more than a decade, before himself succeeding to the chairmanship of that Board.
A potentially more serious problem in attracting staff was the level of salaries in the nationalised industries.
Many of the leaders of the industry were already earning salaries of £4000 — £6000 per annum and in the larger companies they could earn more.
Yet Ministers only received £5000 and Permanent Secretaries in the civil service £3500, and the Treasury were naturally concerned that public sector industries should not get too far out of line.
In competition with lucrative private sector offers, however, the Treasury's approach had to give way to pragmatic concessions to attract able men.
The resulting salaries were still rather below market rates for top managers and engineers.
The chairman of the Central Authority was paid £8500, his deputy chairmen £5000 and other full-time members £3500, while Area Board chairmen were offered salaries of £4000.
These in effect became ceilings for the whole pyramid of staff salaries so that those senior men below board level also found their salaries constrained.
Some engineers and managers, especially those coming from municipal employment, found the new salaries they were offered higher than their pre-vesting salaries, but others found that they were expected to take a cut.
In the case of a number of key senior men appointed by the Minister and the Central Authority, ‘personal allowances’ to make up some or all of the difference were thus necessary to attract them.
Despite these problems of appointments arid salaries, the great majority of the senior managers and engineers did join the new nationalised organisations.
The major exceptions were managers from the south with directorships or financial expertise, who could readily find more lucrative (and to many of them more satisfying) employment in the private sector.
None the less the electricity industry was fortunate compared with, for example, the coal industry, where politics had long bedevilled management relations with both government and workers, and nationalisation led to the departure of senior managers in larger numbers.
While the Labour Government were anxious to preserve an image of political fairness and reasonable salary flexibility in order to attract the technocratic skills that they recognised were essential for success, they were none the less clear that the public corporations should not simply be the old gang operating ‘business as usual’.
Nationalisation had to have a clear socialist stamp on it.
The rhetoric of participation was to achieve its concrete expression principally through the appointment of Lord Citrine as chairman.
Citrine was a powerful symbol of the elevation of workers to a new role in the industry.
He had started work at the age of twelve as an apprentice electrician, wiring the houses of the rich in Liverpool before the First World War.
(He still had traces of his Liverpool accent.)
In 1914 he had become a full-time trade union official rising to the general secretaryship of the Trades Union Congress in the 1920s.
He had advocated electricity  nationalisation in the 1930s, and during the War (as the TUC were drawn increasingly into the government consultative machine) had distinguished himself as an administrator and committee-man of high repute with members of all political parties.
A gradualist in his socialism, he was now convinced that the trade union movement had ‘passed from the era of propaganda to one of responsibility’.
When the industry's senior engineers and managers met him, he appeared to them as a strong-willed, humourless, puritanical idealist, but he was sane, reasonable and had a strong sense of the practical realities of power.
The early steps in their relationship were not easy, and a few in the industry were never reconciled to his leadership, though all recognised that he was acquiring a strong sense of identity with the industry's interests.
In his autobiography, Citrine himself was to look back on this second career, taken up at the age of sixty, as the happiest time of his life, when his creativity and other faculties were exercised to the full.
The power exercised by Citrine and his colleagues was daunting.
The 1947 Electricity Act laid down in some detail procedures for matters such as capital authorisations from the Ministry and the relative spheres of interest of Central Authority and Area Boards, but on the major questions of business policy the industry had a relatively free hand, subject only to a requirement to consult the Minister on matters of broad policy.
It is true that the legislation was liberally loaded with declaratory phrases enjoining them to provide an ‘efficient, coordinated and economical’ supply of electricity, to extend supplies ‘so far as practicable’, and to make ‘proper’financial provisions.
Such phrases were a fashion of the time and sufficiently vague to be meaningless as a guide on any serious policy matter.
Sceptics might feel that they betrayed a lack of informed thought on the issue of objectives; and certainly a good deal of the time of the economic planners, the Treasury, the Ministry and the industry over the following decades was to be devoted to the search for more meaningful objectives and standards of performance to supplement these minimal statutory requirements.
At the time, however, they were accepted (indeed assiduously pored over and frequently quoted by Citrine and others) as embodying two widely-approved aspirations: firstly, a general desire to spread the benefits of cheap electricity widely (with the ‘public interest’ implicitly seen as overriding the tyranny of the profit-and-loss account); and secondly (but not entirely consistently) the view that these economic objectives should be pursued not through political or civil service channels but by the  ‘business’board of a public corporation with some genuine independence.
Citrine himself was fully committed to both slogans and saw no conflict between the two.
Trained in the hard school of the Labour movement to win legitimacy for their political aspirations toward higher living standards and greater popular participation, he also had a realistic appreciation of the benefits of the economic organisation already achieved by capitalism.
He had grown to admire the broader-minded industrial statesmen with whom he had had contacts in his trade union career: men like Lord Melchett and Lord McGowan of ICI or Lord Hirst of GEC, who had created large-scale industrial organisations and represented a progressive capitalism with which the Labour movement could work.
He relished the thought of showing that he could create a viable large-scale industrial organisation in the public sector, as they had in private industry.
His mission was to show that socialism was not only politically possible but could work well in practice, a natural extension and not (as it was sometimes portrayed by the left) a betrayal of his previous commitment.
As a politician and a realist, Citrine recognised that his plans needed the support of his new colleagues, and consequently that he would have to make tactical concessions and choose carefully the issues on which to fight.
When Shinwell discussed the men from the industry to be appointed to the senior positions, he had at first wanted two deputy chairmen, one to look after generation and the other to oversee distribution and the Area Boards, but Citrine proposed an alternative division between operations and administration, feeling that it was ‘essential to have someone familiar with the operation of large-scale organisations’.
Citrine was thus delighted when, after several men from the industry had refused to serve under him, he persuaded Sir Henry Self to join him as his deputy chairman in charge of administration.
Self was a career civil servant who, after a wartime spell in Washington, had returned as Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Civil Aviation.
A toweringly tall man, he echoed Citrine's sparse, puritanical personality and they shared common ideals of public service.
Both men were later to look back on their partnership with great affection, and their views on organisation (culled from the trade union and civil service worlds) coincided remarkably.
John Hacking, the second deputy chairman, in charge of operations, brought engineering expertise to the senior triumvirate.
(He received a knighthood shortly after his appointment.)
He had been  chief engineer to the Central Electricity Board, and would have preferred the division of duties to have left the control of generation and transmission to the ex-CEB engineers and himself.
He was never equal to Self in Citrine's esteem, and he remained jealous of intervention by Self in matters of engineering and the development of policy on the generation side, for which his background and experience made him the natural senior voice among other engineers and managers.
Ernest Bussey was the fourth full-time member of the Central Authority, taking charge of labour relations and welfare.
He was formerly the general secretary of the Electrical Trades Union, though (like Citrine) he had had to resign his union post on taking up the new managerial appointment.
Outside the industrial relations field, he played only a minor role.
The other eight members of the Central Authority were part-time.
Four were Area Board chairmen, serving in rotation.
Initially they were Josiah (‘Jack’) Eccles, formerly head of the Liverpool Corporation electricity undertaking; Alderman Lewis, a trade unionist and local Labour politician from the Midlands; John Pickles, ex-county electrical engineer of Dumfries and an expert in rural electrification; and Harry Randall, who had been chairman of the London Supply Companies Association.
The most helpful among the other members was E. H. E. Woodward, who had been general manager of one of the best private sector companies, the North-Eastern Electric Supply Co.
He had given some of the more frank and open-minded advice on the future of the industry before nationalisation, and his critical and constructive approach and blend of engineering and commercial experience were to be a valuable input to Central Authority discussions.
Sir William Walker was an ageing Conservative ex-Lord Mayor of Manchester, engineer, and member of the CEB, who had been the architect of the employers' side of the industry's labour relations machinery prior to nationalisation.
Dame Caroline Haslett was a remarkable woman who had trained as an engineer and was founder-director of the Electrical Association for Women.
She voted usually with the ‘top table’ of Citrine, Self and Hacking.
Finally, Tom Johnston, a former Labour minister (who had set up the North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board and was now its chairman), had little interest in matters south of the border, and attended only intermittently.
Although these members of the Authority were formally responsible for determining general policy, there were obvious weaknesses.
Earlier plans to have a full-time member with financial expertise or to  take charge of relations with Area Boards had been abandoned.
On the other hand as many as five out of twelve members had industrial relations expertise.
This was hardly a rational allocation of talent for an industry which, above all others, was capital-intensive, but had an unrivalled record of good labour relations.
Inevitably, much of the real policy making was done in committees of the more active, full-time members working together with their senior officers.
The BEA relied a lot in recruiting its chief officers on the main central executive body of the pre-vesting industry, the CEB, taking both D. W. Coates, their chief accountant, and E. R. Wilkinson, their commercial manager, into similar positions under Self in the new Central Authority, and V. A. Pask, in the crucial post under Hacking, that of chief engineer.
All three remained wedded to the ways of the CEB even in the new organisation.
There were also newcomers among the chief officers, including the secretary, H. E. Carpenter, who had been manager of the West Midlands Joint Electricity Authority.
The full Authority met monthly.
In practice much of the initiation and review of management policy fell to the four full-time members acting with the chief officers.
Citrine insisted that the departmental chief officers met with his full-time colleagues on the Authority weekly, encouraging the officers to comment on general policy matters rather than confining their comments to their own specialisms: a method he had found worked well at the TUC.
Although the Central Authority formally made decisions, and decisions at this weekly meeting were subject to their ratification, the full-time members and chief officers had substantial de facto authority.
Committees of the Central Authority — permanent committees on General Purposes and Finance, Staff and Organisation, Labour Relations, Estates and Real Property, Technical Development and Contracts, Tariffs and Operations, and ad hoc ones on an ever-changing range of topics — also had policy-making and decision-making functions, subject to report or approval by the full Authority.
Again appropriate chief officers played a part on many of these.
Great strain was placed on top management by the process of centralisation, implied by nationalisation, and by the luxuriant growth of committees to develop new policies.
This was particularly so in the early months before and after vesting day, and the concentrated pattern of working which was then established proved very resistant to change in later years.
It was not unknown for one man to chair a dozen committees and even to attend more than thirty  committee meetings in one week, though the average load was, of course, much less than these extremes.
The senior people — particularly Self — had an extraordinarily wide span of responsibilities, and were involved in multiple capacities in committee work.
Already stretched by their individual remits, they had to spend time, much of it unproductive, in preparing papers and attending meetings.
Self and Citrine frequently had to sit through the same item of business as it made its way through three, or in extreme cases five, formal meetings of different bodies before being finally approved.
Moreover, the level of detail was frequently too great to be effectively dealt with by the  committees , many members of which were non-specialists.
Once policy had been hammered out — and sometimes before it had — there were also a whole series of committees with representatives from the regions who needed to be consulted and informed on the views of headquarters.
To many in the industry, unused to this degree of central policy making and coordination, the luxuriant growth of committees seemed to represent an unholy conspiracy of bureaucracy rather than real organisational requirements.
Even within head office, the level of unnecessary detail with which headquarters committees were burdened attracted criticisms.
But Citrine and Self defended their policy against critics, whom they felt were ignoring the new and differing requirements of larger organisations.
In reviewing the early management structure in 1951, Citrine said firmly:
He recognised that the criticism to which he was replying had its root in fundamental differences between the culture of management in the pre-nationalisation industry and what he was trying to create.
Discussing frustration with the new organisation at a gathering of managers and other staff in 1949, he admitted:
Collective decision making, the sharing of responsibility, and solidarity in a common task had been Citrine's way of life in the Labour movement; and the new organisation should, he felt, be formed in that image.
The interpretation of his objective through committees, in which he could win over doubters, was to him a central part of the chairman's task.
Such concepts of group loyalty and common purpose were, moreover, not entirely unfamiliar to the business world he had entered: many of the pre-vesting undertakings had developed a strong group identity among staff.
More generally, a Japanese businessman would probably find them more intelligible and appealing than the liberal individualist doctrines which outwardly were claimed as the cornerstone of British management ideology.
The internalisation of values based on a commonality of experience and reinforced by collective committee decision making is certainly, in principle, capable of producing formidable business success.
Yet Citrine was working within a specific, more individualist business culture and, though change could only come slowly, collective discussion remained the only antidote to bureaucracy that he ever really understood.
Managers and engineers could not help but admire the assiduity and skill with which he could wear down his opponents in discussion, but for many of them this approach conflicted with other managerial values.
It discounted their felt need for individual responsibility and their desire to be entrusted with tasks over which they alone had control.
The frustration was perhaps greatest among the senior men who had come from the company sector, but municipal engineers also could find the professional, full-time and expert Central Authority control daunting in comparison with the earlier part-time, politically-appointed municipal electricity committees which had been easier to manipulate.
Some centralisation and bureaucracy was, of course, inevitable, but Citrine's way  probably accentuated it.
He was well aware of the depth of the chasm which separated the past from the future he hoped to create, and he was above all a realist, but inevitably the fusing of nearly 600 formerly independent undertakings into a new corporate identity was not painless.
Citrine and Self were the architects of the central administrative system established on nationalisation, and the other deputy chairman, Hacking, was also keen on centralisation.
There were, however, limits placed on their centralising tendencies by the Electricity Act itself, which specified the decentralisation of the distribution and retail functions to the fourteen Area Electricity Boards.
The wartime discussions on the future of the industry had envisaged entirely independent Area Boards, but after 1945 new pressures for centralisation were evident.
Herbert Morrison was an advocate of tighter centralised control, and the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Fuel and Power, Sir Donald Fergusson (who believed nationalisation would only work if the public corporations were genuinely independent) felt that independence was more likely to be achieved with a larger corporation which was more able to resist direct government intervention.
Shinwell, however, helped tilt the balance in favour of maintaining some regional independence, and he told the House of Commons that:
The fact that the men on the Area Boards were appointed directly by the Minister (and not by the Central Authority — though the Organising Committee and later the Central Authority were consulted) meant that the Boards were something rather more than subsidiaries of the larger entity.
Yet under the Act the Central Authority had clear responsibility for coordination and financial policy, and to enforce its powers it had, in the last resort, powers of direction, though only the Minister had powers of dismissal.
The Authority also had specific powers over the retail tariffs and labour relations machinery of the Area Boards.
The fourteen Area Board chairmen were men of some seniority and experience.
Five of the initial appointees were from supply companies, five from public electricity authorities, while one was from the engineering industry, two from the trade unions and one from the civil service.
The ones who served on the Organising Committee and the embryo Central Authority, and the remainder who joined them on appointment later in 1947, were quite clear that they would not give up their statutorily entrenched independence to Citrine and Self.
Because of the delays in appointments to the Area Boards, much of the initial planning work on organisation had to be done centrally, but the chairmen were soon stoutly defending their autonomy.
In December 1947, for example, when they had agreed a memorandum on Area Board organisation, Randall, the London Board chairman, insisted that it should be a purely advisory document not binding on the areas; and some degree of variation in local organisation did in fact emerge.
The resistance of Area Board chairmen to the encroachment of the centre on their powers was persistent, and Citrine, conscious of the strength of the chairmen's position, gave way.
Speaking of the Boards, he said:
At his first formal meeting with the chairmen after all had been appointed, he outlined how he might achieve the generalisation and standardisation of ‘better practice’:
The latter suggestion was indeed taken up and the Area Board chairmen met monthly with Citrine, Self and Hacking to work out a common policy.
The chief officers of the Area Boards — engineers, commercial officers, secretaries and accountants — also had regular meetings with their opposite numbers at the Central Authority.
Citrine's policy was the standard one: to hammer out a consensus by discussion.
He and Self devoted infinite pains to making this democratic centralism work.
The Area Board men, worn down and frustrated by committees and discussions, sometimes resented the method.
But the Central Authority always preferred persuasion, keeping their powers of direction in reserve.
In principle the Central Authority could also delegate some of the functions reserved for it in the Electricity Act.
Some Area Board chairmen pressed for increased devolution to them on matters such as labour relations or generation.
This Citrine resisted.
On labour relations he was, understandably, quite clear that his own central direction was required.
On generation, there had been a long-standing debate within the industry, and Citrine felt it was best to avoid any further uncertainty by being firm on the issue.
Prior to nationalisation many of the larger undertakings had been vertically integrated, both generating power and distributing and selling it.
Although the generation and distribution functions had become increasingly specialised as the industry developed, there were still many who felt that ‘power boards’— fully integrated undertakings — had significant advantages.
If the Central Authority had delegated its powers of generation to the area distribution boards, they would, in effect, have become integrated power boards.
Despite Citrine's attempt to settle this issue by firmly rejecting the proposal, this organisational option still had many advocates within the industry whose views were to surface in later years.
Although the power board option was initially ruled out, the Central Authority (which inherited nearly 300 power stations previously operated by 130 separate generating authorities) clearly required some kind of regional devolution of management, though they were not, on this side of the industry, constrained by any statutory provisions for regional organisation.
The CEB had previously exercised coordinating functions over generation, and it was thus natural that John Hacking and his other ex-CEB colleagues should play a large part in determining policy in this field.
Hacking was much liked by the professional engineers and managers in the industry and faced less initial distrust than his colleagues Citrine and Self, though he was no less committed to a policy of centralisation.
Most of the CEB men, Hacking included, saw as one of the great prizes of nationalisation the possibility of escaping from the voluntarism which had characterised their former relations with the undertakings.
They advocated central technical control, ideally by the six Grid control regions which the CEB had operated.
Many other members of the Organising Committee felt, however, that the devolution of power in generation should be to the smaller areas covered by the fourteen Area Boards.
Those advocating power boards found this argument especially persuasive, since it opened up the possibility of continued cooperation between the two sides of the industry at regional level, and of the continued joint use of common services.
There was also a genuine fear that open conflict between the two sides of the industry must be avoided (a fear which was shown to be not entirely illusory in a subsequent reorganisation, see pp. 194–5 below).
The issue was not resolved by the Organising Committee, but eventually Hacking retreated from the CEB view and accepted the arguments for fourteen generation areas coterminous with the distribution boards.
He also felt that the burden of duties on the divisional controllers who would head the area organisations for generation was sufficiently great to justify more, but smaller areas.
A further advantage was that this provided more top posts for senior and experienced men from the undertakings.
The Central Authority thus created fourteen generation divisions  for the construction, management and operation of power stations.
They recruited as divisional controllers six former CEB managers, six municipal engineers, and two engineers from the power companies.
These jobs on the generation side of the industry had a larger engineering content than the Area Board jobs in distribution, and, in terms of assets and capital expenditure, were a weightier responsibility.
Yet the salaries were typically below those of Area Board chairmen, and the prestige of these posts was arguably compromised from the beginning by the salary and status differentials.
The divisional controllers also lacked the independence conferred by ministerial appointment on Area Board chairmen, and were more constrained when they were called regularly to London head office conferences.
The centralised technical control, exercised by the chief engineer's department at headquarters, meant that the men who had accepted these posts were to find their room for independent and creative action significantly more constrained than was the case for their colleagues in the Area Boards.
The extent to which management powers over generation were devolved depended on the central triumvirate of Citrine, Self and Hacking, and not on a statutorily entrenched position.
It is a measure of the fundamental instincts of Citrine and his colleagues that, where they had the greater power to centralise, it was centralisation, and not devolved responsibility, which was their watchword.
As vesting day, 1 April 1948, approached, the shape of the organisations which were to take over the industry, and the men who were going to lead them at national and regional level were known.
During the preparations for the switch from control by company boards and municipal electricity committees to control by the new national and regional authorities, there was both excitement and concern about the future in the industry.
For most workers and consumers, the change was noticeable only in the gradual change in letterheads, titles and nameplates: the familiar paraphernalia of institutional changes.
For most managers, too, the local interim managerial arrangements for transfer — under which an executive officer, usually already in post, was appointed to supervise arrangements — were relatively painless.
Mergers are usually disturbing to employees and managers alike, and a merger of nearly 600 undertakings might have been expected to create more pain than most.
Problems there certainly were: the disentangling of assets with multiple uses (for example, some offices had been used for gas billing as well as for electricity) inevitably caused some headaches.
How  ever, the absence of any major disruption suggests that the careful preparation of the transition to the new organisation had paid off.
As midnight struck on vesting day, Lord Citrine, after more than a year of planning, was waiting up excitedly with Sir Henry Self in the flat above their new London headquarters in a converted block of flats in Great Portland Street.
John Hacking stayed the night at home in bed.
This partnership — a trade unionist, a civil servant, and an engineer — now had a large slice of Britain's economic future in their hands.
MEETING THE CAPACITY CRISIS
The most serious problem faced by the British Electricity Authority in 1948 was the chronic disequilibrium of supply and demand.
For some years after the War there had been severe power cuts in winter, when demand reached its peak, because of shortages of both power station capacity and coal to burn in the plant that was available.
In the fuel crisis of February 1947, an already overstretched system had been brought to breaking point: electricity supplies to many users had been periodically interrupted for weeks on end and other supplies had been restricted, in the severest winter for more than a hundred years.
The situation had then improved, thanks partly to higher priorities for allocations of coal, steel and men to the electricity supply undertakings and partly to the milder weather in the winter of 1947/8.
Even so, the industry had to cut off between 10 and 20 per cent of peak loads in these winters, despite attempts to reduce the peak demand by less drastic means.
The latter included exhortations to consumers to switch off appliances, reductions in supply voltages by 5 per cent(which was considered the maximum tolerable limit), and encouragement to industrialists voluntarily to stagger their factory hours away from peak times.
This situation was primarily the consequence of wartime cutbacks  in investment in new generating plant and the difficulties of transition back to the peacetime construction programme.
At a time when the growth of electricity sales showed no signs of slackening, the four years lead-time for the installation of new power station plant meant that there was little chance of any of the new postwar orders released by government planners for manufacture providing much relief until 1949 or later.
There had been some plants under construction for wartime-approved purposes, but in 1945 itself only 170MW of new plant had been completed, and in 1946 this could only be increased to 288MW and in 1947 to 340MW.
This was well below the levels which had been necessary to meet the annual growth of demand before the War (712MW had been completed in 1938), and also well below the level of around 1000MW a year which the CEB now considered necessary.
It was fully recognised by the Government, moreover, that it would take some years for normal conditions to be restored.
At the first meeting of the Central Authority, Shinwell had told Citrine and his colleagues that a reasonable aim would be to meet full demand by 1951 ‘if that was at all possible’ in the light of other national investment demands.
The Government's economic planners knew full well that, with shortages of essential materials such as steel, even that was an optimistic target.
The planners had in fact already taken out of the hands of the industry a good deal of the coordinating responsibility for making up the plant backlog, recognising electricity supply as a crucial sector in their overall economic planning and taking steps to intervene directly where they were dissatisfied with the progress made by the Pre-vesting electricity undertakings.
In key respects the views of Whitehall coincided with those of the Central Electricity Board, which had for long felt that its own, indirect control of power station construction was inadequate.
In particular, CEB engineers considered that stations designed and ordered by the separate municipalities and companies led to a proliferation of designs and a failure to gain the advantages of replication.
The manufacturers, flooded with a backlog of orders far in excess of their capacity, also felt that they would be able to do a better job if designs could be standardised, and had pressed the Government for action in 1947.
The Ministry of Supply's Directorate of Power Station Equipment was already engaged, with some assistance from the CEB, in piecemeal standardisation initiatives and attempts to allocate materials and orders between manufacturers more rationally.
In November 1947 they had issued a statutory order (which was to remain in force until July 1950) limiting all new orders for turbo-alternators for the home market to sets of 30MW capacity (with prewar standard steam conditions of 600psi and 850°F) and 60MW sets (with more advanced steam conditions of 900psi and 900°F).
This was later to be criticised as imposing an unnecessary conservatism on design (pp. 104–10, below), but at that time (with shortages of skilled draughtsmen and engineers, and the overriding priority of speeding up the installation of safe and reliable sets) it was widely supported by the manufacturers and the CEB as well as in Whitehall.
The turbo-alternator manufacturers reckoned that it would enable them to cut between six and nine months off delivery dates, and the boiler-makers reckoned the standardisation of boilers to supply steam to the standard units would also speed up construction.
However, given the long lead-times in manufacture and construction, it was recognised that the standardisation could only have an effect in the forward programmes for 1950 onwards.
When the British Electricity Authority and its divisions took over responsibility for generation design in April 1948, the engineers from the CEB, particularly Hacking, and Pask, his chief engineer, looked forward to strengthening the role of the centre in the design function, but that too could only have an impact in the longer run.
To meet the immediate problems, the vital priorities were the proper progressing of the manufacture of designs for nearly 6000MW of plant planned or under construction by the former undertakings, and the acceleration of work in progress on sites.
At the Organising Committee, the retiring CEB chairman had confidently suggested that the old CEB organisation could continue to handle matters in this field and there would be little need for change: ‘The CEB in conjunction with a strong committee on which the Ministry of Supply were represented were working hard on the generating plant extensions and it would not be necessary for the Organising Committee to worry over-much about the details of this programme in the meantime.’
Citrine and Self were preoccupied with the administrative problems of vesting, organisational initiatives, and Area Board relations; and their new cramped headquarters in Great Portland Street could not absorb the CEB organisation.
Many of the staff continued to look on Hacking and his staff at Trafalgar Buildings (the old CEB headquarters) as a continuation of the CEB.
His engineers were glad to continue with the central job they had been engaged on before: the attempt to speed up power station completion rates in undertakings they now controlled more directly.
Hacking had an additional office in Great  Portland Street headquarters, so that he could liaise with Citrine, Self and the administrators, but his organisation at Trafalgar Buildings remained basically that of the CEB.
In the postwar economy, still beset by shortages of materials, and particularly of steel, the BEA, like the pre-nationalisation industry, had to fight a continuing battle for resources with Sir Edwin Plowden's Central Economic Planning Staff and ultimately with the Cabinet.
The civil servant on Plowden's team in charge of the power station construction programme was F. W. (‘Bomber’) Smith, who had made his name in the War by successfully stepping up aircraft production in Beaverbrook's celebrated Ministry.
In August 1948, Gaitskell specifically asked that he be transferred to the Ministry of Fuel and Power to coordinate the power station construction programme.
Like the old CEB, the new Central Authority bombarded Smith and the Cabinet's Investment Programmes Committee with a barrage of complaints against cuts in their forward programmes, but Smith seriously doubted whether they had the capacity to implement the large programmes implied by new requests for men and materials.
They had had high priority since the fuel crisis of February 1947, but boilers and site work had in many cases been delayed (mainly because of steel shortages) so that 300–400MW of plant completed by the turbo-alternator manufacturers had had to be put in store for a year or more.
Smith therefore felt that the manufacturers' allocations should be cut back to a more realistic level than the BEA's plant-ordering programme, while he allocated more steel for the foundation and building work on power station sites which was the bottleneck.
He telephoned Hacking in September 1948 to offer an extra 50000 tons of site steel immediately and a further 180000 tons for 1949.
As the engineers within the BEA began to take over direct responsibility for the power station sites during 1948, the prospect of strengthening the organisation improved.
The faulty programming of work in a situation in which everyone was trying to beat the planners, and having variable success, but not producing whole working power stations, was clearly ludicrous.
Within the chief engineer's department the main responsibility for sorting things out fell on Group-Captain C. E. H. (‘Charles’) Verity, who came from one of the best pre-vesting undertakings (the London Power Company), after a wartime spell of directing the bombing of German power stations, to be the headquarters Generation Construction Engineer.
Verity found that as many as ten government committees were responsible  for coordinating the work of all the former undertakings, manufacturers, construction firms and consultants, and that, in addition to the planners, four Ministries — Fuel and Power, Labour, Supply (responsible for manufacturers) and Works (responsible for construction sites)— were involved.
The tangled web of committees seemed to him likely to retard rather than accelerate development, and he hoped that clearer BEA responsibility would, as their headquarters staff were built up, lead to quicker progress.
By November 1948, it was agreed that they could take over the responsibility for progressing work on the manufacture of plant and on-site construction from the Ministries of Supply and Works, and the following year they did so.
Although liaison work with the Ministries and the planners was still necessary, Verity, a natural conciliator, created a progressing organisation which was more streamlined and probably as effective as possible in the prevailing conditions of materials shortages.
Carefully logging the state of progress on all manufacturing and site work, they were able to determine priorities which were likely overall to increase the rate of commissioning of working stations rather than partial completions.
The work was not easy — manufacturers, for example, sometimes had to be asked to ease off on an item of plant in a fairly advanced state of completion (but for which the site was not yet prepared or the boiler installation delayed) to press on with others at an earlier stage of manufacture which could be installed earlier.
In Whitehall, Smith was pleased with the progressing organisation built up by Verity, but in 1949 it became clearer that the bottlenecks were not only on site steel but in the inadequate response of the pipework and boiler manufacturers.
Hacking and the BEA engineers were, Smith felt, reluctant to press hard to get additional boiler manufacturing capacity.
At the end of September 1949, therefore, Smith was himself seconded to the BEA to work on sorting out this problem, and he was in fact to stay, in a sustained attempt to work out a better contracts system, thus further strengthening the BEA's management of the construction programme.
The joint efforts of Smith and Verity also introduced more realism into BEA planning.
In April 1948 they had inherited work in hand from five CEB annual programmes with nearly 6000MW due for completion by 1950.
This was far more than could be justified in the straitened circumstances of the time (and indeed it would have produced a large margin of spare capacity on the actual early 1950s peak demand).
It was more a CEB attempt to point out their difficulties than a serious construction programme.
By the end of  1948 Smith had worked out more plausible commissioning targets rising from around 562MW in the current year to 1107MW in 1949, 1155MW in 1950 and 1600MW in 1951.
Even targets of this order implied an ability to commission a boiler every six days and a turbo-alternator every twelve days for several years: well above the levels ever achieved before in Britain.
There were subsequent cuts in allocations to the BEA because of the devaluation crisis of 1949 and the Korean War crisis of the early 1950s, and the difficulties of construction and boiler manufacture remained persistent.
Thus even these reduced targets were not met: actual commissioning levels were 37 per cent below target in 1949, 19 per cent below in 1950 and 42 per cent below in 1951, with the programmed stations for these years being rolled over into 1952 and 1953.
This shortfall arose partly because, even when difficulties could be foreseen, it was sensible to aim high and maintain manufacturers' confidence in a sustained market growth, though, as we shall see, it also reflects a persistently poor record for the British power station construction industry on completion times.
Power cuts were thus to remain a fact of life at winter peak times in Britain into the early 1950s.
Although the widespread disruption of the earlier 1949 crisis was avoided, the load which had to be shed in the severe winter of 1951 (2109MW) was in absolute terms the highest ever, and still amounted to 17 per cent of the load on the system.
HALF-PRICE ELECTRICITY?
The impact of power cuts in an advanced industrial society is inevitably serious.
In the circumstances of the 1940s, it was felt most by the large industrial users, who could be contacted quickly to switch off demand ‘voluntarily’ to avoid the collapse of the supply system which would follow if the load were too great and the frequency were allowed to drop below the safe minimum.
Voltages were also cut, producing an annoying slowness in the cooking of breakfasts and a reduction in the output of heating appliances, but again there were practical limits to the relief of the peak load by this means.
All consumers were urged to ‘switch off at the peak’ and in periods of severe difficulties moral suasion was backed up by statutory controls, though for small consumers these were practically impossible to enforce, so that voluntary restriction remained the more important.
The cooperation of consumers enabled the disruption of production to be minimised; and the industry's expertise in avoiding the more serious problems developed with experience and with the higher priorities they were granted for scarce coal supplies after the disastrous crisis of February 1947.
The widespread power cuts to factories which had then been necessary had caused nearly 15 per cent of the UK workforce to be laid off and were estimated to have cost some £200 millions of vital production.
By the early 1950s, however, the cuts, though more severe in terms of the number of megawatts cut off, were less sustained, widespread and damaging.
In the winter of 1950/1, for example, government estimates were that  consequential industrial production losses had been £8–10 millions.
There were also financial losses to the British Electricity Authority from having to operate old and inefficient plant for more extended periods than they would have chosen in normal times: in the early 1950s the extra cost of burning scarce coal inefficiently was reckoned at £3½ millions a year at the low official coal prices of the time, though the real resource cost was somewhat higher than this.
Given the difficulties of making up the capacity backlog in the short term, attention inevitably focussed on the other side of the equation: the growth in demand and the possibility of restricting it.
Industry was not here the culprit.
With the restrictions firms accepted, industrial sales grew very slowly and, after falling in the later years of the War, did not again reach the 1943 level until 1949.
A committee at the Ministry of Labour had also worked out with industrialists methods of shifting the hours of work to avoid the winter peak times, and this load spreading helped a lot to contain industrial peak demand at these crucial times.
The restlessness of industrialists at being expected to take the brunt of sacrifices had led to commercial consumers (shops, offices, hotels, etc.) also being brought into the load spreading arrangements in 1948.
The demand on the system none the less continued inexorably to grow.
Sales by 1948 were almost double those of ten years earlier, though the installed capacity of power stations had been increased by less than half of this.
All categories of sales had shown an increase in the decade, but the really spectacular growth, especially after 1943, had been in sales to domestic consumers.
By the later 1940s, domestic sales were approaching nearly three times the prewar level.
While moral suasion had been favoured in the War (in preference to rationing) as a means of restricting domestic demand, and had for a time been partially successful, as peace returned it lost much of its impact.
The British public, after years of sacrifice, were less and less inclined to tolerate prolonged austerity; and, though in other fields the Labour Government was extremely successful in diverting resources away from consumption and towards investment and exports (at considerable cost to its own political popularity), there were limits to the extent that this could be achieved in electricity.
Electricity, indeed, now became a major loophole in the rationing system by which common sacrifices were imposed on all.
This was particularly evident in space heating: coal had been the normal method of heating for British householders, but with a low coal ration now applied in order to conserve coal for industry, they still had the  option of switching on electric fires.
Understandably, these fires — which at thirty shillings were cheap to buy and easy to install — were widely sold in their millions in the postwar years.
By the time the Government tried to close up this loophole, by restricting steel allocations for electric fire manufacture, it was too late.
When the industry was nationalised, three-quarters of domestic consumers had fires, compared with only a quarter before the War.
The growth of domestic demand was also boosted by the connection of many new consumers: the Boards naturally gave priority to the new estates and ‘pre-fabs’ of the postwar housing drive which urgently needed to have electricity connected.
The controllers of the National Grid could see the shift in domestic demand directly reflected in the pattern of load on their power stations.
Whereas before the War, the peak had come with lighting demand in the late winter afternoons, it was, for some years after the War, between 8 and 9a.m. when the domestic space heating demand was at its height.
Inevitably the industry came under some pressure from the Government to control this burgeoning demand from domestic consumers, without which the capacity crisis would have been a good deal less serious.
The first years of nationalisation were thus regularly punctuated by government demands for consideration of rationing by price or by direct load limitation.
The prices being charged by the industry after the War were undoubtedly excessively low, and this in itself had artificially stimulated consumer demand.
In the decade prior to nationalisation, electricity tariffs had hardly increased at all in money terms, and the average domestic price of electricity had fallen faster than in any other decade in history, both in real terms and relative to the price of its major competitors, gas and coal.
By 1948, although living standards in general were no higher than a decade previously, the average domestic consumer was using twice as much electricity as then, but paying only half as much for it per kWh in real terms.
Such a record might appear to be an occasion for delight in consumers and pride in the industry, but it did not in fact arise from efficiency increases (indeed physical indices of efficiency showed a decline because of inadequate investment in new plant).
Rather it arose from a fortuitous combination of circumstances which bore little relation to the long-run economic costs of producing and distributing electricity.
During wartime and the postwar era of government price control, electricity undertakings had in many cases been prevented from raising domestic tariffs to meet increased costs, and had drawn instead on their reserves and on the automatic increases paid by larger (mainly industrial) consumers under the coal-cost increase clause of their special tariffs.
Moreover, many domestic consumers were on tariffs in which extra kWhs purchased were cheaper than the initial units.
This had in part been justified by cost conditions — a larger domestic consumer was cheaper per kWh to supply than a small one — though in the conditions of shortage which prevailed it was arguably foolish to maintain such a strong incentive to increased usage.
There were some undertakings still charging only ½d. (or even, in a few cases, ⅓d.) per additional kWh to domestic users after the War, and ½d. was not even enough to pay for the coal needed to generate that amount of electricity in the majority of the power stations they were then using, far less to pay the other costs of supply.
As nationalisation approached, moreover, the independent undertakings were in no mood to increase prices.
Indeed, for the local authorities (many of whom were angry that the Government were treating nationalisation merely as a book-keeping transaction within the public sector and thus paying them little compensation for the takeover), the maintenance of uneconomically low prices was one way of getting their own back for the local ratepayers (who were also usually electricity consumers).
The Central Authority were extremely worried about the transfer of lump sums to municipal coffers, or rebates paid to consumers, and tried to persuade the Government to act to prevent such abuses pending nationalisation.
Eventually, however, they concluded that the best the Ministry could do was to prohibit a reduction of charges, though this limited only the most flagrant abuses.
The result of these various pressures was that, when they were taken over, some 150 undertakings were heading for an aggregate deficit of £7 millions (more than 3 per cent of total BEA revenue) over the year.
Within a month of nationalisation, the Authority's commercial manager had identified the more serious black spots in which tariffs for additional domestic kWh were below ¾d. — which he reckoned to be the level required to cover costs — and in the next few months prices were generally raised to this level as a ‘first aid’ measure, pending the development of a proper pricing policy.
In order to put this over sympathetically to consumers, the Central Authority issued a directive enforcing it on Area Boards: thus underlining the absolute necessity for this increase.
There were also some presentational reductions in prices in some isolated, small-scale undertakings, where domestic consumers using electricity for very  little more than lighting had been charged very high flat rates per kWh.
(The maximum price was reduced to 6d.)
Sensible and necessary price increases none the less attracted a predictably irresponsible press reaction, with Conservative newspapers bearing anti-nationalisation headlines such as‘You own the electricity industry — AND UP GO THE PRICES’.
These price increases restored the industry's income to levels sufficient to cover book costs, but prices still remained low relative to the higher costs the industry was having to incur to meet the new demand.
This was realised by some in the industry, but there was little agreement on whether it was proper to take account of those long-run costs immediately.
In retrospect, we can see that there were strong economic reasons to do so, certainly by the canons of modern public sector pricing theory which suggests that prices should be set at the (long-run) marginal costs of supply.
However, the costs appearing in the books of the newly nationalised industry were considerably below these, largely because, while capital charges normally formed a large proportion of the total costs of electricity supply, the industry had in recent years been prevented from investing heavily and most of its inherited equipment stood in the books at prewar values.
This was particularly serious because of its impact on relative prices in the energy sector.
The coal and gas industries, which were significantly more labour-intensive, had seen their current costs escalate more rapidly, and lacked the cushion of historically low capital charges.
This change in relative prices would have been rational if it had reflected any real improvement in the competitive power of electricity (and there had been a continuing shift in favour of electricity for the whole century), but now the shift was artificially exaggerated by historic cost accounting in a period of inflation, and by temporarily depressed investment levels.
The demand for electricity was thus being artificially boosted: the price was known to be sufficient only to meet the historic average costs of supply, not the costs which in future would have to be paid if the demand were met.
These price and cost interrelations were not well and explicitly understood at the time, and it is perhaps anachronistic to criticise the industry for not adopting them.
Indeed the major criticism is properly addressed to the advocates of nationalisation, who had given far too little attention to the general question of pricing and investment rules by which the public sector should operate.
The contemporary academic debate among economists had become bogged down in a rather arid byway of marginal costing and subsidies, and provided  little useful guidance on the substantive issues of the day.
Labour politicians, even those with a training in economics, were muddled about the issues, and generally seemed to favour the historic average cost principles, which also seemed to many at the time to be enshrined in the wording of the Act, which merely required the industry to break even ‘taking one year with another’.
The political pressures reinforcing this attitude were powerful, and Shinwell, with his eye on the working class cost of living, told the Central Authority at its first meeting that they should not charge prices higher than costs (without, however, specifying how this was to be interpreted).
If higher prices had been used to ration demand, the industry would, of course, have made large book profits, and this would probably have been politically unacceptable to a government which remembered election promises that nationalisation would mean cheap electricity.
The Economist sensibly saw an electricity tax as a way of resolving this problem, but, with the Conservative opposition ready to taunt the Government with unfairly raising prices, the prospects of a rational price policy were not good.
Some civil servants did see the need for higher prices.
Some planners, for example, saw that their economic planning might be more effective if they used the price mechanism to work with them rather than against them, and Philip Chantler, the economic adviser brought into the Ministry of Fuel and Power in 1947, consistently advocated a move to higher prices.
These were largely voices in the wilderness: the politicians, administrative civil servants and managers in the industry simply lacked an understanding of the common language of economic discourse which was essential to a rational analysis of energy prices.
(It was more than a decade before Chantler's ideas were fully accepted even within the Ministry.)
Any hope that the new Ministry of Fuel and Power could rationally ‘coordinate’ a national policy on energy inevitably went out of the window with this absence of an acceptable common vocabulary with which to discuss the issues.
Within the industry, the consequences of a rudderless Whitehall were welcomed at the commercial grass roots level.
Managers were delighted at the price advantage which they had gained over their gas competitors and the question of whether it was artificial did not seriously concern them.
Other senior men in the industry, equally, were not averse, either in principle or practice, to the low price of electricity.
Municipal men had traditionally operated in a service-inspired environment and were strongly committed to the spread of  electricity use, especially to domestic consumers.
Men from the company sector might find the jargon of competitive market solutions more appealing, but most recognised they were now entering a new milieu.
Citrine was happy to tell them, in the traditional (if somewhat imprecise) formula, that the industry was now to be operated in the national interest and not for private gain.
While a good case can, in retrospect, he made for the national interest being served by higher prices, there were few at the time who argued against the interpretation of Citrine and Self that there was a long-run obligation to sell as much electricity as possible at as low a price as possible.
This objective of growth could not, of course, in the early stages, be pursued without restraint, for the capacity crisis prevented the industry from meeting all demands.
Against the protests of many of their salesmen, then, the Central Authority and Area Boards gave in to government pressure to restrict promotional advertising and hire purchase schemes in order to curtail the over-rapid growth of demand.
Publicity was directed to persuading people to switch off at peak times, and some Boards, notably the Eastern, banned sales of space heaters at their showrooms.
The commercial men resented thus having to create a negative image of their product, but this was the least the industry could do to allay government criticism that they were expanding more rapidly than resources allowed.
The Boards' own impression, strengthened by many consumer complaints about power cuts, was that people wanted faster expansion.
Inevitably, then, their major strategy for meeting demand became the long-term one of building enough new capacity to meet the demand placed on the system at the low price levels which enabled them to increase sales while just balancing the books.
Yet, until that capacity could be built, it seemed, power cuts in winter would remain a fact of life.
The one Minister with the political courage and economic sense to attempt to alleviate this situation by using the price mechanism selectively was Hugh Gaitskell.
He and Shinwell had told the Central Authority at their first meeting in September 1947 that, while general price rises could be ruled out, they were prepared to look at the possibility of controlling demand at peak times by differentially higher prices for peak use or by mechanical load-restricting devices.
In February 1948, under increasing pressure from industrialists to control the growth of non-industrial demand at the peak, Gaitskell established a committee, under the chairmanship of Sir Andrew Clow, a former governor of Assam.
Edgar Wilkinson, the BEA's Commercial Manager and Ronald Edwards, an LSE economist, played a leading part in the deliberations of the committee, which heard some powerful evidence of the damage done at the peak, particularly by the space heating load, and of the need for restriction by an increased winter price or other means.
Despite Wilkinson's attempts to moderate criticism of the Area Board's policies, and a trade unionist member's introduction of some woolliness in the text to accommodate his dislike of any rationing by the purse, the committee's report, submitted to Gaitskell in June, did make some strong proposals.
In addition to some longer-run experiments with ‘off-peak’ supplies, time-of-day metering and load limiting devices, the committee recommended that the main practicable way of meeting the short-term objective of cutting peak demand was to impose a surcharge on winter purchases of electricity.
Gaitskell was convinced that this proposal was right, and gained the agreement of his cabinet colleagues and, eventually, of Citrine.
When Citrine revealed the proposal to the Area Board chairmen, however, they reacted angrily.
The Clow Committee had recognised there would be practical problems: the quarterly cycle of meter reading would make it difficult to concentrate the higher charge on the crucial months of December, January and February when demand was highest; in really cold weather or if coal remained in short supply it would have only limited deterrent effect; and off-peak demand might be adversely affected.
But they reckoned without the mood of the chairmen, who saw the committee's proposal as an intolerable and misguided interference in the detail of their management policy.
Only a few months after vesting day, they were still wrestling with the enormous problems of reorganisation and the standardisation of the many different electricity tariffs they had inherited: this additional burden seemed to them too much.
They were, moreover, quite convinced that the Clow differential would cause greater problems than the committee realised.
When Gaitskell met the chairmen on 22 July 1948, however, he mercilessly exposed many of their arguments as the specious reasoning of bigoted men.
Their professed need for a load valley in summer to permit overhaul could not be reconciled with the common observation that their capacity problems were not at their worst then; it could not both be true that the differential charge would have no effect and that it would have so large an effect in cutting consumption the Boards would make losses.
As Gaitskell recalled in his diary:
Citrine's trade union negotiating skills now came into their own.
After initially agreeing with Gaitskell, he had won the confidence of the chairmen by putting their case loyally and firmly, excusing his outburst later to Gaitskell as a necessary way of bringing the chairmen round to compromise.
The compromise which Citrine was able to cobble together was, however, in the worst tradition of the proverbial camel: a horse designed by committee.
Gaitskell, Citrine, Self and Wilkinson had all seen earlier that, to be effective, the differential charge would have to be large: perhaps 1¼d.
Per kWh in winter as against ½d. in summer, which might cut peak consumption by around 10 per cent.
Eventually, after much arguing, the Area Board chairmen agreed to 1.1d. in winter and 0.65d. in summer.
To protect themselves, they were to be permitted to say that this differential was being implemented ‘at the Minister's request’.
The experiment was, as might have been predicted from the chairmen's opposition, a failure.
The differential was too small to have a big impact, and, when it was publicised at all, was accompanied by assurances that the cost would be cancelled out by the lower summer charge.
Many consumers did not even know of the charge until after the winter of 1948/9 when it was imposed; because of cyclic meter reading, many received their winter bills only as the charge was lowered; and some were never surcharged at all.
By the spring of 1949, the Boards were triumphantly arguing that they had been proved right in that the differential charge had had no effect on consumption and merely provoked public discontent.
Although Gaitskell at first stood his ground, it was obvious that, in the face of obstruction from the industry, he could not make a sensible price policy stick, and in July he announced the abandonment of the Clow surcharge.
The memory of this episode had an impact on government — industry relations and on the future development of pricing policy.
For years, the Clow surcharge was misleadingly referred to by electrical enthusiasts as proof that demand for electricity at peak  times was completely inelastic within the relevant price ranges.
Gaitskell's initiative, powerful and well-intentioned though it was, was counter-productive, reinforcing rather than dissolving the prejudices within the industry which stood in the way of a more rational pricing policy.
The industry's cause was not a particularly noble one, but their victory was an important step in establishing a degree of independence from government, and it is in this that its major significance lies.
Gaitskell was probably the brightest and most administratively experienced Minister the industry has ever had to deal with.
He had been defeated, and he knew it.
As Citrine had earlier told his colleagues, a tactical retreat of accepting the Minister's suggestion and then showing it to be ineffective would enable them better to assert their independence in future.
Gaitskell now knew that there were practical limits to the extent to which the Government could exert control over the industry.
He mused for a time over alternative means of strengthening control, even on the possibility of a Minister replacing Citrine as chairman, but in the end he accepted the logic of the independent Morrisonian public corporation on which Labour's nationalisation had ostensibly been based.
The tragedy of the industry was that they had won the battle only by turning their back on the price mechanism: a procedure for resource allocation which, arguably, is the best medium for the decentralisation of decision making to firms in the modern economy.
As events were to show, the underlying problems of resource allocation remained; and the failure to solve them was insidiously to add to the pressures gnawing away the industry's independence.
In winning the battle, as we shall see, they had sown the seeds of losing the war.
RECOVERY AND DEVELOPMENT (1948–57)
MINISTERS AND MANDARINS
I
The Clow episode showed how much the Whitehall view of the permissible level of intervention in the affairs of public corporations had changed since before the War.
The relationship between Ministers and the new Electricity Boards, though laid down by statute, was not rigidly specified, but large powers of fuel policy coordination, and of oversight of finance and general policy, were given to the Minister.
He could use these to intervene on virtually any aspect of policy, though, in practice, as we have seen, his prospect of imposing a policy against the united opposition of the Boards was slim, and there was a widespread commitment to at least the principle of independent management for public corporations.
None the less, this was a significant change from the days of the old CEB, which (though hedged about by precise legal requirements on matters such as pricing) had not been subject to government limits on finance (choosing to raise its fixed-interest capital without government guarantee) and had ignored ministerial requests when it felt they were unjustified (being protected against the sanction acquired by the Minister in 1947: the power of dismissal).
The rule of law in the 1926 Act had, in a real sense, been replaced in 1947 by the rule of the Minister.
The examples given in Parliament i of areas where the Minister would feel free to intervene — the military implications of power station siting, research policy and the development of rural supplies — were to be only a small part of ministerial initiatives in the evolving relationship between the alternative centres of decision  making power enshrined in the Act.
Citrine was, of course, the ideal person for the top job which this created, for his skills were essentially in politics and public relations, not in management.
He knew the corridors of power from the angle of the politicians, and he was determined to use that knowledge to maintain as much independence for the industry as possible.
He aimed, where he could, to take the industry out of party politics, but was willing to conform to the national interest where that was clearly defined by a Minister who had obvious Cabinet support.
Citrine became the doyen of the nationalised industry chairmen, sometimes leaving chairmen in other industries aghast at the audacity of his refusal to agree to ministerial requests, notably on matters such as wage policy (see pp. 132–3, below).
He symbolically refused to sign the first Annual Report to the Minister with the traditional ‘Your obedient servant’, preferring the more neutral ‘Yours faithfully’.
His image as a tough negotiator in his new job, as in his old one, soon became the common talk of the corridors of Whitehall and Westminster, and his reputation for firmness in the exercise of power became legendary.
He traced its origin to his former position in the trade union movement (hinting that he had an agreement to go back to the TUC where he could make more trouble for any government if they pressed him hard).
The reality of Citrine's position was somewhat less dramatic than was sometimes imagined by contemporaries.
It is true that he knew the Prime Ministers of the later 1940s and early 1950s, Attlee and Churchill, personally, and he was not averse to breaking protocol by raising policy matters with them behind the back of their Minister of Fuel and Power on a few occasions.
These occasions bore no fruit, however, and the effectiveness of his power really depended more on the skilled team he had behind him — with Sir Henry Self coordinating their relations with Whitehall from his own intimate knowledge as an ex-mandarin — and on the strength of the pressure of argument which they maintained.
Citrine — sometimes with Self and Area Board chairmen, sometimes with other nationalised industries' chairmen and sometimes alone — had irregular unminuted meetings with the Minister of Fuel and Power (and sometimes with other senior Ministers) at which they hammered out compromises on the more difficult policy questions.
Yet months could go by without such a meeting, and they were less regular than those of, for example, the National Coal Board chairman.
This infrequency was in part at Citrine's choice: he could maintain it partly because the industry's  problems were less serious than those of coal.
(Success, if skilfully presented, did bring greater independence.)
Citrine recognised, moreover, that his own highly visible profile could sometimes be counterproductive.
To Gaitskell, the defeats he had to accept from Citrine and the Area Board chairmen clearly rankled.
The Conservatives also were to find it difficult to forget that he was not from their side, but a Labour appointee with clear and continuing sympathies for the trade unions.
Citrine's interventions largely succeeded because they were in general well-timed; on issues on which he was utterly sure of the rightness of his cause; and on ground which had been well prepared in advance by correspondence between officials at the BEA and the Ministry, so that the Minister's brief could be effectively exploited in the discussion.
Nationalised industries usually have an advantage against their ‘sponsoring’ ministry in that their management is more continuous than that of ministers and mandarins, but this was not the case for Citrine.
It is true that there were six different Ministers of Fuel and Power while he was chairman: Shinwell when the Central Authority was constituted, Gaitskell between 1947 and 1950, then Philip Noel-Baker until Labour's defeat in 1951, and, under the Conservatives, Geoffrey Lloyd until 1955, then Aubrey Jones for just over a year, followed by Lord Mills.
In fact, Gaitskell dominated policy throughout Labour's period — first as Shinwell's deputy, then as the Minister proper, and finally in senior Cabinet economic posts for the period when Noel-Baker (who had no Cabinet seat) was formally in charge.
Under the Conservatives, Lloyd's four-year stint also provided unusual continuity.
Among the mandarins, at Permanent Secretary level, Sir John Maud (who succeeded Fergusson in 1952) was to outlast Citrine, and his smoothing magisterial presence was an important influence in questions such as board appointments (reserved for the Minister's private office) and fuel industry coordination (which brought together the various Ministry divisions ‘sponsoring’ each energy industry).
Much of the routine work of correspondence with the BEA, and the practical implementation of statutory ministerial duties, fell to the Electricity Division, where again there was remarkable continuity: M.P.
(‘Pat’) Murray headed the division between 1947 and 1959.
The initial pathway of the developing relationship between Whitehall and the BEA was not entirely smooth.
Both sides were in a new situation and anxious to set precedents which would entrench their position.
The Ministry, though in general it had a weak set of  personnel by Whitehall standards, was imbued with the common cultural attitudes of the mandarinate.
It left the BEA in no doubt that it represented the ‘public interest’, and did not wish the BEA to forget its responsible, national status.
For their part, the BEA were anxious to prevent detailed intervention, and tried (though not always successfully) to insist on the protocol of official exchange through their secretary, rather than permitting Murray and the other civil servants direct access to specialist BEA personnel for information on particular policy issues.
Senior engineers and managers in the industry were often contemptuous of the amateurishness and lack of detailed knowledge of the civil service.
They sometimes excelled in the art of misleading Whitehall with what at best were plausible half-truths, and expressed astonishment at the mixture of the trivial and the monumental which the political origins of some queries forced on civil servants.
They soon learned that an internally consistent paper with logical relationships to what had gone before stood a better chance of acceptance than something which was right but new: civil servants after all knew little about the industry and had little basis on which to judge proposals except consistency with what had gone before.
But gradually a mutual respect, based on agreed boundaries for each other 's territory and mutual usefulness, built up.
At Citrine's suggestion Murray attended the majority of the meetings between the Central Authority and the Area Board chairmen, and he was able to convey government thinking to them informally, while sometimes receiving information ‘off the record’ and relaying signals back to Whitehall.
As usually happens, the ‘sponsorship role’ of the Electricity Division led to Murray becoming not so much a controller of the industry as an honest broker between the BEA and the Whitehall machine in general.
Being closer to the industry's own thinking, for example, the Electricity Division was soon pressing within Whitehall for higher capital investment allocations for electricity both against the other fuel divisions in the Ministry and against the Treasury.
Murray and other civil servants were clear that they were being bamboozled on issues like the Clow differential (p. 37 above) but accepted much of the industry's case.
They still (like Citrine himself) lacked the threshold level of knowledge necessary to make serious contributions to the more technical decisions, but they soon acquired the expertise to translate known needs into appropriate Whitehall language, according to the changing fashions dictated by public opinion or cabinet preoccupations.
In that, they became a valuable ally of the BEA, enjoying in  return an increasing influence over the latter on matters where presentational concessions could smooth the industry's political path.
The BEA and the Area Boards reciprocated by, in general, not ‘padding’ their capital applications with bogus figures to anticipate cuts, though the BEA did, on occasion, deliberately withhold information which they felt would prejudice their case within the Ministry.
As the relationship developed, the rhetoric staking claims to differentiated skills and functions remained, but each side moved culturally closer to the other.
Officials in the Ministry wrote to the BEA for the ‘facts for next year's campaign’ against the Treasury, and were thought by the BEA officials ‘quite genuinely to be trying to fight our battle’.
Despite the Permanent Secretary's disapproval in principle, several senior civil servants from the Ministry were later to join the industry's management.
The commercial and business orientation which the public corporation (as distinct from Ministry) form of management was designed to preserve, was inevitably diluted by this process, though it remained an important part of the self-image of those working in the industry.
While they became more like civil servants, and adopted some civil service ways, the primary loyalty of many of them remained to the business and commercial ethic of suppliers of an electricity service.
II
The central issue to be determined in this evolving process of acculturation and of bargaining was the proportion of the nation's investment resources to be devoted to electricity supply.
In the early years, the crucial controls on investment (for private industry no less than nationalised boards) were the physical allocations of resources such as steel.
The steel control remained in force (apart from a brief interval from June 1950 to February 1951 when shortages none the less remained) until May 1953; building controls lasted into 1954.
The Cabinet, advised by the economic planners under Sir Edwin Plowden, decided year-by-year allocations of the vital materials, and the Ministry used this as a basis for their discussions on financial investment limits with the BEA.
(Under the Act, the Central Authority had to discuss their forward programmes and gain approval for their specific annual investment needs from the Minister.)
Inevitably this procedure, in the early years, worked less than smoothly, with budgets drawn up hurriedly under the pressure of reorganisation, and the Ministry being quite glad on occasion if they  were exceeded, since this simply meant that the industry had achieved more than expected with limited physical resources.
As a Ministry minute of March 1951 noted:
The financial constraints were initially rather phantom-like (in the first year, for example, there was prolonged and somewhat inconclusive discussion with the Ministry about the budget and it was not finally authorised until the financial year was over!), but the physical constraints were none the less effective in limiting the industry's expenditure.
With the September 1949 devaluation of the pound (requiring redirection of resources to exports) and the Korean War in the early 1950s (requiring the diversion of investment to defence industries), the physical constraints became distinctly painful.
Gaitskell (now dominating Labour's economic policy and still smarting from the defeat over Clow) cut the allocations to electricity more than to the other fuel industries (which the planners felt could meet energy demand at less capital cost).
Investment in power stations, to overcome the capacity backlog, was cut relatively little, but the Area Boards' budgets for 1950 and 1951 were severely pruned, particularly for the building of what were considered frills: new offices, show.
rooms or service centres.
The chairmen were, of course, willing to make some cuts where the national interest required it, but Gaitskell pushed them too far, making what seemed to them impossible demands.
While they were being asked to trim investment, the Government's own policies were creating additional needs for investment in electricity distribution: airfields and other new defence installations for the Korean mobilisation, for example, required new electricity mains, as did the new housing estates which were a vital part of Labour's drive for electoral popularity.
Between February 1950 (when the electorate returned the Labour Government with a barely adequate majority) and October 1951 (when Labour went to the polls again and were defeated), the confidence and authority of Gaitskell, as of his Government, withered.
He had failed to control the growth in demand by the Clow experiment.
In follow-up discussions in December 1950 the BEA agreed to further limitations on promotional  advertising and a series of somewhat inconclusive committees and working parties on alternative mechanical methods of load limitation, but these had no perceptible effect on sales.
With demand still growing rapidly, it was obvious that the lower levels of investment in electricity imposed by Gaitskell (however necessary they might seem from his broader viewpoint) were inadequate.
By 1951 the Area Board chairmen had a burgeoning portfolio of examples of demand outstripping supply: tens of thousands of new houses would have to be left without electricity if their investment allocations were not increased.
The Boards' main weapon in a situation like this was public opinion, and, with elections pending, it was a particularly effective one.
Citrine, who, despite his wrangles with Gaitskell, was keen that Labour should win, warned in the summer of 1951 that he could no longer hold back the Area Board chairmen from politically damaging attacks on the Government if the investment controls were not relaxed.
Some of the extreme cases (such as the Yorkshire miners who would strike unless electricity were connected to their village) did reach the public eye, and it became clear that Citrine was not fooling when he said there were many equally damaging examples for which the chairmen would insist on pinning the blame where it belonged — on government.
Under this threat, Gaitskell allowed them to increase the investment allocation for supplying industry and new housing estates, though there were some cuts in the rural electrification programme.
In return for such concessions, the Labour Government generally won the silence of the chairmen on politically-sensitive issues.
It was agreed, for example, that the post-devaluation cuts and the later cuts in rural electrification should not be subject to public announcement.
It suited both parties for their accommodations to be by ‘gentleman's agreement’.
The public were a ‘voice offstage’ to be used by each side in their threats, but only in the last resort was public debate considered to have a useful role in decision making.
Within the BEA, the need for collusion with Whitehall on matters of this kind immeasurably strengthened the instincts of centralisation and secrecy with which the top management were imbued.
The hostile Conservative press environment into which the nationalised organisations were born, and the unusually vituperative and irresponsible anti-nationalisation tone of Churchill's parliamentary opposition, also strengthened their preferences for keeping a low profile politically.
All the chairmen made an effort to reply to inaccurate or unverifiable press  criticism, and to stress their Boards' positive work in maintaining supplies in difficult conditions of great austerity, but experience proved truth to be of only limited effectiveness against prejudice.
The ‘orgy of slander’ against the Labour Government and all its works had already had severe direct impact on the chairmen.
In 1949, for example, it emerged before the Lynskey Tribunal that George Gibson, the chairman of the North Western Board, had somewhat unwisely accepted a gift of clothing from the flamboyant contact man, Sidney Stanley.
Gaitskell and Citrine were clear that Gibson was innocent of the whiff of corruption surrounding the allegations, to which he had no opportunity to reply (and Churchill in this case expressed his sympathy for Gibson), but his resignation had, inevitably, to he accepted.
Some years later, the chairman of the Yorkshire Board, W. M. Lapper, was tried on a charge of breaching the building control regulations.
The leaders of the industry were shocked when Lord Chief Justice Goddard sentenced him to six months imprisonment.
Lapper had certainly been guilty of conceit (a wrought iron gate had been ordered with senior managers' initials worked into it), but the sentence was interpreted as a politically motivated attack on wastrel public corporations, and was widely felt to be unjust.
Several other chairmen wanted a concerted public admission that they too had inadvertently breached the regulations (and it was indeed difficult to avoid technical breaches of the detailed regulations), but the choice was made rather to maintain a prudential low profile.
Yet, when any mistake or misjudgement could not only be pounced upon by the press and magnified as an indication of bureaucratic muddle or high-handedness, but also lead in extreme cases to job loss or imprisonment, the instinct for self-preservation by secrecy and tight central control was understandably strengthened.
The preference of ministers and mandarins — none of whom had a desire to be exposed to public criticism — for the ‘gentleman's agreement’ rather than the public discussion of serious policy issues was equally understandable.
When ministers uttered phrases such as the need for ‘public accountability’— a suitably imprecise but popular slogan — they usually meant accountability to themselves, rather than to Parliament or the public.
Such a conception was, moreover, implicit in the ideal of the independent public corporation, not subject (like the civil service) to parliamentary scrutiny of the details of its policy.
Labour Ministers consistently refused to answer questions in Parliament on the day-to-day administration of the industry, though the Board chairmen themselves courteously replied  to direct queries from MPs.
The Labour Government also refused to countenance a select committee on nationalised industries.
Debates in the Commons on the industry were thus inevitably general, trivial and partisan, but Ministers often preferred this situation to detached scrutiny by a more expert parliamentary committee.
In opposition the Conservatives had, it is true, pressed for a select committee, but when they returned to power the Commons committee they established was quite ineffective.
Conservative Ministers in office (like their Labour predecessors) remained uncooperative, and the select committee on nationalised industries was immersed in procedural wrangles over its terms of reference until the late 1950s and transacted no serious business.
III
The Conservative election victory of 1951 also brought little immediate change in the control of the level of investment by the supply industry.
Physical controls on capital spending remained, but, as under Labour, with the gradual restoration of the weakened economic base more resources could progressively be made available.
The level of investment by the BEA rose from only £92 millions in the financial year 1948/9 to £125 millions in 1950/1 and £196 millions in 1954/5 (only about two-fifths of this overall rise being accounted for by the fall in the real value of the pound).
In the election campaign, the Conservatives had made much of ‘setting the people free’ of the planners, and of making the nationalised industries more ‘businesslike’and ‘commercial’, but the reality of controls remained for some years, as indeed was inevitable given the physical limits of a national cake whose size was fixed in the short term.
In the first meeting with the Area Board chairmen in February 1952, the new Conservative Minister of Fuel and Power, Geoffrey Lloyd, stressed the need for economy as forcefully as Gaitskell, and capital allocations were still as carefully scrutinised.
The higher interest rates and credit squeeze control used by the Conservatives did, however, slow down growth in the economy overall.
Electricity demand responded (rising only 3.7 per cent in 1952/3 compared with 8.4 per cent in the previous year and 12.4 per cent in the year before that), thus providing some respite in the BEA's struggle to keep up.
Moreover, with a politically more secure government and fewer power cuts (the benefits of new investment were gradually coming through), the threat of public exposure could not be as effectively used by the Boards against Whitehall, though the mandarins remained for a time  concerned that Citrine was aiming at such an anti-government campaign.
However, with the Treasury less hostile towards electricity than under Gaitskell, and from 1953, the general economic situation improving considerably, the BEA were able to raise investment to a relatively high level.
The spirit of cooperation with Whitehall at official level thus survived the change of government intact.
As soon as the Conservatives came into office, there had been some signals to the nationalised industries that financial disciplines were likely to displace physical controls on investment.
From 1952 onwards rising interest rates were another outward indication of this.
Within the BEA, the majority of the top management initially seemed relatively happy with the old regime of physical controls.
though Ernest Long (who took over as BEA secretary in 1951) was more flexible than most, seeing that financial disciplines were, at least potentially, the medium for achieving greater independence from Whitehall.
Within the Ministry, however, there was increasing discontent with the existing controls.
Chantler, their economic adviser, told the new Minister frankly that the Conservatives had over-estimated the reality of controls, and most of his colleagues shared his view that any new system of control could scarcely be worse than the one they were attempting to use.
Chantler noted, however, in 1952, that ‘the current investment review has been even more fantastic than its predecessors if that were possible’, and it was not until 1953 that the Treasury had worked out a new system of investment control.
This led to the partial abandonment of physical controls and a move towards financial disciplines for the nationalised industries.
Ernest Long summarised the change snappily in his note to the Authority's accountant when they were working out the implications in 1954: ‘instead of being messed about by the long-haired boys at the Treasury we are now dealt with by the Finance boys — and we much prefer it that way’.
The subjection of the industry to ‘financial disciplines’ was inevitably at first a slogan rather than a policy.
Its precise effect on the allocation of investment resources would depend on the detailed working out of the disciplines, and the Treasury certainly took no chances on a complete return to the free market in investment capital.
Annual budgets still had to be checked by the Ministry and Treasury, and continued to be pruned.
As before there were considerations of restricting overall investment to physical availability of materials, and of maintaining leverage over the nationalised industries as part of Keynesian demand management in the economy  (allowing greater expenditure when a slump threatened and reining it in when the economy appeared to be overheating).
R. A. Butler, the new Chancellor, was, moreover, unwilling to take chances on market forces in areas which were vital for his economic strategy, such as the export drive.
He thus insisted that quantitative limits on the capacity of generating plant the BEA were permitted to order should remain, so that home manufacturers would have sufficient spare capacity for export markets.
Much paper passed between the BEA and the Ministry, with the BEA agreeing to these limits for presentational purposes.
Yet in reality neither they nor the manufacturers took the limits seriously, and Central Authority engineers deliberately ignored the agreed commissioning limits.
The result — a rather higher rate of completion of power stations and higher spending four or five years later in the mid-1950s — was welcomed by the Electricity Division, but it annoyed the Treasury and caused political embarrassment for the Government (which had been promising restraint in the public sector).
The desire of politicians to control annual outcomes in this way was unrealistic when applied to a policy in which the industry's own long-term objectives (in this case overcoming the capacity backlog) were in conflict.
Physical limits after 1953 were progressively less effective (and in most other areas not even formally retained), but the Government hoped that the new financial disciplines would have some effect in curbing the industry's investment demand.
For this hope to be fulfilled, however, there would have to be fundamental changes in BEA attitudes and decision-making procedures.
These were slow to develop, and the realisation of this made it difficult (even had they wished to do so) for Ministers to treat them like private sector companies, subject largely to control by fiscal and monetary policies rather than detailed intervention on capital spending.
Under the old regime, the Central Authority had treated their financial policy as a quite separate exercise having no relationship to their investment policy.
Their aim in borrowing money to finance new investment (either short-term from the banks or longer-term through their public issues of fixed-interest capital) had simply been to minimise the interest rate paid, an objective Citrine and Self pursued avidly.
The signals that such interest rates might normally be expected to give initially had very little impact on investment policy, whether in determining the quantity or the type of capital projects undertaken.
Indeed some years later (when examined by the Radcliffe Committee on the working of the monetary system) Sir Henry Self was to show  that his basic attitudes to this question remained fundamentally unchanged: interest rates, he said, affected their costs, not their investment behaviour.
For many years the response of the Central Authority remained the traditional one of the physical planner: new investment, irrespective of any rate of return required, was determined by predictions of demand made in physical terms with no allowance for the effect of price increases.
To them, it was axiomatic that prices and interest rates should be kept down to further their objective of cheap electricity.
These non-market attitudes were slow to give way, and their persistence helps to explain the Government's reluctance to abandon quantitative controls over programmes of investment.
There were none the less growing pressures on the BEA to discipline their own requests for capital through the achievement of a higher rate of return on capital, and higher rates of self-financing, both of which conformed to the Conservative Government's image of efficient private enterprise industry and ‘commercial’ disciplines.
The Treasury and the Ministry were involved in continuous discussions with the Authority's officials to establish the point from the early 1950s onwards, whenever capital programmes, borrowing limits (which required ministerial and parliamentary authorisation), or depreciation policy came up for discussion.
The Boards were, of course, also subject to the macroeconomic signals of the shift to a more market-orientated economy, particularly the trend rise in interest rates.
Labour's traditional view had been that interest rates should be kept down and investment restricted to feasible levels, not by monetary policy, but by quantitative credit controls and physical materials controls.
Although this could, as Labour-inclined economists increasingly accepted, lead to the misallocation of resources (through the underpricing of capital relative to other inputs), lower interest rates were still being trumpeted by Labour spokesmen as a great advantage for nationalised industries well into the 1950s.
The Conservatives relied more on monetary policy, and, with R. A. Butler as Chancellor of the Exchequer, interest rates fluctuated around a rising trend, and gradually forced up the BEA's borrowing costs.
For new short-term borrowings (which on several occasions rose above £100 millions) the BEA were charged bank rate (or only slightly more): this rose from 2 per cent under Labour to 4 per cent in March 1952, falling slightly in the following years, but rising again and, from February 1955 never falling below the 4 per cent level.
On most of the nationalisation  stock (paid to compensate former owners) and earlier long-term borrowings they inherited at nationalisation (much of it raised at the low interest rates of the 1930s) they paid only 3 per cent.
On the six new long-term capital issues they made between 1948 and 1955 to finance expansion — each for £100–200 millions — they paid a rate which rose from a little over 3 per cent initially to just over 4½ per cent by 1955.
These rates were somewhat better than those obtained by blue-chip industrial companies, being attractive to fixed-interest investors because of the cast-iron British Treasury guarantees behind them.
In the later years, however, these issues were pitched at optimistically low interest rates: the last BEA issue, of £200 millions in August 1955 (among the largest seen by the London market), was left largely in government hands.
The nationalised industries' borrowing as a whole had, in fact, become part of the public sector borrowing requirement and, in order to tighten up the monetary control, all new capital for the electricity industry (and other public sector industries) from 1956 was raised directly by the Treasury, and then lent by them to the industry.
These loans continued to reflect the progressively higher interest rates, which enhanced inflationary expectations were leading the market to demand on Government issues.
The interest rate paid on the first tranche of capital direct from the Treasury, at 5¼ per cent, was the highest they had ever paid.
Citrine and Self hoped that the rise was temporary and would be reversed (wedded, as always, to a philosophy of cheap capital and low prices, and the world as they hoped it would be again), but high interest rates continued to reflect the buoyant competing demands for capital and mild inflationary tendencies in the UK economy.
IV
The large demands which the BEA made on the capital market — at first directly in their own capital issues and then indirectly through the Treasury borrowing requirement — attracted criticism that electricity was ‘crowding out’ more desirable investment projects with potentially higher rates of return in the private sector.
Certainly the industry's borrowings amounted to a significant portion of the new capital raised on the London market, and the profitability of its investment was below that typically earned by private industry.
The traditional Conservative cry against the nationalised industries thus had some plausibility for anyone concerned with a correct allocation of investment resources in the economy: though it should be  remembered that the electricity boards were (unlike private industry)not in general free to invest as much as they wished at low rates of return, but were subject to annual quantitative limits agreed with the Minister.
There were, moreover, good reasons why a rapidly-growing industry such as electricity should raise a large proportion of its capital on the market rather than financing itself through higher earnings, as some of the critics suggested.
Geoffrey Lloyd (who had ministerial experience of the oil industry) pointed out that, despite similar economic characteristics, the oil companies were able to achieve a higher degree of self-financing.
Too great a reliance on self-financing would, however, require prices which were well above long-run costs (or as it was differently but conventionally expressed in the contemporary discussion by officials, would burden present-day consumers with an unfair proportion of the costs of supplying electricity in the future).
On this argument higher rates of self-financing would lead to the artificial depression of sales and to under -investment in electricity, precisely the opposite of ‘crowding out’.
In fact, Ministers were rarely happy to contemplate the rise in prices which would be necessary to raise the industry's earnings and its capacity to finance itself, though limited pressure was exerted.
This was principally directed toward the gradual adoption of more realistic depreciation provisions.
We have already seen (on pp. 33–4, above) that in 1948 the conventions of historic-cost, straight-line depreciation of capital led (if the Boards broke-even on book costs) to artificially low prices.
There was some allowance made for this indirectly by assuming rather conservative lives for the inherited assets, and by the early 1950s, more of the higher postwar investment costs were also entering into the historic cost depreciation charges.
The conservative bias in estimating lives was maintained for new investment, and other highly conservative accounting practices generally had an effect similar to replacement cost depreciation.
Prices were gradually raised to meet these higher costs.
By the mid-1950s, moreover, with technical progress and economies of scale expected to reduce the capital cost of future generating plant below typical early 1950s levels (see pp. 111–22, below), a respectable case could be made that eventually historic average costs would come into line with replacement costs.
Within the Ministry, there had been some pressure for the explicit adoption of replacement cost depreciation conventions.
The Boards' lines of defence against this — replacement costs were hypothetical and difficult to estimate, tax complications might follow — read like a weary defence of the  status quo, but the Ministry did in the end accept that their creation of special ad hoc depreciation reserves did go some way to meeting the point.
The Electricity Boards were generally reluctant to go further and show large surpluses in their accounts, for fear of criticism both from consumers and from workers in the industry, though some Boards went further than others in this direction.
The chairman of the London Board, Harry Randall, for example, was convinced of the need for Boards to earn a more ‘commercial’ rate of return, and his Board consistently had bigger surpluses and a higher level of self-financing than the others.
For most chairmen, however, Citrine's view that they should move only slowly in this direction, doing little more than break even (but conceding part of the case for higher depreciation), seemed quite consistent with the philosophy of nationalisation.
It was also acceptable to a Conservative Government which, despite its rhetoric, had no desire to see politically unpopular price rises laid at its own door.
In March 1956, for example, the Prime Minister appealed to nationalised industry leaders for price stability.
Citrine and the chairmen agreed to freeze their prices, despite rising costs and a less than enthusiastic approach to this Cabinet policy from the new Minister of Fuel and Power directly responsible, Aubrey Jones.
By early the following year some Boards were, as Jones had foreseen, going into deficit, and this inevitably compromised the industry's ability to meet the higher self-financing targets they had previously agreed with the Ministry.
The upshot of these pressures for self-financing was that in the first ten years some 36 per cent of the industry's investment was internally financed: £488 millions from depreciation allowances and £98 millions from surplus after interest payments.
Almost all of the remaining capital required to make up the £1551 millions invested came from borrowing.
The self-financing ratio was no higher in the later years of the period than at the beginning, though, without the pressure from the Ministry, it would no doubt have declined.
The ratio was slightly lower than that achieved by the industry before nationalisation, but it was not markedly out of line with other countries.
As the postwar economic recovery progressed, the cost of borrowing increased, but physical supplies of investment goods became less scarce.
Thus the BEA (though still constrained by annual capital budgets agreed with the Ministry) found its own task in meeting the satisfactorily buoyant demand for electricity less constrained by physical shortages.
The Conservatives had clearly let the economy  overheat for electoral advantage in 1955, but as soon as the election was over, clamped down with a credit squeeze and requests to trim expenditure below the agreed levels.
Citrine, now more aware of the new world they lived in, was more willing to contemplate price increases to finance investment, but conflicting signals came from Whitehall about both the merit and the practicability of such a change.
At times it seemed that price increases would be favoured as a means of raising self-financing and reducing pressure on the capital market; at others that rises would be deprecated as contributing to inflation.
The dilemma was to persist, with no clear and consistent signal coming to the industry.
Meanwhile, both on power station sites and on distribution works, with physical controls over materials gone, Central Authority exhortations to spending units to curtail expenditure were less effective.
In 1955/6 budgets were generally overspent and by a larger margin than in earlier years.
It was known that the financial controls within the industry left a good deal to be desired, but when the new Minister of Fuel and Power, Aubrey Jones, tried to tighten up in 1956 (even beginning the publication of annual investment targets in a bid to increase the Boards' commitment to them), he found it was not easy to impose such discipline when his target was fixed unreasonably low, as the Boards assured him it was.
With the rest of the economy still showing healthy expansion, the Boards were soon faced with the option of disobeying Whitehall or failing in their statutory duty to supply new consumers, and they chose the former, with one Board bluntly saying they were ignoring the Government's financial allocation (which was then increased for the industry generally).
Conservative Ministers were, then, no more able than Gaitskell to hold back the rising tide of demand for electricity, which, if the system were not to break down and new connections to be refused, the Boards had to follow up with new investment.
As their experience built up, the Treasury became less and less convinced that the role that had been envisaged for the nationalised industries in overall demand management was a desirable one.
The public corporations — and especially the capital-intensive Electricity Boards — had, it is true, underpinned the sustained high level of both private and public investment spending in postwar years which was one option in a Keynesian strategy for the avoidance of slump and the maintenance of full employment.
In the ‘fine tuning’ required in year-to-year economic management, however, the record was less impressive.
In most years, the Boards had spent more than their  budget, and neither Whitehall's control of the Central Authority, nor the Central Authority's control over Area Boards and other spending units, was capable of accuracy within margins as large as five per cent(a margin by no means unusual in the private sector also).
Overspending sometimes exceeded this level even after such window-dressing as was feasible.
Even if the Treasury had been able to use electricity investment for ‘fine tuning’, however, the wisdom of doing so was now widely doubted.
When the economy was overheating and the Government wished to cut investment demand, the over-expansion in sectors such as industry and housing usually placed demands on the electricity supply system which required increased rather than decreased investment.
In such circumstances, cuts in one sector over which the Government happened to have direct control could merely create an imbalance and shortages.
Short-term contracyclical changes in electricity investment were, moreover, extremely difficult for the Boards to accommodate, given the long lead-times of their investment projects.
Power station projects took four or five years, and major distribution schemes eighteen months.
Large adjustments downwards required the costly cancellation of contracts (which the Boards understandably resisted), and sheer logistic and managerial problems also limited their capacity quickly to accelerate their planned programmes.
Macroeconomic policy makers could, it seems, use general fiscal and monetary tools, more effectively than revisions of nationalised industry investment programmes, for short-term adjustments.
V
What was the upshot for resource allocation of the wrangles between the Electricity Boards and Whitehall in the first ten years of nationalisation?
The share of the electricity supply industry in UK domestic capital formation rose from 7 per cent in 1948 (about the same as in the 1930s) to above 8 per cent in the mid-1950s.
This was, in the view of many contemporary economists, whose conclusions have subsequently been accepted by economic historians, too high.
There were strong a priori arguments for this view, based on the industry's low achieved rate of return compared with potentially more profitable projects in the private sector.
If free-market conditions had generally prevailed, and if the BEA had got all the investment resources it required at low interest rates, this conclusion would be unassailable.
Yet these conditions patently did not apply.
The resolution of the question thus depends on the extent to which  the actual mix of physical controls, slowly improving financial disciplines and quantitative annual investment limitations were effective in limiting the very real possibility of over-expansion by the industry.
That they were at least in part effective was clearly the case.
Investment programmes were consistently cut back and the BEA remained short of power station capacity at peak times throughout their first ten years.
To say more precisely whether these cuts produced something like the optimal solution to the level of investment (though with the inconvenience of power cuts at the peak), is problematic in an economy which (even in the 1950s) was subject to considerable disequilibrium in prices and inherited production patterns.
There are, however, a number of considerations which suggest that the economists who criticised the industry exaggerated their case.
Firstly, the proportion of British investment resources devoted to electricity was, if anything, low by international standards, so that, other things being equal, Britain at least would appear to have suffered no greater investment ‘distortion’ than elsewhere.
Secondly, economists may have over-estimated the elasticity of demand for electricity, and thus exaggerated the distortions caused by prices that were too low.
In some areas, such as domestic (especially space heating) sales (as we shall see in Chapter 7), the economists' criticism that the demand could have been more efficiently met by other fuels was generally convincing, but they greatly exaggerated the extent to which electricity investment was dominated by the need to meet this demand.
Moreover, while it is perhaps plausible that, because of such factors, there was some over-investment in electricity, the potential economic penalties of this misallocation were probably rather small.
There is certainly no reason to believe that the electricity industry generally wasted investment resources in the manner of, for example, the nationalised railway industry in the same period, which (far from making even the minimal return required by the public sector) incurred mounting annual losses, yet persisted in uneconomic investment programmes.
We have focussed attention in this chapter on the Government's control of aggregate investment levels, but government influence on the details of investment was, in some areas, no less strong.
The supposed division between ‘general policy’ as a matter for the Minister, and ‘detailed execution’as a matter for the Boards — which was implicit in much earlier discussion of the public corporation — proved in practice to be meaningless.
As we shall see in subsequent  chapters, a wide range of managerial decision making was subject to ministerial intervention, while over substantial areas of ‘general’ policy ministerial views made no significant impact.
The whole bias of the leading engineers and managers in the industry was, of course, to maintain their independence both in the development of policy and in its execution.
In pursuing this object, they had the formidable weapons of their superior knowledge and direct executive control.
Whitehall recognised the wastefulness of attempting to duplicate their expertise, though the Ministry of Fuel and Power had appointed expert advisers on both economics and science, perceiving the need for at least some expert technical knowledge if they were to exercise their overseeing role.
The long, arduous and structured process of conflict over the annual budgets gave the mandarins a chance to probe detailed questions of rural electrification, delays in connecting particular consumers, hire purchase finance, and other relatively minor areas.
Their overall fuel policy role was also to give them influence over more central aspects of BEA decision making on the choice of fuel for power stations, particularly when oil and nuclear power began to look like attractive options to add to the industry's coal-fired base.
The leading engineers and managers who were involved in these consultations often retained strong negative stereotypes of the civil service.
While they generally accepted the legitimacy of Whitehall interventions as ‘bankers’ to the industry in the annual investment review, when it came to discussion of other policies they were more likely to complain about the time that Whitehall committees and correspondence pre-empted, and to show impatience with civil service style.
In some areas — notably labour relations policy — Citrine was able successfully to keep the mandarins and ministers at bay, but he lacked the independent powers of the old CEB to say a straight ‘no’ in the last resort on a point on which the Minister had strong feelings.
SYSTEM EXPANSIONS: THE AREA BOARDS
Although the Central Authority initially resisted the more direct encroachment of Whitehall on the Area Boards (successfully insisting that communication should normally be through the Authority), the semi-political process which determined the Whitehall allocation of resources to electricity was mirrored within the British Electricity Authority.
The division of power and cash between the Authority itself (responsible for generation) and the Area Boards (responsible for distribution) was subject to a complex process of bargaining not only with the Ministry but also internally, with discussion there directed as much to political, consensual ends as to traditional commercial disciplines.
This was pre-eminently the case where the Area Boards were united in opposing the Central Authority or the Government (as on the Clow differential), though Citrine was more willing to give in to such pressure on matters where he respected the Board Chairmen's views, such as tariffs, than on matters where he was determined to impose his own, as in labour relations.
However, the statutorily-entrenched power of the area chairmen meant that they were more successful than any other group within the Authority in forcing reconsideration of headquarters' views.
This consensual bargaining process also played a significant part in determining the allocation of resources between individual Area  Boards on matters on which their interests differed.
The chairmen, jealous of their independence, would have been happy to see less uniformity in practice, but as the requirements of justifying the industry's policies to Whitehall became more apparent, they accepted (albeit often reluctantly) the Central Authority's point that consistency between Boards was easier to defend than were individual policies which each Board considered right.
Attacks on the Area Boards from the press and the Conservatives also strengthened the instinct to develop a defence of their position through consistency.
The Central Authority's ambition to standardise was also based on the role accorded to it by statute ‘…to co-ordinate the distribution of electricity by Area Boards and to exercise a general control over the policy of those Boards’.
Citrine sometimes threatened a directive as his ultimate bargaining counter, but Area Board chairmen could call his bluff and he usually preferred to search for collective agreement.
In some areas, the Central Authority's status, despite its statutory powers, was weak because of its own lack of experience and knowledge.
The chairmen could not help but note, for example, that on tariff policy the headquarters staff were less expert than the former regulatory body, the Electricity Commissioners.
The commercial department of the Central Authority was staffed at the top by three ex-CEB men who had been experts in the complex bulk tariff rules laid down in 1926 to secure equity between independent undertakings: a job which no longer existed.
None of them had direct experience of retail tariff-making and they were to find most of their initiatives on tariffs blocked by the Area Board chairmen.
While some of the less experienced chairmen welcomed guidance from the Central Authority, the majority were more rugged in their resistance to headquarters encroachment on their commercial responsibilities.
Harry Randall of the London Board was vociferous in opposition to headquarters, and made the running in the questioning at Area Board chairmen's meetings.
For many years there were political overtones in this opposition, with Citrine seeing Randall as the representative of a capitalist rump in the industry which must be controlled.
However, contrasts in personal style between chairmen inhibited concerted action on some matters and helped Citrine.
Randall, for example, had a rather starchy personality, while Alderman Lewis, the ex-trade unionist chairman of the Midlands was rough and loquacious: they had no personal rapport.
Dissident chairmen were, however, frequently able to gain the support of other  chairmen on specific issues of Area Board independence, and it was these issues that became the substantive ones between the central regime and the Boards.
Some chairmen expressed their discontent with Citrine's centralising tendencies, for example, by asking to be released from their turn at occupying one of the four Central Authority seats reserved for them, or by sending deputies to headquarters meetings.
This annoyed Citrine and he had formal resolutions passed requesting the presence of the chairmen, but these also were sometimes ignored.
The chairmen met Citrine and his colleagues formally once a month, prior to the meeting of the Central Authority, and (again in the face of Citrine's active discouragement) sometimes co-ordinated their views by meeting in advance.
Citrine was always reluctant to withdraw from a Central Authority position, but the more effective chairmen soon learned that careful preparation on committees beforehand and advance lobbying of Citrine and Self were a surer way of winning their point than the abrasive technique of frontal opposition.
The sometimes strident expressions of independence at Area Board chairmen's meetings were often just theatrical reminders to Citrine and his headquarters colleagues that limits to consensus existed beyond which they would be unwise to step.
Once a consensus had been reached, it had no legal standing, but Citrine expected the chairmen to go back to their own Boards and secure acceptance of the common policy.
Chairmen did not always agree with this interpretation, though they were aware that the Central Authority could in the last resort compel compliance by issuing a directive.
This option was, however, never used without the agreement of the chairmen, and then only on those rare occasions when they felt it would help secure acceptance of unpopular measures by their colleagues and the broader public.
More commonly, Citrine and Self took infinite pains to secure voluntary acceptance of central guidance, and were successful.
In the early months after nationalisation, for example, the ex-trade unionist chairman of the North Western Board, George Gibson, initially opposed the much needed price rises (with the backing of his Board) but Citrine was able to talk them round.
The most potentially explosive area of contact between headquarters and the Boards was in financial control.
In the early years, when physical investment allocations were more important, and no adequate financial procedures had been established, the Boards were keen to establish their independence in this area.
The position of the  Central Authority was strong: they were responsible for the Boards as a whole breaking-even over a period of years; their approval was required for capital and current expenditure; and they raised the capital and controlled the reserves and bank-balances of the Boards.
The Boards accepted the general financial oversight, and also the cuts imposed on their early capital budgets, at government behest, on some of the less essential items such as Board offices and shops, rural electrification and hire purchase finance.
However, when the Central Authority's engineers and accountants suggested that they would require technical details of proposed capital schemes before authorising the expenditure, the area chairmen rebelled.
The critics attacked the ‘detailed time-wasting and expensive procedure involved in the proposals’, and deplored the second-guessing of the decisions of responsible Boards which they implied.
Faced with a determined revolt, the Central Authority settled for the submission of capital programmes with less detail.
In the following years discussions continued between the officers at the Boards and at headquarters in an attempt to sort out a practical level of detail which preserved the Authority's control over general policy and coordination, while reserving clearly local matters to the Area Boards.
The Authority had, however, conceded the central point that responsibility for technical efficiency and financial viability of individual schemes lay with the Area Boards.
This might be taken to imply that each Board should be financially self-supporting.
Under the legislation this was not in fact required (only the Boards as a whole were required to break even ‘taking one year with another’), but Citrine and his senior colleagues believed that it was a desirable principle that each Board should break even, and within a few years of nationalisation this was also tacitly accepted by the Boards.
Some chairmen, notably Randall of the London Board, created considerable surpluses and reserves, and his Board was the only one never to make a loss.
Others, such as the South Western, North Western and Midlands Boards, were less keen to raise tariffs to meet rising costs, and had to be given financial aid occasionally by the Central Authority from its reserves.
The Authority spent a good deal of time trying to persuade such Boards to avoid deficits by raising tariffs to remunerative levels, but commercial disciplines were inevitably weakened by such dual responsibility and ad hoc decisions.
This was also the case when external or internal politics, rather than commercial performance, seemed to be becoming a yardstick in financial allocations between Boards.
In 1951, for example, the Boards had been asked by the Minister to cut their spending on rural electrification, and most did so; the South Western Board, by contrast, pressed on and a few years later were praised by the same Minister for pursuing this uneconomic development.
They also received a grant of £250000 from the Central Authority to cover losses.
Cecil Melling, the chairman of the Eastern Board, drew the inevitable lesson, and in a subsequent year overspent his budget by as much as 12 per cent.
When the Central Authority carpeted him for this, he stated that he had done it both to meet statutory obligations and to make faster progress on rural electrification than agreed.
He pointed out that, unlike the South Western Board, he was not asking for any subsidy.
Self was ‘reluctant to criticise a Board for showing enterprise’ and no action was taken.
Such deliberate flouting of the financial control of the centre was rare, though overspending was, as we have seen, common, and financial controls were generally weak.
Moreover, the cases that did occur (and the Central Authority's reluctant acquiescence in them) pointed up the importance of internal politics as well as commercial disciplines in determining both the Boards' behaviour and internal resource allocation.
Some of the former private enterprise managers (notably E. H. E. Woodward on the Central Authority and Harry Randall at the London Board) had seen from the beginning that proper decentralisation required that the Boards relate capital expenditure to revenue-earning potential in order to retain direct control of their financial viability; and outside commentators were sometimes surprised that the Boards' decisions on capital expenditure to meet statutory obligations were made quite separately from the revenue estimates which determined their profitability.
Yet this was in part a reflection of the special conditions they faced.
Much of their investment was pre-determined by their statutory obligation to supply (which was restored in 1953 as general supply shortages disappeared), and their revenue could (given their quasi-monopoly position) be fixed (within broad limits) by the level of tariffs which they chose.
Some schemes were, moreover, undertaken, even though it was known that they would make a loss, because of the statutory duty to supply.
Inevitably, then, the logic of the more normal commercial practice of decentralisation to independent profit centres was compromised, irrespective of Central Authority preferences.
Citrine and Self also felt a duty to ensure some fairness between Boards in cases where resources or needs differed, or where temporary financial difficulties were encountered.
There were, how  ever, considerable practical problems for the Central Authority in disciplining this instinct by devising measures of performance alternative to the profit yardstick, The Area Board barons liked to keep the Central Authority distant from their own fiefs, but they did come to court to bargain on the issues which had to be resolved between them; and when they did this personal and political factors could be as important as commercial or economic ones.
Some of the Area Board chairmen could not help noticing that their colleagues who shouted loudest could sometimes induce appeasement, Citrine and Self seeming to show more regard for consensus than for the merits of the case.
Of course, all human institutions must rely heavily on consensus, and it is proper that they should, but in the British Electricity Authority, partly because of the predilection of the chairmen and partly because of the difficulty of defining yardsticks, internal politics were to dominate commercial allocative mechanisms more than in most businesses.
While they were subject to important central pressures, the Area Chairmen and their Boards had considerable authority and status at the local level, which they sought to develop by rooting their Boards firmly in the local community.
Municipalities had, prior to nationalisation, often controlled local electricity sales and distribution, and the 1947 Act required the Minister to establish Consultative Councils of consumers, to expand this tradition of consulting those who used the monopoly electricity service.
Many former elected municipal electricity committee members were initially appointed to the Councils, but there were also other local personalities and representatives of local interest groups, notably farming, industry and the trade unions.
On one issue which centrally concerned the Consultative Councils — electricity prices — their attitudes were predictable and damaging: the Councils generally added to the pressure for uneconomically low prices, though members who adopted an aggressively consumerist line were unlikely to find themselves reappointed by the Minister.
The members who got most out of it, and were most appreciated by the Boards, were those who saw their role as a symbiotic mixture of representing consumer complaints to managers and presenting a favourable public relations image for the Board.
This ‘give-and-take’ role was encouraged by the requirement that the chairman of the Consumer Consultative Council be appointed as a member of the Board, thus giving him direct access to the decision makers, but also creating a reciprocal responsibility.
Within a few years, most Boards felt that the Consultative Councils helped to   defuse individual complaints and to present a favourable image to the public, and were willing to defer to them on some matters of general  policy of an essentially political or presentational nature, such as priorities in rural electrification or aspects of domestic charging.
While the Conservative Political Centre later referred to the Councils as ‘wet and windy’, and consumerists felt they were inadequate, the Boards saw their work as a solidly realistic achievement.
Within the Boards, policy formulation in practice lay largely in the hands of the chairman and his deputy (one of whom was usually an engineer) and their senior officers (usually four: an engineer, commercial officer, accountant, and secretary).
Although the Boards had somewhat uninspiring regional names, most of them tried to present a more appealing local public face by using acronyms or logos such as‘MANWEB’ for the Merseyside and North Wales Electricity Board, and ‘Seeboard’for the South Eastern Board.
Their areas varied considerably in size and in composition (see Figure 6.1).
The smallest, the South-East Scotland Board, sold much less electricity than Birmingham Corporation (the largest pre-nationalisation undertaking).
The most rural — and also small — South Western Board had no city larger than Bristol and a large rural hinterland.
The London Board, by contrast, was heavily urbanised and had a dominant domestic load; whereas Boards in South Wales and the North had a preponderant industrial load.
The fourteen Area Boards themselves had to devolve some functions further and they initially set up about 500 local districts (slightly fewer than the number of pre-nationalisation undertakings).
A district typically had 20–25000 consumers and covered 130 square miles, and initially they were grouped into an intermediate level of control, the ‘sub-area’; with an average of five sub-areas in each Board.
There was some variety in this local organisation.
In some Boards devolution of management to the districts was restricted; other Boards were more adventurous.
In some, districts were headed jointly by an engineer and a commercial manager (on the argument that there were essentially two different functions: system engineering, and sales and contracting); in others each district had only one manager (usually an engineer).
Some Boards tried to preserve a sense of identity, basing districts on pre-nationalisation undertakings (encouraging rivalry between them), while others aimed to blur old loyalties in merged districts, and encouraged increased cooperation between them.
In all Boards, however, there was an increasing tendency to merge districts; and in a few, to eliminate the sub-area tier of management completely, decentralising management directly to enlarged districts.
London, with its highly compact districts, took  the lead in this, and moved to a two-tier rather than three-tier organisation.
They ignored pressure from the Central Authority to await common agreement on a matter they were surely right in considering as one best left to the judgement of each area according to local conditions.
The advocates of reorganisation and nationalisation in the 1930s and 1940s had claimed there were potentially large gains in efficiency in distribution, and, while their forecasts were probably exaggerated, the new Area Boards were able to reap some of these advantages of larger-scale distribution and more centralised management.
Functions such as stores and meter testing and repair were centralised, and costs reduced.
More specialist managers and salesmen were employed; and supplies of engineering and office equipment were standardised and thus cheapened.
In the South Western Board, for example, it was decided to centralise accounting functions, reducing billing costs by more than a quarter in the first eighteen months, and there were further economies subsequently through mechanisation and centralisation on their Plymouth accounting office.
The biggest and most general gains, however, were in system engineering, as the Boards modified inherited plans for the reinforcement and extension of the distribution networks.
The large wartime backlog of investment left considerable scope for economies in new investment, as in the first ten years the length of distribution mains in service were extended by nearly a third.
Many older mains also required reinforcement to raise their capacity to match increased demand.
For several years, however, with investment restricted, Boards had in parts of their areas to postpone such work.
Here they attempted to persuade consumers not to install additional appliances which would overload the mains: where they failed in this, breakdowns inevitably followed.
The engineering works to extend and reinforce the system absorbed the bulk of the Area Boards' capital budgets, but could now be more efficiently planned.
Whereas, before nationalisation, the planning of bulk supply points from the National Grid had been constrained by complex legal and financial negotiations between the CEB and the undertakings, engineers were now able to plan the cheapest effective layout, resulting in more supply points and increased usage of the high-voltage 132kV system for energy transfer and thus reduced transmission losses.
An agreement with the Central Authority that the National Grid and local distribution systems would be planned to minimise joint costs (without regard to the incidence of  expenditure on the Authority or the Boards) largely overcame the earlier inefficiencies of divided ownership.
The local distribution systems, usually based on lines of 66kV, 33kV and 11kV, were also now more rationally planned, with the aim of minimising all local distribution costs without regard to the former local undertaking boundaries which had often borne no relation to the electrical load characteristics of an area.
The long-run gains were greatest in areas such as London, where an illogical patchwork-quilt of undertakings had persisted before nationalisation, and jealousies between municipalities and companies had limited cooperation in rational distribution development.
London began with one of the most expensive distribution systems and developed one cheaper than some other Boards.
Moreover, the new Area Board planning not only reduced the costs of developing the system, but also significantly improved the security of supply, with most towns served by several alternative sources on the new integrated distribution networks designed by the Area Boards.
These benefits were not, of course, costless, and there were aspects of the reorganisation which some managers felt were decreasing their efficiency.
The centralisation introduced an extra tier of administration at the Area Board headquarters, and in one Board, the North Eastern, this extra tier was somewhat unnecessarily introduced into an area which prior to nationalisation had had a rather efficient, centralised company undertaking, in order to conform to the organising committee's purely advisory organisational blueprint for Boards.
In all Boards there was certainly an increase in red tape and committee work, and perhaps a loss of initiative and an unwillingness to take responsibility among managers and engineers, and, in a very few cases, simple unchecked extravagance.
Yet, the dangers of centralisation certainly seem to have been avoided in the main spending area, that of system engineering.
Subsequent criticism of inadequate standardisation suggests indeed that there was some sensitivity to the benefits of using the remaining economic life of non-standard systems and older equipment within Boards.
The independent philosophies of system design in the Merseyside & North Wales and London Boards and the fast movement to a two-tier rather than three-tier management devolution in the latter Board also suggest that the drive to standardise did not significantly constrain local initiative where local conditions were thought to require a less orthodox approach.
Whatever the balance of gains and losses, the nationalised Area  Boards were certainly more frugal than their predecessors had expected to be in their capital expenditure.
In the War, distribution expenditure had been running at only a fifth of the prewar level, and the plans prepared by the undertakings for the Electricity Commissioners show they expected to continue to spend more than half of all their capital on developing distribution, as they had in the 1930s.
In the first ten years of nationalisation the proportion in fact declined to around a third.
This was partly because of government restrictions on capital spending on distribution to below what engineers in the industry considered desirable.
In some cases, for example, to keep within trimmed budgets, Boards had to install mains of too low a capacity to accommodate reasonable expectations of future load growth (causing greater expense later on); they also retained old vehicles and offices with excessively high running costs to save on capital expenditure.
The Central Authority also felt that Whitehall pruned the Area Boards' budgets, which could be relatively easily adjusted to meet short-term government policy, more severely than their own budget for generation.
Yet the substantial reduction in the planned expenditure on distribution suggests that the gains from reorganisation did outweigh the losses, and enabled the Boards to expand the system on a more economical basis than their predecessors would have found possible.
The pruning of distribution budgets by government also restricted the Area Boards in an aspect of standardisation which many were anxious to pursue: that of converting non-standard AC consumers, and those who still had DC supplies, to the British standard 240V AC domestic supply.
There was an extraordinary range of voltages: the London Board, for example,(where the fragmentation of undertakings had been extreme) inherited 17 different DC and 20 different AC voltages.
In earlier decades it had been generally agreed that there would be benefits from standardisation, but with the benefits accruing variously to consumers, undertakings generally and appliance manufacturers, while the costs fell on the non-standard undertakings alone, there had been a failure to agree on finance for a common scheme.
Meanwhile the estimated costs of standardisation were increasing as consumers purchased more non-standard appliances.
There were nearly three million non-standard consumers (nearly a third of the total) on nationalisation, and this number increased as resources were simply not available to convert local networks when new houses required a supply.
However, as materials supplies improved in the mid-1950s, the Boards increased their  expenditure on standardisation.
They usually started on the DC networks, where the benefits from both reinforcement and standardisation (which were usually tackled together) were greatest.
With a statutory duty to promote standardisation, the nationalised Boards were willing to go ahead with these schemes, paying for the conversion of consumers' apparatus as well as of their own mains, even where the returns to themselves were not adequate.
There were, of course substantial external benefits — through greater consumer convenience when moving house and cheaper standard equipment and appliances — and such a policy was, arguably, economically justified.
There would, indeed, have been a good economic case for some sharing of the burdens between Boards, since all benefited from standardisation though some incurred larger costs than others.
However, Randall (with more concern for principled commercial independence than for the economic logic of external benefits) refused to ask for such a subvention from central reserve funds for his London Board (which carried the greatest burden of standardisation expenditure).
In all Boards, the highest priority was accorded to the connection of new consumers who would otherwise be without a supply.
On nationalisation around a quarter of households in Britain still lacked a supply of electricity, most of them in urban slums (which had been uneconomic to connect either because of their short expected life or the inability of the occupants or unwillingness of their landlords to pay for internal wiring).
The proportion without electricity was to be reduced to less than one in ten in the first decade of nationalisation.
The principal beneficiaries were those who moved to the new houses built in the postwar housing drives, which (with a few exceptions in remote rural areas) all had electricity as a basic service.
More than 2.7 million new houses were built in the first ten years of nationalisation, and 1954, the peak year of Macmillan's housing drive, saw 354000 completed.
In Britain as a whole the number of domestic electricity consumers rose from 9.7 millions on nationalisation to 14.3 millions ten years later, reflecting the increase in the number of households as well as a sharp reduction in the proportion without electricity.
For many of the poor, the novelty of electricity was a symbol of access to a new postwar affluence, though consumption by such consumers typically remained small, and the Boards reckoned that many of these connections would be economic only in the longer run.
The capital charges typically incurred by the Boards on new domestic connections were as much as £1 per quarter, while many  consumers (especially new ones) paid little more than this (and thus insufficient to cover the additional costs of supplying current) in the early years.
Although the real cost of electricity had fallen dramatically, the quarterly electricity bill for small consumers used to budgeting weekly could still present a financial challenge.
Over a quarter of households prior to nationalisation had opted for a coin pre-payment meter to ease the burden, though some Boards now discouraged this (because of the high cost of installation and adjustment, and the risk of theft).
Quarterly bills were thus more widely used by the mid-1950s, even for the relatively poor consumers.
The Boards usually carried out the work of laying distribution mains themselves, though sometimes they used independent contractors.
They were also in the business of wiring installations for consumers (in houses, factories, schools, offices, shops) beyond the mains terminals, and this brought them into direct competition with the 7500, usually small, independent electrical contractors.
They agreed with the Electrical Contractors' Association at an early stage that they would operate on ‘fair and unsubsidised’ commercial lines.
A few Boards, seeing this as an essential part of their electricity service, expanded their contracting activities enthusiastically, while others left the business largely to private contractors.
The London Board, which inherited a particularly efficient contracting subsidiary from a company undertaking, expanded it further (even being allowed for special contracts to compete in the area of other Boards) and it became the most profitable part of their operation.
Inevitably, however, the Electrical Contractors' Association were annoyed if their members were undercut by nationalised Boards.
There was thus some political pressure from Conservative Ministers to ensure that Boards allocated overheads to their contracting activities properly and secured an economic profit, but the contractors' association director was so politically inept in following this up that Citrine had no difficulty in exposing him to Whitehall as a biased anti-nationaliser who was unwilling to accept a reasonable accommodation.
Most Boards were, however, able to reach agreement with local contractors on acceptable principles of fair competition, to which they formally agreed to adhere.
The Boards were far from innocent, however, and when they later developed a proper accounting system to allocate overheads fairly it was found that there had indeed been some unfair cross-subsidisation to their contracting accounts.
As we shall see in the next chapter, their commercial urge to expand was not adequately disciplined by proper costing, though in this particular  case the distortions caused were quite small.
The most difficult part of the Boards' programme of expanding the distribution system was in rural areas.
The method of distribution by overhead lines on wooden poles (rather than underground cables) was cheaper per mile, and usually tolerated in the countryside (especially when the Boards pointed out that it was a pre-condition of receiving the benefit of electricity supplies), but even so distribution to scattered rural premises was more expensive per consumer than in compact urban areas.
Most of the larger villages which could economically be connected already had electricity supplies on nationalisation, but rural pressure groups had been successful in gaining an opposition amendment to the 1947 Electricity Act safeguarding further development by enjoining the Boards to ‘secure, so far as practicable, the development, extension to rural areas and cheapening of supplies of electricity’.
Prior to nationalisation rural areas had been served either by companies (which charged prices which reflected the higher costs of rural supplies), or by nearby local authority undertakings extending beyond their municipal boundaries.
In the latter case, rural consumers were also typically charged higher prices, since the pressure from the local voters and ratepayers in the town was usually effective in curbing any idea of subsidy to the rural areas to meet the higher costs of supply.
On nationalisation, this local democratic pressure was removed, and most Boards took the statute as meaning they should do their best to extend supplies to rural areas even if they incurred losses in doing so which had to be made up from surpluses elsewhere.
It was agreed at an early stage (principally at Citrine's insistence) that sales in urban and rural areas should be at common prices, so that many rural dwellers already having a supply had prices reduced, though new consumers distant from the mains still had to pay a one-off contribution or line rental (which varied according to the Board) to meet part of the cost of connection.
The Boards preferred the wholesale development of rural districts (rather than piecemeal individual connections) since this reduced their costs, and they were generally able to use public meetings and written publicity to bring collective pressure on all potential consumers in a village to sign up for a supply, thus making comprehensive zoned development possible.
In the early years, the reluctance of some Boards to incur losses, the physical shortages of essential supplies like the wooden poles, and government cuts in their capital budgets, all delayed their rural programmes.
None the less, the proportion of farms connected rose  from 32 per cent in 1948 to 47 per cent in 1953.
Most of this rural development was unremunerative, and the South Western Board, with one of the largest rural populations and an accumulating deficit, determined to resolve its problems by political lobbying.
Stanley Steward, its first chairman — who had been an electrical manufacturer in the private sector — mobilised considerable pressure from the ‘county’ set on his consumer Consultative Council, and lobbied both the Government and the Central Authority for a subvention.
The Minister refused a direct subsidy, but brought pressure on the Central Authority to do something.
They felt that a good deal of the South Western Board's troubles were brought on by excessive expenditure and inadequate tariffs, and Steward found little sympathy from the other Boards, since some of them had equally serious system extension, reinforcement and standardisation problems, and were financing them by adequate tariffs.
By 1953, however, with Conservative rural constituencies pressing their MPs for a rural electrification subsidy, and the Minister looking more favourably on capital expenditure for this purpose, the Area Board chairmen hammered out a national plan for rural electrification, which was finally agreed at an extended and controversial meeting at a country hotel in Moretonhampstead in 1953.
It was reckoned that, within ten years, 85 per cent of farms could be connected (enough to satisfy the Minister and ease political pressure), though the overall programme would cost £130 millions and result in annual losses of the order of £4 millions.
Some Boards were not keen to bear these substantial losses.
The South Eastern Board, for example, generally refused to subsidise rural connections (charging the full cost to new rural consumers), and other Boards tried to minimise their commitment.
Still more Boards disliked the idea of subsidising other areas.
None the less, the South Western Board was clearly in financial difficulties, and in 1954 the Central Authority did make a subvention of £250000 from central reserves, with the possibility of further help five years later, hoping that the Board would now make reasonable charges to its consumers to cover expenditure.
Randall for the London Board did not fail to point out the contrast between this and his own refusal of central funds for standardisation (for which there was in fact a far sounder economic case).
Some feared that the concession would weaken the financial discipline on the Boards, though in fact the conditions imposed by the Central Authority raised the South Western Board's financial targets and they were soon in healthy surplus.
The agreed national rural electrification programme proceeded faster than planned, and by 1958 72 per cent of farms were already connected.
Compared with earlier, politically-inspired rural schemes in countries such as France (with a larger rural vote), British rural electricity development was efficiently executed with, generally, lines of adequate capacity, planned zoned development, and the revenue — cost gap eased by a higher consumption than was common overseas.
If it offended against purist commercial canons, then it could fairly be pointed out that the alternative might easily (like overseas systems) have offended more.
The price to urban consumers of bearing the losses incurred (probably of the order of 2 per cent of their bills) would have been considered by many to be an acceptable concession to the aspirations of country dwellers, and perhaps few would have endorsed the complaint by a contemporary free-market economist that ‘a slum dweller has to contribute to the cost of providing electricity for a country mansion’.
Yet it was undeniable that the Conservative political pressure to extend rural electrification had led to a diversion of scarce capital resources into investments which were known to be unremunerative and in fact turned out to be so.
There were, moreover, rather more poor urban dwellers still lacking electricity supply than there were rural dwellers, and investment in the reinforcement, standardisation and extension of urban supplies (some of which the Boards considered would be remunerative) was being cut back while this uneconomic development of rural areas was pressed forward.
When the pressures of the market and of urban local democracy (which had earlier restricted rural development) were replaced by ministerial investment control and rural pressure group activity at the national level, the consequences for efficiency and equality were not always those which the rival contemporary slogans of left and right might lead one to expect from them.
Such pressures would, however, probably have materialised in the postwar political climate, whether the industry had been nationalised or not.
For some chairmen, moreover, the prospect of playing Father Christmas (which their rural electrification largesse offered them) provided a not entirely unwelcome opportunity to affirm their commitment to the local community, and the voices of discontent raised against the policy were few.
COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT: PRICING FOR GROWTH
The objective of the Area Board chairmen in the 1950s is perhaps best interpreted as maximising the rate of growth of electricity sales consistent with covering book costs overall.
In the early years, they were constrained severely by the shortage of generating capacity and, in many areas, by the low capacity of inherited distribution mains; though the backlog of investment in both was, by the mid-1950s, being overcome.
Even in the earlier period, however, it was difficult to hold back the commercial urges of line managers, though some marketing effort was initially canalised into the job of discouraging the sale of electric fires or persuading people to go carefully in the use of electricity at peak times.
When accused of promoting sales at a time when they were incapable of supplying the electricity, the Board chairmen were robustly defensive.
They were doing their best to restrict peak growth, but neither the Central Authority nor the  Government, they argued, should attempt, for short-term reasons, to blunt the commercial edge of the industry.
They were anxious to build up their Board's commercial skills and saw this as an essential part of gaining the advantages of larger-scale management after nationalisation.
Earlier, the large undertakings had been able to appoint specialised commercial officers to deal with the special selling requirements in markets such as that for industrial power.
Many pre-nationalisation undertakings had also entered the retail market for electrical appliances, with shops or ‘showrooms’ where consumers could pay their electricity bills and get advice on electrical products.
In many cases, however, the new Boards felt that their predecessors had not gone far enough.
The smaller undertakings generally had possessed only weakly-developed sales functions, and they had sometimes had to call on outside expertise.
This had occasionally been available from the Central Electricity Board, whose own commercial staff negotiated some large industrial sales contracts for undertakings.
More generally, the cooperatively financed Electrical Development Association (EDA) ran joint industry advertising campaigns and provided advice from specialists in particular areas such as commercial or industrial sales.
Citrine, with his instinct for seeking stability and continuity, wanted to preserve the EDA intact on nationalisation, but the area chairmen felt the Boards should take over its work.
After a year of arguments, Citrine finally relented and the EDA's local work was taken on and expanded by the Area Boards, though its London headquarters, with a staff of 67, survived as a formally separate organisation but with its £150000 annual budget financed principally by the industry.
(It was not finally to be absorbed as the industry's central marketing department until 1968.)
Many of the chairmen were also anxious to strengthen their presence in the retailing of electrical goods by extending the number of shops and releasing the commercial drive of managers.
Earlier some engineers had derided this side of the business as mere ‘ironmongery’, and there had also been political constraints on development.
The opening of shops, for example, had been restricted in some municipal undertakings by pressure from Conservative town councils dominated by local shopkeepers who feared the competition.
In some such areas the shops the Boards inherited were known as ‘showrooms’ and were precisely that: places where electrical appliances could be shown, but not sold.
Many in the industry hoped that such political restrictions would now end.
None the less, sales promotion was, in the early years of shortages, pursued in a restrained way.
Advertising was directed to restricting peak sales, and capital spending on the building of new shops was limited by the shortages of building materials.
The goods they had previously concentrated on selling, like cookers, were difficult to move when power cuts were a regular winter occurrence; and many appliances were only available in small quantities.
Staff training stressed service and advice rather than aggressive selling, and people found the Board shops (or ‘service centres’ as they were rather coyly called before the 1960s) helpful on matters such as fixing plugs, and advice on safety, reliability, running costs and brand choice.
More aggressive marketing was carried out by door-to-door canvassers in some Boards, and promotional advertising also increased as the supply situation got easier.
The first big postwar EDA campaign was in 1954: the ‘Four Foundations of Modern Living’ advertisements promoted electric cookers, water heaters, refrigerators and washing machines, and were heavily supplemented by the Area Boards' own campaigns.
The Boards also aimed to expand sales through the provision of hire and credit facilities.
They had inherited a large number of hire schemes, and sometimes (particularly for cookers in working class areas) found it economic to continue these.
In the mid-1950s nearly half of all cookers used by consumers were still on hire.
In general, however, they found that consumers took better care of appliances on hire purchase and that servicing costs were lower.
They thus increasingly promoted this alternative means of easing the financial burden of appliance ownership.
From the beginning of 1956, pleased with the success of hire purchase, they abandoned hire schemes for cookers, after securing agreement from the gas industry, their major rival, to do the same.
They did, however, continue to offer exceptionally generous hire purchase terms on cookers: one Board, for example, offered repayments over ten years and a free parts and replacement service over that period.
On other appliances, terms were less generous and usually subject, like those of other retailers, to government credit restrictions.
In the 1950s, the Boards found the Conservative Government increasingly concerned about their shops' competition with the private sector of electrical retailing.
Ministers and MPs complained about their allegedly ‘luxurious’ service centres or excessive advertising in one breath, while berating the nationalised industries in the next breath for being insufficiently ‘commercial’.
Despite some pressure from sales staff to be allowed a more adventurous policy of  price cutting and quantity marketing, the Boards agreed to maintain manufacturers' list prices in order not to offend competing retailers, though there was some disguised price-cutting in their favourable hire purchase terms, especially for cookers.
As with their installation and contracting accounts (p. 72, above), later investigation showed that there was some inadequate accounting for overheads on retailing.
It also provided some justification for Conservative Government pressure, showing that their intervention was not simply politically-motivated protectionism of their own supporters in private retailing.
The Conservatives' attempts to deal with it were hardly fair to the Boards, however.
In the mid-1950s, when the private sector finance houses were increasing their facilities for private retailers, the Government withheld some of the funds the Boards requested for developing their own hire purchase schemes, thus further hobbling them against the competition.
Rather more reasonably, the Government also insisted that they raise the interest charge in hire purchase schemes to market rates (rather than the privileged rates at which the Boards borrowed capital from the Treasury).
Even so, a rise in the proportion of appliance sales on hire purchase from only a tenth on nationalisation to nearly a half ten years later enabled them to retain their share in the growing retail market for electrical goods at about the 25 per cent level which they inherited on nationalisation.
By then they were selling more than half a million major appliances annually.
The industry's own appliance selling effort was not dictated purely by its retailing interests, but was biased towards winning that part of the domestic electricity load which most helped them to increase electricity sales while minimising costs overall.
An important aspect of the industry's own cost structure (which shaped their strategy) was the high cost of servicing a small account, and of cabling and metering a house which used little electricity.
In many homes, apart from the essential lighting load, there were only infrequently used appliances such as electric irons or low-consumption ones such as radios.
The charge to such consumers did, of course, reflect some of the higher cost of supplying small quantities of electricity.
Nearly one-third of domestic consumers in 1948 were on very high flat-rate tariffs designed for small users, but these were gradually induced by Area Boards to shift to ‘two-part’ or ‘block’tariffs which had been adopted by most of the larger, progressive undertakings before nationalisation.
These encouraged greater electricity use and more accurately reflected the underlying decreasing cost structure of domestic supply.
Under a two-part tariff there was a basic standing charge (aiming to  cover costs of servicing the account, connecting supply and providing generating capacity) and a low charge per kWh of electricity purchased.
Under a block tariff, the initial kWh purchased carried a high price, but if consumption increased the extra blocks of kWh were charged at a significantly lower rate.
The effect of both tariffs was the same: the more, electricity the consumer used, the less he would on average pay per kWh.
The Boards directed their marketing policy to the same expansionary end as their electricity tariffs: trying to sell those appliances — particularly cookers and water heaters — which used additional large quantities of electricity.
Whereas a consumer using electricity only for lighting, an iron, a radio and a vacuum cleaner might use under 300kWh a year, the addition of one heavy current-using appliance like an immersion water heater or a cooker would more than quadruple that basic demand.
In connecting new houses, the Boards made generous allowances for such future load growth in distribution cables, though, in the early years especially, the shortage of materials inhibited the adoption of an expansionary sales and investment policy.
Another initially important barrier to the spread of appliance use was the limited capacity on the consumers' side of the terminals.
Many homes, especially the older ones, were wired for lighting only or had only one or two, low-powered socket outlets.
The Boards' own contracting services and the customer canvassing activities of their salesmen played a part in remedying this situation; and in most new houses ‘ring’ mains, with a range of socket outlets and the new standard 13 amp fused plugs, became the norm.
There was a temporary setback to this trend in Macmillan's housing drive, when housing standards were cut to increase construction speeds.
The expense of twelve lighting points and six socket outlets (as high as £30 in the mid-1950s when this was being promoted as a desirable minimum) also deterred some builders.
None the less by the mid-1950s some 58 per cent of consumers had power sockets of about five amps rating, with an average of 3.4 sockets each, and many new houses had nine or more.
In the 1950s only a quarter of the growth in sales of electricity to domestic consumers came from newly-connected homes and another quarter from the extended use of existing appliances, but as much as half came from newly-purchased appliances.
Irons and radios had been the only appliances owned by the majority of consumers before the War and they were joined by electric fires at the end of it.
By the mid-1950s only two other appliances had reached majority owner  ship: vacuum cleaners (which had already been well-established in the 1930s) and televisions (which, though new, proved the most rapid growth area, approaching 50 per cent ownership levels among consumers by 1957).
On most appliances (except cookers which were exempt) the high postwar level of purchase tax (varying between 50 per cent and 100 per cent for much of this period), government restriction of credit facilities, and the limited adoption of modern design and mass production techniques severely limited the market size.
Refrigerators were especially expensive and only one in ten consumers had them by 1957, while washing machines (few of which were automatic) had reached only one home in five.
In the first ten years of nationalisation, the ‘age of affluence’ was, for most people, still on the horizon, though the taste for consumer durables was visibly spreading.
It was the thermal load — cooking, water heating and electric fires — which created the greatest challenge for the industry's domestic sales strategy.
Their success in winning this load (which formed the bulk of domestic sales) explains why domestic consumers accounted for almost a third of the Area Boards' sales in the first ten years, rather more than was typical in other industrialised countries.
The spearhead of their sales drive was cooking and water heating, in which their major competitors were the gas boards.
Gas cookers were cheaper to buy and operate than electric cookers, and the Electricity Boards discussed the possible production of a cheap standard cooker to boost sales.
They failed to agree on a design, but the ‘modern’ image of electric cooking, particularly among young housewives, led to a gradual expansion of cooker sales.
The improved design of hotplates (and faster electric kettles for boiling water) also enhanced the image of electric cooking.
The Boards were conscious that cooking was generally an off-peak load (and thus cheap to supply), and, to reflect this advantage to themselves and meet gas competition, they generally accepted lower retail mark-ups on cookers than was usual on other appliances.
The consequence of this policy (already well established in many areas before nationalisation) was that they had a virtual monopoly of electric cooker sales, other retailers finding the trade unattractive.
Although the gas industry retained the larger market share for cooking overall, more than a quarter of consumers had electric cookers by 1958 and electricity for cooking continued to account for a fifth of domestic electricity sales.
There was also competition with gas (and with oil and coal) in the more rapidly growing market for water heating.
At the end of the  War, around a half of British households still lacked a fixed bath with hot, running water, but electricity played a part in changing this (whether as the only heat source or as summer immersion heating to complement water heating by the more common coal-fired back boilers).
By 1958 more than a quarter of consumers had electric water heating (compared with an eighth on nationalisation) and water heaters accounted for about a quarter of all domestic electricity sales.
Electricity was still more expensive than gas on a ‘heat-only’ basis, but its cleanliness, relative cheapness of installation, and convenience were powerful selling factors, and the rapidly rising trend of gas prices was gradually narrowing the gap between them.
Competition with gas was non-existent in many rural areas which lacked gas supplies but was at its most fierce in new urban housing estates.
Most electricity men were convinced that, just as in lighting they had outmatched gas completely, it was only a matter of time before they did the same in other uses.
To many it seemed that for new houses to be carcassed for gas as well as electricity involved an unnecessary duplication of expense.
Their patronising public attitude to their old and stagnant gas competitors was complemented locally by fierce competition to win the new housing market.
Each Board devised its own policy, sometimes offering developers incentives like free connection of a new housing estate if they installed electric cooking or water heating or an agreed minimum of sockets.
The gas industry legitimately complained that this competition was sometimes far from fair: the Electricity Boards were using the leverage provided by the necessity of electric lighting to try to exclude gas and deprive consumers of a free choice.
The Electricity Boards' defence (that the offers reflected their costs because small consumers were expensive to supply) was plausible in principle, but in a few Boards collapsed under more careful probing, and allegations of unfair competition continued to flow both ways between the industries.
There is, of course, always a danger that, in industries with some monopoly power, an element of competition, far from being beneficial, will induce uneconomic cross-subsidisation to win business, and this certainly happened in some areas.
However, the controls over local management in this respect were tightened up from the mid-1950s onwards.
It is, moreover, debatable whether the dynamic, competitive stimulus of the rivalry between the two industries also had good effects in sharpening the commercial edge of both of them.
Certainly that was the view of many of the senior managers who welcomed this exposure to the tests of the market-place as an important discipline  and validation of the ‘business’ status of the nationalised Boards.
The Achilles' heel of their competition with gas, and, more particularly, with coal (which still remained the mainstay of domestic heating in Britain) was the sale of electric fires.
We have seen (pp. 30–1, above) that the vast expansion in the number of such fires in the postwar years had provided consumers with a way of avoiding the consequences of coal rationing, but the effects on the electricity supply system were devastating.
Although in public statements the Boards tended to minimise this effect, their own load experts reckoned that space heating accounted for a significant proportion of the load at peak times.
(It was, of course, the load at peak times which imposed the highest costs on the system, partly because it was then that the least efficient power stations were used for generating, but principally because, since electricity could not be stored, it was the peak load which determined expenditure on new capacity.)
Appliances like cookers and water heaters tended to be used at off-peak times, but the use of electric fires was concentrated on the colder times in winter which coincided with system peak demand.
In the extreme case, a consumer who bought a one-bar electric fire for thirty shillings and paid less than a penny per hour for the electricity at peak time, imposed costs on the Electricity Boards of at least £60 for the kW of power station capacity needed to meet the demand.
In practice, not all fires were used at the peak, but even at the higher real prewar price levels, research had shown that only about a third of the costs imposed by the peak space heating demand were being recovered in contemporary domestic tariffs.
It is hardly surprising that marketing efforts in the 1930s had typically concentrated on other appliances.
The attitude of the nationalised Boards to the accelerating growth of the postwar space heating load was ambivalent.
They generally did not promote the sale of fires through showrooms or canvassers, and in the Eastern Board even banned their sale for several years until the peak capacity shortage eased.
Yet, of course, electric heating remained attractive to consumers (most of whom by then had fires or, if the Boards refused to sell them, could obtain them from other shops).
The view that keeping warm was socially undesirable was not a convincing argument for most consumers, whatever appeals to their spirit of cooperation on peak use were made.
The common misery imposed by coal rationing could be avoided by the simple expedient of plugging in and switching on, and in the later 1940s about two-fifths of domestic electricity sales were for space heating.
There were, moreover, many commercial men within the Boards who felt that in the long run it would be desirable and economic to win the space heating load.
All but a few households in Britain relied for heating on solid fuel fires in the principal room, and few considered it necessary to heat bedrooms or bathrooms continuously, even in winter.
Many electric fires were thus used as intermittent bedroom heating at night, or to heat the main room on cooler spring or autumn evenings when the coal fire had not been needed during the day.
In British conditions, electric heating seemed a natural complementary heating source at a time when central heating with individual room control was virtually unknown.
Many in the industry felt it was worth while taking risks on the peak space heating load, by keeping prices sufficiently low to attract in addition such off-peak evening or spring and autumn space heating loads, as well as the cooking and water heating sales.
Others (who were more justly accused of commercial megalomania or electrical messianism by critics) felt that the ‘all-electric’ future was near at hand, and that it was only a matter of time before all heating — continuous or intermittent — would be by electricity.
The crux of the debate was whether this was the most cost-effective way of meeting the demand for heating in Britain, 7 and the Boards were under considerable pressure from the Government to justify their commercial policy, which seemed to be attracting peak loads at uneconomic prices.
We have seen the deep resentment of the chairmen at Gaitskell's imposition of the Clow differential, which was an attempt to create a pricing structure which reflected the higher winter peak costs (pp. 36–8, above).
Although the Government had then retired hurt, the Clow Committee's more general criticisms of the industry's slowness in responding to the need to limit the peak by experimentation with load limiters or time-of-day tariffs remained, both within government and from bodies like the Federation of British Industries.
The Central Authority were, however, able to continue to deflect this criticism.
A government committee, investigating fuel and power policy under Viscount Ridley in 1952, suggested tighter control of pricing policies to ensure fair competition between the fuel industries.
This, the committee felt, was important if (as they recommended, and the fuel industries readily agreed) a system of price competition with free consumer choice was maintained, as the best way of ensuring efficiency in the allocation of resources in the energy sector.
The Minister's response was to set up a coordinating committee of the nationalised fuel industry chairmen.
They were, however, able successfully to fob him off with various working parties, with joint industry — civil service membership, to look at detailed questions such as the principles of pricing and the possibility of load limiters.
Predictably the committees and working parties achieved little.
They spent small amounts of money on load limitation experiments, but decided to do nothing.
On pricing, the conclusions which could be generally agreed were so flabby and meaningless that they might have made even the most brazen practitioner of newspeak blush.
It was sensibly decided not to publish the draft White Paper they prepared.
It is perhaps reassuring that they at least recognised utter nonsense when they wrote it, if disappointing that this was essentially a confession of failure by a Ministry whose central function had been to coordinate energy policy.
It was accepted within the Ministry that the fuel industry chairmen's coordinating committee (which rarely met) existed solely in order to provide an illusion of activity and allay parliamentary criticism.
The industry thus managed to maintain its freedom on this central aspect of commercial policy making, but its competence in living up to this challenge left much to be desired.
In the abstract, it is true, the principles they professed were exemplary.
The official Central Authority view was that their prices should fully reflect costs and that the ‘all-electric’ home was not a practicable proposition, since solid fuel would be more economical for continuous space heating.
However, they felt it important that consumers should retain the freedom of choice so that those who found the extra cost of electrical ‘refined heat’ worthwhile because of its cleanliness and convenience were free to pay for it.
They also stressed the importance of maintaining a price structure which continued to attract off-peak loads, such as cooking, water heating and non-winter space heating, and which would enable them to increase the consumption of small consumers to more economic levels.
In justifying their policies, however, they sometimes stooped to making public statements that were palpable nonsense: denying that space heating was a peak load, and devoting efforts commensurate with those of the ostrich to shift discussion to more defensible territory.
The stridency of their assertions tended to grow in inverse proportion to the extent of their knowledge on costs.
Outside critics, of which the most devastating was the Oxford economist Ian Little, had no difficulty in showing that their arguments ‘fail to wriggle out of the obvious’, which was that much of the domestic thermal load was being sold below cost and was  thereby winning heating markets which could be more efficiently supplied by alternative fuels at lower overall national cost.
This controversy could in principle have been resolved if the Electricity Boards had had effective knowledge of their own costs in meeting specific loads, but they conspicuously failed to develop and use the research necessary to establish this.
Their main source of information was meter reading, which, of course, told them nothing about what purposes domestic electricity was used for, and, more importantly for their costs, about what times of day it was used.
Some of the defenders of the domestic load, such as Dennis Bellamy (chairman of the Yorkshire Board), occasionally quoted cost and load data to justify their views, but these were based on such a biased sample of observations that it was difficult for any serious enquirer to accept them at face value.
In most Boards, commercial officers were preoccupied with the immense task of standardising the mass of different consumer tariffs inherited from the separate undertakings on nationalisation, avoiding rapid change which would upset consumers, but producing a coherent, standard charge which would be defensible.
Faced with these immediate problems, few of them had time to reflect that such an exercise might logically be based on proper cost research.
A basis for such costing investigations had existed in a team at the Electrical Research Association, jointly supported by the more forward-looking pre-nationalisation undertakings.
On nationalisation this small research staff, under a refugee from Nazi Germany, Paul Schiller, had been taken over by the BEA's commercial department.
They continued their research, but their reports were no longer published (as they had been up to 1948); and, at a time when cost research was more clearly needed than ever before, Schiller's team was starved of funds and talent.
Many Area Board chairmen were also dilatory in providing the researchers with information, and opposed the expenditure of resources on this research (preferring to concentrate commercial research on appliance development).
Most chairmen remained implacably opposed to any rethinking of their basic commercial philosophy as a result of the limited investigations which were possible, and Schiller's results were deliberately and systematically suppressed, since they showed the outside critics to be right on the space heating load.
Schiller had demonstrated the danger of space heating sales before nationalisation and he continued to dissent on that issue within the BEA headquarters, backed by a genuine concern to advance scientific knowledge in this area.
Unfortunately, the manner of his presentations and his attitude to criticism tended to alienate support for his case further, though his views were balanced and based on careful research.
(They did, fur example, show that the external critics, who claimed that the cooking and water heating loads were fully on-peak and failed to cover costs, were mistaken.)
Horrified by the obstructionism of his superiors and unable to make progress, Schiller leaked information to the press and helped fortify the outside criticism, though his superiors decided not to discipline him for this.
With political pressure (following the Ridley Committee) mounting for the industry to develop proper costing, Schiller's position improved slightly and he worked to change views within the industry.
He was able partly to overcome continuing obstructionism by using techniques of regression analysis to estimate load characteristics.
His first major costing exercise suggested that domestic consumers not only failed to meet costs on peak loads but, in all except one Area Board (where the data may have been biased), failed even to cover the average costs of supplying them.
This conclusion was, of course, extremely uncomfortable for the chairmen, since, if correct, it exposed as baseless their assurances to the Ministry on pricing policy.
There were genuine reasons for doubting its accuracy — the issues of joint cost allocation were (and remain) problematical — hut the senior management response to it (they insisted it be withdrawn even from internal circulation) betrayed a greater devotion to the cause of suppressing criticism than it did to that of searching for the truth.
Schiller none the less continued his research and provoked controversy by his estimate that, by the mid-1950s, though space heating sales had fallen to only a fifth of domestic sales, they still accounted for some three-fifths of the peak: significantly more than the BEA had ever publicly admitted.
The price of additional kWh in the domestic tariffs remained far below the costs incurred in supplying this demand (even on generous assumptions about margins of error in the calculations), and Schiller pressed the undesirability of adding to peak demand through further space heating sales.
His warnings were private to the industry and went largely unheeded.
It was only some years later, when the over-expansion he had forecast had materialised, and some of the more obscurantist leaders of the industry had been replaced by new men, that the industry came to terms with the problem (see pp. 212–17, below).
The critics of Schiller's cost research argued that electricity tariff policy could not be ‘handed over to a set of calculating machines’, and claimed instead to base their prices on ‘judgement and wisdom’.
Inevitably, this meant something between ‘charging what the traffic would bear’ and subjective cost assessment or extrapolation of past practice.
The Central Authority itself had to fix its own tariff for the bulk supply of electricity to the Boards and initially did well in reflecting costs by resisting pressure for ‘postalisation’ or charging a common national price.
They sensibly retained a regional fuel cost differential to reflect differing local coal costs, and their two-part bulk supply tariff, based on both a capacity charge per kW of peak demand and a running charge per kWh also sensibly reflected costs.
Attempts to make this cost reflection more sophisticated at a later date were, however, jeopardised by internal BEA politics, which reduced initiatives to the lowest common denominator acceptable to the Area Boards.
There were minor improvements: capacity charges to Boards whose peaks were on Sunday and did not coincide with system peaks were reduced a little in 1950 and further in 1954; an allowance was made for lower-cost regional energy imports in 1957.
But further proposals for the better reflection of system costs were rejected.
Cecil Melling (the chairman of the Eastern Board, who had supported Schiller's work since before nationalisation and took costing more seriously than his fellow chairmen) for a time gained the support of the Central Authority's commercial department for the better reflection of off-peak costs in the bulk tariff, but the other Area Board chairmen strongly opposed the initiative.
Fearing criticism if their bulk supply costs were better known (unsustainable assertions on off-peak generating costs had been made to the Ministry), they felt that the less guidance they got in tariff making from the Authority's bulk supply tariff the better.
Tariffs, they considered, were a matter for their own judgement at local level, and the existing simple bulk supply tariff, together with their own knowledge of the industry, were argued to be a sufficient incentive to develop off-peak sales.
Inevitably, the requirements both of compromise and of secrecy meant that Citrine and his colleagues at the top backed the obscurantism of the majority of the chairmen against Melling.
In his own Board, Melling was none the less able to pursue an off-peak pricing policy, despite criticism from the other chairmen that he was breaking the common front against Ministry interference on pricing.
He introduced an optional tariff in which all night units were cheaper, and persuaded manufacturers to produce night storage  heaters, though this night tariff was not widely promoted and was used by shops and offices rather than by domestic consumers initially.
All other Boards preferred to develop special separately-wired circuits for off-peak electricity, and, in the two southern Scottish Boards, this load was sold with enthusiasm.
In most other Boards, however, the off-peak rate was pitched high and the selling effort was minimal, off-peak supplies being offered in some Boards only from 1955, under pressure from both the Central Authority and the Ministry.
Most chairmen continued to believe, as they had told the Ministry in July 1953, that ‘the role of tariff policy, taken by itself, in improving the load factor of the system is not capable of much further advance.’
It is difficult to view this obscurantism of the chairmen with sympathy.
Their policies were riddled with the logical absurdities on pricing of which Gaitskell had earlier been so critical.
Yet they did face a genuine dilemma, which the simple formulas offered by critics could not resolve.
Demand was not always as price-elastic as the critics suggested, and the contrast between the views of managers within an industry (that price elasticity is low) and that of economists (that it is high) is a familiar one from other industries.
It is not always the case that the economists' bias is right.
It was conceivable that, as the area chairmen feared, higher prices in domestic tariffs would not only have discouraged undesirable loads such as peak space heating, but also the ones such as water heating and cooking which helped them in their overall commercial strategy and were largely off-peak.
If demand were more elastic in these uses than in peak space heating, higher prices could have damaged their cost-reducing strategy, and might even have worsened the load factor.
They had done virtually no research on the elasticity of demand, relying as usual on their intuition and experience, but in this case intuition may not have played them entirely false.
Most subsequent studies have shown the difficulty of measuring the price response of demand.
There are wide variations in different uses, and substantial effects from income, complementary appliance ownership, other fuel prices, and other factors largely beyond the control of the Electricity Boards irrespective of the pricing policy they adopted.
The policy of developing a diverse range of domestic uses by a moderate price policy and vigorous but selective appliance sales promotion might in these conditions have been a reasonable one.
Yet it was accepted privately within the industry that their ‘promotional’ pricing could be below cost in order to compete with  gas (precisely the kind of uneconomic cross-subsidy of which critics accused them).
Many chairmen were content to adopt a ‘swings and roundabouts’ approach — to this, provided they broke even on sales overall.
In the less cautious Boards, they were even prepared to let their more bullish exponents of domestic electrification pursue all domestic sales without regard to costs, with growth as the sole objective.
For a time, however, this policy seemed to be achieving expansion without the problems predicted by their critics.
As they had hoped, when domestic coal supplies became more plentiful in the mid-1950s, the share of electricity sold for space heating did indeed decline sharply.
By contrast, off-peak sales developed faster than peak sales overall, so that the underlying load factor (conventionally measured as the actual sales over the year compared with the sales that would have resulted if peak demand had been supplied throughout the year) rose satisfactorily from around 43 per cent on nationalisation to around 47 per cent ten years later.
Many chairmen took this faster expansion of off-peak than on-peak sales as evidence that their domestic sales strategies were justified, but Schiller later developed estimates which suggested that the true significance of domestic sales were masked by this experience.
By his calculations, domestic sales (about a third of total sales) accounted for as much as half of the peak load (most of it space heating) in severe weather, and thus imposed rather higher system costs than industrial and commercial sales.
It was, however, to be some years before the broad outlines of his findings were accepted.
After all, what were a theorist's research results worth compared with a lifetime of experience in electricity supply?
In the meantime, electricity prices were gradually raised to nearer long-run costs.
The bulk supply capacity charges to Area Boards rose 64 per cent in the first ten years of nationalisation, as the higher postwar investment costs were reflected in the Central Authority's books; and running charges were raised by 45 per cent, reflecting the rising cost of coal supplied by the National Coal Board.
These increases were significantly more rapid than the general rate of inflation but, as we have argued (pp. 31–4, above) they were entirely desirable.
Yet, not all this increase in bulk costs was passed on to the consumers in retail tariffs.
Each household's peak demand was not measured directly.
Instead most Boards adopted a standard proxy measure such as the number of rooms or the floor area of the domestic premises concerned, and based their standing charges or the charge for the first ‘block’ on this.
Even in 1948, this was already a  poor proxy for peak demand, but ten years later, when the peak demand of a typical domestic consumer was significantly higher, no adjustment other than increases proportionate to the increased bulk capacity charges had been made.
Since incremental kWh charges were also increased only in step with the bulk running charge, the Boards were in effect making no charge for any additional capacity necessary to meet the increased domestic sales over that ten-year period.
There was thus still a substantial subsidy, reducing prices below costs on domestic sales, at the end of the period as at the beginning, and the Boards showed no signs of facing up to this.
Indeed, they boasted proudly that retail electricity prices had risen more slowly than the retail price index in general: although their own tariffs had risen faster, average consumption had gone up and the extra kWh had been sold at the lower incremental charges of two-part or block tariffs, thus bringing the average domestic price in their first ten years down by a fifth in real terms.
Their boast was in some respects justified, for some of the fall in the real price of electricity was indeed a result of their successful promotion of domestic loads: reducing supply costs by increasing the average consumption per consumer.
Yet, while many chairmen persisted in denying it, the probability is that domestic prices remained inadequate to meet the overall costs of supplying domestic consumers, as they had been on nationalisation, though now for a new set of reasons, which betrayed a continuing inadequate degree of attention to proper costing exercises.
The contemporary debate on energy policy and the sales effort of the Boards concentrated on the domestic sector, though two-thirds of electricity sales were in fact to other consumers; industry, commerce, transport and farms.
The industry's preoccupation with domestic sales derived not only from political pressure, but also from the fact that a large proportion of their resources (both capital and manpower) was necessarily devoted to servicing the generally small and thus more expensive-to-supply domestic consumers.
Yet nearly two-thirds of the Boards' revenue came from the generally larger industrial and commercial consumers.
Sales to these consumers (which had been more effectively restrained in the difficult 1940s) rose more rapidly than those to domestic consumers in the first ten years of nationalisation.
Citrine liberally laced his public speeches advocating electrical expansion with references to the need to emulate the Americans in improving industrial productivity by increasing the amount of electric  power per worker.
The nationalised Boards, being larger than their predecessors, could, moreover, now afford to employ more specialist sales staff to cater for these markets (though they found that their pay scales made it difficult to recruit and keep good industrial salesmen in competition with the electrical manufacturing concerns).
The problem of pricing was somewhat easier in the case of larger consumers than of small domestic ones.
The rising cost of coal was automatically reflected in their contracts, so that, on nationalisation, there was less of a backlog to make up in price increases and consequently less ill will from necessary increases.
With large consumers, moreover, the cost of more complex metering was justified, and most were placed on a tariff based on their measured maximum demand as well as a cost-based running charge.
Some industrial consumers regretted that the Boards' attitudes to tariffs were much more rigid than that of their predecessors (who had been more willing to negotiate special rates).
Boards differed in their attitudes, the best being willing to modify standard tariffs where variations in costs justified it.
There were, for example, special agreements for the waiving of demand charges for off-peak supplies, and special terms for standby supplies for industrialists generating their own electricity, though these fell far short of what some industrialists, perhaps ingenuously, demanded.
In so far as the historic cost pricing rules applied, the large consumers were subsidised like others initially, but, by the mid-1950s, their prices probably reflected long-run costs fairly accurately (though they correctly, if somewhat ineffectively, complained about the continuing subsidy to the domestic consumer, which they suspected but could not prove).
The average price paid by industrial and commercial consumers declined only slightly if at all in real terms over the first ten years of nationalisation, but electricity usage in industry was probably less price-elastic than in most uses, and other factors were the main stimuli to sales growth.
Sales grew fastest, for example, in the rapidly-expanding, electricity-intensive chemical industry, and in the more prosperous areas of the South and Midlands.
They grew slowly in transport, where trams and trolley buses were being replaced by diesel buses, and where the British Transport Commission's railway electrification proposals were slow to mature.
Overall, industrial electricity sales grew twice as fast as industrial output.
Electricity continued to replace steam-powered mechanical drives, and the subdivision of power which it made possible remained a fundamentally attractive characteristic.
New industrial methods based on assembly  lines and continuous processes were typically more dependent on electricity than the ones they replaced.
By contrast, electricity for the production of heat was less successful against its competitors, though in special situations where off-peak supplies could be negotiated or, as in the pottery industry, where cleanliness, lack of flame and ease of control were at a premium, new supply contracts were won.
In areas where manufacturers or users were unwilling to pioneer applications, moreover, the Electricity Boards were able to finance demonstration projects, with some success in areas such as off-peak concrete-embedded electric floor heating for new factory, office and housing projects, and novel industrial processes of small scale.
Before the War, many large consumers had generated their own electricity (45 per cent of industrial electricity came from self-generation in 1938), and some of the larger firms, such as ICI and Ford, had been pioneers in generation technology.
As the benefits of large-scale integrated operation of power stations on the National Grid increased, however, the threat of such competition receded; and the share of self-generation, already down to 31 per cent on nationalisation, had been further reduced to 22 per cent ten years later.
Private generation remained economic where a firm had complementary process steam requirements (and could use back-pressure sets to produce both steam and electricity), where waste heat from another process could be used, or where investment incentives (not available to nationalised industries) or local property taxation (for which the Electricity Boards were more highly rated) gave an artificial subsidy to private firms.
Industrialists sometimes argued that they would generate even more electricity privately if the Boards did not make excessive charges for standby supplies, and this view derived some plausibility from the fact that the share of private generation was lower in Britain than in other European countries.
At least part of the explanation of this was, however, the efficiency of the National Grid's integrated programme of power station planning and operation, with which smaller private generating stations were less and less able to compete economically as the 1950s progressed.
GENERATION: CENTRALISATION AND CONSERVATISM (1948–53)
Responsibility within the BEA for the design, construction and operation of power stations lay principally with Sir John Hacking, the deputy chairman with engineering expertise, and with the senior of the officers, V. A. Pask, the chief engineer, who like Hacking came from the CEB.
The urgent problems of accelerating the construction programmes inherited in 1948 were being tackled, as we have seen, under Verity and Smith (pp. 23–8, above).
The headquarters engineering department found, however, that for new stations it had to take on many more staff, both to develop its limited expertise in generation design, and to fulfil its function of coordinating the work of the fourteen divisions to which generation operations and construction had been decentralised.
Most of the supply industry's generating expertise had previously been in the larger power companies and municipalities (which had been in the forefront of developing the more advanced power stations), but the first power company engineer they recruited as head of generation design fell ill shortly afterwards and died.
With many of the other leading generation engineers having taken positions as divisional controllers, he was difficult to replace, and responsibility as Pask's deputy for generation thus fell to J. D. Peattie, an ex-CEB operations engineer, with little experience of the power station design side, and to other ex-CEB staff who had previously liaised with the undertakings on  power station design.
Lower down the organisation, recruitment was no easier.
There was a considerable shortage of skilled designers and draughtsmen, and, despite several years of efforts, and assurances by Hacking that headquarters would build up their design expertise, recruitment problems remained.
When a delegation of US engineers in 1953 criticised power station design and construction, the engineers pointed to the inadequacy of their staffing levels for the unusually wide headquarters responsibility.
None the less the chief engineer's department had expanded considerably since CEB days (when they numbered 65): the technical and engineering staff at headquarters grew from 173 in 1948 to 330 by 1952.
The chief engineer's department remained in the old CEB headquarters, and Hacking and Pask were looked upon by the divisions as the engineering heads of the industry, but the division of responsibilities at the top of the BEA, as we have seen, envisaged a role also for Self, as the deputy chairman in charge of administration (pp. 12–13, above).
While Hacking had accepted joint responsibility for this organisational blueprint, his own instincts were to preserve the independence of the chief engineer's department from Self's administrative control as much as possible.
Pask more determinedly attempted to block Self's attempts to assert control, which he saw as unnecessary complications at a time when their efforts should be directed single-mindedly to overcoming the serious generating plant backlog.
The most conspicuous battleground in this prolonged conflict over the locus of control was the procedure for placing contracts.
Pask's initial strategy was simply not to reply (and to discourage his other senior engineers from replying) to communications from Self and the secretarial and accounting departments.
Thus Verity, the generation construction engineer, replied to an enquiry in September 1949 as to why the engineers had not reacted to a draft contracts procedure sent to them six months ago:
While Self knew that the pressures were great, and respected the engineers' need to retain control of technical aspects of contracts and  tender assessments, he also knew that the engineers were deliberately fending him off and impeding the agreement on procedures which he felt was essential for Central Authority financial control.
‘Bomber’ Smith (who joined the Authority's staff from the Ministry in September 1949) had his own doubts about the engineers, feeling that their desire for a good technical liaison with the manufacturers, and particularly the boiler-makers, tended to paralyse the BEA's capacity to exercise commercial pressure on them.
He wanted a more determined effort to speed up deliveries and to force an expansion of manufacturing capacity to meet the BEA's greatly enlarged needs.
With backing from Citrine and Self, Smith tried to exercise such leverage, and (when he failed to persuade the existing boiler manufacturers to respond) proposed to attract new firms to the industry by the promise of orders to keep them in business.
This determination to prevent the manufacturers exploiting a sellers, market induced Self to ask Smith to stay on and establish a Contracts Department as a step towards firmer financial control over the engineers.
The engineers strongly opposed this, but Citrine gave his backing to Self at a Central Authority meeting in March 1950 (when Pask was absent abroad).
The meeting was one of the most acrimonious they had experienced, but Citrine firmly overruled the engineers;
Self's victory was bitterly resented by the engineers and, on his return, Pask tried (unsuccessfully) to overturn it.
For some months the engineers tried to obstruct and by-pass Smith, until Hacking told them firmly that there must be a considerable change of heart by all concerned to work together.
Contracts thereafter became a joint responsibility, and the commercial edge of BEA pressure on manufacturers did improve, though financial controls remained weak.
Although Self was accused by the headquarters engineers of bureaucratic interference, his own doubts about the policies being pursued by the chief engineer's department crystallized into a conviction that they were guilty of unnecessarily over-centralised procedures, a view shared by many engineers in the divisions, though not by Hacking.
There were delays of months while specifications and tenders for new power stations were cleared by the headquarters  engineers, but Hacking insisted that there must be close technical control of design from the centre, claiming variously that the limited technical skills of divisions or the requirements of standardisation made centralisation necessary, or (quite implausibly) that anything else was illegal under the 1947 Act.
Self, by contrast, felt that the creativity of the divisions could be unlocked if central controls over both design and expenditure were relaxed somewhat.
From 1951 divisions were allowed a slightly greater say in designing power station layouts and in the placing of small contracts, but Hacking and Pask opposed any further decentralisation.
Self and Ernest Long, the secretary, devoted a good deal of thought to methods of budgetary control which would make decentralisation possible, but the headquarters engineers, still deeply distrustful of anything from Self, had little conception of the financial and management principles of decentralisation.
They reiterated the old CEB faith in the imperatives of central technical control, and brushed aside potential gains from decentralisation, but themselves maintained a very weak financial control over the divisions.
Attempts by Long and Self to fix annual financial budgets for the divisions were initially opposed by the headquarters engineers.
‘I think I should react more favourably to an attitude of confidence and trust…than to an attitude of suspicion that I am inherently extravagant and require continual supervision,’ wrote one in 1952, showing his misunderstanding of the decentralising potential of financial controls.
Even when a budgetary procedure was first reluctantly accepted in 1953 (under extreme pressure from Self), the engineers continued to see their task in technical not financial terms, and the financial controls remained rudimentary in the extreme.
Self, worn down by the struggle, seems eventually to have been convinced that the measurement of divisional performance by budgetary control and other yardsticks was not possible.
This militated against any substantial devolution of managerial power and initiatives to the divisions.
Meanwhile the controllers and their senior staff fulminated against excessive interference from both engineers and administrators at headquarters, who, in their view, lacked the experience of power station design, construction, and operation which the divisions themselves had inherited from the local undertakings.
The feeling that the centre only wanted financial and technical control to check every detail of their action, rather than to stimulate responsible management decentralisation, inevitably increased.
The policy confusion at the top did not preclude efficient management lower down.
The operational side of the BEA's generation  responsibilities were perhaps least compromised.
On nationalisation, the divisions had acquired around 300 power stations, initially grouping them for management at an intermediate level.
Gradually, as the smaller, obsolete stations were closed and the skills and authority of remaining power station superintendents increased, the divisions decentralised responsibility directly to them and intermediate ‘group’ offices were abandoned.
The day-to-day operation of power stations remained under the control of the six National Grid Control Centres, which (now they were freed from the financial provisions which had governed their relationship to the independent undertakings) were able to run them in a more efficient merit order, reducing the cost of generation.
This completed the process begun in the early 1930s of concentrating generation on the most efficient stations, and using the least efficient only during the winter peaks.
The BEA were also able to make savings of about 1 per cent of generation costs by centralising the purchase of coal and rationalising its transport, eliminating cross-hauling and sharing facilities such as sea-going colliers.
A system of operational efficiency comparison was also evolved by the mid-1950s, which allowed for the development of rivalry and emulation between power stations and contributed to the development of cost-consciousness.
On the generation design and construction side, the picture was a good deal less inspiring, though improvements were made and some of the inherited handicaps were overcome.
The transmission design and construction function (which was in the hands of a centralised headquarters group inherited from the CEB) was a model of efficiency, but the power station side posed more serious problems.
The task the divisions faced on the generation construction side was unique in British industry.
No other organisation needed to meet such a rapidly expanding demand for a single product that they had, in effect, to build one new factory every two months, as the BEA did during their first ten years.
This power station construction programme absorbed the greater part of their capital budgets, as well as a good deal of management time both at headquarters and in the divisions.
The capacity of the fourteen divisions to shoulder this responsibility, and the load placed on each division both varied enormously.
The largest division had more than ten times the construction workload of the smallest (which had quite inadequate technical staff).
Many of the projects taken over on nationalisation were, moreover, either wholly or partly in the hands of civil and electrical engineering consultants, whom the BEA assured of  continuing support for the  foreseeable future.
Although both ‘Bomber’ Smith and the engineers hoped that in time they would be able to bring construction times down nearer to three years (from the beginning of work on site to the commissioning of the first sets), the time actually taken was typically five or more years.
The BEA planning and design procedures, far from cutting this back, sometimes seemed designed merely to codify delays.
The divisions were given the go-ahead for construction five years in advance of the anticipated need for capacity, but during the previous three years there had been detailed consultations between headquarters and the divisions, about the power requirements, about the site, and about the design and layout of the proposed plant.
There were also regular conferences at headquarters for divisional controllers and further coordinating meetings for other divisional officers, with whom their headquarters functional equivalents liked to maintain direct contact.
The divisional controllers themselves complained that this compromised their own line of authority within the division, and they generally harboured a strong feeling that headquarters interfered too much in the design of new stations.
The controllers, own awareness of local conditions and operational requirements (not to speak of their pre-nationalisation experience in design and construction) could, they thought, have been more fully harnessed to the task.
When headquarters control extended to such mundane questions as whether a chemical or flushing toilet should be installed and whether surrounds should be grassed over or concreted, it is easy to understand the frustration of the engineers in the divisions.
The ‘strong technical control’ which had been seen by the CEB men at the centre as essential for efficiency was seen by many in the divisions as an unnecessary drag on initiative and responsibility.
The invariable response of headquarters was, however, to reiterate their ideas on the desirability of centralised technical control and to ignore its cumbersome, deadening effect.
Some improvements were, however, possible as a result of centralisation.
The work of Smith and Verity in this field, for example, represented a real gain for central coordination which was not always fairly appreciated by the controllers, who had a narrower local viewpoint.
For some years after nationalisation, the overall materials supply situation remained bleak.
There were still serious steel shortages, and materials were diverted to fulfil Macmillan's ‘housing crusade’ targets in the early 1950s.
Then, under pressure from the Chancellor, Whitehall insisted on the manufacturers diverting  turbines and other equipment to export markets rather than to the BEA.
Yet the bottlenecks in the industry's own programme were identified, one by one, and their control over the manufacturers was gradually increased.
Smith allocated orders to bring in new manufacturers where the existing ones proved excessively unreliable in breaking delivery promises or refusing to build new capacity.
The BEA also looked carefully at the possibility of importing plant and materials, but (with steel prices significantly higher in the USA and Europe and considerable difficulties in obtaining foreign exchange) they confined themselves to importing only a few specialist components which were causing serious delays in the programme.
For example, after British manufacturers had failed to provide adequate supplies of boiler tubes, they decided to import some from Italy in the early 1950s.
As with the Area Boards, the materials supply situation cased considerably after 1953, and they were able to negotiate tighter contracts with better delivery dates for the mid-1950s and after.
Whether because of the easing of the general supply situation, or because of the improved coordination, the delays in completing power stations were progressively reduced in the 1950s, with completion on average nearly eleven months behind pessimistic schedules in the early 1950s but down to eight months by the mid-1950s.
This still meant that they were taking more than five years on average, a rather miserable performance when compared either with American or with some continental European power stations.
In the mid-1950s only a few of the simpler, standard power stations were beginning commissioning three to three-and-a-half years after the start of work on site, but the BEA failed to get their average performance near to that of their best or up to the similar three-year timings achieved by the Atomic Energy Authority in developing their smaller (but more challenging) demonstration nuclear power plants.
The problems encountered on these large power station construction projects were variously blamed on restrictive practices by site labour, inadequate resources at the design stage, insufficient materials priorities for the industry, and ineffective project management combined with over-centralisation of detail.
Whatever the causes of construction delays, they were to remain a persistent and seemingly insoluble problem, not only for the electricity supply industry but for a wide range of other British industries embarking on such large capital projects for decades thereafter.
Despite these problems, the BEA were able, in the first ten years of nationalisation, to double the capacity of National Grid power  stations.
Commissioning levels were well below target initially, but, with the roll-over of previously uncompleted programmes, they began comfortably to exceed annual targets from 1952 onwards (when the annual commissioning rates averaged double the prewar level).
As a result, by 1956/7, although there remained a cumulative backlog of nearly 1800MW of uncompleted power station capacity, the system was capable of meeting the demands placed on it in a mild winter, and power cuts had by then become a rare occurrence.
The margin of safety was, however, still less than they considered desirable, and was inadequate to meet the space heating peak in a severe winter.
This reduction in the gap between supply and demand had been achieved despite a consistent forward under-estimation of the peak demand in every year and a consequential under-ordering of plant.
In determining the level of planned capacity five years ahead, separate estimates had been made by the BEA commercial department (taking into account national economic trends), the engineers (using simple arithmetical extrapolation of past growth), and the Area Boards (using their local knowledge), Their forecasts had one thing in common: they all under-estimated the growth (the commercial department's forecasts being least, and the Area Boards' most, accurate).
By the mid-1950s, the actual level of demand being experienced averaged 8 per cent more than the compromise estimate which had been adopted in determining the forward programmes.
Nevertheless, the high reliability of most of the new postwar plant, together with the policy of keeping very old plant in service virtually until it dropped apart (there were few plant retirements in this period) was sufficient for the National Grid Control to maintain a supply, albeit with immense efforts from the operating staff during the winter peaks, when virtually all available plant had to be maintained in readiness.
The high reliability of the new postwar plant may, however, have been purchased at too high a cost.
Certainly there were those, both in the divisions and outside, who felt that the BEA headquarters design policy, in its search for reliability and speed of construction above all else, had imposed an unnecessary conservatism on development.
Long-term planning took a back seat in the deliberations of the senior engineers whose efforts were principally devoted to overcoming short-term problems.
Forward planning (matching load forecasts and planned capacity, thinking about the future regional spread of power stations), was, of course, necessary, but was in practice merely a part  time function of the ex-CEB engineers in charge of system operation.
The CEB had, in fact, been quite sophisticated in its long-term planning, and their interwar prognostications had proved remarkably accurate.
The old CEB's pooling of national demands and its integrated operating philosophy had also been quite uniquely effective in reducing the level of standby plant required in Britain, and in planning national needs for capacity extensions in the most economical way.
The CEB also had an enviable record both in practical technical research preparatory to new Grid developments and in meeting Grid construction targets.
By 1948, however, the CEB engineers had become unusually conservative, and this appeared both in their views on future load growth (which they greatly under-estimated) and in their unwillingness to develop beyond the inherited 132kV National Grid to meet the demands of the decades ahead.
In the early months of the BEA, these conservative attitudes remained strong (though experimental work on higher voltage transmission was continued), and many CEB men felt it would be best to break the Grid up into three to meet the future demands they were expecting, rather than to raise the voltages and maintain a national system.
This seemed to one leading outside consultant unnecessarily restrictive.
A higher-voltage superimposed Grid would, the consultant argued (in a report prepared on his own initiative and published in the leading electrical engineering journal), extend the benefits of pooling demands nationally to gain economies of scale, a smaller spare plant margin, and increased reliability, as had the original Grid.
There was also, he felt, a good economic case with the higher voltage for transporting energy from coal mines to the load centres in the form of electricity cheaply via the Grid rather than in expensive coal trains by rail.
There was still considerable doubt among the ex-CEB men about the merits of this thesis, but Hacking and Pask, annoyed at being upstaged by an outside critic, pressed for a reconsideration of the issue, while D. P. Sayers, a new non-CEB recruit as head transmission engineer, catalysed the headquarters engineers into a new approach.
The precise costing of the alternatives was difficult (particularly since the nationalised rail and coal industries both refused to give guidance on their future prices which were a crucial element in the analysis), but by 1950 a working party chaired by Sayers concluded that, on balance, a higher-voltage superimposed network — Citrine insisted it be more elegantly referred to as the ‘Supergrid’— would be worthwhile.
In July of that year the Central  Authority accepted a proposal to invest £52 millions over ten years in 1150 miles of 275kV Supergrid lines.
The new lines, with more than six times the transmission capacity of the old 132kV Grid lines, would greatly strengthen the north — south interconnections which had been weak in the original Grid design (see Figure 8. 1).
Sections of the Grid which were expected to carry increasingly heavy loads (such as those between the coalfield power stations in the East Midlands and load centres in London) were to be constructed with wide clearances so as to be suitable for conversion to even higher voltages later should the need arise.
This decision was criticised at the time as unnecessarily ambitious, both by visiting American engineers (who were unused to Britain's highly integrated planning approach) and by the press, but the BEA's experience was to prove the critics wrong.
Demand on the system grew faster than expected (thus building up the economic  usage of the Supergrid rapidly and increasing the efficiency gains).
There were considerable savings both on the capital cost of power stations and on their operating costs.
In retrospect, indeed, the only criticism was to be that the whole Supergrid had not been designed for conversion to even higher voltages.
The system had to be extended considerably beyond the 1950 plans at both 132kV and 275kV in order to meet the greatly increased demands of the late 1950s.
From 1950 onwards, the BEA in their annual development plans also increasingly relied on the Supergrid to overcome the constraints on power station siting.
Many of the sites they inherited in 1948 were near the towns and cities which were the main load centres, but such sites seemed less likely to gain planning permission in the 1950s.
The BEA thus increasingly looked for sites more distant from the load centres, locating them instead on the coast (where cooling water supplies were cheap and plentiful) or on the coalfields (where coal would be the cheapest).
The Supergrid gave them more freedom to optimise their siting by these criteria.
They failed to obtain any long-term understanding on future regional coal price differentials from the National Coal Board, but their discussions did seem to indicate that there would be advantages to shifting away from the high-cost coalfields of Kent, South Wales and Scotland, and towards the cheaper coal of the East Midlands and Yorkshire.
As the 1950s progressed, therefore, new power station investment was increasingly concentrated on the latter areas.
Their forward planning guesses on coal fortunately proved correct, and substantially lower coal costs developed in those areas in the 20–30-year lifetime of the stations.
In the field of power station design, the conservatism of the headquarters engineers was more persistent than in the case of the Supergrid.
While in the 1930s the CEB men had been leaders in advocating larger-scale power generation, with the undertakings sometimes dragging their feet, by the time of nationalisation they pinned their faith more on the benefits of standardising on 30MW and 60MW sets as a means of both cutting costs and overcoming the capacity shortage (see pp. 24–5, above).
The 30MW sets were extremely conservative (the first set with the standard conditions had been commissioned as long ago as 1929), but Pask, the chief engineer, resisted pressure to reduce the number of such sets in the early years and concentrate more on the 60MW design.
This was cheaper per MW and had more advanced steam conditions and higher thermal efficiency.
It was as large a set as had been developed  earlier for general use, except for the London area (where a few larger sets had been installed in the 1930s and some larger sets of somewhat antiquated design were also completed by the BEA in its early years), There were, however, doubts about the flexibility in start-up and shut-down times for the new 60MW and other new designs, and a fortiori about more advanced designs.
CEB engineers feared that an over-commitment to the 60MW and other new designs would compromise operating flexibility.
Some 86 per cent of the plants built in the early years of the BEA were therefore the 30 and 60MW sets with standard steam conditions.
This conservatism was arguably excessive, given the subsequent relatively trouble-free experience of most of the innovations in power station design which might realistically have been on the agenda at this time.
These were generally recognised to involve no large changes in technology, but there was considerable potential from a series of small innovations, which reduced both the capital and operating costs of generating equipment.
Historically, the movement towards larger sizes (which reduced capital costs) and more advanced steam temperatures and pressures (which increased the amount of useful energy extracted from the fuel used) had gone together.
This was because the higher pressures and temperatures required more advanced materials engineering, which was often only worthwhile if there were also economies of scale (the 200MW sets with advanced steam conditions built later, for example, used less than half as much steel per MW as the simple 30MW sets the BEA were installing).
It was not until 1950 (three years after a similar set had been commissioned in America) that the BEA decided to go for some of these gains from larger scale by ordering an advanced 100MW set for 1955.
They and the manufacturers then successfully persuaded the Government to withdraw the order standardising turbo-alternators in the 30 and 60MW sizes.
A more serious constraint earlier had been the weight of components which had to be transported by road, but the adoption of hydrogen-cooling of the rotor (pioneered in America before the War) now made it possible to reduce the size of components in the larger sets.
The first 100MW set at Castle Donington (Leicestershire) was not in fact commissioned until 1956.
The next advance in scale, a 120MW set, was ordered in March 1952 for Blyth (Northumberland) but not completed until nearly seven years later.
The 120MW sets (and some of the later 60MW and 100MW sets) also incorporated a considerable advance in steam conditions, with pressures of 1500psi (compared with 900psi in  standard 60MW sets) and temperatures of 1000–1050°F (compared with 900°F).
In such conditions some of the turbine blades would glow at a dull red heat, and this represented the practical limit for ferritic steel: higher temperatures could only be attained with the use of special (austenitic) steels, which were in short supply in Britain at the time.
Yet this modest advance in steam conditions was approached late and with circumspection: the sets on order for the whole of the 1950s commissioning programmes remained mainly the 30MW and 60MW sizes, and only a third of the sets adopted the more advanced steam conditions.
Other innovations were also approached with circumspection by the BEA headquarters design engineers, even though significant experience of them had been gained both in this country and abroad.
The technique of introducing a steam re-heat cycle (in which steam is extracted from the turbine at an intermediate stage, raised to a higher temperature and reintroduced into the lower pressure stage) had been pioneered in Britain by consultants and widely adopted in America.
Yet, despite inheriting a successful re-heat design under construction at Dunston (Tyne and Wear) on nationalisation, the CEB engineers doubted the operational flexibility of the re-heat sets in meeting the more variable load on the British Grid.
Only when they had gained experience of the re-heat sets at Dunston (in 1952) did they concede its flexibility, and re-heat became standard in their new stations from then onwards.
Dunston and other non-standard stations also pioneered ‘unit’ boilers in Britain.
British engineers in the 1930s had preferred to have several boilers per turbine and a station spare, though this involved expensive interconnecting pipework and American experience showed that ‘unit’ boilers (one per turbine) could be reliable.
The BEA engineers, in consultation with the boiler-makers, initially concentrated on alternative options for improving boiler reliability, and they had serious doubts about the manufacturers' capacity to make reliable unit boilers with the higher postwar steam conditions, though gradually these were adopted after 1952.
The conservatism of Pask, the chief engineer, seems to have derived from pressure from his ex-CEB colleagues in operations, who stressed the need for absolute reliability in new machines.
In the conditions of capacity shortage which they faced, short-term considerations favoured priority attention to reliability rather than optimising long-term efficiency.
The headquarters generation design engineer, Freddie Shakeshaft, also a CEB man, had a ‘seat of the  pants’ approach to engineering, stressing practical experience rather than theoretical extrapolations of design parameters.
(Like many British design engineers at the time — and unlike Continental or American ones — he had no university training and had come up through the usual apprenticeship route with evening and part-time study.)
He took Pask's conservative philosophy even further by stressing that even in less strained times Britain should not pioneer technology, but should let America develop experience and then copy the designs.
He and his colleagues were well aware of the more rapid progress in America, and there were regular transatlantic visits by headquarters engineers, but only when they were quite sure of new techniques and had discussed them thoroughly with the British manufacturers were they prepared to make a move.
There were some engineers who wanted more experimentation and more rapid adoption of larger sizes or re-heat, arguing that, while Britain had at last caught up with American levels of thermal efficiency in 1938, she was now again falling behind.
Given Shakeshaft's conservatism, and the BEA's long power station construction times, relative backwardness was indeed inevitable, since it effectively placed eleven years between the trial of new technology in America and its first adoption in Britain.
It is hard to believe that a more adventurous policy would not have been justified (even had it led to more mistakes and power cuts at the winter peak).
None the less, given the pressures on the BEA at the time, it is perhaps understandable that in the early years speed (which proved elusive) and reliability (which they achieved) were given priority over efficiency and economy.
By 1952, however, impatience with the conservatism of Pask and Shakeshaft was growing within the BEA.
Although Self and Citrine lacked the confidence and knowledge to pressure the engineers on technical questions, both Hacking and Woodward on the Central Authority began asking increasingly awkward questions about whether they were unnecessarily foregoing the potential benefits of more advanced sets.
Pask stonewalled, claiming variously that he had no staff to answer questions, that only one boiler-maker in Britain was capable of making unit boilers for large sets, that they would encounter operational difficulties, that there would be economies to replication of smaller sets, that larger sets were more expensive than small ones, and that station layouts would not accommodate them.
There was something in several of these points, but they ignored the obvious, and when proper figures were forced out of Pask, it was  evident that substantial potential economies were being bypassed.
The experimental 100MW sets were expected to burn 9 per cent less fuel per unit of electricity generated than the standard 60MW sets and 20 per cent less than the 30MW sets; their capital costs were 6 per cent lower than 60MW sets and 23 per cent lower than 30MW sets.
The decision-making procedures within the BEA were, however, slow and, even when a decision to advance design had been taken, some headquarters engineers argued that there should be no change in station designs even in the two years before its sets were ordered (typically seven years before planned commissioning and eight years before actual commissioning).
This was undoubtedly overdoing the advantages of forward planning, and unnecessarily froze their rate of technical advance (particularly since some manufacturers were known to hold BEA orders in abeyance for several years after receipt).
The manufacturers were generally happy with the BEA's conservatism, which suited their export concentration on low technology markets, and gave them a relatively easy and highly profitable life (though as the 1950s advanced more of them were to become worried that they were missing out on new technical developments as their world market share slipped).
As with the Supergrid, the leading electrical engineering consultants were generally more adventurous and expressed surprise at the conservatism of the BEA, though, in order to keep their power station consultancy contracts, they went along with headquarters' design policy.
Price signals also failed to provide significant pressures on the BEA.
Initially, indeed, the generating programme was not subject to Central Authority financial appraisal of costs, and, even when alternative technologies were later evaluated properly, the prices used (interest rates, steel and coal prices) were those fixed by the Government at below market levels.
This blunted the edge of their potential impact, though the steady rise in factor prices to nearer market levels in later years did help propel the BEA into more adventurous policies to achieve capital economies and improved fuel efficiencies.
Pressures from the consumer market to go for cheaper and more efficient plant (which earlier, when there had been competition from generation by private industry, was a major spur to efficiency for CEB planners and the undertakings) was now less effective.
Firms like ICI or Ford might, as in earlier years, have been able to build larger or more technically advanced sets for their own electricity supplies, but faced with the same shortages of steel and skilled men as the supply industry, they were now less  inclined to branch out in this way, particularly as the BEA were selling electricity to them at prices based on historic costs, even though the new power stations were costing more.
(By the time this artificial advantage had evaporated, moreover, the supply industry, as we shall see, had moved to larger, more technically advanced sets, and few large private firms had sufficiently big demands to justify the ordering of sets of a competitive size.)
With pressure from the market, the consultants and the manufacturers all weakened, then, any change in BEA policy would have to come from a change of heart at central headquarters.
Hacking, though he favoured a more adventurous policy, was indecisive about making the personnel changes required, and preferred a low-key campaign of persuasion.
Peattie and some others were converted to the view that they should build more 120MW sets in 1952, but Shakeshaft and Pask remained attached to a conservative mix of 30MW and 60MW units, with only a cautious experimentation with larger sets.
The result was that, as late as 1953, 30MW sets were still being ordered, no decisive commitment to the larger sets with more advanced steam conditions had been made, and effectively the majority of the sets planned for the whole of the 1950s were of conservative design.
The price paid was a more expensive supply system than was strictly necessary.
This is not to say there were no gains from the policy.
The costs of some less rewarding false trails in technical advance (for example, cyclone boilers, cross-compound turbo-alternator layouts, supercritical steam conditions) were avoided by the conservatism of the early 1950s.
The sets that Were built showed another advantage of conservatism in that, despite some initial trouble with 60MW sets, they settled down to be more reliable than the engineers counted on.
This enabled the Electricity Boards to meet demand in the late 1950s despite under-forecasting of loads and overrun construction times (see p. 213, below).
Moreover, despite the conservatism in design, the capital cost per MW of generating stations did decline in real terms, by more than a quarter in the period affected by the BEA's decisions in its first five years, a decline almost as rapid as that achieved later.
Some of these gains were from replication of standard designs, though these were reckoned to be small, presumably because the large number of separate manufacturers and divisions involved in the work greatly reduced the potential cost reduction through learning effects.
Most of the reduction came from the limited move away from the smaller sets towards the more advanced 60MW  and 100MW designs which was possible within the conservative framework.
If the move had been even faster, then the capital costs would no doubt have declined more, and less coal would have been used in more thermally efficient stations.
The contrasting experience of France (which like Britain had a relatively integrated national supply system) is illuminating.
French engineers, facing similar difficulties of a wartime investment backlog (but, significantly, steel prices which reflected real shortages), based more of their immediate postwar programme on sets of 100MW and above, and soon standardised on 125MW sets (the first of which, with re-heat, was commissioned in 1955, three years before the BEA's first 120MW re-heat set).
The average thermal efficiency of French steam power stations, which had been well below that in Britain initially, was to overtake it in the later 1950s, as the more advanced French sets were commissioned; and France caught up with American levels of thermal efficiency, while Britain remained behind.