

CATHOLIC HISTORY FROM VATICAN I TO JOHN PAUL II
ADRIAN HASTINGS
In 1989 much of the world was celebrating the 200th anniversary of the start of the French Revolution.
The modern history of the Catholic Church has been immensely affected by that chain of events.
Institutionally it was shaken almost to pieces, and certainly out of the torpor that had descended upon it in the long aftermath of the Counter Reformation and the seventeenth-century wars of religion, by the reverberations of the Revolution with their deeply anti-religious and anti-traditional note.
For years the pope was in exile from Rome, most religious orders and seminaries were closed in the Mediterranean heartlands of the Church, and missionary work overseas was effectively suspended.
All the more striking was the subsequent nineteenth-century Catholic revival centred upon the reign of Pius IX and the First Vatican Council of 1870.
It was an extraordinarily effective revival, in pastoral, missionary and institutional terms, equally effective in such varied situations as northern France, Ireland, the United States and Africa.
The old religious orders were reinvigorated and hundreds of new ones — especially orders of teaching and nursing sisters — founded.
In intellectual terms the predominant note of the revival was undoubtedly counter-revolutionary, despite the quite influential presence of Catholic ‘liberals’ and modernizers in many lands.
But the more the revival got under way, the more it responded to Rome's own ethos, the less accommodating it was in regard to the values of either Protestantism or modern secular, liberal society.
Modern Roman Catholicism was shaped in the age of Pius IX in terms of the highest of papal doctrines, Marian devotions and a steadily growing organizational centralization upon Rome.
From Pius IX on, every pope became the centre of a considerable personality cult made possible by the railway and, later on, the modern media.
Thomist theology and philosophy were laid down in a rather ossified form as the normative Catholic intellectual system, drawn from the Middle Ages and therefore free of any taint of modern influence.
Regional variations — Gallican or otherwise — were disapproved, whether liturgical, theological or pastoral.
The definition of papal infallibility (even in its rather restrained terms) and of papal supremacy over the Church by the Council of 1870 merely formalized the pinnacle of a far larger system, theoretical and institutional, of monarchy.
The anti-modernist campaign of Pius X and his Secretary of State, Cardinal  Merry del Val, pushed further the theological and intellectual implications of this radical otherness of the Church in regard to the whole process of Western society's post-revolutionary modernization.
Although society as a whole was very far from accepting the extremes of revolutionary order and, of course, most of Europe, Britain above all, had fought for years to suppress it, the painfulness of the Church's early experience of the Revolution helped to keep it profoundly opposed even to the Revolution's more moderate implications, ones increasingly accepted by European society as a whole.
At the same time it must be stressed that the ecclesiastical character of ‘ultramontanism’(the dominant, Rome-centred, theory and practice of Catholicism in this period) was not a mere post-Revolution reaction: it was the direct heir of medieval papalist and Counter-Reformation Catholicism.
The centralizing and autocratic nature of papal monarchy as it had developed after the Gregorian Reform of the eleventh century was probably the principal underlying problem behind the sixteenth-century Reformation.
While the subsequent Council of Trent greatly strengthened the moral, pastoral and even intellectual life of the Church, it was reluctant to accept any part of the Protestant doctrinal and institutional critique.
On the contrary, the lines of division were hardened between the two Western Christian camps, even on the more pastoral issues.
To name but three: Protestants everywhere insisted upon the necessity of allowing the laity to worship in the vernacular, giving them the cup in communion, and allowing the clergy to marry.
Rome steadily rejected any compromise upon all three and continued to do so into the twentieth century.
It was very probably that rejection — over essentially non-doctrinal, but pastorally central, issues — rather than fundamental theological disagreements which rendered the sixteenth-century schism truly and practically irresolvable.
The outcome in the wider area of Church organization was that while Protestantism surrendered more and more to nationalism, Erastianism and/or fragmentation, Catholicism held these forces in check through clericalism, centralization and an enhanced uniformity.
The nineteenth-century Catholic revival reinforced these, and other, medieval and anti-Protestant characteristics.
The ultramontanist Church of the post-Vatican I era grew immensely strong in the conviction, loyalty and discipline of its members, especially the spirituality, unquestioned obedience and hard work of its religious orders.
The renewal, after the dreary state of the early years of the century, seemed a miracle in itself and was felt to be one.
Freed, furthermore, after 1870 from the embarrassment of the papal states and continually reinforced by its growing missionary societies, the Church was manifestly expanding in number and influence all through the first half of the twentieth century, when other large Churches were only too clearly declining rather than advancing.
All this was a miracle which was deeply and self-consciously anti-accommodationist, anti- aggiornamento one might well say.
One must never forget this long, almost glorious, background to the discontents, ‘conservative’ and ‘progressive’, of the post-Vatican II years.
The final climax of the old regime may be seen in the twenty-year reign of Pius XII (1939–58), a pope at the time most profoundly revered.
The model had been increasingly internationalized as the churches of Latin America, Asia and  Africa were given a more active role within it — but then in principle it always had been internationalist, and even in class terms egalitarian, the greatest of all ultramontanes being the socially radical English Cardinal Manning.
Beneath the surface, the model in Pius XII's time had not greatly changed even if communism had, understandably enough, replaced either Protestantism or liberalism as the chief immediate foe.
The Church remained a supernatural fortress set against the world, its walls manned night and day by the committed, its lonely leader almost an oracle of heavenly wisdom.
Yet beneath the surface many other things had been happening too.
In an age in which the Church was living and functioning largely within more or less liberal, democratic societies and in which defence mechanisms such as the Index of forbidden books had ceased effectively to function, it was no longer possible to insulate Catholic society mentally from the world around it.
Nor did Catholics for the most part wish to be so insulated.
The crisis of modernism had arisen at the beginning of the century as a consequence of the profound, perhaps too rapid, infiltration of Catholic institutions and consciousness by the scholarly methods and intellectual attitudes and presuppositions which had developed earlier in predominantly Protestant and liberal milieus.
While the anti-modernist purge put this process back a generation, it could not stop it re-emerging, especially in the most advanced areas of Catholic culture in northern Europe.
The growth of the liturgical movement, the lay apostolate, biblical scholarship, the need for Catholics to participate in democratic politics at least in order to protect Catholic rights, the urgency of collaborating locally with non-Catholics in opposition to Nazism: all this and much else had produced a profoundly altered consciousness within the more wide-awake parts of the Church by the later years of Pius XII's reign.
The post-medieval, ultramontane model was simply not proving workable in either intellectual or social terms.
The French Dominican, Yves Congar, perhaps the Church's greatest prophet of the age, demonstrated with learning, vigour and clarity that Catholicism had much to learn from Protestantism and much to reform in itself.
The paradox of Pius XII's reign was the acceptance of chunks of a new model — the encouragement of modern biblical scholarship in the encyclical Divino Afflante Spiritu , of participant liturgical reform in Mediator Dei , of an increasingly multi-faceted lay apostolate — together with slightly ineffectual but still painful attempts to silence Congar and many others (the Jesuit Teilhard de Chardin most of all), the signing of highly reactionary concordats with Spain and Portugal, and an even greater stress on Marian devotion (culminating not only in the definition of the Assumption in 1950 but in the ‘Marian Year’ of 1954).
All in all, an ever-growing institutional centralization was matched by a burgeoning theological pluralization.
Congar had in point of fact expressed himself cautiously enough, yet several of his books were proscribed.
In retrospect, one can see far better than even he could see at the time how deeply the logic of the ‘New Theology’, biblical and historical rather than scholastic, was bound to challenge the whole shape of the contemporary Church and the way it perceived orthodoxy.
The denunciations of dangerous new ideas in the 1950 encyclical Humani Generis are intelligible enough, but by now they were  almost bound to be ineffective, and as the intellectual viability of ultramontanism crumbled, the now unprotected power structure surrounding the papal monarchy came more and more into open and criticizable view.
Whether Pope John quite saw the inevitable implications of his great démarche when, in 1959, he announced the calling of a general Council, does not matter very much.
Once he had called it, appealed to aggiornamento , banned anathemas, included observers of other Churches within its deliberations, and allowed it to have its head against the warnings of the guardians of the old order such as Ottaviani and Ruffini, the consequences were inevitable: the foundations of many hundred years were going to be rocked upon every side.
This volume is an attempt to review both the achievements of the Council and its impact upon the next quarter-century.
The underlying cause of the achievement was not really Pope John, the bishops or even the theologians themselves.
It was much more the sheer vitality and range of committed ability, lay and clerical, present in the Church at that time and just waiting for a new lead.
The Catholic Church in the age of Mother Teresa and Barbara Ward, of Julius Nyerere and Lech Walesa, of Oscar Romero and Pedro Arrupe was a Church at the height of its confidence and its ability to relate to the world in a mood of inspiring solidarity.
This was a great age of Catholic history and the importance of the Council can only be appreciated if the strength of the Church it triggered into a spiral of reform — a strength that had steadily grown beneath the surface in the pontificate of Pius XII — is well appreciated.
What is at once important to stress about the Council is the lasting caution, indeed conservatism, of the majority of its members and of their consultants, as much as of the curia and the popes.
It is customary to divide the Council into a ‘conservative’ minority and a ‘progressive’majority, but such a description can be profoundly misleading.
Almost all were conservatives if compared with their contemporaries in most other Western Churches, in secular society or even with their own younger clergy.
The division might more accurately be described as one between ‘reactionary conservatives’ and ‘liberal conservatives’with hardly half-a-dozen genuine radicals in the Council chamber (Archbishop Roberts was never once permitted to speak!).
It was for this reason that the Council's final documents remained so ambivalent.
Nevertheless, the dynamic of four sessions did have a remarkable effect not unassisted by the fact that when Cardinal Montini became Paul VI, this meant that one of the most thoughtful and determined of the moderately progressive conservatives was now pope.
Certainly the third and fourth sessions approved of texts and ideas that it would be hard to imagine would have appealed to many of the bishops before the Council began.
This dynamic could not indeed have developed as it did without the very considerable influence behind the scenes, particularly in the preparation of documents between sessions, of leading consultants whose theology was indeed far beyond that of any but a handful of bishops: Congar, Rahner, Philips, Chenu, Courtney Murray among others.
The Council became a genuinely learning process, and once the name of the game had been defined as aggiornamento , once ecumenical understanding and co-operation with other Christians had been moved from the presupposition of ‘dangerous’ to that of  ‘Christian’and ‘highly desirable’, there developed for a while a new logic which could not easily be denied.
Cautious as the Council's immediate formulations almost always were, the outcome was that the Latin liturgy was replaced by the vernacular, the cup was offered to the laity, married men would at least be ordained to the diaconate, Protestant Bible societies were to be worked with, the modern world was to be sympathized with rather than condemned.
To an old and faithful servant of the ultramontane papacy such as Ottaviani, it was all the most absolute madness.
Indeed, if the Bible was to be taken so very seriously, separated brethren listened to attentively, the world served and precisely in its contemporaneous form, all sorts of other things were bound to start falling into new places too, places extremely different from those provided by ultramontanism.
The ecclesiastically most delicate application of this lay in the area of collegiality.
Vatican I immensely strengthened the theoretical authority of the papacy, and this had now passed into the common mind of Catholics lay and clerical alike.
It said nothing whatsoever of any correlative power of the episcopate.
Bishop Goss of Liverpool at the time declared disgustedly that ‘bishops who went to Rome as princes of the household to confer with their august Father will return like satraps dispatched to their provinces’.
Perhaps that seems a little severe, but in practice bishops were subjected henceforth to an ever-closer Roman control and appointment system, while being offered no theology to ground any distinct authority.
It had been intended at Vatican I to complement the papal definitions with something much wider, but pressure from Franco-Prussian conflict combined, maybe, with a lack of Roman interest in a larger agenda, prevented anything further from being said.
The assertion of a doctrine of episcopal ‘collegiality’ as expressive of the Church's ministerial leadership, in continuity with the first group of twelve apostles, was far removed from a theology of papal ‘monarchy’such as had long dominated Roman ecclesiology.
A collegial model looked both more scriptural and more ecumenical — as well as being more suited to a post-monarchical world — even if bolstered up by a not-too-sound and rather fundamentalist interpretation of a selection of New Testament and patristic texts.
It horrified the Council's more conservative wing for, despite all protestations that it was complementary to and not contradictory of Vatican I's teaching on papal primacy, it did inevitably suggest a remarkably different overall understanding of how the Church should be governed.
Chapter 3 of the Constitution on the Church, spelling out the doctrine of collegiality, was theologically and dogmatically at the very heart of Vatican II's debate and contribution to Catholic self-understanding.
Indeed its formulation provided the theological undergirding for having a Council at all and not leaving everything to the pope to decide alone.
But while collegiality was undoubtedly accepted in theory (subject to the circumscribing commentary of the nota praevia ), it was provided with no effective form of implementation outside a full Council, even if Paul VI's establishment of an advisory episcopal synod to be called regularly was in practice an attempt to provide some ongoing form for collegial responsibility.
The Council allowed a much increased use of the vernacular in the liturgy.
It  never, however, approved the celebration of the Mass wholly in the vernacular, Eucharistic prayer and all.
This was Pope Paul's decision two years after the Council was over.
The Council permitted the laity to communicate with the cup on a very few occasions.
It was the post-conciliar Church that came increasingly to recognize this as the norm, at least for smaller congregations.
The point is that the Council took decisions that appeared revolutionary enough in the context of Catholic life as it had hitherto been, but that, only a few years later, seemed instead as rather cautious half-measures requiring very considerable extension.
A theoretical stress upon biblical study, an active laity, the reunion of Christians, and a positive commitment to the service of the world in its cultural, social and economic needs, coupled with an absence of guidance as to how all this was to be done and how far one could go in these various directions, led both to a state of real popular enthusiasm but also, almost inevitably, to tension and conflict.
In some areas, most notably the liturgical and the ecumenical, Rome did get off to a good start in providing directives of a sort that would carry confidence at least temporarily; even here, however, there was the inherent problem that a body of directives implied the establishment of a stable state (e.g. in ecumenical relations), while the reality was in fact necessarily more fluid.
Once one set of directives, however good, had been implemented, a new set of possibilities necessarily unfolded.
In the immediate post-conciliar phase (1966–7), Rome remained not far off the avant-garde of progress, but once the first round of directives was complete and the curia firmly back in control, the conservative tendency regained the upper hand in the centre while progressive tendencies were still growing stronger in many a periphery.
In general, people not actually involved in it saw the Council as the beginning of a new ecclesial era rather than a way of concluding some long-standing issues and leaving it at that, yet the Council's documents remain for nearly all Catholics the most authoritative Church teaching of this century, beside which even papal encyclicals have comparatively slight standing.
They stand above and beyond any particular attempt, papal or otherwise, definitively to interpret them.
In this situation three recognizable approaches to interpretation can nevertheless be distinguished.
The first is that of many Catholics who already thought the Council a strange and almost unnecessary development.
They have, so far as is possible, wished to interpret the texts within a context of earlier teaching and pre-conciliar practice, against which the Council was, to a considerable extent, deliberately reacting; yet, as the texts even as finally formulated remain to a considerable extent a jumble deriving from different hands and including material composed substantially before the Council began, there is much in them to countenance such a viewpoint.
The second is that of people, and they included Pope Paul himself and most of the Council fathers, who greatly welcomed what had been done and desired its effective implementation, but saw it as all in all a daring and radical reform which had gone beyond anything they sought when the Council began and which did not require significant further development.
They found it hard to cope with the implications of the objective open-endedness of the Council's vast range of  teaching.
Once the phase of immediate implementation was passed, this group came little by little to realign itself with many in the first group against whom they had in the conciliar years themselves taken quite a clear stand: a new status quo must be achieved if the Church was not to be upset by ceaseless change and debate.
A third approach was adopted by a small minority of bishops but an ever-larger circle of theologians, young priests ordained round about the time of the Council and lay activists, all far more aware of the objective inadequacy of the conciliar documents as they stood: inadequate precisely because their composers had been over-anxious not to make any sharp break with pre-conciliar practice.
They now seemed too cautious, too reluctant to admit to the most defective aspects of the post-medieval Catholic tradition, too little aware of the real situation in the Church of the southern hemisphere (whose voice was heard remarkably little in the Council's debates).
On two crucial issues in particular the Council had, anyway, been prevented by the pope from deliberating: the morality of artificial contraception and the obligation of celibacy for all priests of the Western rite.
It was these two issues that would remain as seemingly irremovable areas of tension across the next twenty years.
The pre-conciliar Church was, publicly at least, remarkably homogeneous in opinion.
The conciliar debate of the early 1960s was essentially a debate not only within the walls of St Peter's, but throughout the Church.
When the Council ended in Rome, the wider debate did not, though the pope, the curia and, indeed, many of the bishops, found this hard to comprehend.
It obviously could not end, at least until a coherent new form of Catholicism had gelled in practice.
After twenty-five years this has still not happened.
The Catholic Church can be, and is, now seen by its members in extraordinarily different ways.
For some, the Council was no more than a prudent but much misunderstood attempt to update a few relatively minor matters.
Confidence in an infallible papacy remains here undiminished.
The Church's inner spirit, organization and theology need be little different in the 1990s from how they were under Pius XII in the 1950s.
For others, that is quite impossible.
For them, the shift required, and in part even achieved, was theological rather than administrative: the Council represented a decisive, if still partial, move away from a one-sided theology which had prevailed in the Roman communion across the Middle Ages, the Counter Reformation and ultramontanism.
The role of the papacy itself now requires basic reinterpretation.
The Council effectively recognized that in a number of important matters Protestants had been right and Catholics wrong.
The theological implications of such a recognition were profound, and required far more than a change in regulations.
Furthermore, in this view, the world of the twentieth century again necessitated a quite extraordinarily different Church and theology from that appropriate in the past.
In this context, issues dividing Catholics and Protestants themselves became almost trivial.
If the Council did a good deal to catch up with the agenda of the Council of Trent, it did rather little to face the real agenda confronting the whole human and Christian community in the last decades of this century.
While in 1990 it is clear which of these views is currently favoured in Rome, it is far from clear which will finally prevail.
It is, however, now possible, historiographically, to divide the twenty-five years following the Council into two distinctly different eras — that of Paul VI and that of John Paul II.
The central event of the former's pontificate can hardly fail to be seen as Humanae Vitae in 1968, central because its publication marked a watershed separating the first years of enthusiasm, of an optimistic post-conciliar implementation in which Rome and leading Catholic theologians were still working more or less hand in hand (as they had done in the latter years of the Council) from the far more contestatory and unsure later period.
Paul VI was from then on unable to identify himself with the ‘progressives’ in a way he had managed hitherto.
Over contraception, but on much else too, his underlying Roman curial temper proved finally decisive.
Yet he could never identify himself with a counter-attack either.
He remained too personally committed to the values of the Council and to a certain vaguely liberal spirit.
Hence he satisfied neither side within an increasingly polarized Church.
He never penned another encyclical and his final decade remained one of conservative indecision rather than of reaction.
But as he aged, the curia showed  itself once again to be more in control than the pope, the very curia which he had himself attempted, if with all possible politeness, to reform.
If today we can see better than we could at the time the agonized grandeur of the figure of Pope Paul, the one almost ‘liberal’ pope of modern times, we can also see how deeply uncertain was the Church he left behind him and — after twelve years — we begin too to be able to assess in its very different character the pontificate of John Paul II.
Karol Wojtyla was not a ‘liberal’ in any Western sense, though he too may briefly have thought of himself in such terms in student days.
A man of immense physical vigour, intellectual confidence and moral force, as naturally extrovert as was Paul painfully introvert, his decisive experience was not that of the Council (which he did attend), nor of the Western Christian's attempt to reshape the gospel when faced with the blandishments of agnostic affluence, still less was it any deep experience of the struggles of the third world; instead, it was that of the Church's singularly successful, no-nonsense resistance to communism in Poland: a combination of old-fashioned pieties, unquestioned doctrinal certainties, down-to-earth preoccupation with basic human rights, and a dose of sheer populism.
He had little time for the confusion that the Council had appeared to generate in many parts of the Church.
Despite his many languages, he also had little sense of cultures other than his own.
Many aspects of the post-conciliar debate seemed simply, and not surprisingly, to have passed him by — they seemed to him but the fashionable irrelevancies of a West that had had it rather too good, yet dangerous temptations too.
His was a world in which sacred and secular, clergy and laity, men and women, were all to be sharply separated in a way that neither modern secular society, nor those in the West attempting to rethink Christianity in relation to that society, could possibly accept.
It would be gravely mistaken to understate the depth of difference between John Paul II and the general viewpoint of what one may call the Western Catholic avant-garde , the post-conciliar network of theologians, religious and committed laity.
The pope came nearest to a  characteristic post-conciliar viewpoint over social justice; here indeed his major encyclicals could be regarded as constituting a high-water mark in ‘progressive’ concern, even adopting elements of a Marxist analysis beyond any of his predecessors; he was also, very moderately, ecumenical, though he showed little interest in the theological implications of an ecumenical agenda.
However, in his central theology and sense of the nature of religion in general and Catholicism in particular, he remained extraordinarily faithful to the papacy of Pius XII during which he had been trained and ordained.
Elected in 1978, it is hardly surprising that John Paul should see his task as the re-establishment of order and confidence on pretty traditional lines, though his charismatic personality shown forth throughout the world in an unending series of exciting international tours for a time almost concealed what was going on.
Different as his experience was from that of the curia, he found in it an ally far more than had Paul with his long curial background.
But he found other allies as well, everyone in fact who had been uneasy with the extent to which traditional Catholicism had been of late put into question.
Even the extreme, and already almost schismatic, group of neo-traditionalists led by Archbishop Lefebvre from Econe was very nearly reconciled.
If the Jesuits had been the greatest implementers of post-conciliar renewal in the Pauline era, Opus Dei would shortly become John Paul's most reliable institutional arm.
While the papacy of Pope Paul had remained uncomfortably unidentified with either ‘progressive’ or ‘conservative’, that of John Paul became increasingly closely tied to the latter, and at times in a state of not much less than guerrilla war with the ‘magisterium’of the Church's principal theologians: a truly strange position for a pope to be in.
In one way all this undoubtedly strengthened the papal role — people knew far more clearly what was now wanted — but on the other hand, it weakened it by narrowing the base of loyalty.
While Humanae Vitae began the detachment of large segments of the Catholic community, particularly more vocal segments, from the near unanimous and unquestioned following of papal authority characteristic of the pre-Vatican II era, it was left to John Paul and Cardinal Ratzinger, prefect from November 1981 of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, to harden that detachment into a consistent attitude of distrust as the pope seemed to distance himself more and more from many of the central values of the Council, and of the most apparently positive and welcomed developments of Catholicism in the subsequent years.
Collegiality seemed now once more a forgotten word.
It would all the same be gravely mistaken to interpret post-conciliar Church history almost wholly in terms of the personalities and persuasions of two outstanding popes.
Despite an undoubted attempt to enlarge rather than curtail the sphere of effective papal control — an attempt that on the surface at least succeeded again and again in particular areas from Holland to Brazil — the wider agenda was seldom set in Rome.
It was set a great deal more by the massive alteration in the balance of the Catholic community — the decline of France, Italy and Spain, the rise of Brazil, the United States, the Philippines, even Zaire, the revival of Catholic Eastern Europe, the larger shift from both west to east (especially in Europe) and from north to south.
The geography of  the Catholic Church in 1990 has become remarkably different from that of 1960.
Where, for instance, there was then a mere handful of African bishops, there are now many hundreds.
This is not as such an effect of the Council, but the geographical shift has coincided with, been stimulated by and itself has greatly affected, post-conciliar change.
If in the age of Paul VI the major challenges to Roman policy still came from Western Europe, by the age of John Paul II they were coming from other continents.
In retrospect, the ending at this point of the long preponderance of Western Europe (that is to say, Italy, France, southern Germany, Belgium and Spain)— a preponderance common to the pre-conciliar Church, the Council and even the pontificate of Paul VI — in the affairs of Catholicism and its replacement by a far wider range of geographical influences, may appear as far more significant than any shift from the mildly liberal to the neo-conservative.
At the end of our period, developments in Soviet-dominated Europe still further altered the ecclesiastical map quite decisively, though the longer-term consequence of the sudden collapse of forty years of communist domination is, in 1990, impossible to predict.
The Church's Eastern European resurgence, centred upon its long recognized strength in Poland — a country led from mid-1989 by a devout Catholic prime minister — but now including almost every country from Czechoslovakia to Lithuania, as well as what previously seemed the almost unimaginable resurrection of Uniate Catholicism in the Ukraine, has ensured that Catholic history and geography in the 1990s are likely to look very different from that of the 1980s.
This liberation of what had been, since the end of the Second World War, ‘a Church of silence’, may do much to transform an atmosphere of widespread ecclesial decline, noticeable particularly in Western Europe, into one of confident revival.
It cannot but contribute to the impression of providential suitability of an Eastern European pope.
To understand the internal dynamic of debate, change and tension within Catholic history in this period, it may be helpful to divide it into three parts.
The first phase, that of the theologians of the 1950s and the central issues of the Council itself, might be characterized as ultramontanism versus what we may call (using an old term, now largely abandoned) Cisalpinism.
The latter, represented by people like Yves Congar, Henri de Lubac and Louis Bouyer, appealed away from the post-medieval neo-scholastic synthesis of contemporary official Catholic theology to a far more creative use of biblical and patristic sources; it accepted the rightness of part of the classical Protestant critique of Roman Catholicism; it fully adhered to the highest standards of modern scholarship, but in a really quite traditional way.
It had adopted some of the theology of sixteenth-century Reformers and some of the learning of nineteenth-century Protestant scholars, but very little of it was genuinely very modern in terms of the second half of the twentieth century, and hardly anything in it challenged in the slightest the more basic dogmas of Catholic theology, Trinitarian, incarnational and sacramental.
While the Council did not fully accept this viewpoint by any means, it owed a very great deal to it in its most influential formulations.
Unfortunately, the institutional implications of this agenda in terms of the partial dismantling of Roman monarchy and a  particular style of clerical ministry seemed more revolutionary than did the theology itself, and neither Council nor curia was anxious to consider them, beyond the encouragement of national or regional episcopal conferences, the establishment of a consultative synod of bishops and the ordination of married men as deacons.
By the middle and later 1960s, however, this ‘Cisalpine’ theological agenda was being overtaken by a more evidently twentieth-century one: modern biblical scholarship turned out not to have stopped with Westcott and Lightfoot nor even with Dodd, but seemed much more a matter of swallowing Bultmann and Nineham; ecumenical theology now led one less to Luther and Calvin or even Barth than to the vapid profundities of Tillich, Bishop Robinson's Honest to God and beyond.
Once young Catholic theologians began to think for themselves, the excitements of modernity in the wider cultural mood of the 1960s carried them far beyond Congar.
De Lubac, von Balthasar, Bouyer and Jacques Maritain could cry ‘treason’, but Marxism, structuralism and post-structuralism collectively devastated the French School of Theology until it almost ceased significantly to exist.
If Rome pulled further and further back from a willingness to tolerate new theologies, it was due to a not-unfounded belief that by 1970 ‘new theology’ meant a very different thing from what it had meant before 1960.
Ratzinger had himself been a seemingly progressive young conciliar peritus .
His road back to traditionalism could appear the only way to escape a theological disintegration which threatened not just Vatican I, but Chalcedon and Nicaea as well.
By the 1980s the prevailing agenda had shifted yet again as Latin America, Africa and Asia came increasingly to the centre of Catholic concern with liberation theology upon the one side, inculturation upon the other.
In point of fact, in terms of Catholic tradition, the challenges here might be less awkward than those of phase 2 (and to some extent John Paul II was able to recognize this), but the crucial ecclesiastical issue once more(as in phase 1) had become the acceptability of diversity, and the curial mind had never escaped from the conviction that unity requires uniformity.
Moreover, while the ‘Marxist’ note of liberation theology, though played up by old-fashioned conservatives, did not frighten the pope, the ‘basic community’implications of liberation theology for the structuring of the Church and the ministry posed once more a considerable challenge to the structures of celibate clericalism.
Whether pope and curia can or should win such battles is not for us to say.
It is certainly much easier for them to win a great many individual battles than to win the war.
There seem three conceivable different outcomes in the middle term.
The first is that with another ten years of John Paul's rule, the silencing of awkward bishops and theologians, the appointment to the episcopate of a most carefully selected team of neo-conservatives, a rather traditionalist form of Catholicism will, in fact, harden and remain for a long time effectively unchangeable.
The new episcopate, the troops of Opus Dei, Comunione e Liberazione and the like, reinforcements maybe from Poland and some parts of the third world, will have made the more liberal vistas of Vatican II and its immediate aftermath just another brief aberration within Catholic history comparable to the conciliar movement of the fifteenth century.
While various  precise Vatican II reforms (such as the use of the vernacular) will, of course, be retained, its chief significance will have been reduced from the theological to the administrative, and John Paul II will appear in retrospect as the true successor and vindicator of Pius XII and of papal authority as proclaimed by Vatican I.
A second scenario is that this cannot happen.
The pluralist forces within both the Western and the third-world Church are simply too strong and too lively to be tamed by a papacy with really quite limited weapons at its command.
Resistance, grounded on a far deeper sense of the rights of conscience, the role of the laity and the fallibility of ecclesiastical authority than existed in pre-conciliar days, will not be overcome at the level of the clergy, the religious orders, the thinking laity or — above all — the theologians.
It is relatively easy for Rome to control the bishops, exceedingly hard for it to control anyone else.
The pendulum will swing back with a pope of another complexion and a new phase of more radical reform will curb the structures of ultramontanism in a way Vatican II almost wholly failed to do.
John Paul's pontificate may then appear as, in part, aberration, while a pluralist Catholic Christianity will be revealed as not only heir to the central religious tradition of the West, but as able to respond without losing its core identity to the needs both of a truly world Church and of the ongoing transformation of human consciousness and intellectual understanding.
The third possibility is that neither of the others can work.
The first will neither be abandoned nor genuinely prevail, and will merely sap the vitality of area after area of real ecclesial strength, thus preventing the second from getting under way.
The Church cannot be reclericalized, but any alternative model of ministry or communion can be blocked from the top.
The intellectual strength of Catholicism will fade under the pressure of a rather fundamentalist theology imposed upon seminaries and Catholic institutions of all sorts.
The Church will then inevitably decline in an increasingly irreversible way, as in some parts of the world it may already be doing.
Manifestly so vast a body does not collapse overnight and much of the decline can be masked for decades.
It will retain its strength more in some places than in others.
It will continue to win some local battles.
But its overall role as a credible world community of faith and love, a body that can be ignored by no one, a living tradition that combines humanity and the most sophisticated rational understanding with divinity and mystical insight, will simply dwindle away in the twenty-first century, leaving the Church as a narrowing fellowship upon the margins of history.
Perhaps even that future may be judged providential, but in such a story Vatican II will appear as the final occasion when Christianity was at the centre of significance for human and religious history, and John Paul II will be judged not the healer of a divided Church, but the gravedigger of Pope John's aggiornamento .
It is, of course, impossible to foresee the future, but the effective demise of the Catholic Church has been prophesied so often that it seems wiser to conclude that the vast movement of transformation begun by Vatican II will not be easily ended either internally or externally.
It may well be that, for the Church historian of the middle of the twenty-first century, the tensions of the  period of John Paul II through which we are now passing will themselves appear as but an interlude in the process initiated by the Council, and ending in a form of Catholicism still unimaginable today.
COUNCILS IN CHRISTIAN HISTORY
MICHAEL J. WALSH
When Vatican II met, the 1917 Code of Canon Law determined who had the right to attend.
This code included cardinals, patriarchs, archbishops and bishops, heads of (male) religious orders, and any other prelate with jurisdiction over a district of his own.
Decisions taken, said the Code , require papal confirmation, but a Council exercises supreme jurisdiction over the Church.
It wasn't always so.
Which Councils — more often than not called synods during the first thousand years — were ecumenical was determined not by the pope, but by their reception in the Church at large.
Theory now has it that Councils are convoked by popes: the early ones certainly were not.
At Nicaea in 325 the bishops and priests (from the Western part of the empire, only priests attended) were called together by the emperor because theological disputes were putting too much of a strain on the unity he was striving to achieve.
The imperial presence was manifest: those who attended had the advantage of travelling on the imperial transport system; the structure of the Council mirrored that of senatorial procedure, the 318 fathers (a traditional number — actual attendance was more likely to have been about 250) gathered in a hall of the imperial palace; Constantine spoke asking them to restore concord, and then left them to themselves.
That they were left to themselves is evident, for Eusebius of Nicomedia, who was close to Constantine, found himself on the losing side in the debate about the relationship between Father and Son, defeated by a group led by a mere deacon (though soon to be a bishop), Athanasius of Alexandria.
It was another Eusebius, of Caesarea, who was the moving force behind the formula around which the Council eventually gathered, known now, with a number of amendments introduced at the Council of Constantinople, as the Nicene Creed.
In the approved sequence, Constantinople (AD381) comes next, even though it was attended by fewer bishops (about 150) than the non-approved Rimini of 359 (about 400).
What is more, the Council was wholly Eastern.
Pope Damasus was not only not present, he was not even represented.
After Constantinople the debate about the nature of Christ polarized between two patriarchs, Nestorius of Constantinople and Cyril of Alexandria.
Nestorius believed it heretical to describe Mary as Theotokos , or God-bearer, on the basis that Mary gave birth to a man, Jesus, in whom God dwelt.
This view was rejected by Cyril, who had the Bishop of Rome, Celestine I, on his side.
Nestorius was supported by John, Patriarch of Antioch.
Theodosius, the Eastern emperor, summoned a Council to meet at Ephesus.
Cyril opened it on 22 June 43 1, before the supporters of Nestorius had arrived.
Nestorius himself refused to attend and had to be given protection by imperial troops.
When the  dispute was eventually resolved in Cyril's favour, it was not by the Council but by a decision of the Emperor Theodosius.
While Nestorians went their own way, the orthodox were again split over the manner in which divine and human natures were united in the person of Christ.
Eutyches, archimandrite (or abbot) of a monastery in Constantinople, believed that in effect there was only one nature.
This theory (monophysitism) was rejected at a Council held at Chalcedon in October 451.
Again the number of Western representatives was small: there were only five papal legates, three bishops and two priests, but they were given the presidency partly at least because this council, though formally convoked by the emperor, had been called for by Pope Leo.
And in the end it was Leo's formulation of the faith that was accepted by the Council fathers.
Both the Emperor Marcian and his wife Pulcheria played an active part in the meetings: Marcian and Leo found themselves at loggerheads not so much over the dogmatic formulation as over the disciplinary canons that were appended.
Debates on the relation of divine and human in Christ were still not entirely over.
In different forms they were pursued at the second and third Councils of Constantinople (553 and 680–1).
In 692 a fourth Council of Constantinople, almost wholly taken up with disciplinary matters, marked a watershed in relations between East and West.
The pope of the day refused to approve its conclusions, and the gathering is omitted from the Councils recognized in the West.
The disagreement is significant.
Hitherto, the ecumenical gatherings had chiefly been concerned with theological issues, even if matters of discipline such as the manner of determining the date of Easter had crept in.
The important meetings had taken place in the East, and though very few representatives of the Western Churches had, attended, the canons had been accepted as binding upon the whole Christian world.
It is sometimes asserted that Eastern bishops displayed greater theological learning than those in the West, which is why most Councils took place in the East.
It is possibly true, and though the challenges presented to the Western bishops on the nature of the Church (Donatism) and about grace and free will (Pelagianism) were serious enough, theological debate rarely seems to have aroused the same passions in the West as it did in the East.
There was little in the West to compare with the fanaticism shown by Eastern monks or lay people as well as bishops over the minutiae of dogma.
It burst out again over iconoclasm.
In 730 Leo III the Isaurian issued an edict forbidding the veneration of images, icons.
After much destruction of icons the conflict in the East was resolved in 787 by the second Council of Nicaea.
Though there were two papal legates, the Council was an Eastern affair, to solve an Eastern problem.
It was called not by a pope, nor even a patriarch, but by the Empress Irene.
Just under a century later, in 869–70, the Emperor Basil II, though he had turned for help to Pope Hadrian II, was responsible for summoning the fourth Council of Constantinople.
Some of its canons were concerned with the veneration of images, but the chief problem was the position of Photius as patriarch of Constantinople.
He was deposed by what the Western Church regards as the 8th Ecumenical Council.
It has not been recognized in the East.
The eleventh century saw the formal rupture between East and West, and also a determined effort by the papacy to reform the Church.
Plans of reform were worked out at a succession of Councils or synods attended only by Western bishops.
These were distinctly papal Councils, called by popes and used by them both to make their reforms better known throughout the Church and to involve other ecclesiastical dignitaries in the reform movement: it suited the papacy to extend the range of people invited.
Invitees were not only bishops, but heads of monastic orders, theologians representing the academic magisterium, even lay people.
The first of such Councils to be recognized as ecumenical by the Western Church took place in the Lateran basilica, Rome, in 1123.
It did little more than endorse reforms already introduced: the second ecumenical Council of the Lateran (1139) did likewise.
Though exact figures are lacking, as indeed they are for the previous Councils, Lateran II seems to have been better attended than most, if not all, others hitherto.
It has remained of particular interest because its canon seven was the first to declare the marriage of clerics not only unlawful but invalid.
The third Lateran Council (1179) was the result of an imperially inspired schism.
Again the number attending was large, and again the canons of the Council, after dealing with the problems occasioned by anti-popes, covered a range of reforming issues.
Lateran Councils I to III were a prelude to one of Christianity's greatest of all assemblies, Lateran IV, summoned by Innocent III to meet in November 1215.
Eastern bishops were invited — though those in communion with Constantinople did not turn up — as well as abbots and lay representatives not only of princes, but of some city-states as well.
It was remarkably brief, but encompassed a great deal and was consciously planned and carried through as an ecumenical Council, the first of its kind.
Its impact upon the Church was considerable — especially perhaps in England; its conclusions were chiefly to do with discipline, and its provision requiring annual confession and Communion, remains today.
With the 13th general Council, the chief subject was the conflict between the pope and the emperor.
It was held at Lyons in June and July 1245, and ended with a sentence of deposition being passed against Frederick II, though a number of other canons concerned chiefly with structural matters within the Church were also given the force of law.
Lyons I was poorly attended: Lyons II (May and July 1274), though not up to the numbers of Lateran IV, had a wide spread of members.
There were places for kings or their representatives and, more particularly, for Greeks.
They approved an act of union between the Churches, acknowledging the primacy of the popes.
This patently political act was rejected by the vast majority of the Greek hierarchy.
The next Council, that of Vienne, south of Lyons, took place from October 1311 to May the following year, and was unusual in that only a selection — though a geographically fairly wide selection — of bishops were invited.
It took place under the shadow of the French king, Philip the Fair.
He already had all the Knights Templar in France arrested on trumped-up charges of immorality: now he wanted conciliar approval.
The fathers failed to give Philip the satisfaction of a full-scale condemnation: the Order was suppressed by an administrative act of the pope's and not by the Council.
Vienne marked the beginning of the papacy's long exile in Avignon.
Its return to Rome towards the end of the fourteenth century resulted in a schism with two, and for a time three, rivals for the papacy.
The obvious way to resolve the dispute was to call a Council to decide among them — though such a course of action might be taken to imply the supremacy of a Council over a pope.
It was the German King Sigismund who summoned the 16th Ecumenical Council, though invitations were later also sent by Pope John XXIII.
It met at Constance in November 1414 and Pope John was deposed.
Expecting this, he had first tried to flee the city, and in the aftermath of John's flight the Council passed a decree (Sacrosancta ) proclaiming the supremacy of the Council over the pope.
One of John's rivals, Gregory XII, resigned his claim and returned to the ranks of the cardinals.
The other, Benedict XIII, fled to the castle of Peñiscola in north-east Spain, where he spent the remainder of his days: the Council deposed him in July 1417.
In November the cardinals, together with representatives of the different national groupings, elected a new pope for the whole Church, Martin V. Before doing so, however, they had ensured through the decree Frequens that Councils were to be called at regular intervals of ten years.
Martin complied with Frequens .
After five years he held a Council first at Pavia then at Siena, but it was so poorly attended it has not been counted as ecumenical.
Seven years after that he summoned another, this time to meet in Basle.
By the time it began, in July 1431, there was a new pope, Eugenius IV.
The weariness with Councils that Martin had experienced at Pavia and Siena was apparent: the Council was opened by the papal legate without a single bishop present.
Eugenius then tried to dissolve the Council he had not wanted in the first place.
The few conciliar fathers who had finally gathered refused to accept his decision.
He was forced to withdraw his dissolution, though only after more than two years of controversy, during which time the Council had gone about its business and drafted a number of decrees that restrained the power of the papacy, and laid down reforms throughout the Church.
But the chief issue turned out to be reunion with the Greeks, required by Emperor John VIII Palaeologus for political reasons.
The emperor wanted to meet pope and Council.
The majority at Basle wanted the emperor to go there or to Avignon: the pope proposed Ferrara, which suited the Greeks better.
In September 1437 Eugenius transferred the Council to Ferrara: the majority refused to go and, after proclaiming conciliar superiority to the pope, deposed Eugenius and elected an anti-pope.
Meanwhile, after the Greeks had reached Ferrara, Eugenius was forced to transfer the meeting to Florence.
It was therefore at Florence that agreement between Greeks and Latins was reached — though again it was to be of short duration.
The Council, the longest so far, moved to Rome in 1442 and came to an end, while the rump of the Basle gathering gradually faded away.
It is scarcely surprising that popes did not like calling Councils.
It is also not surprising that there continued to be those who believed the papacy on its own incapable of reforming the Church, and that a Council was needed.
When a pope next called a Council it was only because the French king, then at war with the papacy, had called one of his own.
But the popes of this Council, Julius II and Leo X, bore out the fears of the conciliarists.
Reforms for the Church were proposed, but on the eve of the Reformation, Lateran V (1512–17), under the presidency of the popes, achieved little or nothing.
Perhaps Trent has been the most important of all Councils in the history of the Roman Catholic Church but, like Lateran V before it, it was forced upon an unwilling papacy.
It might possibly have been convoked earlier had not Luther urged that a general Council, to which the pope would be compelled to submit, should decide for or against his Ninety-Five Theses, thus reviving the spectre of conciliarism.
The sack of Rome in 1527 by the troops of the Emperor Charles V finally forced Clement VII to agree to a Council, though it was left to Paul III to summon it in 1544.
Charles feared for the unity of his dominions under the threat of Protestantism, and it seemed he might call a national synod in Germany which would not only undermine the authority of the papacy, but in the interests of political unity approve theological positions Rome could never accept.
Trent (Triento in northern Italy) was within the imperial territory, but sufficiently close to Rome for the papacy to influence events.
Trent lasted, on and off, from December 1545 to December 1563, Pius IV giving his approval to its final conclusions in January 1564.
For a time it was held at Bologna, in the papal states, but the imperial representatives protested and the pope moved it back to Trent.
Numbers were small at first, but by the end some 250 bishops were present.
For a time Protestants attended, but hopes that the Council might reunify the Western Church — the Eastern was scarcely considered — were dashed.
The Council fathers decisively rejected Protestant doctrines on central issues such as justification, the presence of Christ in the Eucharist and sacramental efficacy, and promulgated a series of decrees on purgatory, the veneration of relics, images and saints, and indulgences — almost, it seems, as an act of defiance to the reformers who had denied them.
Alongside doctrinal debates, it was decided early in the Council that the fathers were to legislate for widespread reform in the Roman Church.
The whole package, doctrinal decrees and disciplinary reforms, has shaped Catholicism down to the present.
‘Tridentine’, rather unfairly, has become a term of abuse: Trent was a great reforming Council.
But its very success was its undoing.
Nobody for a very long time afterwards felt the need to change things.
The Church ossified.
There was not another Council for over 300 years.
When the next one met, attracting three-quarters of all the world's 1,050 or so Catholic bishops, it was in the basilica of St Peter's for the first Vatican Council.
They gathered in December 1869: they rapidly dispersed the following July at the outbreak of the Franco-German War.
In between, the bishops had debated a number of issues both doctrinal and pastoral, though only the doctrinal ones reached definitive form and were approved.
Chief among these were the definitions of papal primacy and infallibility.
So lofty were these papal prerogatives, that no further Council would ever be needed, or so it seemed to many.
Though the definition of infallibility was a good deal more circumscribed than often presented, Vatican I did what its promoters had asked of it.
It elevated the papacy to a new level of authority within the  Church, compensating for the steady erosion of its political role during the nineteenth century.
Pius IX had attempted to make it ecumenical by summoning representatives of the Eastern Churches not in communion with Rome.
They did not come.
Protestants were another matter: they were not invited as such, but urged instead to return to the fold of Roman Catholicism.
Anglican bishops were not asked to attend or to send observers.
There were no representatives of governments.
It counts as the 20th Ecumenical Council.
The 20th, that is, in Roman Catholic lists.
East and West went their own ways after Constantinople IV, ecumenical in the West though not in the East.
Since Trent, even the West has been divided.
One can debate whether gatherings after Constantinople or after Trent have been ecumenical, but it is a sterile argument.
What emerges from the history of the Councils is that it is impossible to determine a pattern.
Some have been called by popes, but others called by rulers against papal wishes.
Some have been purely doctrinal, others purely pastoral, a good many have been both.
The number of bishops attending, at least until Vatican I, has been a small proportion of the total, and membership has not always been restricted to bishops, or even to clergy.
The synods regularly meeting in Rome since Vatican II could claim to be more representative of the Church than the majority of Councils.
Not by history alone, in other words, would one come to the firm description of a Council, and its relationship to the Roman Pontiff, that is contained in the 1983 Code of Canon Law .
The facts are much more messy.
As the foregoing brief chronology has demonstrated, which Councils have been recognized as ecumenical is far more arbitrary than is acknowledged by the bland words of the current Code .
What has mattered is their ultimate reception as ecumenical by the Church at large.
And by that criterion Vatican II has greater claim to be ecumenical than many of its predecessors.
Councils in Christian History: Bibliography
PIUS XII
MICHAEL J. WALSH
For many within the Roman Catholic Church the remote, emaciated, ascetical figure of Pius XII remains the paradigm of what a pope should be.
Though after the Lateran Pact of 1929, which settled the conflict between the Holy See and Italy, the Bishop of Rome was no longer a (self-imposed)‘prisoner in the Vatican’, the papacy's isolation remained, heightened in popular consciousness by the war years.
His readiness to speak on almost any topic, and especially on medical ethics, was remarkable: his speeches averaged out over the pontificate at almost one a day.
Though (except for the definition of the bodily Assumption of Mary in November 1950) none of these declarations fell into the formal category of infallible as defined at Vatican I, none the less Catholics came to expect authoritative guidance from Rome on all manner of issues — a strong tendency within the Church down to the present day.
Much of the conflict over the nature of authority since Vatican II derives from the manner in which it was exercised by Rome in the first half of the twentieth century, and particularly during the pontificate of Pius XII.
Eugenio Maria Pacelli was born on 2 March 1876.
His Pacelli grandfather had served Pius IX in the administration of the papal states: his father Filippo was a lawyer practising in the papal courts — he became an adviser to the commission for the codification of canon law set up by Pius X in 1904.
After his ordination to the priesthood by the Cardinal Vicar for Rome (May 1899), Eugenio himself studied law and then entered the Congregation for Extraordinary Ecclesiastical Affairs (now the Council for the Public Affairs of the Church), which handled relations between the Holy See and civil governments.
He was, however, chosen by the Congregation's secretary, Cardinal de Gasparri, to assist the codification commission.
From 1909 to 1914, when he became secretary to the Congregation, he lectured on ecclesiastical diplomacy at the Academia dei Nobili.
In 1917 he was consecrated archbishop and sent to Munich as nuncio, or papal ambassador, where he was considerably shaken by first-hand experience of a Bolshevik revolution.
In 1920 he was made nuncio to the German Republic, although he did not move to Berlin until 1925.
This period was a particularly happy one for him.
He became a fluent German speaker and Germanophil.
In 1929 he was recalled to Rome to take part — with his lawyer brother — in the final negotiations over the Lateran Treaty.
In December he became a cardinal; and the following February he followed his old master de Gasparri as Secretary of State.
On 2 March 1939 Pacelli was elected pope in succession to Pius XI in the shortest conclave there had been since 1623.
As pope, his affection for Germany reasserted itself.
He surrounded himself  with anti-Nazi German Jesuits, among them his secretary and his confessor, Augustine Bea.
In 1933, as Secretary of State, he negotiated a concordat with Hitler — on paper, a triumph for the Church; in practice, totally ignored by the German leader.
Pacelli sent off formal notes of protest at violations of the terms of the agreement: these, too, were ignored.
Four years later, in March 1937, at the instigation of Pacelli and with the assistance of a number of German bishops, Pius XI issued an encyclical,Mit Brennender Sorge , in bitter condemnation of Nazism.
Yet that clear vision of Pius XI's last years seems to have been lost when his Secretary of State succeeded him as pope.
Pacelli's relationship with Germany during the Second World War, and his apparent failure to act sufficiently vigorously in defence of the Jews, remains the great enigma of his pontificate.
It seems likely that the Vatican was much better informed than the official collection of documents,Actes et Documents du Saint Siége , would have the world believe.
Pius XII was trained as a diplomat, and retained his faith in diplomacy despite its obvious failure in the case of Germany.
After Cardinal Maglione's death in 1944 Pius acted as his own Secretary of State and increasingly reserved decision-making to himself.
Any assessment of Pius XII's long pontificate — he died at Castel Gandolfo, the papal summer residence, on 9 October 1958 — must take account of his early career.
Although he engaged in some pastoral work in the years after his ordination, preaching and hearing confessions, his time was spent almost entirely in the papal civil service and, until the appointment to Germany for just over a decade, almost entirely in Rome.
He travelled a little as papal legate, and made a private visit to the United States and Latin America, but his experience of countries other than Germany' (which he loved) and Italy was practically non-existent.
Perhaps conscious of this disadvantage, one of his first acts after the war was to internationalize the college of cardinals.
In February 1946 he appointed thirty-two cardinals from all parts of the world, and twenty-four more in 1953.
There were still more Italians in the sacred college than any other national group, but they now numbered only one-third of the total.
Pius's motives were not perhaps as straightforward as it might seem.
In the aftermath of the war, an international Church had to dilute — at least— the influence of Italian prelates.
And it also seems likely that Pius XII wanted the cardinals to act as papal legates, representatives of the pope in their different territories, ensuring through the bishops under their charge that true doctrine was taught to the laity.
That true doctrine was to be handed down by Pius XII through his speeches and writings.
He had spent his early years as a priest in the papal service under Pius X, whom he canonized.
Holy though he may have been, Pius X, abetted by the English-born Cardinal Rafael Merry del Val, waged a vigorous and not always clean campaign against the dangers of modernism.
His successor was determined to be no less a guardian of the strictest orthodoxy.
Given his vision of the Church, it is easy to categorize Pius XII as a theological conservative.
The truth, however, is not so straightforward.
During the modernist crisis, no area of scholarly research had been subjected  to as much intellectual oppression as the study of the Scriptures.
The Biblical Commission, originally established to foster biblical scholarship, had been used by Pius X to repress it.
Its declarations required Catholic scholars to believe, for example, that Moses had written the Pentateuch, and that St Matthew's Gospel was the first Gospel to be composed.
More remarkable still, in 1907 Pius X instructed Catholics to give assent not only to what the Biblical Commission had already decided, but to all decisions that it might make in the future.
Despite these difficulties, Catholic biblical scholarship had advanced, albeit cautiously, particularly as far as the Old Testament was concerned.
Oddly, much credit for this advance has also to be given to Pius X who, in 1909, founded the Biblical Institute (the Biblicum) in Rome and handed it over to the charge of the Jesuits, the Dominicans having earlier founded the Ecole Biblique in Jerusalem.
The violently anti-modernist spirit lived on, however, and just before the Second World War found expression in a thirteen volume, wholly uncritical commentary on the Old Testament by an Italian priest, Dolindo Ruotolo.
This commentary was put on the Index of forbidden books for its errors.
Ruotolo apparently submitted, but then published a pamphlet attacking current exegesis, especially as it was taught at the Biblicum.
The Biblical Commission responded with a letter which came to serve as the first part of an encyclical,Divino Afflante Spiritu , published by Pius XII on 30 September 1943.
Though it naturally carries the pope's name, credit for writing this most liberalizing document belongs to the pope's confessor, the German Jesuit Father (later Cardinal) Augustine Bea, who was then rector of the Biblicum.
Though the immediate effects of the encyclical were muted — in 1943, as one commentator noted, ‘the excitement was elsewhere’— the long-term effects were dramatic.
Not only had a pope approved the scholarship of Catholic exegetes, but he had encouraged their endeavours and removed the threat of condemnation by the Church because of their use of modern exegetical method.
Its whole tenor was positive, with particular stress being put upon the need to return to the original languages in which the sacred texts had been composed.
While it did not mark the end of the conflict — though the early decrees of the Biblical Commission were quietly withdrawn in 1955, the Biblicum was to come under attack on the eve of the Council — it was the most important milestone in the history of Catholic scriptural scholarship.
It freed scholars to pursue their researches without having to look over their shoulders at the Holy Office.
It prepared the way for the men who were to prepare the way for the Council.
Though the Constitution on Revelation at Vatican II has often been regarded as the major landmark in Catholic biblical studies, the real turning point had occurred with Divino Afflante Spiritu two decades earlier.
The implications of the papal encyclical reached further than the study of Scripture.
The principles of historical criticism could be applied to religious disciplines other than biblical ones, most notably to the development of doctrine.
Theology began to take a direction that Pius XII found uncomfortable.
The outcome was another encyclical,Humani Generis , published on 12 August 1950.
‘Evolutionism’ and ‘historicism’, together with existentialism, were among the non-Christian philosophies listed by the pope as contributing to the spread of ‘error’in Catholic theology.
No theologian was censured, nor even mentioned by name.
None the less, a number of distinguished theologians, French Jesuits and Dominicans in particular , were dismissed from their teaching posts soon afterwards.
They included Henri de Lubac, later to be raised to the rank of cardinal, though only after he had retreated from the more extreme position on the relationship between nature and grace he had adopted in 1946 in his book Surnaturel ; Marie-Dominique Chenu, one of whose books was placed on the Index in 1942 for daring to suggest that Thomas Aquinas ought to be studied against the history of his times; and Yves Congar, who survived to become one of the leading theologians of Vatican II.
The publication of Humani Generis came as an especial shock to the Catholic world because the theological developments it criticized had passed largely unnoticed.
The writings of one of the great visionaries of the period, the Jesuit Pierre Teilhard de Chardin, were not allowed to be published and he remained little more than a name, if even that, to all but a few scholars.
Those who had read his mimeographed books and articles, however, were among those who were removed from their posts in the aftermath of the encyclical.
But quite apart from this degree of thought control, still in operation in the theological sciences despite the freedom granted to biblical studies by Divino Afflante Spiritu , Pius XII had succeeded in focusing Catholic attention upon issues other than theological ones.
It was a period of increasing devotion to Mary, with the establishment of Marian institutes and journals to foster it.
Between 1948 and 1957 a thousand titles a year appeared in praise of Mary.
This was actively encouraged by Pius XII, who himself was particularly attracted to Our Lady of Fatima — perhaps he found the message of doom congenial.
There were also stories circulating that he had been the beneficiary of Marian apparitions.
On 1 November 1950 he declared that Mary had been assumed bodily into heaven — the doctrine of the Assumption, which had no scriptural, or other early Church, warrant, but which had been celebrated liturgically at least from the fourth century and certainly from the fifth.
Marian fervour was also encouraged by the declaration of a ‘Marian Year’ in 1954, and celebrations for the centenary of the Lourdes apparitions four years later: the 1950s was probably its highest point.
Sober theologians warned against the excesses of the devotion, attempting to root devotion to Mary in the Scriptures, and pointing to the difficulties that were occasioned in relations with other Churches.
This reaction, in its turn, peaked during Vatican II: no separate document on Mary was produced, and her role, when it was treated, was linked to that of the Church in Lumen Gentium .
In 1950, however, many saw in the Dogma of the Assumption a test of the loyalty of those theologians who had been criticized, if not condemned, by Humani Generis .
The issue of papal authority was central to the encyclical.
Although Pius conceded that popes were not exercising their full authority in these letters, if a view was expressed it was ‘no longer[to]be a matter of free debate among theologians’.
The pope applied to himself the words of Christ, ‘He that heareth you heareth me’.
Just over a decade later, as the papal curia prepared for the Vatican Council, Cardinal Ottaviani proposed a profession of faith for the Council fathers which would repeat the anti-modernist oath (no remarkable thing in itself: the anti-modernist oath was required to be taken by all those teaching in seminaries, and all priests before ordination) and once again to repudiate the errors that had been condemned by Humani Generis .
A number of those ‘errors’ were directly concerned with Scripture, but there was also a particular problem associated with the origins of the human race Pius, it was clear, was not happy with the theory of evolution: more problematic still was the whole question of original sin.
It was far from clear to the pope how this could have been transmitted to the whole human race unless there had been an historical Adam and Eve, that is, a single set of parents.
Even as distinguished a scholar as Karl Rahner loyally attempted to fall in line with papal doctrine, but only at considerable cost to his credibility.
The general tenor of Humani Generis was a reaffirmation of a whole string of Catholic doctrines that Pius or his advisers believed to be under attack, including the existence of angels, transubstantiation, the value of Thomism as the Church's philosophy, and the centrality of tradition.
Among these doctrines was one that Pius had made particularly his own, the notion of the mystical body of Christ.
His encyclical Mystici Corporis had been published on 29 June 1943; in other words, only three months before Divino Afflante Spiritu .
It did not display, perhaps could not have done so, the depth of biblical scholarship that the later encyclical did so much to encourage.
It was striking for its insistence on the role of the Holy Spirit, but equally remarkable for its firmly identifying the Roman Catholic Church with the body of Christ.
It served in consequence to reinforce in Catholics their already strong, triumphalistic, sense of their own distinctiveness from other Christians.
While clearly it is unhistorical to judge Pius XII in the light of the later developments at the Council, it is equally wrong to deny him, and to attribute to the Council, credit for many of the liturgical changes in the Church.
This is not to diminish Sacrosanctum Concilium , which ranks with the Constitutions on the Church, on Scripture and the Pastoral Mission of the Church as one of the major documents of Vatican II, but at least as much as they — and perhaps more so — it had been prepared for during the pontificate of Pius XII.
His encyclical Mediator Dei , published on 20 December 1947, was the first one in the history of such documents to be devoted exclusively to the liturgy.
This encyclical was, of course, theological rather than practical in its purpose, and though it undoubtedly helped to quicken the pace of liturgical reform in the Church, the driving force of change lay elsewhere — most particularly perhaps in Germany.
At a conference organized in June 1950 by the Liturgical Institute of Trier, a lecture by Romano Guardini led to a resolution calling upon the German bishops to request Rome to move the long Holy Saturday service from the early morning to the late evening, thus again making it the vigil service it once had been.
The request was granted — in the first instance for a year.
A second conference — though the first international gathering for it was co-sponsored by the Centre de Pastorale Liturgique of Paris — was held in July 1951.
This time the subject was the rubrics of the  Roman missal and the form of the Holy Saturday vigil.
Again reforms were introduced.
Numerous changes followed, either by way of decree from the Sacred Congregation of Rites, or through direct papal intervention.
Rules that had once obliged Catholics to fast from midnight before receiving Communion were eased.
Evening Mass was permitted.
More changes were made to the Holy Week liturgy.
The question of music in the liturgy was addressed.
A little of the vernacular (the proclamation of the Epistle and Gospel) was allowed into the Mass.
In September 1956 liturgical leaders, including six cardinals and 800 bishops, came together in Assisi to express their gratitude to the pope for all the changes that had been brought about in the liturgy during his pontificate.
But by that time Pius had become alarmed at the pace of change.
There had already been warnings issued to clergy not to take the law into their own hands, and in his allocution to the participants the 80-year-old pontiff gave expression to his fears.
Apart perhaps from the revision of the Holy Week liturgy, the changes brought about in the Church's worship under Pius XII now seem relatively modest.
But they were a good deal more important at a symbolic level.
The unchanging nature of the Latin, Roman liturgy was something upon which many Roman Catholics set — and some still set — great store.
That changes were possible at all even in this most sacred area of ritual meant that changes were possible elsewhere.
This was of immense psychological importance.
And in encouraging the biblical movement, Pius XII had made an indirect contribution to liturgical renewal of equal significance.
For that, too, Pius deserves much credit.
There is a great deal in Pius's character that seems contradictory.
The liturgical reforms, the encouragement he gave to biblical scholarship, the beginning he made, for whatever reason, at internationalizing the college of cardinals, his call to bishops to send their clergy as missionaries to Latin America and, more particularly, to Africa, these all suggest a pope who was far from conservative in outlook.
And if the doctrine of collegiality is to be seen as one of the major contributions of Vatican II to the life of the Church, even that can be found in the pontificate of Pius XII, for it was he who set up CELAM, the Conference of Bishops of Latin America.
And there had even been an abortive project for a Council.
This proposal, which has only fairly recently come to light, was made by Archbishop Ruffini of Palermo and Monsignor Ottaviani, then an official of the Holy Office.
They had wanted an updating of canon law, a reassertion of control over Church organizations, the declaration of Mary's Assumption (perhaps as a sop to the pope), and a firm condemnation of nascent ecumenism and what they saw as a new outbreak of modernism.
The plan was for a short gathering, possibly not more than a month long, which would reassert the unity of the Church and its authority in matters of the faith.
Preparatory commissions were set up, bishops were consulted.
And then the idea was dropped.
Pius took it upon himself to proclaim the Dogma of the Assumption.
Without recourse to the world-wide episcopate, he issued  Humani Generis to condemn the string of ‘false philosophies’ that had been identified by the commission on speculative theology.
It is unclear why he so suddenly dropped the idea that he first pushed forward with some vigour.
If it is true that he saw the Church in the form of a pyramid, as many people did, with authority flowing down from himself to cardinals, bishops and then to priests, then a Council had no place in any such scheme of things: it only confused the pattern of authority.
But it also appears that the bishops who were consulted replied with considerable enthusiasm, proposing a much wider agenda than that originally intended.
It may have become obvious to Pius and his advisers that a Council would not be as easy to manipulate as they had imagined.
Vatican II was to prove them correct.
3 Pius XII: Bibliography
JOHN XXIII
PETER HEBBLETHWAITE
John XXIII was elected pope in October 1958.
Barely three months later he announced his Ecumenical Council (together with a synod for the diocese of Rome and the reform of the Code of Canon Law) on 25 January 1959, the last day of the Octave of Prayer for Christian Unity.
He was speaking in private in the chapter house of the abbey of St Paul's-without-the-walls.
Seventeen Roman cardinals were present.
He had known most of them for half a lifetime.
They did not react.
Instead of the enthusiasm Pope John had hoped for, there was what he was reduced to calling ‘a devout and impressive silence’(Hebblethwaite, 1984, p. 196).
Yet we now know that the silence was not total.
Cardinal Nicola Canali, responsible for Vatican finances, enquired whether ‘once again the preparation of the Council would be entrusted to the Holy Office’.
Canali was referring to the project for a short, sharp Council conceived in 1948–9, which would have reasserted Catholic unity around the Holy Father after a murderous war, condemned contemporary errors and defined the Assumption by acclamation.
That project had been abandoned.
So Canali's question assumed that Pope John had the same kind of Council in mind as Pius XII.
Yet this was not so.
Cardinal Carlo Confalonieri, who is our source for this story, goes on: ‘Pope John paused for a moment, as though surprised at this question and then said, with a calm but decisive voice: ‘The Pope presides over the Council (Presidente del concilio è il papa )’ ' (Riccardi, 1987, p. 153).
The implications of this remark were not immediately obvious.
But with hindsight it is possible to say that Pope John had already rejected the defensive-minded, judgemental, negative Council projected in 1948–9.
He had thought about conciliar history and knew what sort of Council he wanted.
It is very striking to note the way Pope John always claimed paternity of the idea of the Council.
‘The summoning of the Ecumenical Council’, wrote the editor of his diary, ‘was entirely his own initiative and in capite under his own jurisdiction’(Roncalli, 1965, p. 345).
He allowed that others had proposed the Roman synod and the revision of the Code of Canon Law.
But he always insisted that the Council was his responsibility.
In his farewell letter to Capovilla, he defined himself as ‘Pope of the Council’(Hebblethwaite, 1984, p. 474).
In all this we should see not personal vanity — Pope John was too old for that — but an act of primatial responsibility.
Presidente del concilio è il papa .
It has often been said that he did not really have any very clear idea of what he wanted from his Council; and as far as content goes, that may be true.
He did not have a blueprint for the Council.
But he had a very clear idea of the manner in which his Council should be conducted.
In his address opening the Council he expressed it by saying that the Council would be ‘pastoral’ rather than dogmatic, and talking about aggiornamento and rinnovimento — terms that harked back to his youth when both were slightly suspect.
(Abbott, p. 716).
But it was not such language that captured the imagination of the world.
John thought in images.
On the death of Pope Pius XII he wrote: ‘One of my favourite phrases brings me great comfort: we are not on earth as museum-keepers, but to cultivate a flourishing garden of life and to prepare a glorious future’(Capovilla, 1978a, p. 481).
John expressed this sense of burgeoning new life in the Church by calling the Council ‘a new Pentecost’.
It is highly significant that he had used this expression in a letter written from the conclave to a friend, Giuseppe Piazza, the Bishop of Bergamo: ‘My soul finds comfort in the thought that a new Pentecost can blow through the Church, renewing its head, leading to a new ordering of the ecclesiastical body and bringing fresh vigour in the journey towards truth, goodness and peace’(Capovilla, 1978b, p. 47).
Within a few days of his election he already knew that the way to realize this ‘new Pentecost’ was an Ecumenical Council.
He chose his first Whitsunday as pope to announce details of how the Ante-preparatory Commission would be organized.
He noted how Pius IX had used the Feast of the Immaculate Conception, 8 December, to advance the various stages of Vatican I. He used Pentecost in this way because, as he said, ‘It is from the spirit and doctrine of Pentecost that the great event of the Ecumenical Council draws its substance and its life’(Acta Apostolica Sedis 52, p. 517).
This implied far more than the juridical observation that the Holy Spirit would ‘assist’ the Ecumenical Council.
It meant that in John's mind the Council was an event of the Holy Spirit in which the whole Church was involved.
Everyone was urged to say his ‘prayer for the Council’: ‘Renew thy wonders in this day, as by a New Pentecost.’
This, though it aroused enthusiasm, could not set the agenda of the Council.
Some 2,150 replies had been received from the prelates and Catholic institutions consulted.
They were not particularly inspiring, though Michael van der Plas has shown that neither were they nugatory.
Cardinal Bernard Alfrink, for example, launched the theme of the local Church, talked of ‘unity in diversity’ and invented collegiality before there was a word for it.
(Van der Plas, 1984; for Alfrink, see pp. 55–6).
John's next decision was at first blush disconcerting.
On Whitsun eve, 1960, the Central Theological Commission was set up to prepare the Council; subject to it were ten sub-commissions presided over by the heads of the corresponding Roman dicasteries.
Thus Gaetano Cigognani, of the Congregation of Rites, was responsible for liturgy.
This meant that the preparation of the Council would be in the hands of the ‘museum-keepers’ of the Roman curia.
But John had not taken leave of his senses.
He knew that he had to coax the curia along.
A Council prepared against the curia would be doomed to fail.
In any case, by involving the curia in the preparations for the Council, he hoped to ‘convert’ it to his own sense of the priority of the pastoral.
On 20 June 1961 Pope John addressed the first meeting of the central  commission.
Here for the first time the actual shape of the Council was outlined.
Pope John dealt with practical aspects: choice of theologians and canonists to act as experts; rules of debate; voting procedures; working-language (Latin); relations with the press.
More important was Pope John's statement that the purpose of the Council was the aggiornamento of the Catholic Church.
This would of itself set off ecumenical vibrations such that, although it could not be called a ‘Council of reunion’ like Florence, it could be a Council leading towards what he called ‘the recomposition of the whole mystical flock of Christ’.
He admitted that this would involve ‘a change in mentalities, ways of thinking and prejudices, all of which have a long history’.
Finally, he hinted at a principle of crucial importance: ‘The language we use in the Council should be serene and tranquil; it should shed light on and remove misunderstandings; and it should dissipate error by the force of truth ’(Discorsi, messagi , colloqui del Santo Padre Giovanni XXIII , vol. 3, p. 575).
Cardinal Alfredo Ottaviani, Pro-prefect of the Holy Office and President of the Central Theological Commission, appeared to think that this was misguided or purely formal.
The question of how to deal with errors was at the heart of the debates in the central commission in the twelve months that preceded the Council.
Ottaviani continued to believe that ‘error has no rights’ and argued for repression; Cardinal Augustin Bea, President of the newly created Secretariat for Christian Unity, shared Pope John's judgement that ‘condemning errors’was not the best way to open up a conversation (or dialogue) with other Christians or the modern world.
These meetings were a dress-rehearsal for the first session of the Council.
But since they were held in secret, few knew this.
Another great advance in precision about the goals of the Council came on Christmas Day, 1961, with the solemn apostolic constitution,Humanae Salutis , the official convocation of the Council.
In a single sentence, Pope John provided the Council with a method and commentators with material that could last a lifetime.
He spoke of the need to ‘discern the signs of the times’: ‘We should make our own Jesus’ advice that we should know how to discern ‘the signs of the times’(Matthew 16.4), and we seem to see now, in the midst of so much darkness, a few hints which augur well for the fate of the Church and humanity' (Abbott, p. 704).
Pope John's ‘optimism’ was later criticized — why should he ignore apocalyptic signs of disaster to concentrate on those that gave grounds for hope?— but hope was in such short supply in 1961 that his words were eagerly seized upon (Moltmann, 1977, p. 368, n. 64; The Extraordinary Synod of 1985 likewise gave a more ‘pessimistic’reading of the ‘signs of the times’).
The motu proprio Consilium Dei Nostrum in February 1962 fixed the date for the start of the Council: 11 October 1962.
Astonishing to relate, it was still widely believed at this time that a single session would suffice, and indeed the Council actually started under this illusion.
Yet the schemata or draft texts were piling up.
Pope John did not seem worried.
In April he told the fifth session of the central commission that ‘the consent of the Bishops will not be difficult to obtain and their approval will be unanimous’(Rouquette, 1968, p. 114).
This raises the most difficult problem of all for the historian of the Council.
Does this remark mean that Pope John approved of the curially prepared texts, and hoped that they would win unanimous acceptance?
This view has been put forward by Joseph Ratzinger in his interviews with Vittorio Messori.
Pope John, it is said, ‘had not envisaged the possibility of rejection and expected a rapid and painless vote in favour of projects that he had read through and welcomed with full approval’(Ratzinger Report , 1985, p. 41).
The implication is that Pope John sided with the minority at the first session and was ‘upset’(as the minority often asserted) at the rejection of such excellent drafts.
But this view is, as Giuseppe Alberigo remarks ‘unfounded and therefore unreliable’(Riccardi, 1987, p. 238, n. 69).
There is evidence on the contrary that Pope John was less than happy about certain schemata .
On 27 July 1962, he told Roberto Tucci, editor of Civiltà Cattolica , that he ‘did not like the technical and harsh tone’ of some of the drafts (ibid.).
On 24 July he had criticized the first version of the ecumenical decree,Ut Omnes Unum Sint : So although it is no doubt true to say that Pope John approved in general of the prepared texts, he was not deeply attached to them and was prepared to see them dropped without any deep sense of personal loss.
They would do — until something better came along.
In any, case, the Council was sovereign.
If it wanted to reject the preliminary drafts, so be it.
That was sad, maybe, but not tragic.
The preparatory work for the Council was neither definitive nor sacrosanct.
It could be discarded.
This is a very valuable study, but the mosaic of biblical texts with which it begins does not seem in very good taste.
In general this piling up of biblical texts in the exposition of elementary notions and principles, with the biblical quotations buttressing each other up and introducing ideas foreign to the main theme, creates confusion in the minds of simple average souls who are the majority among good Christians (Capovilla, 1978a, p. 546).
On 11 September 1962, Pope John broadcast to the world in Latin.
His opening words were Lumen Christi Ecclesia Christi (The Church of Christ is the Light of Christ).
This was his indirect comment on the seventy schemata .
‘Has there ever been an ecumenical Council’, he asks, ‘which was not a way of self-renewal through an encounter with the Risen Jesus, the glorious and immortal King, whose light illumines the whole Church for the salvation, joy and glory of all peoples?’
The question was rhetorical.
It was another way of saying there would be no condemnations.
But there was also a new note.
It will be illuminating and helpful to present the Church ‘in the under-developed countries as the Church of all, and especially of the poor ’.
This provided the impetus for the opening sentence of Gaudium et Spes .
One last idea was slotted into place in this 11 September broadcast.
From Cardinal Suenens, Pope John had learned to distinguish between the Church ad intra and the Church ad extra .
Though this distinction could be abused, at this precise moment it helped to clarify two sets of problems the Council would have to deal with: internal questions (nature of the Church, worship, ecumenism, etc.), and external questions (war, peace, birth control, hunger, etc.).
Just over a week later, on 23 September 1962, X-ray examinations  revealed that Pope John was suffering from cancer.
Nothing was said publicly, but from now on he realized that if the Council lasted more than one session, he would not be present to see it through.
As he told Cardinal Gabriel-Marie Garrone, Archbishop of Toulouse: ‘At least I have launched this big ship — others will have to bring it into port.‘
He launched his big ship with his opening address to the Council at the end of an exhausting morning on 11 October 1962 (For complete text, see Abbott, pp. 710–19).
‘Launch’ is an apt term: it was never his intention to control or manipulate the Council, for it was a sovereign body under his presidency; his duty was to see that it was heading in the right direction.
After calling it, this was his most important and abiding contribution to the Council.
He stressed four points.
First, the Council was to be a celebration of Christian faith.
That was why it began with rejoicing, and one can regret that it did not become known by its opening words:Gaudet Mater Ecclesia (Mother Church rejoices).
The Church rejoiced in its ‘unity in diversity’ manifested in the various rites that witnessed to the richness of ‘catholicity’(so often reduced to bland uniformity).
This would have to be remembered in the rough and tumble of debate.
Second, John wanted the Council to share in his optimism about the presence of the Holy Spirit in the modern world.
He denounced the ‘prophets of misfortune’ who see in the modern world ‘nothing but betrayal and ruination.
They claim that this age is far worse than previous ages, and they go on as though they had learned nothing at all from history — and yet history is the great teacher of life (magistra vitae ).
’ John made it clear enough that he was thinking of the Roman curia: ‘In our everyday ministry we often have to listen, greatly to our sorrow, to those…who do not have much discretion or balance’.
So, third, the purpose of the Council was not just to restate and defend past doctrines — for that a Council was not necessary — but to ‘make a leap forward in doctrinal insight and the education of consciences in ever greater fidelity to authentic teaching.
But this authentic doctrine has to be studied in the light of the research methods and the literary forms of modern thought.
For the substance of the ancient deposit of faith is one thing, and the way it is presented is another,’(my translation).
The last sentence of this immensely significant passage was the only text from this address quoted by the Council (in Gaudium et Spes 62).
Finally, John repeated that he wanted a positive not a negative Council.
He did not deny that errors abounded in the contemporary world, but in a characteristic image said that ‘they often vanish as swiftly as they arise, like mist before the sun’.
Nor did he deny — how could he?— that the Church in the past had been preoccupied, not to say obsessed, with rooting out errors.
‘Today’, he blithely continued, ‘the Spouse of Christ prefers to use the medicine of mercy rather than severity.
She considers that she meets the needs of the modern age by showing the validity of her teachings rather than by condemnations.’
In this way Pope John circumvented the nineteenth-century thesis, still defended by Cardinal Ottaviani at the Holy Office, that ‘error has no rights’.
The abandonment of this thesis was a precondition of the Council's treatment of ecumenism, religious liberty and non-Christian religions.
This was the issue that dominated the first session of the Council, the only one Pope John knew.
He intervened rarely, but always decisively, to ensure joint commissions so that the minority (mostly from the curia) would be able to accept the Council's verdict without being humiliated.
But during this autumn of 1962 there were other things on his mind.
The Cuban missile crisis brought the United States and the Soviet Union close to war.
Pope John's message to heads of state — broadcast on Vatican Radio on 25 October — made the front page of Pravda the next day under the banner headline: ‘We beg all rulers not to be deaf to the cry of humanity’.
This was unheard of.
John's appeal enabled Khrushchev to step down without losing face.
It encouraged Pope John to think of an encyclical on peace and Pacem in Terris became his testament.
It was now clear that the Council could not be concluded in a single session.
The announcement was made on 12 November that the second (and final) session would take place from 12 May to 29 June 1963 — an indication that Pope John, despite his mortal illness, still hoped to be present at it.
The first session was in danger of ending in chaos and frustration when a series of planned interventions, approved by Pope John, rescued it.
First, Suenens proposed a plan d'ensemble , an overall plan, to reduce the number of topics and give some direction to their work.
Cardinal Giacomo Lercaro was assigned ‘the Church of the poor’, and he developed the text of Acts quoted by Pope John on 11 October: ‘Silver and gold I have not, but what I have I give you.’
Then Montini dealt with the order of questions the Council had to answer (he had already developed this in a letter to Pope John only a week after the Council began).
They should start with the mystery of the Church, its self-understanding as the sacrament of Christ in the world; this would lead to a consideration of ‘roles’ in the Church-bishop, priest, layperson, religious, etc.
Next would come the mission of the Church, what the Church does in liturgy and apostolic work.
This redefinition would make it possible to discuss the relationships of the Church with separated brethren, civil society, non-Christian religions, the world of work, economics and ‘the Church's enemies’.
Pope John used to say, ‘The Church may have many enemies, but she is no one 's enemy’(p. 207).
He accepted this programme, and half knew that Montini would have to carry it through.
The news that Metropolitan Josef Slipyi, Major Archbishop of the Ukrainian Catholic Church, had been released from his Soviet labour camp and was on his way to Rome, helped Pope John in the final stages of the preparation of Pacem in Terris .
It strengthened his conviction that ‘there exists in man's nature an undying capacity to break through the barriers of error, and to seek the road to truth’(Pacem in Terris 158).
This leads to the distinction between the error (always to be rejected) and the one who errs (always to be respected), and the idea that even ‘erroneous’ systems can have ‘good and commendable elements’(159).
This is why Pacem in Terris was the first papal encyclical that was addressed to ‘all men of good will’.
It had other novel features.
While nineteenth-century Catholic teaching had  been suspicious of ‘human rights’ discourse, John embraced it eagerly and made it a central theme, greatly extending the range and number of ‘rights’, including those of minorities (95–7) and refugees (103–8).
Pacem in Terris was also original in noting three features of the modern world in which John believed the influence of the Holy Spirit could be discerned: ‘the progressive improvement in the social conditions of working people who insist on being treated as human beings’(40); the part played by women in political life and the fact that ‘women are gaining an increasing awareness of their natural dignity’(41); and the ending of imperialism.
There was also an implicit condemnation of atomic weapons: ‘In this age which boasts of its atomic power, it no longer makes sense (alienum a ratione est ) to maintain that war is a fit instrument with which to repair the violation of justice.’
Pacem in Terris summed up Pope John's magisterium, and gave the age-old term a new meaning.
He spoke about universal human concerns, and articulated the aspirations of ordinary people towards peace and a better life.
Whatever authority it had, came not from the power of the speaker — he had none in the conventional sense — but from the cogency and relevance of what he said and the hope it inspired.
Pope John was not a ‘liberal’ in most senses of that term, but he wanted to close the gap between the gospel and life.
In Pacem in Terris he nudged the Council firmly in that direction.
Note
Gustavo Gutierrez has stressed the importance of this remark for Latin America, adding: ‘The preference, the  predilection (not exclusive, let's be clear) for the poor is not opposed in the mind of the Pope to his universal mission; on the contrary it makes his universal mission quite concrete’(Alberigo and Jossua, pp. 239, 240).
John XXIII: Bibliography
THE HISTORY OF THE COUNCIL
MICHAEL J. WALSH
THE YEARS 1959–61
It was the best-prepared Council ever.
Some 800 theologians and other experts prepared the agenda.
The Church's 2,500 bishops and prelates, heads of men's religious orders (though not of women's!), and faculties of some thirty-seven Catholic universities were asked what they thought were the major problems facing the Church.
Some 2,000 replies were received.
Preparatory commissions were set up: the central one included the pope.
There were eleven more, together with three secretariats (press, unity and administration), created on 5 June 1960, the feast of Pentecost.
At solemn vespers in St Peter's that day, Pope John said, ‘The preparation of the Council, however, will not be the task of the Roman curia but, together with the illustrious prelates and consultors of the Roman Curia, bishops and scholars from all over the world will offer their contribution.‘
The central commission approved seventy schemata, of which seven went to bishops the July before the Council: on the sources of revelation, moral order, the deposit of faith, family and chastity, liturgy, media and unity.
Pope John talked of unity being achieved through the Council.
More frequently, however, he spoke of it as a means to modernize the Church so that unity might become possible.
The curia was worried by talk of modernization — especially perhaps by the thought that 2,500 bishops in Rome might make them change their procedures in unwelcome ways.
They were even more alarmed by hostility to the papal diplomatic service.
They countered the threat by inviting only safe theologians — largely Rome-based — to sit on the preparatory commissions.
When pressure was put on them for more radical appointments, invitations were mostly too late to make any significant impact.
THE YEAR 1962: THE FIRST SESSION
In the summer of 1962, in Appropinquante Concilio , Pope John promulgated rules of procedure for the Council (confirmed with some additional points the following year by Paul VI's Ordo Concilii Oecumenici Vaticani Secundi ).
This made it clear that periti might not all be theologians ('canonists and other experts’ were also mentioned), and that there was a distinction between conciliar periti and private advisers to bishops.
The former, summoned by the  pope, could attend discussions in the Council (though normally not speak) and be brought into conciliar committees with the approval of the chairman and members.
In practice, chairmen seldom called those whose ideas they found unacceptable.
Some two hundred periti were summoned to the first session, but by April 1963 the number had reached 348.
The final count was 480, though not all were there together.
In the event, 281 took part in the whole Council, 95 in only three sessions, 63 at two, and 41 at one.
Of the observers whom Pope John had decided to invite, there were some forty present when the Council began.
They represented the spectrum of Christian conviction, East and West — though there was no one from the Eastern Orthodox Churches when it opened, and two Russian Orthodox clergy came shortly after the Council had got under way.
By the time it ended, however, the number had swollen to eighty.
Most were delegated by their Churches, a few were especially invited —‘as motley a group of ‘non-Catholics’ as ever had been assembled', as Dr Albert Outler, one of their number, described them in ‘Strangers within the Gates’(see Outler, 1986, p. 173).
They were placed in the tribune of St Longinus, close to the moderators' table, both for the conciliar proceedings and other events, which gave them an excellent view.
Once a week they met together to discuss, with one of the periti , matters then under debate in the Basilica.
Occasionally they appear to have had some direct influence on the formulation of the documents — the particular mention of the Anglican communion in the decree on ecumenism for example, as of the ‘hierarchy of truths’— and their advice was sought, at least by the Unity Secretariat (whose guest they were) on religious freedom.
They could also seek to express their views by searching out a friendly bishop to speak for them in the debates.
But it was perhaps their indirect influence which, ultimately, was more significant.
Not only could they see, they could clearly be seen: every speaker could not but be aware of their non-Catholic auditors, and trim his words to cause as little upset as possible.
And they talked regularly to, and presumably influenced, conciliar fathers they met socially.
The observers found the proceedings difficult to follow, and had to be supplied with interpreters, for both pope and curia had insisted on Latin as the language of the debates.
The Council, it was claimed, might thus better formulate precise statements.
Perhaps it was also expected to put non-Italians at a disadvantage.
Curial officials ensured conservative cardinals led discussions in the central commission, and that reports of commissions in the L'Osservatore Romano reflected conservative views.
Not all members of commissions could be stifled, however, and debates were at times acrimonious.
The opening was on 11 October 1962.
John's address stressed that the Council was to be pastoral rather than dogmatic, thus distancing himself from his advisers, and endorsing the view, condemned by Cardinal Ruffini, that the task of the Council was not to proclaim new dogmas but to find new ways of expressing the old (see Abbott, p. 710–19).
Over the next few days Pope John talked with groups such as the press and the observers.
The latter were treated with especial courtesy, being provided with the best seats and a translation service.
The press, about 1,000 at the  opening, were not so lucky.
Reporters could not attend meetings, press releases were couched in generalities and favoured the conservative line.
The London Tablet protested that one press release contained fifteen ‘condemns’ in twenty-four pages despite the tenor of Pope John's opening address.
The secrecy of the Council at first proved a problem for journalists, though gradually language groups of bishops and experts emerged to brief reporters after each congregation.
By the fifth week,La Croix was linking names of bishops with the general gist of what they had said in the debates: its editor had the good fortune himself to be a peritus .
Each day began with Mass celebrated in as many different rites as were represented in the Council Hall inside St Peter's.
It was claimed there were twenty-six.
The first general congregation, or working session, was on Saturday, 13 October.
The agenda specified the election of sixteen members to each of the ten Conciliar Commissions — the successors of the preparatory ones.
Eight members were then to be added by the pope.
The commissions were to present the schemata already prepared, and consider amendments.
Cardinal Lienart of Lille proposed an alternative plan.
Instead of voting immediately, he suggested, regional groups should meet to choose the best qualified candidates.
This intervention was backed by Cardinal Frings of Cologne.
The two cardinals were so loudly applauded that it was clear they represented the wishes of the majority.
Not only did this process of consultation demonstrate that the Council was in charge of its own proceedings, but it brought the bishops together and helped them to get to know one another.
It also allowed the commissions to be representative of the whole Church.
The first conciliar text to be considered, on 22 October at the 4th general congregation, was that on liturgy.
It promptly divided the Council into ‘traditionalists’ and ‘progressives’.
The former, while rejecting any change, insisted in particular on the retention of Latin.
The ‘progressives’ were alarmed by the fact that the document produced by the preparatory commission on the liturgy had been altered between approval by the central commission (over which the pope himself presided) and reaching the Council itself.
It now carried the warning that the Holy See had to approve changes before they could be implemented locally — effectively putting the curia back in charge.
Much of the debate of the first few days concerned the use of Latin in the liturgy, but the debate itself of course took place in Latin.
When Cardinal Spellman was presiding, he had such difficulty making himself understood that he had to have someone speak for him.
When Maximos IV Saigh, Melchite Patriarch of Antioch, closed the 5th congregation on 23 October, he spoke in French — to the great relief of many.
On 24 October Archbishop Parente, an assessor of the Holy Office, complained of the criticism of the curia implied in the speeches, and wanted the whole schema sent to the Theology Commission to be reworked.
He argued that the Holy Office had already yielded a great deal.
Further changes required the greatest prudence.
A few days later Cardinal Ottaviani asked  whether the fathers were planning a revolution.
To introduce too many changes, he argued, would cause scandal among the faithful.
Ottaviani overran his time, but at first refused to be stopped.
When forced to do so, the president's action was greeted by applause: the fact that the president was Alfrink of Utrecht added piquancy to the event.
Ottaviani stayed away for a fortnight.
Debate continued until 13 November.
An attempt was made to stop applause, which brought considerable opposition, and another to put Joseph in the canon of Mass — which the pope himself did in a decree of 13 November.
The liturgy schema was an important opening.
It was something about which people felt deeply and divisions among the Council fathers became clear.
On the other hand, it did not touch dogma.
Revelation was another matter.
This followed next, the debate opening on 14 November with a speech from Ottaviani, followed by a presentation of the text which suggested that it was a dogmatic decree concerned with the defence of Catholic doctrine: the existence of ‘two sources’ of revelation, Scripture and tradition.
The schema was promptly attacked by Lienart on the basic ground that there are not two sources of revelation, but only one: the Word of God.
He was supported by Cardinal Bea.
Debate on 16 November was enlivened by a passionate defence of the schema from the Bishop of Faenza who attacked the Jesuit-run Biblical Institute, of which Bea had been rector.
The following day Cardinal Dopfner claimed that the commission responsible for producing the schema had been too much under the influence of the Lateran University — then at odds with the Jesuits, and that the commission had refused to collaborate with the Secretariat for Promoting Unity.
The schema therefore reflected only one particular outlook, he argued, and should be rejected.
This upset conservatives who insisted, inaccurately, that schemata could only be accepted or amended, not rejected.
None the less, an attempt on 20 November to reject the schema failed, though narrowly — possibly because of the way the proposal was framed.
The following day the pope ordered its withdrawal.
It could not be sent back to the original commission which was dominated by Lateran supporters, so a neatly balanced new one had to be constituted with Ottaviani and Bea as joint chairmen.
During this time the bishops were not only rubbing shoulders with the experts in the coffee shop (known as the Bar-Jonah), but they were also attending lectures by the periti .
Ottaviani, feeling that the authority of the Holy Office was threatened, tried to persuade the pope to forbid lectures by the Jesuits of the Biblicum — and even have Karl Rahner banned from Rome.
Pope John flatly refused.
During the third week of the Council, Archbishop Parente appealed to African bishops for support, criticizing them for turning against their old masters (many had been trained at Propaganda Fide) and siding with the northern Europeans.
They appeared to ignore him — and organized themselves with a secretariat of their own.
Similar evidence of unity emerged from the numerous (about 600) Latin American bishops.
Debate on the all-important, but heavily traditionalist, schema on the Church began at the 31st general congregation on 1 December.
It was introduced by Ottaviani, who again stressed that the document before the fathers had been prepared by learned theologians and had the pope's approval.
The previous evening L'Osservatore Romano had carried an article critical of news coverage of the Council and commiserating with the curia because it was constantly under attack.
The Council, said the author, should not be reported as if it was divided along party lines.
The piece tended to blame left-wing publications, whereas in fact the most virulent opposition to the Council had come from the Italian — and to some extent the French — ultra-right.
Osservatore's view was not shared by Council members.
Cardinal Montini, in one of his weekly newsletters for his diocese, directly blamed the slowness of the Council on the curia which had prevented the various commissions co-operating during the preparatory period.
When, on 4 December, Suenens called for a complete redrafting of the schema on the Church, he was greeted with prolonged applause and backed by Montini.
Two days later the secretary general, Archbishop Felici, responded to this by announcing that all schemata would be reworked while the Council was in recess.
There were to be mixed commissions whose deliberations would be sent to bishops and experts for comment, while a new committee would oversee collaboration between the commissions.
It was within these commissions, which now included some of the leading theologians of Germany, France, Belgium and America, that much of the Council's most delicate work of redrafting texts would be done.
Pope John was present at the general congregation on 7 December.
Rumours of his ill-health had cast gloom over the previous weeks, and his presence — on foot — brought great applause.
Though he was more like his old self, many suspected they were seeing him for the last time.
He admitted the Council had begun slowly, but said that was inevitable, and that bishops would work better now they had come to understand different points of view.
He asked them to do their homework with the schemata to be sent them, for the Church had no time to lose.
Although not a single document had yet been approved, he hoped all would be over by Christmas 1963, the 400th anniversary of the Council of Trent.
THE YEAR 1963: THE SECOND SESSION
In June 1963 Pope John XXIII died.
Ironically it fell to Cardinal Ottaviani, most conservative of cardinals, to announce the election of the Cardinal Archbishop of Milan to the papacy as Paul VI.
And one of the first acts of Pope Paul was to determine an early date for the opening of the new session — 29 September.
The Co-ordinating Commission was summoned to meet on 3 July, just twelve days after Paul's election.
The choice of Montini as pope was an enormous encouragement to those working for change in and through the Council.
It was known he believed conciliar mechanisms clumsy and its secrecy too strict.
He also wanted the schema on the Church debated as soon as possible: it was put first on the new session's agenda.
And just a week before the Council opened he warned the papal curia that it must not be an obstacle in the way of reform.
In his opening address on 29 September the pope rejected the notion, common since Vatican I, that the authority of the pontiff alone was sufficient to govern the Church, and listed the four aims of the Council: that the Church should have a clearer idea of its own nature; that there was need for renewal; that Christians of all denominations be brought closer together (he apologized for the Catholic Church's own failings in its relations with non-Catholics); and finally, the need for dialogue between Church and world.
At the beginning of the 37th general congregation Archbishop Felici announced an alteration in the rules governing secrecy: from now on it was permissible to reveal what was said in debates in the Council, though discussion in commissions was still to be kept from journalists.
It was also announced that the number of conciliar periti was not to be increased — a decision not strictly adhered to.
Then debate began on the document on the Church.
The most contentious issue in the early days of the second session was the collegiality of bishops.
There was also a skirmish around the question of married deacons, an idea broached in chapter II of the document on the Church,Lumen Gentium (officially,De Ecclesia ).
After the Council had moved on from chapter II, Cardinal Ottaviani, without protest from any of those presiding, returned to it in defiance of the rules.
His objection was specifically against the idea of a married diaconate, and he accused three periti (unnamed but thought to be Rahner, Martelet and Ratzinger) of distributing pamphlets to the fathers soliciting support for such a project.
Yet the document referred to by the cardinal did not mention a married diaconate and, somewhat oddly, one of Ottaviani's own advisers, Carlo Balic OFM, promptly did what Ottaviani condemned, distributing pamphlets in favour of a separate schema on Mary in the Council Hall in clear contravention of the rules.
Debate on the Church went on through half the time available for discussion in the entire session, and revisions still had to be brought back for approval.
The commission responsible for undertaking this revision was convoked only once a week by its president, Ottaviani.
Suspicion began to be voiced that the minority was attempting to control the Council by a delaying tactic which would render it ineffectual and, as the number of bishops attending declined, unrepresentative of the Church at large.
Cardinal Suenens's attempt to call a vote to test attitudes in the hall  occasioned a crisis between the moderators (chairmen), the four presidents, and the secretary general, Archbishop Felici, who threatened to resign.
The fundamental issue was that of speeding the Council by giving clear directives to the Theological Commission of the collective mind of the fathers.
This crisis was not so much averted as won by the progressives, but only after Pope Paul had taken a hand and, on the issues that Suenens had wished to put to the vote, the progressives won a clear majority on 30 October.
Ottaviani let it be known, however, that his Theological Commission would regard such votes as guidelines only, not directives.
It was in this atmosphere of crisis that debate began on the pastoral office of bishops on 5 November.
It swiftly transpired that the document handed to the fathers for discussion was not that drawn up by the Preparatory Commission, but one revised by members of the Commission who were also members of the  curia.
None the less, there was a substantial majority in favour of accepting it as a basis for discussion, largely because there was much to be said about the interrelationship of pope, bishops and curia, and the draft provided this opportunity.
It was made use of on 8 November by Cardinal Frings of Cologne precisely to call the Theological Commission into line, reminding it that it was there to carry out the wishes of the Council, not to determine what the Council should decide.
He went on to criticize the Holy Office for acting as judge and jury when it condemned theologians without giving them an opportunity to know what they were accused of, or of responding.
He ended by calling for reform of the curia to include many more qualified lay people.
Cardinal Ottaviani seized the first possible opportunity to reply to Frings's attack, to reassert the authority of the Theological Commission as he understood it, and to claim that an attack on the Holy Office was an attack on the pope himself as its prefect.
But that afternoon (8 November) Pope Paul phoned Frings to express his approval of what had been said.
He also saw Ottaviani — effectively refusing him support.
Indeed, the day before he had received Karl Rahner to thank him for his work for the Council.
Not only had Rahner been attacked by Ottaviani a little while before, but he had long suffered at the hands of the Holy Office and his public rehabilitation could be seen as a snub for Ottaviani.
This was soon followed by a further defeat for the conservative faction in the Theological Commission.
They had been delaying a statement of the Secretariat for Unity on religious liberty, which, at this stage, was intended to form part of the schema on ecumenism.
The American bishops in particular were eager to have the issue debated, and petitioned the pope.
Ottaviani first tried to prevent any discussion in the Commission and, when that failed, to delay referring the text to the Council.
On 12 November he was out-voted in his own Commission and the document was sent to the printer.
On 15 November Pope Paul presided over a gathering of those in charge of running the Council.
Cardinal Lercaro, one of the moderators, stressed the need for greater speed on the part of the commissions, reminding them — an indirect but clear reference to the Theological Commission — that it was not their task to decide disputed issues by presenting for discussion one straightforward text, but to evaluate and organize amendments so that they could be more easily decided in the Council Hall.
Though these were the words of Lercaro, there was no doubt he spoke for the pope.
On 21 November it was announced that the pope had decided to increase the size of commissions to thirty, and to allow the Council direct election of most of the new members.
When the votes were announced it became clear that by far the greater number of the new members were on the ‘progressive’ wing of the Church.
It was encouraging news, but the second session drew to a close with the vexed issues of religious freedom and the Jews, which were dealt with in the final two chapters of the document on ecumenism, still undecided — though Cardinal Bea insisted they would be discussed in due course.
Some were cheered, however, by the news that thanks to lobbying by a group concerned with problems of underdevelopment, ‘Schema 17’, which treated of the  Church and poverty, would be placed at the beginning of session three, to be introduced as soon as the debate on the Church had been completed.
On 4 December the session came to a formal close, presided over by Pope Paul.
In the course of Mass the fathers were asked to vote first upon the Constitution on the Liturgy, and then upon the Decree on Social Communications.
Both achieved massive majorities, only four fathers voting against the liturgy document, but a significant number voted against that on communications — which hardly anyone rated highly and some thought an inappropriate subject for the Council.
After the votes, the two documents were solemnly promulgated, but the bishops travelled back to their dioceses with a sense that too little had been achieved.
It was a poor end to a session begun with high hopes.
THE YEAR 1964: THE THIRD SESSION
Between sessions the Co-ordinating Commission drafted new rules of procedure to speed matters up.
There were also new rules for the periti , who henceforth might give advice only when asked.
Should they attempt to influence the bishops, Archbishop Felici warned them on the first day of the new session, they would lose their privileges, a threat that caused considerable resentment as much among the fathers as among their advisers.
The debate on chapter VII on the document on the Church then got underway.
It was 15 September 1964, and the 80th general congregation.
The pace certainly quickened — too much so for some fathers who believed the conservative minority was trying to hurry them towards a close, leaving some business unfinished.
Chapter II of the Constitution on the Church was finally approved, as was much of Chapter III, article by article, and discussion was begun on the pastoral office of bishops.
Then, on 23 September, the 86th general congregation began debate on what had now become a Declaration on Religious Liberty, promptly attacked by Cardinal Ruffini who insisted the title should be ‘Religious Tolerance’ rather than Liberty, for the latter could not be justified theologically.
He was just as promptly rebutted by a string of North American cardinals.
Another staunch supporter of liberty was Cardinal Heenan, explicitly drawing upon the experience of English Catholics.
On 28 September, debate was reopened on a Declaration on the Jews, a topic postponed at the end of the second session and, between times, distinctly watered down by the Theological Commission.
In the Council Hall the new draft was subjected to such criticism that it was returned to the Commission to be revised into its earlier form.
On 7 October the Council launched into debate about the Apostolate of the Laity.
Though the document was about the laity, it had failed to take account of the views of the laity — at least until the previous spring, by which time it was too late for them to have much influence upon its formulation.
It was no surprise, therefore, that this schema was decisively rejected by the majority, in part at least because of the emphasis on ‘Catholic Action’, an ambiguous term which in Italy, Spain and other Latin countries referred to an organization of  the laity dependent upon the bishops, while elsewhere it was synonymous with the lay apostolate in any form.
At the end of the discussion Pat Keegan, a lay auditor, was invited to speak, the first occasion in modern times that a layman had addressed an ordinary session of an Ecumenical Council.
What he chose to say, however, struck the fathers as unexceptional, almost clerical in tone.
It was 13 October 1964 and the 100th general congregation.
On 20 October the debate on ‘Schema 13’ began, what had now become the ‘Church in the Modern World’.
Though no document had been so thoroughly prepared, there was a last-minute suggestion that it should be dropped, for it was clear that, if this schema was presented, the Council would not be able to finish with the third session.
However, as the pope himself had been so committed to it before his election, such an outcome was unthinkable.
The reception of the schema was at first fairly favourable, but gradually became more and more hostile, with Cardinal Heenan of Westminster emerging as perhaps the harshest critic.
On 23 October, however, a rather unexpected mid-morning vote (which left some 200 bishops absent from the hall) declared it acceptable as a basis for further discussion.
For the next fortnight it was examined section by section.
The debates encompassed a vast range of subjects, racial justice, discrimination against women, the Index of forbidden books, even tourism, but the most delicate was the discussion on marriage.
Between the sessions, Pope Paul had called for restraint on this topic, and on 28 October Cardinal Agagianian announced that some matters would not be brought to the Council floor in a move widely interpreted as favourable to the conservative forces in the curia.
In practice, this prohibition did not work — the ‘two ends’ of marriage and birth control being addressed directly, the latter most outspokenly by Patriarch Maximos IV Saigh.
Cardinal Agagianian brought the debate to a sudden close on 30 October to forestall further public discussion outside the Council.
By then, however, it was clear no matter how much the fact was denied by the conservative group that the schema would demonstrate a considerable development in the Church's teaching on marriage.
After marriage it was the turn of ‘culture’(the Bishop of Strasbourg called for the rehabilitation of Galileo) and of economics.
Article 24 was devoted to world solidarity.
The suggestion had been made that the topic should be introduced by a lay expert.
The name of Barbara Ward was canvassed, and appeared to be accepted until the secretary general intimated it was ‘premature’ for a woman to address the bishops.
Instead, James Norris, an American and the person who had put forward Barbara Ward's name in the first instance, found himself having to deliver a special address, and in Latin, at six hours' notice.
It was 5 November 1964, and the 115th general congregation.
Norris made a much greater impact than Keegan had done earlier, and his speech was followed by an appeal by Cardinal Frings for a concerted effort on the Church's part to support projects in relief of poverty.
There was a brief look at war and peace before debate on ‘Schema 13’ closed on 10 November, the 119th general congregation.
The debate on ‘Schema 13’ had been interrupted on 6 November to allow Pope Paul to make an appearance in the Council Hall.
Popes had rarely  attended Councils, but Paul may have wanted to demonstrate the unity between himself and the bishops.
It was imperative, however, to ensure he would be present at the table of Council presidents when debate was reasonably tranquil.
The document on missionary activity seemed a likely occasion.
Paul introduced the document briefly, and then handed over to Agagianian.
He listened to what the cardinal had to say, then left the hall.
In the event, the document proved so unacceptable that after two days' debate it was sent back for thorough revision.
The end of the debate on ‘Schema 13’ was followed by two days of discussion on that on religious life.
It was judged acceptable, yet aroused considerable criticism, not least because no women religious had been consulted in its drafting.
The formation of priests was next considered.
Discussion lasted from 12 to 17 November, apart from 13 November when the pope made a ceremonial offering of his tiara for the benefit of the poor.
This document won praise from the liberal majority at the Council, and was readily accepted, subject to a few amendments.
Similar, though slightly more muted, approval was given to the propositions on Christian education, discussed from 17 to 19 November, and on the latter date the Council turned its attention briefly to recommendations to simplify marriage legislation and end discrimination against non-Catholic partners in mixed marriages.
The proposals were largely welcomed, though Cardinal Heenan objected to removal of the promise by the non-Catholic parent to allow children to be brought up as Catholics, and there was no time to conclude this debate.
These final days of the third session were taking place in increasing gloom.
Several documents gave rise to concern as they were wrestled with in the appropriate commissions, none more so than the all-important Dogmatic Constitution on the Church.
The minority had proposed a number of important changes: would the Theological Commission accept or reject them?
The section mainly at issue was that on collegiality.
On 14 November a booklet was distributed outlining the amendments together with the Commission's comments.
The text of Lumen Gentium had been more or less left alone, but it was now prefixed by an ‘Explanatory Note’(Nota praevia ) which, it was clear when Archbishop Felici communicated it formally to the Council two days later, had come from Pope Paul himself.
The pope's purpose was evident enough.
He had been under pressure to water down the doctrine of collegiality.
He had not given in — nor had the Commission — as far as the text itself was concerned, but the ‘Explanatory Note’ interpreted the text in favour of papal authority.
In the light of this document, conservative opposition to the constitution all but disappeared.
The vote on the constitution as a whole occurred on 19 November, and only ten of the Council fathers voted against it.
The text as it now stood was a compromise.
The alternative, many of the fathers believed, would have been no text at all.
That same Thursday the majority received another setback.
Cardinal Tisserant suddenly announced that further voting on religious liberty would be postponed until the next session, claiming the document now before the Council was so different from what had gone before it needed to be debated all  over again.
There was an immediate outcry.
A petition was organized to the pope, but Pope Paul refused to change Tisserant's decision — made, he said, in accordance with the Council's rules of procedure.
The conservatives had a third victory the following day when the fathers were to vote on the Decree on Ecumenism.
Felici said the document had not yet been printed, and some emendations had been made to the text.
There was no doubt these eleventh-hour changes were made at the wish of Pope Paul, acting to retain the support of the minority.
They had the effect of diminishing the force of the decree, to the distress of non-Catholic observers.
Next the minority requested another postponement, this time of the Unity Secretariat's Declaration on non-Christian religions.
The Council's presidents this time would not hear of it, no doubt after the consternation which had been caused the day before, and it received a favourable vote.
The Decree on Ecumenism was likewise approved, and so was the schema on the Oriental Churches.
At the closing public session on Saturday, 21 November, there was no applause as a grim-faced pope was carried into St Peter's.
The Constitution on the Church, the Decree on Ecumenism and the Decree on Oriental Churches were formally voted upon, and solemnly promulgated.
It should have been an occasion for rejoicing.
Instead, Paul, in his closing address, implicitly rebuked the Theological Commission for having refused to confer upon the Virgin Mary the title of ‘Mother of the Church’ in the chapter devoted to her in De Ecclesia .
The pope now did so himself.
There was a noticeable lack of warmth from the assembled bishops.
THE YEAR 1965: THE FOURTH SESSION
At the beginning of the final session, 14 September 1965, Pope Paul entered the basilica with little of the pomp that hitherto had surrounded the papacy.
He did not comment upon the subjects the fathers were to discuss.
Instead, he announced that he was going to the United Nations in New York to appeal for peace, and that in accordance with the Council's wishes he would establish the long-awaited synod of bishops.
Much to the surprise of the bishops, he did this by a motu proprio on 15 September,Apostolica Sollicitudo .
It was the Council's first full working day, the 128th general congregation, devoted to the vexed topic of religious liberty or, rather, civil liberty in religious affairs.
Debate lasted until 20 September, opposition being voiced by a number of Italian and Spanish prelates.
Pope Paul was to speak to the United Nations on 4 October and this document was one he very much needed approved, at least in principle, before then.
The Council fathers were asked simply to decide whether the text before them was an appropriate basis for a definitive document.
By a vote of nearly 2,000 in favour to just over 200 against, it was agreed, amid applause, to be so.
Immediately after this vote, the Council turned its attention once more to ‘Schema 13’, now denominated by the Co-ordinating Commission, a ‘Pastoral Constitution’.
It was a long document (as one speaker remarked, there was a  danger it would grow so long that no one would read it), but after only two days of discussion the fathers voted overwhelmingly to accept the draft as the basis for the final document and went on to debate it section by section.
On 7 October there began the debate on the revised version of the document on the missionary activity of the Church, and on 11 October votes were taken on the schemas on religious life and priestly formation in the seminaries.
The latter document dealt, among other topics, with the obligation to celibacy, but, — before it could be voted on, Archbishop Felici read a letter from the pope effectively banning discussion of celibacy, and insisting upon the observance of celibacy throughout the Latin Church.
Paul thus neatly avoided a vote expressly on this issue, which might have revealed the Council fathers to have been more or less evenly divided.
Cardinal Bea had later to point out firmly that it did not apply in the East.
Discussion on the schema on priestly life and ministry began on 13 October.
It was voted upon as a whole on 16 October, and taken up again after a week's break on 25–27 October.
The debate was unremarkable save, perhaps, for a paean on the virtues of golf for the clergy from Cardinal Heenan.
On 23 October, however, the pope re-established the ‘priest-worker’ movement in France, suppressed in 1954 at the instigation of the Holy Office.
This somewhat unexpected decision gave ammunition to those who felt the schema on priestly life was too spiritual in tone.
On 14 and 15 October — the latter date was the 150th general congregation — there was a touch of drama over the document on the Jews, or, more correctly, the Declaration on Non-Christian Religions, of which the earlier declaration on the Jews now formed a part.
The final vote was due on 16 October.
It was suddenly realized, however, that many of the bishops would be absent, some on pilgrimage to the Holy Land.
Too small a number of affirmative votes could seem an insult to the Jews; the vote was taken immediately.
The numbers against it were still high (250), but it passed with a respectable majority and was ready for promulgation.
There was a feeling, after the week's break, that the Council was all but over.
At a public session on 28 October, five documents (on the Pastoral Office of Bishops, on Priestly Formation, on Religious Life, on Christian Education and on Non-Christian Religions) were formally voted upon, and promulgated, as were the documents on Divine Revelation and the Apostolate of the Laity on 18 November.
On 30 November the Decree on Missionary Activity was voted through chapter by chapter, and then approved in its entirety.
The Pastoral Constitution on the Church in the Modern World, however, provided the bulk of the work of the fourth session.
Section by section it was being revised in the commissions and then approved during the general congregations — despite last-minute attempts to modify it to contain an explicit condemnation of communism.
A more serious challenge to the text, however, came from a ‘higher authority’— which could only mean the pope — on 24 November when the Secretary of State asked that explicit mention be made of Pius XI's and Pius XII's doctrine on marriage, which would not only condemn all forms of artificial contraception (at this point, before Humanae Vitae , such a ban was not a foregone conclusion), but would also subordinate conjugal love  to the procreation of children as the purpose of marriage.
The pope's request was all the odder because there was already in existence a special papal commission discussing birth control and related issues.
Eventually the commission managed to produce a text which cited Pius XI in footnotes, generally disapproved of birth control without being too specific, and recognized the importance of children to a marriage without limiting marriage to that purpose.
Monday, 6 December, was a dramatic day in the history of the Council.
The Constitution on the Church in the Modern World was resoundingly approved, a special jubilee was proclaimed to celebrate the Council, and a major reform of the Roman curia was announced which, in particular, seemed to curtail the power of the Holy Office — its name being changed to the ‘Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith’.
As the Council drew to a close, Pope Paul said formal goodbyes to different groups.
On 4 December he took his leave of the observers from other Churches in a prayer service which scandalized a number of the bishops because it breached the old rules against communicatio in sacris .
The final public session took place on 7 December, in the course of which Pope Paul removed the excommunication of 1054 against the patriarch of Constantinople.
In Istanbul the patriarch himself reciprocated.
The final four documents were voted upon, and promulgated.
That evening the periti were thanked for their help, and urged to go on talking to bishops now that they had learned to do so.
The following day, the feast of the immaculate conception, there was a closing ceremony in St Peter's Square.
Two days earlier, at the 168th and last general congregation, 2,392 Council fathers had been present.
The History of the Council: Bibliography
PAUL VI
PETER HEBBLETHWAITE
At some point in 1975, when he was seventy-eight and beginning to feel weary, Pope Paul VI made the following note: The whole of Giovanni Battista Montini is contained in these lines.
He certainly underwent many ‘tribulations’ and was often misunderstood.
He knew that he was accused of indecisiveness and vacillation (that is what Hamlet means to Italians) and seems to have felt he may have broken his lance on windmills (that is what Don Quixote means).
He thought he was a moderate.
Neither left nor right, he believed he occupied that ‘extreme-centre’ briefly claimed by Cardinal Léon-Joseph Suenens in the post-conciliar period.
Did he not suspend Archbishop Marcel Lefebvre to the right as intrepidly as the ‘liberal’ ex-Abbot of St Paul's-without-the-walls, Giovanni Franzoni?
He did.
Case proven.
What is my state of mind?
Am I Hamlet or Don Quixote?
On the left?
On the right?
I don't feel I have been properly understood.
My feelings are: ‘Superabundo gaudio .
I am full of consolation, overcome with joy, throughout every tribulation’(2 Cor. 7.4)(Notizario, 1, p. 50).
But this passage reveals other features of Montini's nature.
He was lucid about himself and knew perfectly well what was being said behind his back.
With his keen sense of the complexity of situations, he refused to see the world or the Church in black-and-white terms.
By professional training he had the diplomat's sense of nuances.
He listened to critics as well as to flatterers (no court is complete without them), and was able to learn from them.
Second, his spirituality was based on the Epistles of St Paul.
Though not a Scripture scholar in the strict sense, he knew the Pauline Epistles well and a selection of his lectures on St Paul from the 1930s were published after his death (Colloqui Religiosi , Brescia, 1981).
This interest also helps explain his unexpected choice of name when elected pope.
One can also add that St Paul, who plumbs the depths of desolation but also knows the heights of consolation and joy, provided Montini with a practical spirituality that kept him going throughout his long ‘hidden life’ in the Secretariat of State (1925–54), his pastoral ministry in Milan (1955–63) and finally, his Petrine ministry.
He quotes frequently Seneca's maxim, ‘Quotidie morimur ’(We die daily), but transforms it by St Paul's gloss: ‘Quotidie morior per vestram gloriam, fratres ’(Brethren, for you I die every day: 1 Cor. 15.31)(Lettere a i Familiari , I, p. 351, and II, p. 371).
In a word-association test, joy, gioa  ,Gaudium et Spes , are not terms that readily spring to mind in his connection.
Those who saw Paul VI from a  distance heard only his increasingly strangulated voice and apparently complaining tone.
Yet people almost invariably felt better for meeting him privately.
His last question to bishops on their ad limina visits was always the courteous: ‘And now, is there anything I can do for you ?’
The sense of sustaining joy was not incompatible with feeling that the papal office was like being crucified.
He had served directly under two popes, Pius XI and Pius XII, and knew the stresses and strains he would have to face.
After his election, he went to the ‘Milanese’ church of San Carlo Borromeo and quite openly wept (why not? we used to pray for the ‘gift of tears’) as he quoted the words of Jesus to Peter: ‘When you were young, you girded yourself and walked where you would; but when you are old, you will stretch out your hands, and another will gird you and carry you where you do not wish to go’(John 21.18).
He was already sixty-seven.
Was that too old?
One might argue that Montini, who had more ‘on-the-job’ training for the office of pope and was intellectually better prepared for it than anyone since Benedict XIV in the eighteenth century, became pope too late to give of his best.
In  the 1950s Montini was the man everyone wanted to meet.
Frank Giles, then Rome correspondent for The Times , says that though technically below Monsignor Domenico Tardini in rank, Giles was advised to take sandwiches.
Most people credited him with having more influence, especially with the Pope.
That belief must have accounted for the number of those wanting to see him and the fevered state of his waiting-room.
He had the enviable but potentially inconvenient gift of making each visitor feel that he was the person Montini had been waiting all his life to talk to.
The result was that his daily arrangements became hopelessly dislocated.
It was not unknown for people with appointments to wait several hours before they were ushered in (Giles, 1986, pp. 106–7).
But it was worth waiting, for ‘Montini was a great talker of great subtlety, the very opposite of the earthy and outspoken Tardini’.
Giles recalls one remark when Montini was criticizing the De Gasperi Christian Democratic government for inaction while denying that he was doing anything of the kind (a typical Montini ploy): ‘In political questions the Church has to be general, just as in religious matters she cannot afford not to be particular’(ibid., p. 109).
But if Montini was so indispensable in the later stages of the pontificate of Pius XII, why was he suddenly packed off to Milan without the cardinal's hat that routinely went with the office?
That the archbishop of the prestigious see of Milan, graced by St Ambrose and St Charles Borromeo, should not be made a cardinal looked like a deliberate snub.
Montini's very popularity meant that he had enemies.
He knew French lay intellectuals like Jacques Maritain (ambassador to the Holy See, 1945–8) and Jean Guitton, who spent 8 September with him every year from 1950 to the end of his life.
He was believed to be pro-French, and therefore ‘liberal’.
In 1953 the young Monsignor Derek Worlock was taken aside by Cardinal Giuseppe Pizzardo and warned that ‘Montini is the most dangerous man in Rome’.
The particular incident that led to his removal was apparently as follows.
Montini attended a ‘secret’ meeting of the Catholic youth movement (GIAC), whose president, Marco Rossi, was nominated by the pope.
Their purpose was to put a stop to the alliance of the Christian Democrats and the Neo-Fascists being promoted by Luigi Gedda, head of Catholic Action.
Montini agreed with the students that such an alliance could only prove disastrous for the Church, and Rossi resigned as a protest.
It was unheard of to resign from posts nominated by the pope.
Montini kept the letter on his desk, wondering what to do.
He was accused of ‘withholding information from the Holy Father’ and so relegated to Milan.
This story has an added interest.
Rossi went on to become a psychiatrist.
In a book published in 1975, he praises Montini for the courage he had displayed in supporting him twenty years earlier, but adds this comment: One does not have to accept all of that to recognize that the assessment is shrewd.
What happens when the man who for decades faithfully served the absolute regime while at the same time understanding the need to revolt against it, becomes the head of it?
He will seek to reform it (see Chapter 9(A) curial reform) and make it less absolute (see Chapter 9(F) synods), but he will hardly revolutionize it.
This was when I began to understand his drama, though never to accept it.
There was a conflict between the role and the man, between the priest who wanted to lead a hidden life and the public persona who worked within a regime of absolute power which he faithfully served while understanding the need to revolt against it.
This led to a deep conflict within himself which carried with it the handicap that he did not really understand the ordinary world, was remote from everyday life, and so lacked balance.
He was always tempted by abstraction and idealism (Rossi, 1975, p. 117).
The tension that every honest office-holder in the Church must feel between ‘the system’ and his (male language appropriate here) Christian pastoral impulses is most acute for the Bishop of Rome.
For there is no one to blame above him.
Everything Rossi says is illustrated by the story of Humanae Vitae , which proved to be the central crisis of his pontificate.
Once the Papal Commission had been disbanded in June 1966, Paul VI was on his own.
‘How easy it is to study, to study,’ he said, ‘how hard to conclude?’
But what on earth was he studying?
Rossi's remarks about ‘abstraction and idealization’ come in here.
A celibate cannot possibly imagine without sin (in which there is no parvitas materiae ) what sexual intercourse is like, and is therefore hardly well placed to judge the psychological effects of artificial contraception.
Did Paul VI, for example, ever wonder how it was that his parents, belonging to the prosperous and cultivated Lombardy semi-aristocracy, contrived to have only three children, while the share-cropping peasants, the Roncallis, had no less than twelve?
Such questions are distasteful for a fastidious cleric who thinks of sexuality as a loss of self-control.
His letter written to congratulate his elder brother Lodovico when his engagement was announced, is typical of the sermons he preached at the marriages of so many friends.
Here is a sample: Lodovico treasured this letter and published it only in 1986.
More than a period piece — it dates from 1924 — it may throw light on the view of marriage that led to Humanae Vitae .
Looking at it selfishly, I can say that the happiness of the family now depends on you, for it is in you that the family is renewed and starts again.
We who stand on the touchline are glad that you are happy.
You know that being happy is a difficult business.
But the Lord has made it easier for you by giving us the lesson taught so  simply and sublimely by our parents — the joy of love, that is of understanding and being understood, of giving and receiving, of sacrificing oneself to be recreated, of pouring out the treasures of one's own heart only to find them multiplied endlessly.
You have the privilege of having found a lovely woman, privileged and — you know this better than I do unique.
Having found your precious pearl, see to it that your soul is clad in a new personality (Notizario , 12, pp. 99–100).
Thus the ‘study’ on which he embarked was, one suspects, confined to one aspect of the question: was the Church's authority so committed by Casti Connubii of 1931 that any change now would discredit that authority?
Once the four moralists of the minority took over, and the question reverted back to the Holy Office (still presided over at this date by Cardinal Alfredo Ottaviani), there could be no doubt about the answer: consistency required a continued ban on contraception.
Paul VI tried to modify the harshness of the early drafts by injecting a tone of patient pastoral compassion, but by then the damage to the Church's credibility was done.
Yet Humanae Vitae was ‘prophetic’ in two senses at least.
The feminist movement has combined with ecology to make many women feel that stuffing themselves with pills is not what Mother Nature wants, and that learning to understand their bodies by the rhythm method is superior.
Second, how liberal Catholics pooh-poohed when Paul VI said that the widespread use of contraceptives ‘could open the way to marital infidelity and a general lowering of standards’(Humanae Vitae 17).
No, they said, we are talking only about the responsible use of contraceptives by those who have already had several children.
Here not much study was needed (a few David Lodge novels would do) to show that the pope was right and the liberal Catholics wrong.
Yet one cannot escape the feeling that if Humanae Vitae had been essentially a reasoned condemnation of abortion, the witness of the Church would have been all the more powerful.
Another way of expressing the ‘tension’ that racked Paul VI is to consider him as the heir of Pius XII and John XXIII.
He could emulate neither the austere aristocracy of Pius XII, whom he revered and always defended, nor the comfortable geniality of John XXIII for whom he felt great affection (dating back to 1925).
An Italian scholar has tried to trace their influence on Paul VI by noting how many times he quoted them.
We get the following result in the first five years (Pius first): 1963, 28–63; 1964, 53–36; 1965, 30–43; 1966, 31–34; 1967, 22–35.
In the year of Humanae Vitae , Pius wins 26 to 17 and in 1969 by 34 to 28.
I will pursue this arithmetic no longer except to say that John's only winning year subsequently was 1971, and that the last two years were 3–3 and 2–2 draws (Melloni, 1984, p. 173).
Melloni uses these data to argue that the influence of Pius prevailed as the pontificate wore on.
There is something in that.
But such statistics can be used to prove almost anything.
Yet there is, of course, what Melloni calls a ‘double continuity’.
If Montini had immediately succeeded Pius XII, it is unlikely that he would  have called a Council.
We know this from the fact that on the evening of the day Pope John announced his Council, Cardinal Montini rang his old mentor, the Oratorian Giulio Bevilacqua, and said: ‘This holy old boy doesn't realize what a hornet's nest he's stirring up.’
To which Bevilacqua replied: ‘Don't worry, the Holy Spirit is still awake in the Church’(Fappani and Molinari, 1979, p. 171).
But he soon became the keenest and most enlightened Italian expounder of the Council, and wrote a pastoral letter for Lent 1962,Pensiamo al Concilio (Let's think about the Council), that learnedly explains to the Milanese what is going to happen.
It is fair to say that it has the sweep and scope of an encyclical.
Some saw it as a policy platform for the conclave that could not long be delayed.
It also implied that the Roman curia would have to change as a result of the Council: There he defined, but in his customary idealistic way, his own pontificate.
Fraternity would become something to celebrate joyfully, and unity would no longer be glum uniformity.
The Church throughout the world received orders and instructions which it obeyed willingly enough, though sometimes it regretted that there were no arrangements for dialogue and that it had not been invited to collaborate; the result was that unity had to be lived out in passive acceptance rather than celebrated in fraternity (Pensiamo al Concilio 9; see Hebblethwaite, 1984, p. 409).
In an hitherto untranslated note probably dating from the summer of 1963, just after his election, Paul VI reflects on the ‘difficult succession’.
It would be naive and vain to try to emulate Pope John, who was unique and unrepeatable.
Paul can't hope to equal John but, he adds wistfully, he can't even be like him.
His attempts to dangle babies on his knee had proved disastrous.
So he stopped trying.
However, he then says that he has continued the work of John XXIII with such fidelity that, ‘if anything, the criticism that I lack initiatives of my own would be nearer the mark’(Notizario , 13, pp. 15–16).
He then remarks on the ‘myth’ that had grown up around John XXIII: This is an important statement.
It means that Paul VI saw himself as the true heir of Pope John — but of a very different Pope John from the version usually presented to the public.
He laboured throughout his pontificate from (what he considered) the false expectations aroused by Pope John.
He could do nothing to change that.
Harm, and serious harm is done to the memory of Pope John when one attributes to him attitudes he did not have.
A good man? yes.
An indifferent man? no.
How firmly he clung to doctrine, and much he feared certain dangers…
Pope John was not weak, was not a compromiser, was not indulgent towards erroneous opinions or towards the so-called inevitability of history etc.
His dialogue was not merely goodness leading to cowardly renunciation (ibid.)
In the same note he claims that, in some sense, he was ‘more modern’ than good Pope John (he mentions his appearances at the Milan Fair as evidence); and says ‘perhaps our life is marked by love of our own time, of our world more clearly than by anything else’(ibid.)
When he said much the same thing at the end of the Council, Archbishop Marcel Lefebvre and the right-wing  were up in arms at this ‘humanism’.
Paul VI did love the ‘modern world’ and saw it reflected through the painters and writers he admired.
But there was always what he calls in this note ‘the loyal conviction that Christ is both necessary and true’.
There has been much unprofitable speculation about whether John XXIII could have concluded the Council successfully.
What is absolutely sure is that Montini, even during the first session when Pope John was alive, provided the plan that saved the Council from chaos and then, on becoming pope, saw it patiently through to the end despite formidable difficulties.
The plan was put forward in a letter to Cardinal Amleto Cicognani, Secretary of State, dated 18 October 1962, when the Council was barely a week old (L'Osservatore Romano , 26 January 1984, or Hebblethwaite, 1984 pp. 442–4).
No one has so far questioned the judgement that ‘Montini's letter is the single most important document for understanding not only the first session but the whole Vatican Council’.
Montini was more far-sighted than anyone else present, certainly more than the many ‘progressives’ who could see no further ahead than the next vote (perhaps that was the influence of the press).
But even so, it was far easier to set out a project for the Council than to implement it.
Let us consider one ‘test-case’ for Paul VI's handling of the Council.
The second and third sessions were dominated by the question of ‘collegiality’.
That episcopal ordination made one a member of the episcopal college was accepted in principle by the second session.
But there was still a long way to go, for the intransigent opposition not only refused to give way but put intense private pressure on Paul to reject this pernicious doctrine of collegiality.
A private note, signed by twenty cardinals and ten major religious superiors, reached Paul VI on the eve of the third session (see Hebblethwaite, 1988, pp. 598–601 and p. 614).
The leader in this initiative was the Spanish canonist Cardinal Arcadio Larraona, patron of Opus Dei, and Archbishop Marcel Lefebvre was among the signatories.
The letter said that collegiality was novel, unfounded, unscriptural, ‘not even solidly probable’, and hinted at the powerful influence of ‘non-doctrinal forces, whose aims and methods are not beyond reproach’(by which they meant that the press was distorting the event by presenting it in terms of heroes and villains).
Paul would be going against his papal oath if he accepted collegiality.
The matter should not be put to the vote.
Recommended action: suspend the session, and submit the matter to a new mixed commission that would report when the question had ‘matured’.
That might take a long time, they intimated.
Paul VI was very sensitive to this minority position.
He admitted he felt somewhat bitter, though only in Latin:Quadam amaritudine affectus sum , and resolved to stress henceforward the positive aspects of collegiality.
So he held firm and, after the decisive vote on paragraph 21 of chapter 3 of Lumen Gentium , noted late at night: These rather scrappy notes, jotted down late at night on 22 September 1964 take us to the heart of Paul VI, and illustrate how he saw his Petrine ministry in relation to the ministry of other bishops.
They show that he was thoroughly sincere in his acceptance of collegiality.
We are satisfied because: this is not a new doctrine, except for the good it allows us to foresee; it is not immatura (not yet ripe): the yes vote is attributable to Vatican I, to the two previous sessions, to the really profound studies of the Theological  Commission, to the general development of theological studies in the Church, to the Church's self-awareness, to ecumenism; it is not contrary to the primacy (reaffirmed at least 20 times).
The Church is both monarchical and hierarchical; having collaborators is not a limitation; what would happen if this doctrine were not approved?
Feudalism?
Ecclesiastical irresponsibility? etc.
Instead: solidarity, charity, unity; intrinsic and constitutional bonds with the primacy; overcoming of Gallicanism, nationalism (cf. local episcopal conferences) -and fears of papal aggression; obedience derived from within; authority without jealousy or exclusiveness (Non rapinam arbitratus est — He did not think it plunder,(Phil.
2.6).
(Caprile, 1986, pp. 351–2).
But — in Montini's case there was always a but — he still felt he should try to enable the minority to vote placet on collegiality.
He did not want to see them simply crushed, not only because he respected their opinion, but because he would have to go on working with them after the Council.
Hence the formula: after the Council he wanted there to be des convaincus, pas de vaincus .
This, it is now clear, was the motive behind the nota praevia which accompanies Lumen Gentium (Abbott, pp. 97–101).
It was not designed to contradict chapter 3 on collegiality, still less subtly to undermine it; it was to enable the die-hard conservative minority to vote for chapter 3 with a clear conscience.
The other ‘disappointments’ during the final week of the third session (known as la settimana nera ), such as the last-minute papally imposed amendments to the decree ‘on Ecumenism’, had a similar function: to make the text more acceptable to the minority.
But little of this was clearly known at the time, and so some observers concluded that Paul VI secretly connived with the minority.
On the conscious level, this was almost certainly not so, though deep down there may have been a certain complicity.
But Paul's ‘solution’ to the problem was a typically ‘diplomatic’one that appears to achieve something valuable but may satisfy neither side in the long run.
The majority went on feeling unsure about his real convictions, while the minority were not assuaged.
Paul's penchant for ‘diplomatic’ solutions of this kind also meant that many Council texts remained ambivalent.
Whatever the theory, Paul VI's pontificate acted out dramatically the tensions between primacy and collegiality — but this came about only because he took collegiality seriously.
Cardinal Suenens pointed out to him that although no one could say he had no right to produce Humanae Vitae on his own, it would have had more credibility had it been collegially prepared.
Is that why he wrote no more encyclicals after Humanae Vitae ?
Octogesima Adveniens (1971) on the 80th anniversary of Rerum Novarum was not an encyclical but a letter to Cardinal Maurice Roy, then president of International Justice and Peace.
Yet it represented a great advance on Populorum Progressio (1967), which showed that he was still listening and  learning.
It assigns to the local churches the task of discerning the signs of the times, for ‘in view of the varied situations in the world, it is difficult to give one teaching to cover them all, or to offer a solution that has universal value’(no. 4).
Such is not our intention or our mission, he modestly concedes.
His last major document,Evangelii Nuntiandi (1975), was even more ‘collegial’ in that it represented his resolution of the impasse of the 1974 Synod on Evangelization.
Here one sees the function of the primacy as holding in balance the different tendencies which always threaten to tear the Church apart.
He was still trying to govern the Church from what he took to be the ‘centre’.
In 1930, while making a retreat at Monte Cassino, Montini meditated on ‘authority as service’ and wrote: Not a bad epitaph.
When one has an office, one should carry it out with courage and firmness; without being depressed or crawling, one should not merely do what is possible, but should try, dare and risk making the office as beneficent as possible.
All dodging of problems — whether out of laziness or exhaustion — goes against the Holy Spirit.
One should therefore learn how to give orders, and how to put up with the unsuccessful results of one's efforts (Notizario , 11,1985, p. 21).
6 Paul VI: Bibliography
THE KEY TEXTS
ADRIAN HASTINGS
The documents of the Second Vatican Council have provided the Catholic Church with what is undoubtedly the weightiest body of official teaching in the twentieth century.
However, although the Council said an awful lot, much of it was rather long-winded; moreover, it avoided solemn definitions and almost avoided direct condemnations.
Its teaching is not — at least for the most part— either definitive or exclusive of error.
Nevertheless, the authority of an ecumenical Council, more representative of the whole world than any previous Council, working responsibly and prayerfully across four years with all the support it could get from the ablest theologians, is clearly in human and ecclesial terms as considerable as can be.
While the Council was in general described as having a ‘pastoral’ rather than a ‘dogmatic’purpose, it went out of its way to name two of its principal documents ‘Dogmatic Constitutions’.
So its teaching may in theory be ranged along a spectrum from the ‘dogmatic’ to the ‘pastoral’.
In reality, however, it is not so easy to separate the two.
The more dogmatic statements were surely ventured upon chiefly for pastoral purposes, while the more pastoral initiatives invariably contain within them very considerable theological presuppositions.
In practice — and even in theory — there is also a spectrum of the more and the less significant.
In theory, the ‘Constitutions’ were clearly intended to be more authoritative than the ‘decrees’; and, all in all, they were.
But while some things in one document may be manifestly weighty, other parts of the same document appear platitudinous, verbose or banal, a stringing together of old-fashioned cliches gilded with a little rhetoric drawn from the often superficial optimism of the early 1960s.
Cardinal Heenan declared both the decree on the mass media and the Declaration on Christian Education ‘not of conciliar calibre’.
It is hard to disagree.
There is indeed in all a welter of words; and while some sections of the final documents had been intensely discussed, formulated and reformulated across several sessions, much else — quite inevitably — was barely discussed at all.
In these circumstances, it is crucial for the reader twenty-five years later, faced with these sixteen documents, to be able to apply principles of evaluation; but these principles should not be drawn extraneously from some private viewpoint or ideology, but instead drawn intrinsically from the Council's own experience and the immediate aftermath of implementation.
What mattered most?
To answer that question it is possible to make use of a number of criteria:
1
Things matter if, as themes, they can be seen to be frequently returned to  in the documents and, moreover, to be responding to the stated purposes of Pope John in calling the Council.
2
Things matter to the extent that they are significantly new in terms of official Catholic teaching; that is to say, in comparison with papal teaching or the major textbooks of approved theology of the first half of the twentieth century.
It is, of course, important to remind ourselves that the Council went out of its way, for instance , to reiterate that it was in no way contradicting Vatican I and instances of contradiction should not be lightly proposed.
It would seldom, anyway, be a matter of contradiction, more — as the Council itself would have stressed — of complementarity.
But you do not call an ecumenical Council and keep it going for four years at vast expense in order principally to repeat what is already well known to be the teaching of the Church.
That would be absurd.
Common sense requires one to recognize that the most significant things were what was being said for the first time, at least in that form, in modern Catholic history and with such authority.
3
Things matter to the extent that they were discussed at considerable length and drafted with particular care.
We know which those passages were from detailed accounts of the Council events.
Passages on collegiality, religious liberty and the Jews, for instance, matter greatly because they were at the centre of lengthy conciliar debate as many other passages were not.
4
Things matter because the precise form of words in which they are expressed indicates that the Council intended this particular passage to have an especially authoritative character.
5
Things matter because they directly lead to specific and major changes in the life of the Church, its worship and institutional structures.
Such passages (at least outside the Constitution on the Liturgy) are remarkably rare, but there are a few which called for and obtained almost immediate implementation in a way that introduced significant new dimensions into Church life.
Applying these five criteria to the documents it is possible to distinguish reasonably enough between three types of significance which can best be considered separately.
The first type is that of new general orientations of a very wide sort, basic themes that keep coming back across the documents and hence can be said to characterize the Council's mind and achievement as a whole.
The second type is that of rather specific passages which contain a recognizable shift on pre-conciliar teaching.
The third type is that of major practical decisions requiring some sort of new institution or the adoption of specific behaviour of a sort hitherto either forbidden or, at least, not encouraged.
As regards new and wide-ranging orientations in Church life-our vaguest category — we will note six, while recognizing that these might well be grouped in different ways.
(a)
‘The People of God’.
At the time of the Council this was surely the characteristically conciliar expression which mattered most to the majority of  people throughout the Church.
Previously, the Church had been usually defined as a ‘society’(even a juridically ‘perfect society’), a term taken to imply the primary need for authority, and frequently used in relation to the state.
It was almost never described as the ‘People of God’.
This highly biblical term, though basic to the New Testament and frequently used in early liturgical prayers, had almost completely disappeared from pre-conciliar ecclesiology.
Its evocative power derived not only from its biblical roots, but also from the fact that it did not evoke clergy or hierarchy but rather the basic equality of all the baptized.
The decision to accord a full chapter to it in the Constitution on the Church, and prior to that on the hierarchy, was symbolically one of the most important the Council ever took.
While the whole theological context of that chapter was important, we may note here especially the stress on the priesthood of all the faithful — a theme that Luther made much of, but which Catholic tradition had downgraded ever since.
The active role of the laity in the Church was very much a theme of the pontificates of Pius XI and Pius XII.
The conciliar stress upon it was not new and the Decree on the Lay Apostolate is one of the less advanced texts the Council produced.
Nevertheless, even here the shift is noticeably away from a hierarchically controlled model of ‘Catholic Action’, as it had come to be called, to a far more diversified one.
But still more important for the laity in the Church than either the decree or chapter 4 of Lumen Gentium (precisely on the laity), remains chapter 2, ‘The People of God’, which located the basic roles of all Christians in aspects of the nature of the Church deeper than the hierarchical.
Nothing has been more ominous in the doctrinal shift of the 1980s than the actual hostility to this term which can now be found in Roman teaching.
(b)
Next comes the extremely widespread stress upon the Eucharist as the centre of the Church and its unity.
Again and again in different documents it is emphasized that ‘in the sacrament of the eucharistic bread the unity of all believers is both expressed and brought about’(Lumen Gentium 3), the Eucharistic celebration is ‘the centre and culmination of the whole life of the Christian community’(Christus Dominus 30).
While Pius XII's encyclical Mystici Corporis brought back the concept of the Church as the body of Christ to the centre of Catholic teaching, it most remarkably avoided the slightest reference in this to the relationship between the Eucharistic body and the ecclesial body, and omitted the slightest notice of the basic Pauline text for that relationship, 1 Corinthians 10.17.
The Council, on the contrary, when speaking about the Church as body of Christ, insisted that it is the Eucharistic body which forms the ecclesial body and twice quoted 1 Corinthians 10.17.
Again the Council stressed that the Church itself in consequence of all this has a sacramental character: it too is the ‘sacrament of salvation’.
Further, the word ‘communion’, a term again involving a verbal identification of Church and Eucharist, was so much used by the Council that it has subsequently been seen to express the Council's ecclesiology most profoundly and has been made great use of in such documents as those of ARCIC.
Finally, it is the Council's stress upon the Eucharist-Church relationship that provides the root for its theology of local churches; wherever the Eucharist is celebrated, there is the  Church present:Ubi Eucharistia, ibi Ecclesia .
Nothing of this was to be found in mainstream pre-conciliar Roman ecclesiology (though it is to be found in 1950s books representative of the ‘new theology’ by scholars like de Lubac and Congar, writers under much official suspicion at the time).
Where post-conciliar theology will say that the Eucharist gives the Church its unity, pre-conciliar theology would undoubtedly have been most likely to declare that it was the papacy that did so.
(c)
The third decisive orientation is the widespread insistence upon the primacy of Scripture in theory and in practice.
The ‘Teaching Office is not above the word of God, but serves it’(Dei Verbum 10), ‘Easy access to Sacred Scripture should be provided for all the Christian faithful’(Dei Verbum 22).
While the preparatory drafts, drawn up in Rome before the Council opened and very largely rejected by the fathers, had made heavy use of scholastic terminology and not much of Scripture — as was generally characteristic of pre-conciliar theology — the Council almost systematically reversed this, eliminating scholastic terms again and again and falling back on biblical ones.
This scriptural insistence is naturally to be found set out most clearly in the Dogmatic Constitution on Revelation, but it is in fact present in all the important documents.
It was probably this scriptural revolution more than anything else which made the ecumenical one possible, and one of its earliest post-conciliar consequences was the beginning of active co-operation with the Bible translation societies, whose work had hitherto been boycotted by Catholics.
(d)
Pluralism.
A repeated stress upon the benefits brought by diversity is a recurrent theme of the Council documents.
This returns again and again in a variety of contexts, but the theological heart of it is to be found in the development of a theology of the Church as a communion of ‘churches’.
Use of the word in the plural is utterly uncharacteristic of pre-conciliar Roman theology, stress being always upon the unity and singleness of the Catholic and Roman Church.
Even in the Constitution on the Liturgy, approved in the second session, where a theology of liturgical pluralism is to some extent accepted, there is no use of the word ‘church’ in the plural nor of the phrase ‘ecclesia particularis’(particular church), though the thought of the constitution would have benefited from such use.
It is only in the third- and fourth-session documents that this is to be found, and increasingly frequently, as, for instance, in chapter 13 of Lumen Gentium or in chapter 3 of the Decree on Missionary Activity, entitled ‘Particular Churches’— a chapter written largely in the fourth session and one of the Council's most mature texts.
Besides ecclesial and liturgical pluralism, theological pluralism is also commended — a genuine diversity ‘even in the theological elaborations of revealed truth’(Unitatis Redintegratio 4), the natural consequence of the ‘lawful freedom of theological enquiry to which laity and clergy alike have a right’(Gaudium et Spes 62).
Differing theological formulations, we are assured, are ‘often to be considered as complementary rather than conflicting’(Orientalium Ecclesiarum 17).
It would be quite impossible to find a comparable commendation of theological, or indeed ecclesiastical, pluralism coming from pre-conciliar Rome.
It should be linked with the equally remarkable assertion  that there exists within doctrine ‘a hierarchy of truths’(Unitatis Redintegratio 11).
(e)
All this helped to make possible, and is again included within, the constant ecumenical note.
Theologically separated Christians are no longer seen as simply ‘outside’ the Church,(except by some internal desire on their part) but, on the contrary, recognized as being united visibly with the Church even if in a state of ‘imperfect’communion.
Communion becomes a matter of degree.
In practice, prayer in common, above all within a non-Catholic church, theological dialogue and practical co-operation were all either forbidden or highly restricted until the Council.
From then on they have developed as an almost necessary part of Church life.
While the principles for a Catholic ecumenism were formulated principally in the decree specifically devoted to this, all the other main documents of the Council — most notably the two dogmatic constitutions and the Declaration on Religious Freedom — were profoundly affected by this concern.
(f)
The final wide-ranging orientation, as obvious as any, and especially of course in Gaudium et Spes (the Council's final major document and by far the longest), is the concern with secular human values, with justice and peace.
This is obviously not new, and is in part an expansion of the teaching of a long line of papal encyclicals on social justice beginning with Leo XIII's Rerum Novarum and extending up to Pope John's Mater et Magistra and Pacem in Terris , but there is no possible doubt that the Council, following in this the footsteps of Pope John, gave both a wider range and a new urgency to concerns of this kind as properly constitutive of a very large part of Christian living.
Indeed here more than anywhere we may detect the Council's most characteristic of orientations in comparison with all other Councils: a concern with ‘the signs of the time’(Gaudium et Spes 4 and cf. 44), things outside the Church's own life, the major problems cultural, economic and political of the contemporary world.
For an understanding of the Council's orientation this remains absolutely pivotal: the Church's life and career cannot be self-sufficient.
It is a strength, not a weakness, that it responds precisely to the ‘signs of the time’ presented by secular society.
However, this was not a merely secular orientation.
It remained a profoundly Christological one, though this has too seldom been recognized.
The first part of Gaudium et Spes returns again and again to the theme of Christ, the New Adam who ‘fully reveals man to man’, himself making man's vocation clear, and in whom is to be found the key and focal point for human history and civilization.
These wide orientations underpin and make sense of our second series — certain rather specific texts that represent in more precise manner the Council at its most authoritative.
While the list could undoubtedly be extended, the eight chosen here all have great weight, and not one of them is really imaginable as appearing in a pre-conciliar Roman document.
The first to be noted must surely be that relating to collegiality — a long text including most of Lumen Gentium 22.
Any doctrine of collegiality at all was bitterly resisted by a small minority.
As the majority (and Pope Paul too) was most anxious both to carry the minority with it and not to seem to be in any  way undermining the Roman primacy, there was such a lot of qualifying done in the course of the final formulation of the text that, as it stands, it reads a little weakly.
Nevertheless, it still asserts that the episcopal college as such is empowered with ‘supreme authority…over the whole Church, exercised in a solemn way through an ecumenical council’.
That this was significantly new is demonstrated by the bitter resistance to it from people who had been near the heart of the Church, yet it was finally approved overwhelmingly and constitutes the most precise dogmatic statement within this ‘dogmatic constitution’.
While not intended as a dogmatic definition, it was in fact little less.
The second text, coming again from Lumen Gentium , is the statement in article 8 that the unique Church of Christ ‘subsists in’ the Roman Catholic Church.
Taken by itself such a statement may not suggest any great alteration from previous doctrine, but it was intended to be and it was.
Mystici Corporis and all other recent official teaching had simply identified the Roman Catholic Communion with the Church, and the Council's text, as first written, did the same with the simple verb ‘is’.
The very deliberate rejection of ‘is’ and its replacement by ‘subsists in’opened the door to acceptance of the, at least, partial ecclesial status of other Christians and other ecclesiastical bodies.
The Council declared that the Church of Christ is to be found here, but it no longer says that it is not to be found anywhere else as well.
This brief statement is fundamental for all subsequent Catholic involvement in the ecumenical movement and provides the foundation stone for the Decree on Ecumenism.
The third text is an equally remarkable but less well known one.
It is remarkable first because it is found in two places in almost identical form (Orientalium Ecclesiarum 5, and Unitatis Redintegratio 16); secondly, because in each case, and only here, did the Council use the word ‘solemnly’: it solemnly declares.
The word is one traditionally used for definitions or other dogmatic statements of exceptional weight.
The complete statement (Orientalium Ecclesiarum 5) is as follows: The Council ‘solemnly declares that the Churches of the East, as much as those of the West, fully enjoy the right, and are in duty bound, to rule themselves’.
This text provides the dogmatic core for the theology of a ‘particular church’.
Theologically, the Churches of the East cannot finally be different from Churches anywhere else.
If Eastern Churches have such rights and duties, then American, African and Asian Churches have also.
The Council is, then, here solemnly declaring that throughout the world local churches, or groups of linked churches, have the right and duty, not to be ruled from Rome, but to govern themselves with their own traditions and pastoral needs just as the decree implies the Oriental Churches should do.
The Decree on Ecumenism recognizes that, unfortunately, this principle ‘has not always been honoured’(rather an understatement).
It rightly adds that the exercise of such a right must be done ‘while keeping in mind the necessary unity of the whole Church’, but also that a ‘strict observance of this traditional principle is among the prerequisites for any restoration of unity’.
It had, of course, once more the Eastern Orthodox Churches in mind at that point, but again the principle is no less valid in regard to all other Christian Churches.
The fourth text, in the Decree on the Ministry of Priests (16), is a brief recognition and commendation of the Ministry of married priests in Eastern  Churches.
While this as such simply acknowledges the situation as it is and is followed by a far longer passage relating to the benefits of celibacy for the Western rite, it remains a highly important text because it is the first time a Roman Council or any major Roman document has explicitly accepted and recommended the uniting of priesthood and marriage in a single life.
Once more, it is theologically impossible to separate East from West.
What is theologically and pastorally appropriate in the eastern Mediterranean and the Ukraine cannot be theologically wrong and pastorally unsuitable anywhere else.
Here, as in the previous item, conciliar recognition of the rightness of the Oriental tradition in principle undermines the Latin system as legally enforced elsewhere.
The fifth text is the central thesis of the Declaration on Religious Freedom: ‘This Vatican Synod declares that the human person has a right to religious freedom.
This freedom means that all men are to be immune from coercion on the part of individuals or of social groups and of any human power’(Dignitatis Humanae 2).
This statement and the Declaration as a whole has been claimed on good authority as ‘the most controversial document of the whole Council’(J. Courtney Murray: Abbott, p. 673).
It explicitly reversed the accepted Catholic teaching which related freedom only to truth and not to persons, claiming that error had no rights.
It is certainly irreconcilable with various nineteenth-century Roman statements and does, of course, implicitly condemn the practice of the Inquisition and much else.
The Declaration was fiercely resisted by the minority.
Ecumenically it is as important as anything.
Doctrinally it demonstrates that ‘development’ may have to proceed at times more by reversal than by an extension of what has hitherto been taught.
The sixth text is the condemnation of anti-semitism: the Council ‘deplores the hatred, persecutions, and displays of anti-Semitism directed against the Jews at any time and from any source’(Nostra Aetate 4).
Such condemnation was not, of course, new.
Pius XI, for instance, repeatedly condemned anti-Semitism during the 1930s, as did Pius XII subsequently; but this was — all in all-a stronger, more public, more obviously unqualified condemnation.
It was still not much to say after the Holocaust and so many long centuries of discrimination by Christians, and often by Church authorities, against the Jews.
It was, however, of great importance that it was said as clearly as it was by the Council.
The seventh text is a further condemnation, this time relating to war: ‘any act of war aimed indiscriminately at the destruction of entire cities or of extensive areas along with their population is a crime against God and man himself.
It merits unequivocal and unhesitating condemnation’(Gaudium et Spes 80).
This is the unique text in which the Council formally used the word ‘condemn’(it had, perhaps regrettably, been persuaded in the case of anti-Semitism to substitute ‘deplores’ for ‘condemns’).
It is already significant for that reason: the Council's resolve to condemn mass destruction in modern war is shown to be all the more strong.
The test certainly covers, and therefore condemns unequivocally, the American dropping of nuclear bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki; it does, however, not deal as absolutely as did Pope John in Pacem in Terris with all possible aspects of modern war or even with  every possible use of nuclear weapons.
It remains significant — perhaps all the more significant — for what it does say.
The final text concerns the responsibility of the married in deciding to have or not to have a child.
The Council did not discuss the morality of methods of contraception because Pope Paul asked it to leave the matter to his own special commission.
It did, nevertheless, develop a theology of marriage in which procreation was no longer seen as its sole purpose, but conjugal love was recognized as of equal importance, and this inevitably placed the issue of contraception in a somewhat different light.
Still further, it explicitly commended the concept of family planning.
Whereas in the past Catholic teaching had implied that all such matters should be left to God, however large a family one already had, the Council affirmed that ‘parents themselves should ultimately make the judgement’(Gaudium et Spes 50) as to whether or not they should have further children.
They might rightly decide that ‘at least temporarily the size of their families should not be increased’(Gaudium et Spes 51).
Conciliar recognition that the practice of family planning, and not simply the acceptance of as many children as came was the morally responsible and best form of behaviour for a Catholic, represented a very considerable change in attitudes.
While the issue of means was left unresolved, clear teaching in regard to the issue of ends was in the long run probably more important.
We have now to turn to a survey of the third area of significance: the main points that had a specific and almost immediate practical effect upon the life of the Church.
The list is restricted to seven but, again, there are others with a claim to inclusion.
The first, deriving also from the Council's first major text, and with little doubt the most decisive for the life of most Catholics, was that to make far greater use of the vernacular in the liturgy (Sacrosanctum Concilium 36 and 54).
This did not at first include the canon of the Mass, but the momentum of change was such in the early post-conciliar period — moreover, the absurdity of retaining an isolated island of Latin was so obvious — that this quickly followed.
More than anything else it has changed the public lifestyle of Catholicism for the ordinary churchgoer so that it is hard for the young actually to realize that thirty years ago Mass said wholly in Latin, including even a first reading of Epistle and Gospel, was simply taken for granted by most people.
Even in countries like England where there was initially a relatively strong movement to retain Latin, it is clear twenty-five years later that interest in any return to its regular use is minimal.
The second, and closely related, change is the permission in the Constitution on the Liturgy (55) for Communion under both kinds to be given to religious and laity in certain circumstances.
The Council indicated a few limited examples of such circumstances (e.g. to the newly baptized in a Mass following their baptism), but here again, once admitted, the essential rightness of Communion under both kinds became more and more widely recognized so that communion is now so given at all Masses in many churches and dioceses throughout the world.
It is becoming difficult to imagine that for centuries even a nun receiving daily Communion was never once in her life permitted to receive the cup.
Here, as with the vernacular, the Council for the sake of  strengthening the ‘active participation’ which it correctly laid down as a vital principle of liturgy, overthrew a deformation which had become customary in the Middle Ages and against which the Reformation had vigorously protested.
In making the change, the Church effectively admitted that on these points the Reformers had been in the right.
The third matter is again liturgical and again related — that of concelebration (Sacrosanctum Concilium 57 and 58).
From about the twelfth century and until the Council, every priest was expected to say Mass separately each day.
This involved the multiplication of side altars (in some seminaries and religious houses literally dozens of small altars were still being constructed in crypts even in the 1950s) for the celebration of ‘private’ Masses.
In religious communities and seminaries most priests never received Communion (except on Maundy Thursday) in a community mass, but removed themselves to celebrate on their own with a single server.
The profound symbolism of the sacrament of unity was thus gravely impaired.
The Council's permission for many priests to share in a single concelebration was again, initially, limited to a very few occasions, but before the end of the 1960s the absurdity of the former practice had become rather obvious and concelebration was rapidly becoming the norm for all circumstances where the number of priests exceeded the number of community Masses needed for a pastoral purpose.
Side altars and crypt altars survived, if at all, only as an unused oddity whose purpose would require considerable explanation for the young.
This proved in itself a major revolution, not only for the liturgy, but also for clerical life, even if the initial rather clumsy practice of massive concelebration by all priests present at any Mass itself expressed over-forcibly a clergy-laity divide and has later tended to give way — except for certain symbolic occasions (e.g. of a bishop meeting with his diocesan clergy)— to a pattern in which most supernumerary priests at a given Mass simply join with the lay congregation.
Our fourth point is the restoration of the diaconate as a permanent order in the Church to which the married could be ordained (Lumen Gentium 29).
There are now several thousand married deacons in the Church, mostly in North America.
The duties of the deacon were specified as ‘to administer baptism solemnly, to be custodian and dispenser of the Eucharist, to assist at and bless marriages in the name of the Church, to bring viaticum to the dying, to read the Sacred Scriptures to the faithful, to instruct and exhort the people, to preside at the worship and prayer of the faithful, to administer Sacramentals, and to officiate at funeral and burial services’.
It cannot escape notice that almost without exception these duties were performed, and in most countries-at least of the West —only performed, by priests until the Council.
It noted that ‘these duties so very necessary for the life of the Church can in many areas be fulfilled only with difficulty according to the prevailing discipline of the Latin Church’.
That is to say, with a law of clerical celibacy and a consequent inadequate number of priests, there was often no one available to do them.
Hence the revival of the very ancient order of the diaconate (in the pre-conciliar Church the diaconate was indeed conferred, but only on people who were almost immediately afterwards going to be ordained priests).
The decision to include married people in this was both practically and theoretically  crucial.
It was crucial in practice, because otherwise few would have been available and no significant increase in manpower for the fulfilment of these duties would have been forthcoming.
But theoretically, the significance was still greater: the traditional Western bar on the ordination of the married had always applied to the diaconate as much as to the priesthood (and for the same initial reason: marriage involving the practice of sex was regarded as causing pollution).
The Council's decision to scrap the tradition in regard to the diaconate suggested that the same tradition in regard to the priesthood could equally well be abandoned if it was pastorally desirable.
The fifth point is rather more ambiguous in its conclusions and present degree of applicability (Unitatis Redintegratio 8;Orientalium Ecclesiarum 26 and 27).
Prior to the Council,communicatio in sacris — that is to say, sharing in the formal worship of a Church other than one's own, and especially in communion — was completely condemned.
The term was never used in regard to anything acceptable.
The Council's use of the term is therefore revolutionary.
It does not condemn the practice.
On the contrary, it sees it as in some circumstances actually commendable, but restricts this by declaring that (1) it should not be used ‘indiscriminately’ for the restoration of unity,(2) the fact that communion should ‘signify unity’means that it is ‘generally’to be excluded, at least if somehow it ‘would damage the unity of the Church’,(3) it must never involve ‘formal acceptance of falsehood or the danger of deviation in the faith, scandal or indifferentism’.
These are major restrictions but the balance has decisively changed from a simple ‘No’ to a nuanced ‘Yes and No’.
The conclusion would seem to be that where there seems no danger of damaging the unity of the Church and no danger of scandal or deviation from the faith, admission to communion may be used discriminately.
In fact, the Council went on at once to put this principle into practice and agree that admission to communion (that is to say, in common parlance, partial intercommunion) may be accepted ‘in order to promote closer union’(Orientalium Ecclesiarum 26).
‘To promote closer union’ means that it is, in the Council's judgement, an acceptable means towards fuller unity in some circumstances, and not only to be seen as an expression of full unity already achieved.
The decree goes on to allow Eastern Christians, separated from the Catholic Church, to receive Catholic sacraments in some circumstances.
Catholics are permitted to receive valid sacraments in other churches in similar circumstances of pastoral need.
While these clauses as such refer to the East only, the same theological principles apply elsewhere, and were subsequently explicitly applied in the Secretariat of Unity's first Directory.
The principles here are clear, fully Catholic and yet in terms of pre-conciliar Roman theory revolutionary (not so revolutionary in practice: some sacramental sharing had always continued in parts of the East where ecclesiastical reality had never quite caught up with the theory of ultramontanism).
They have increasingly been applied by ordinary church members in the years following the Council.
However, official teaching has gone the other way, becoming increasingly restrictive in its emphasis on the grounds that the sharing of communion is acceptable only as an expression, and not as a cause of unity.
This is, of course, poor sacramental theology which makes of every sacrament  a cause of what it signifies.
It is also explicitly opposed to the conciliar text.
There is, undoubtedly, a tension between cause and consequence, but no acceptable way in which significance can be confined to the realm of an expression and consequence of unity institutionally achieved.
Sacraments go deeper and by nature precede, not follow.
The element of causality in the sacrament of unity is undoubtedly the primary one, from 1 Corinthians 10 onward.
Sharing the Eucharist is a major part of a Christian's basic baptismal rights, only to be denied in principle on account of grave sin.
The sixth point is the instruction (Christus Dominus 37–8) to establish Episcopal Conferences with considerable authority and well-defined responsibilities in all nations or pastoral areas.
In many places, such conferences had already come into existence, but their authority has been greatly enhanced by the Council.
This undoubtedly developed a practice of regional collegiality which has been characteristic of the post-conciliar Church.
While it has greatly strengthened individual bishops, hitherto left very much to cope on their own, it has also decreased the scope for unilateral action on the part of an independent-minded bishop.
Last but by no means least must be noted the recommendation in Gaudium et Spes (90) to establish ‘some agency of the universal Church’ in order to ‘stimulate the Catholic community to foster progress in needy regions and social justice on the international scene’.
From this has come the immense development of Justice and Peace Commissions, both in Rome and throughout the Catholic world, which have greatly helped bring to fruition a whole new dimension of church life, a social activism concerned with the service of the poor, of economic justice and of genuine peace (Paul VI later declared that ‘Development is the new name for Peace’).
This in turn has helped generate, and been refuelled by, theologies of liberation which have become central to much Catholic thinking in the latter part of our period.
This list could certainly be extended, but it is sufficient to indicate the deep and wide-ranging impact that the Council had, or should have had, on both theology and practice.
Still today genuine fidelity to the Council needs to be measured by a living commitment both to these specific matters and to further organic developments implicit within their logic.
It is fairly clear that no one would now seriously seek to impose a return to the regular liturgical use of Latin or the celebration of private masses or decree an actual dissolution of episcopal conferences, but full acceptance of many of them is still far from clear even in Rome.
Thus the implications of the Eucharistic nature of the Church have never been recognized by Church authority in areas of an acute shortage of priests; and when, in some of them, episcopal conferences have requested permission to ordain married men to ensure the maintenance of a minimum of regular Eucharistic celebration in local communities, they have been rebuffed by Rome.
Genuine acceptance of the spirit and implications of Vatican II can probably best be seen in the use of a ‘people of God’ ecclesiology, in a stress upon both a working collegiality and the genuine centrality of the Eucharist within the Church, especially the local church, in the warm recognition of the values of pluralism and freedom within and between ‘particular churches’as within  human society generally, and in a commitment to work and find Christian holiness within the struggle for justice and peace in solidarity with the poor.
That list may provide the five most authentic hallmarks of a Vatican II spirit present and active in the Catholic Church twenty-five years later.
THE CONCILIAR DOCUMENTS
Revelation (Dei Verbum)
ROBERT MURRAY SJ
Dei Verbum is theologically the most fundamental of the documents of Vatican II.
Of the four Constitutions, only it and Lumen Gentium are called ‘Dogmatic’, indicating a more formal doctrinal authority.
There are many important links between them, as also with the Constitution on the Liturgy.
These three correspond most to the expectations and hopes previously voiced by bishops and theological faculties.
The nature of the Church and its tradition were central to the unfinished business from Vatican I; Modernism and the Roman reaction to it had left serious questions about the inspiration and inerrancy of the Bible and about the development of doctrine; the Liturgical Movement was already revealing both the need for major pastoral renewal and a vision of what its fruits could be, not merely inside the Catholic Church but also in its ecumenical relations.
Of the four Constitutions,Dei Verbum is the most theologically concentrated; but in its wider relevance it both undergirds and touches most of the Council documents — obviously those on the Church and the liturgy, but also all those with a mainly pastoral thrust.
This wider outreach makes the opening words, ‘The Word of God’, perhaps more arresting than the more technical title ‘On Divine Revelation’.
But if Dei Verbum is so important, has its influence been proportionately great?
A number of factors make it a complex task to estimate the degree of success in twenty-five years.
Before we can try, it will be helpful to recall the issues that were at stake, the aims of the Council in this document, and the main emphases in its teachings and recommendations.
The history of Dei Verbum ,(abbreviated to DV throughout this chapter), as one of the focal points of tension and conflict between theological viewpoints at the Council, is well known.
(See, for example, XR 1, pp. 140–73; XR 3, pp. 35–48; and XR 4, pp. 184–96.)
It was when the draft for a document on revelation was presented in November 1962 that the Council really began to experience the creative polarization that was to shape its whole history.
No other theme was more suited to bring this about.
On one side were found churchmen set on defending truth (seen in a mainly static and propositional way), on condemning error, and on protecting Catholics against ideas of development and change.
The draft on revelation (and a companion, ‘On preserving the deposit of faith in its purity’, also rejected) were prepared mainly by theologians of this tendency, who had been brought up to think of modernism as the most fundamental, comprehensive and insidious of all heresies.
On the other side were many who voiced optimism and trust in the Holy Spirit rather than defensiveness, saw more need for encouragement than for condemnations, and were convinced that there was a new opportunity for liturgical and pastoral use of the Bible which must not be missed.
Here there were probably more pastors than scholars, especially from the third world, but there was a significant number of biblical scholars and theologians who looked back on decades in which loyal Catholic scholars had been harassed and  impeded by an obsessive witch hunt against Modernism.
They were convinced that the Catholic Church needed a credible account of how God's word acts in history, from the first formulation in human language through the gradual process of understanding, under changing historical conditions and as the Holy Spirit gives new insights.
After three years of redrafting and hard debate, a large majority in the Council was able to welcome a text reflecting both the ideas and the spirit of the more ‘pastoral’ tendency.
THE MAIN FEATURES AND EMPHASES OF DEI VERBUM
The Prologue (DV 1) sets the tone for the whole document.
In the Latin, ‘the Word of God’ stands first, as object of the Church's listening and then proclamation.
The order is important.
Only subordinate to this order are references to Trent and Vatican I tucked in, with the promise of doctrinal guidance on revelation and its transmission.
This order of values in the Prologue is reflected in the whole Constitution.
Chapter 1, ‘Divine Revelation Itself’(DV 2–6), maintains the note of proclamation in mainly biblical language, and only towards its end does it reaffirm teachings of Vatican I on the human response to God's self-revelation.
Before this, however, important new emphases have appeared.
The pregnant sentence ‘The economy of Revelation is realized by deeds and words, which are intrinsically bound up with each other’(DV 2) challenges two basic ‘conservative’ positions: the fear of allowing historical development in our understanding of divine truth, and the theory of separate sources of revelation.
History is not merely the theatre in which God's self-revelation becomes known, but is itself a mode of revelation.
All understanding is guided by the Holy Spirit, whose manifold activity is emphasized (whereas the first draft had practically restricted it to biblical inspiration).
In chapter 2, ‘The Transmission of Divine Revelation’(DV 7–10), the sense of historical revelation continues, with repeated emphasis on the Holy Spirit, in relation not only to the apostles but also to the Church as a whole.
The teaching role of the bishops, as successors to the apostles, is described as a service to the whole Church.
The faith is a living Tradition (in a comprehensive sense, made clearer by capital T).
It grows and develops: all members play their part in this, as they feed their understanding of the revealed message by their ‘contemplation and study’ and by experience of ‘spiritual realities’(DV 8; cf.
Lumen Gentium 12 on the ‘prophetic function’ in the whole people of God).
It is by this living and developing Tradition that the canon of Scripture is recognized and its inner power made actual for believers, guided by the Holy Spirit.
This passage, the tone of which reminds one of Newman, goes far beyond the timid language of the first draft and its companion with its static view of the ‘deposit’.
In this way the dispute about Scripture and Tradition as distinct sources of revelation can be resolved (DV 9).
The insistence on separate sources had been an ill-judged reaction to the Reformation Scriptura sola ; now, by viewing both Scripture and Tradition as dynamic realities, they can be seen as intimately  connected, gifts of the one Spirit, in a way that satisfied not only almost all the Council's members, but even the Reformed observers (Schutz and Thurian, 1968, ch. 2).
A final section (DV 10) describes how the Church holds, and is helped to interpret rightly, this single deposit of God's Word which is formed by Scripture and Tradition together.
The ideal (expressed in words again reminiscent of Newman) is a harmonious consensus of the faithful and the bishops; but authority in interpretation of the Word of God is vested in the ‘living teaching office’ entrusted to the bishops.
However, this is no autonomous authority; it ‘is not superior to the Word of God, but is its servant’, bound to listen to it and expound it faithfully (DV 10).
This was well symbolized by the enthronement of the gospel book at the Council, though more could have been made of it (de Maio, 1963, p. 21; Bianchi, 1987, p. 117).
The responsibilities of magisterium remain an issue to which we shall return.
Chapters 3–5 deal in turn with the inspiration and interpretation of Scripture and with the two Testaments.
These chapters are comparatively less weighty, and are perhaps most valuable for what they do not say, if we remember the pressure for definitions and anathemas.
Chapter 3 (DV 11–13) deals quietly with two ancient questions mal posées that were still causing storms: the question of ‘inspiration’(or how human authors wrote ‘God's Word’) and that of ‘inerrancy’(or how far everything they wrote must be God's truth).
There is a touch of ‘learned ignorance’ about the disarmingly simple solutions proposed, but they succeeded in breaking the impasse.
The treatment of the principles of interpretation (DV 12) reaffirms the teaching of Pius XII's encyclical Divino Afflante Spiritu (1943)— very necessarily, since it was still being attacked, even by an Italian cardinal, as late as 1961 (XR 1, pp. 54–5).
Dei Verbum 12 may seem very elementary today, but it gave needed encouragement to long-suffering Catholic exegetes.
Chapter 4, on the Old Testament (DV 14–16), is the least substantial part of Dei Verbum ; it mainly repeats traditional Christian formulas, with no sensitivity towards Judaism as is called for in Nostra Aetate 4.
Chapter 5, on the New Testament (DV 17–20), likewise partly consists of rather conventional summaries; but it does deal, firmly yet flexibly, with questions of the historicity of the Gospels, and agrees that the development of the Gospel tradition was influenced by oral transmission and preaching (for allowing which, responsible scholars had been accused of heresy).
The tone is reassuring to conservative piety yet far from fundamentalism, and it pronounces neither censures nor warnings to inhibit scholarly research.
Today this chapter may seem almost too anodyne to be significant, but it gave much-needed relief and encouragement to Catholic New Testament scholars (see Fitzmyer, 1982, pp. 97–142).
Chapter 6, on Scripture in the life of the Church (DV 21–6), develops the main intention expressed in the Prologue and outlines a pastoral policy for liturgy (21; cf.
Sacrosanctum Concilium 7, 24, 35, 51–2, 92), and for provision of Bible translations (22, including by co-operation with other Christian Bible Societies) with encouragement to reading, study and meditation by every section of the Church (23–5).
Watchfulness and guidance by the ‘magisterium’ are mentioned several times, but the condescending and protective tone of the first draft has happily gone.
AFTER TWENTY-FIVE YEARS
The question was posed above: If Dei Verbum is so important, has its influence been proportionately great?
In terms of continuing public notice and practical effectiveness, the truthful answer has to be ‘no’.
Perhaps too much of it is a text for skilled professionals.
And yet, if we look for signs of the biblical revival that the Council wanted to awaken, in many ways and in many parts of the Catholic world the answer is indeed ‘yes’, and all the more so if we remember how much leeway there was to be made up in knowledge and use of the Bible by Catholics.
It is not easy to survey the many areas in which there has been not only response to Dei Verbum , but also developments traceable to its influence, yet going far beyond what most of the Council's members could have foreseen.
After looking at first reactions I shall sketch the main lines of theological comment and response, and then liturgical, practical and ecumenical developments; then some ‘growing points’ and problems in areas both of praxis and of theological reflection.
The promulgation of Dei Verbum , in November 1965, was welcomed with widespread enthusiasm by Catholics and other Christians alike.
Catholic biblical scholars, theologians and many active lay groups had good reasons to be grateful.
Among the ‘observers’, the Orthodox now had something more like their own teaching on Tradition than from any previous Western Council.
Anglicans and Protestants now not only heard the first systematic teaching on the word of God in the Church ever formulated by a Catholic Council (for Trent had only dealt with particular points at issue with the Reformers), but also admired it.
Most remarkable of all, Karl, Barth, having been unable to serve as an observer, later published his reflections (1967, 1969), asking himself such questions as ‘How would things look if Rome (without ceasing to be Rome) were one day simply to overtake us and place us in the shadows, so far as the renewing of the church through the Word and Spirit of the gospel is concerned?’
(Barth, 1969, p. 75).
Dei Verbum invited Catholics to see God's revelation and human response to it less in merely propositional terms, but more as dynamic operations guided by the Holy Spirit.
For many seminary-trained churchmen this was a radical change in both direction and spirit after some eighty years of official censures and directives, which too often saw a danger of heresy whenever the human part in the dialogue of revelation and the development of doctrine were explored.
(To appreciate the reorientation that was called for after this period, see Latourelle, 1968, pp. 207–309; on Tradition, see Congar, 1966, especially pp. 196–221; on the trials of biblical scholars, see Levie, 1961.)
As the Council proceeded, theologians had a fair idea of what kind of text was coming, and were prepared to explain its teaching and its practical implications.
Among the commentaries that appeared, several were by participants in the Council as members,periti or observers.
Perhaps the most distinguished and rich in content is that edited by Alonso Schokel (1969).
Though this is in Spanish, the contributors were international, reflecting the work of the Pontifical Biblical Institute in Rome.
This volume goes far beyond mere commentary, but ranks  with more systematic works on the theological areas dealt with in Dei Verbum which appeared in the 1960s.
Theologians were constantly in demand to speak and write for a wide public which was eager to understand the Council's message and importance.
(The scene was surveyed regularly in Concilium : during the years 1965–72, when its issues were arranged in volumes, the successive parts of volume 1 (Dogma) and volume 10 (Scripture) contain many valuable articles.)
What Karl Rahner achieved in those years can hardly be summarized (but see his Foundations of Christian Faith, 1978, ch.
V).
However, his former colleague, Hans Urs von Balthasar, though a comparable (but contrasting) giant in the theology of revelation, hardly took any part in the Council or in the subsequent work of exposition and discussion.
Not that he was remote from the Council's concerns; his long-standing dialogue with Karl Barth makes him no exception to the keen and growing ecumenical awareness that characterizes almost all Catholic theological writing since the 1960s.
Out of many systematic works from this period we may select for mention two, both titled Theology of Revelation: that by Latourelle (1968), which is more historically based, and that by Moran (1967), which focuses more on the experience of revelation as personal communion.
The various possible emphases in thinking about revelation are illuminatingly analysed by Dulles (1983), using the method of ‘models’ which he had previously applied to ecclesiology.
On the other main themes of Dei Verbum , Congar's monumental Tradition and Traditions (1966), though finished before the end of the Council, remains unsurpassed.
On the Bible as the word of God, the balance achieved by Dei Verbum is worked out in comprehensive works such as those by Grelot (1968) and L. Alonso Schokel (1967).
Since the study by Vawter (1972), the old problems of inspiration and inerrancy have largely been given a rest by Catholic theologians; perhaps for sheer weariness and relief, but perhaps also because from the late 1960s many of them were theologizing in exciting new university contexts and learning the arcane language of philosophical hermeneutics.
The most fundamental aspects of the liturgical renewal for which the Council called are all related to the biblical element in liturgy and to making it more accessible to all in the vernacular: the enormous enrichment of the lectionary, the emphasis on preaching the Word that has been read, the revelation of how biblically based the Eucharistic prayers and other sacramental actions are, and the restoration of the ‘divine office’ as the ‘prayer of the Church’.
(On the broader context of all this, see Chapter 8A.)
Huge tasks had to be undertaken, and much has been achieved.
The readings and psalms in the vernacular (often helped by clearer new versions, on which see below) and the call for more biblical sermons have already brought appreciable changes in Catholic worship and attitudes.
But there are continuing blockages and problems, many of them practical.
In many large churches, built to enable the greatest possible numbers to attend Sunday Mass, the circumstances of worship too often hinder an effective liturgy of the Word.
In contrast, in smaller and more informal gatherings such as house Masses, the power this can release has often been experienced so impressively that one wonders whether the new liturgy was not given to the Church prophetically, with a view to new  circumstances which were to come, but which till now have been realized only unevenly.
The reform of the lectionary, despite experiment and evaluation before the contents were fixed, has also left serious problems.
One arises from the increase in the sheer quantity of texts to be read, heard and (ideally) expounded, some of them very difficult both for preachers and for their congregations.
Too often, public readers are not trained, either in technique or in appreciation of their role, for this important ministry of mediating the power of the word.
The problem of unrenewed attitudes is most acute among older clergy trained before the Council.
Besides insecurity, there is a theological cause due to an unbalanced view of the relationship of Word and sacrament.
Sacrosanctum Concilium speaks of the presence of Christ both in the sacraments and in the liturgical reading of the Word (SC 7);Dei Verbum likewise speaks of ‘the one table of the Word of God and the Body of Christ’(DV 21).
Though this doctrine is patristic, some ‘conservatives’ at the Council saw a threat to faith in the Eucharistic real presence.
This reveals a mentality for which the Word is metaphorical and therefore less ‘real’.
The truth is that all sacramental thinking and language are symbolic, and precisely thereby, they work in a way not weaker but actually stronger than the way the naive realist calls ‘real’.
The Council was clearly implying that (as Newman saw) Scripture itself works sacramentally , especially when it is made actual by effective reading and preaching in the liturgy.
Whenever the liturgy of the Word remains formal and lifeless, it shows that these fundamental sacramental and liturgical principles have yet to be learnt (see Bianchi, 1987, pp. 120–2).
While training for preaching has happily improved since the Council, other factors have sadly hampered and slowed down the work of theological re-education.
A tragic number of those best equipped to explain the Council's teaching retired from the clergy in the later 1960s and the 1970s, and thereafter were disqualified from teaching as a ministry in the Church, though there is no moral justification for a general judgement that such persons become unworthy to teach.
The right to preach within the Mass is jealously reserved to the clergy, whereas members of the laity often prove to be endowed with this charism.
To see the biblical renewal of liturgy successful in Europe, one still has to seek out certain churches.
The greatest renewal is elsewhere.
The Council's encouragement in the field of Bible translation and inter-confessional co-operation (DV 22) has borne abundant fruit.
The key figure here was Cardinal A. Bea, the veteran biblical scholar whose experience and contacts fitted him uniquely to head the Secretariat for Christian Unity, to develop sensitive relations with both Christians and Jews, to bring all this manifold competence to the redrafting of Dei Verbum and the production of Nostra Aetate , and to foster the desired biblical renewal both pastorally within the Church and by ecumenical co-operation.
The World Catholic Federation for the Biblical Apostolate (WCFBA) was formed in 1969, both to co-ordinate Catholic projects and to be the appropriate organ to work in partnership with the United Bible Societies.
This world-wide structure and partnership has developed remarkably.
In many countries the Bible really has proved, as the  Latin American bishops said at Puebla in 1979, ‘the soul of evangelization’ and of religious education.
Ecumenical pooling of resources for translation work is now normal; in 1984, out of 590 translation projects in progress, 390 were inter-confessional involving Catholics.
There is equally fruitful ecumenical co-operation in activities such as the production of aids to daily Bible reading.
The encouragement to Bible study in Dei Verbum (23–5) speaks in turn of scholarly work, of the training and spiritual formation of the clergy, and of reading by the laity.
Though there has been good response in the first two areas, it is in the third that the brief hints in the text have been totally transcended through the amazing growth of lay groups meeting for prayer or study, representing various degrees of organization or none, some purely Catholic but most of them ecumenically open.
The best-known developments of this kind are the ‘basic ecclesial communities’ in Latin America, but comparable movements have appeared in all continents, varying according to social structure and tradition.
In these new communities Christians have developed their own way of listening to the Word and responding to it from their own situation.
Typical methods are described by Mesters (1980, 1989) and discussed by Rowland (1988, pp. 130–5).
The members may be without education, or able to use handbooks such as those of Abesamis in the Philippines (1988) or of Tamez in Costa Rica (1982).
These communities were discussed by Pope Paul VI in Evangelii Nuntiandi 58 (1975; Flannery 2, pp. 738–40), appreciatively though with some warnings: there is a danger of manipulation of the Word through ideological pressure and too selective reading (cf.
Bianchi, 1987, pp. 132–6); but the vitality of this movement surely surpasses all other responses to Dei Verbum .
The Council's message to those engaged in biblical and theological research was encouraging and trustful.
In this atmosphere Catholic scholarship has flourished, increasingly in an ecumenical setting and moving in directions not yet envisaged by Dei Verbum .
Its chapter (4) on the Old Testament reflected the ‘biblical theology’ of the 1950s and the patristic viewpoint as enshrined in the liturgy.
Catholic teachers turned with new confidence to biblical criticism, but by the 1980s many of its presuppositions were being questioned and its power to generate real understanding doubted.
The ideal of ‘listening to the text’ and allowing different possible ‘readings’has come to the fore, helped by a new appreciation of Jewish exegesis, often through joint study with Jews (as was recommended in Nostra Aetate 4), and by refreshing contributions from students of other literatures.
This ‘new look’ need not, of course, exclude older interpretations; but it may well rejuvenate preaching.
New Testament studies have flowered to an extent too rich to summarize; let one work stand for all: Brown's magisterial commentary on the Fourth Gospel (1971).
The relationship of Christology to New Testament study has remained a crucial area of study and debate.
A useful contribution to this, entitled Scripture and Christology , appeared in 1984 from the Pontifical Biblical Commission in its new character since its reconstitution in 1971.
This text, without carrying official papal authority, truly maintains the spirit of Dei Verbum .
It surveys eleven contemporary approaches, evaluating them fairly and positively sketching the desiderata for an integral Christology (see Fitzmyer, 1986).
This document is significant not only for New Testament studies.
In the ecclesiological context of Dei Verbum 10, it represents an exemplary exercise of magisterium as the ministry of teaching in the Church.
This term always had this broader sense until, in the mid-nineteenth century, it began to have a capital M and a personified sense restricted to the episcopate, or more often just the papacy, as holders of teaching authority (see Congar, 1976; Hill, 1988, pp. 75–88).
Dei Verbum 10 describes the magisterium as subordinate to the Word, but follows this with a problematic image of Scripture, Tradition and the Magisterium as a kind of trinity.
The propriety of this depends on how inclusively or exclusively magisterium is being used.
The third member is only commensurate with the two modes of revelation if it means a charism, constantly in action throughout the Church, guiding true understanding and teaching it.
It is always to be hoped that this charism will be active in popes and bishops, but it is not, nor can it be, reduced solely to their authority.
The more inclusive, ‘small m’ sense of magisterium has the main weight both of history and of Tradition behind it, and it is in this direction that the most vital movements in the Church — especially the increasing witness of women — are developing (cf.
Metz and Schillebeeckx, 1985).
In the open intellectual milieu where Catholic exegetes and theologians now move among colleagues of other traditions of faith or of none, the traditional term ‘hermeneutics’(the art and the principles of interpretation) has been taken over for a mode of philosophical discussion so technical that its products are usually baffling even to a well-educated reader.
This is a tragedy, for biblical hermeneutics concerns the problems facing any ordinary person who wants to find meaning in texts coming from a remote past, and to understand in what sense they can be ‘the Word of God’.
The traditional doctrines of ‘inspiration’ and ‘inerrancy’were posed in terms that actually added to the problems.
Yet they were attempts to answer real questions, and not simply for fundamentalists.
There is a ministry here that theologians and biblical scholars owe to the Church, to develop a hermeneutics more widely accessible to ordinary intelligent people today.
This is done outstandingly by Mesters (1989).
One other critical feature of the present situation for maintaining the ministry of the word should be mentioned: it concerns the study of the biblical languages (Hebrew, Aramaic and Greek) and those of the classical ancient versions, at a level sufficient to assure that there will be enough scholars able to serve as fully competent exegetes and, therefore, as active tradents of Tradition.
The primacy of classical studies in their chief base (Europe) came to an end about the middle of this century.
What was a broadly based culture has become a field of specialization.
This must be a matter of serious concern for the Church.
Training scholars will not physically feed the hungry, but failing to train enough of them will mean clogging the springs from which we drink.
After twenty-five years we can indeed see much response to Dei Verbum , but it is still limited.
Bishops at the Synod of 1985 and Pope John Paul II himself in 1986 complained that the message has not yet been heard.
In 1984 the WCFBA Plenary Assembly asked for a Synod entirely on the biblical apostolate in the Church.
The desired agenda would include the relation between the Word and  the Eucharist; the liberating power of the Word of God; the Bible and the laity: the various ministries of the Word and their relation to exegesis; the danger of fundamentalism; the Bible and ecumenism; inculturation of the Word of God; the Bible and other sacred scriptures.
This summary list indicates the amount of work still to be done.
Note
In 1989 the WCFBA was renamed more simply the Catholic Biblical Federation (CBF).
8B Revelation (Dei Verbum): Bibliography