

Glial growth factors are alternatively spliced erbB2 ligands expressed in the nervous system
Mark A. Marchionni, Andrew D. J. Goodearl, Maio Su Chen, Olivia Bermingham-McDonogh, Cassandra Kirk, Marvin Hendricks, Frank Danehy, Judith Sudhalter, Kazumi Kobayashi, Diana Wroblewski, Catherine Lynch, Mark Baldassare, Ian Hiles, John B. Davis, J. Justin Hsuan, Nicholas F. Totty, Masayuki Otsu, Robert N. McBurney, Michael D. Waterfield, Paul Stroobant
Glial growth factors, proteins that are mitogenic for Schwann cells, and several ligands for the p185 erbB2 receptor, are products of the same gene.
Alternative splicing of the messenger RNA generates an array of putative membrane-attached, intracellular and secreted signalling proteins, at least some of which are expressed in the developing spinal cord and brain.
These factors are probably important in the development and regeneration of the nervous system.
SCHWANN cells have important roles in the development, function and regeneration of peripheral nerves.
During embryogenesis Schwann cell progenitors migrate from the neural crest, then proliferate along tracts to be occupied by peripheral axons where they support axon extension.
The development of peripheral axons seems to rely on Schwann cells, particularly for the formation of the basal lamina and as a major source of trophic factors, which regulate neurite outgrowth and neuronal survival.
During later stages of development Schwann cells produce the myelin sheath.
Adult Schwann cells normally are quiescent, but retain the capacity for cell division and can dedifferentiate to a highly proliferative state after nerve injury.
Myelin breakdown products, inflammation and loss of axonal contacts provide several potential signal sources to promote an early burst of Schwann cell proliferation following nerve injury.
Later, during axonal regrowth a second burst of Schwann cell proliferation precedes remyelination.
Many trophic factors can influence axonal growth and neuronal survival during nervous system development and in the regeneration of peripheral nerves.
As Schwann cells can produce a number of these factors, it is important to understand the signals that regulate Schwann cell proliferation, migration and differentiation.
Studies on purified rat sciatic nerve Schwann cells have shown that proliferation in vitro depends on mitogenic factors.
Bovine brain extracts and bovine pituitary glands have been identified as enriched sources of a mitogenic activity.
A mitogen of M r 31,000 (31K) named glial growth factor (GGF) was purified from bovine pituitary.
Schwann cell mitogenic activity from bovine pituitary extracts can be resolved into three activities with different molecular masses: GGF-I (34K), GGF-II (59K) and GGF-III (45K)(A.D.J.G. et al.,manuscript submitted).
Protein sequence derived from purified GGFs (A.D.J.G., manuscript in preparation) has enabled us to isolate and characterize several complementary DNA clones encoding proteins with Schwann cell mitogenic activity.
Our analysis of both cDNA and genomic sequences reveals that the single GGF gene encodes multiple Schwann cell mitogens derived from alternatively spliced mRNAs.
Interestingly, products of this gene are also specific activators of the p185 erbB2 receptor tyrosine kinase, including the structurally related, previously described heregulins and neu differentiation factor.
Moreover, as revealed by in situ hybridization analysis, the GGFs appear to be expressed in the nervous system during embryonic development.
We therefore conclude that the GGFs are alternatively spliced, putative p185 erbB2 ligands produced in the embryonic nervous system.
GGFs produced in peripheral nerve probably play a significant part in regulating the functions of Schwann cells during development and following nerve injury.
Sequence of glial growth factors I, II and III
GGF-I, GGF-II and GGF-III were purified from bovine pituitary glands using methods described elsewhere (A.D.J.G. et al.,manuscript submitted).
Novel peptide sequences obtained after enzymatic digestion are shown in Table 1.
A closely related peptide sequence was found to be present in all three GGF molecules, namely GGF-I peptides 2 and 7, GGF-II peptide 12 and GGF-III peptide 13.
As these peptides are derived from three separate protein preparations containing GGF activity, we focused on this peptide sequence for the molecular cloning of GGF DNA sequences.
Cloning and structural analysis
We used degenerate oligonucleotide probes designed from the peptide sequence common to all three peaks of GGF activity to screen a number of cDNA and genomic libraries and initially isolated a single bovine genomic DNA.
Characterization of this clone (λ GGFBG1) allowed the isolation of multiple cDNAs derived from several mammalian tissue sources.
Beginning with the bovine source, where the purification of GGF activities from pituitary suggested an apparent tissue source for cDNA cloning, we analysed mRNA prepared separately from anterior lobes, posterior lobes, and hypothalami.
These reverse transcription-amplification (RT-PCR) analyses indicated that the posterior lobe of the pituitary was the most enriched bovine neuroendocrine source of mRNA homologous to the genomic sequence determined in λ GGFBG1; consequently, a set of five overlapping PCR products were cloned and sequenced.
Analysis of the bovine mRNA and genomic sequences (not shown) showed that the GGF transcripts were alternatively spliced products of a single bovine gene.
Collectively, these sequences were found to encode twelve of the pituitary GGF peptides.
To obtain full-length cDNA clones, we screened libraries prepared from bovine posterior pituitary, human fetal brain, human brain stem and rat pituitary.
We identified two bovine posterior pituitary cDNAs (GGFBPP4 and GGFBPP5), three human cDNAs, including one from fetal brain (GGFHFB1) and two from brain stem (GGFHBS5 and GGFHBS14), and one rat pituitary cDNA (GGFRP3).
The deduced amino-acid sequences of three full-length clones, GGFHBS5, GGFHFB1 and GGFBPP5 are shown in Fig. 1 a.
The latter two clones are homologous structures derived from human and bovine sources, respectively, and their deduced sequences are 92% identical.
Although GGFHBS5 and GGFHFB1 both contain five common coding segments, these clones commence with distinct N-terminal coding segments designated 1 or 2.
Transcription of these two mRNAs is probably initiated at two distinct promoters.
Untranslated sequences upstream of the coding regions 1 and 2 were found to be unrelated, and attempts to identify transcripts that contain linked 1 and 2 sequences by library screening or through RT-PCR experiments were unsuccessful (data not shown).
But as the 5' ends of these transcripts have not been mapped, we cannot rule out the possibility that transcription is initiated from a single site and that the variability is generated through differential splicing alone.
Fifteen bovine peptide sequences (Table 1) have been mapped within these three deduced bovine and human protein sequences.
Segment 1 encodes six of the peptides, all of which are unique to GGF-II.
In fact, all but one of the new peptide sequences obtained in the analysis of GGF-II have been accounted for within the predicted GGFHBS5 protein sequence.
This correlation of the GGFHBS5 clone with GGF-II activity is supported by estimates of the deglycosylated size (45K) of GGF-II (A.D.J.G. et al.,manuscript submitted), which is roughly the predicted size of the protein encoded by GGFHBS5.
The deduced protein sequences reveal an extended hydrophobic stretch located in coding segment 1, near the N terminus of GGFHBS5.
Positions of the cysteines indicated in Fig. 1 a imply similarity to several known superfamilies of proteins.
The pattern of six cysteines encoded in segments 6 and 8 matches that of an epidermal growth factor (EGF) -like motif.
Coding segments 3 and 4 contain a pair of cysteines and other landmark residues conserved in members of the C-2 immunoglobulin superfamily.
Most significantly, an interesting similarity to the human basement membrane heparan sulphate proteoglycan core protein was detected.
The peptide sequence ADSGEY, which is located next to the second cysteine of the C-2 immunoglobulin fold in these GGFs, occurs in nine of the twenty-two C-2 repeats found in that basal lamina protein.
Finally, juxtaposition of cysteines 3 and 4 (Cys 245 and Cys248) in segment 1 may imply a kringle-type folding pattern for the N terminus.
Alternatively, these cysteine residues could participate in intermolecular disulphide bonds.
While these studies were being completed, five different cDNAs encoding several putative ligands of the p185 erbB2  receptor tyrosine kinase were cloned and characterized.
Comparison of our GGF clones with these sequences reveals that the glial growth factors and those ligands, namely the neu differentiation factor (NDF) and the heregulins, are products of the same gene.
Heregulin β 3 (ref. 24) is identical to GGFHFB1, but GGFHBS5 is a new structure.
In comparing the deduced sequences of the two human GGF cDNA clones isolated from tissue sources (GGFHBS5 and GGFHFB1), we have confirmed the sequence variation noted between α- and β -heregulins (position 38 in GGFHFB1).
This residue is therefore probably polymorphic in the human population.
To understand the structure of specific parts of the GGF gene most relevant to the mRNAs that we have identified, we analysed sequences from two bovine genomic DNAs containing coding segments 1, 3 and 4.
DNA sequences extending across these three coding regions have been determined, and these data showed that the coding segments 1, 3 and 4 each represent exons in the bovine genome.
Inspection of the intron/exon junction sequences (Fig. 1 b ) obtained in the analyses of these three exons has shown that the different N termini of GGFHBS5 and GGFHFB1 (and the homologous bovine mRNAs) can be explained readily by alternative splicing.
Either exon 1 or coding segment 2 can splice with exon 3 to encode an alanine across the splice junction.
Secondly, only exon 3 can splice with exon 4 to encode a glycine across the splice junction and maintain the reading frame.
As the same alanine and glycine codons are present at these positions in both human and bovine cDNA sequences and because the human gene, where analysed (data not shown), has the same intron/exon boundaries, we suggest that these conclusions are applicable to the GGF gene structure and to the mRNA splicing patterns in both species.
The GGF gene has a mosaic structure, composed of at least 13 coding segments (representing a minimum number of exons) and at least two functional domains recognized in known superfamilies as already described.
The transcripts start with either coding segment 1 or segment 2; coding segments 1 and 5 are mutually exclusive.
With one exception, GGFBPP1, all of the mRNAs contain a core immunoglobulin-like fold and one EGF-like motif (segments 3, 4, 6, 7 or 3, 4, 6, 8).
Variations on these two central themes occur in both the 5' and 3' directions (Fig. 2) and contained within the core sequence is the optional segment 5.
Interestingly, the 3' end of GGFBPP1 differs significantly from all others: C-terminal coding sequences and the 3' untranslated sequences are transcribed by reading beyond exon 4 to a polyadenylation site in the following intron sequence (Fig. 1 c);this transcript encodes a protein that is truncated after the immunoglobulin-like domain.
We postulate that GGFBPP1 and/or a related transcript (containing segment 2 as an N-terminal coding segment instead of segment 1) may lack mitogenic activity.
By analogy, a splicing variant of the hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) gene produces a truncated protein, which is a natural antagonist of HGF.
Possibly this form of GGF could act as a natural antagonist by inhibiting an activity of the receptor, such as ligand binding, dimerization or kinase activation.
This suggestion is supported by studies that show that at least some of the activities of GGF (and related) gene products have been associated with expression of the EGF motif alone.
Although the three purified GGFs are products of one gene, specific assignment of a single mRNA to each protein is made difficult by the large number of alternatively spliced mRNA variants.
But as already noted, the predicted sequence and size of the protein encoded by GGFHBS5 make it a likely candidate to encode GGF-II.
We have therefore designated the product of this sequence as recombinant human (rh) GGF-II.
Activities of GGFs on cultured Schwann cells
We transiently expressed several cDNAs in mammalian cells, then assayed both cell lysates and conditioned medium in a Schwann cell proliferation assay.
We observed a twofold to fivefold stimulation of proliferation of Schwann cells treated with recombinant materials over background activity present in mock-transfected host cells (Table 2).
The mitogenic activity of the GGFHFB1-encoded protein was detected within lysates derived from transfected cells and was not detected in conditioned medium.
Similar results to GGFHFB1 were obtained with the bovine cDNA clone GGFBPP5 (data not shown).
In view of the sequence identity of GGFHFB1 and heregulin β 3, the lack of detectable secreted activity was not surprising.
In contrast to the other heregulins, biologically active (p185 erbB2 receptor tyrosine kinase activation) heregulin β 3 is not detected in conditioned medium from transiently expressing COS cells.
Here, only recombinant human GGF-II (from GGFHBS5) is secreted at significant levels into conditioned medium.
To investigate this ability of different recombinant GGFs to be secreted, we determined for the two human cDNA clones the distribution of total expressed GGF (Schwann cell mitogenic) activity between cell lysate and conditioned medium after transient mammalian transfections (Table 2).
Most (87%) of the mitogenic activity expressed in GGFHBS5 transfections was present in the conditioned medium.
In contrast, we did not detect significant amounts (over mock transfected control samples) of activity in conditioned medium from the GGFHFB1 transfection.
Co-transfection and parallel transfection experiments using a non-secreted marker protein (β -galactosidase plasmid) confirmed that GGF activity in conditioned medium results from secretion and not simply from cell lysis or leakage.
As all three recombinant GGFs terminate in the ectodomain, the ability of recombinant GGF-II to be secreted is presumably mediated through the N-terminal hydrophobic stretch encoded by segment 1.
It seems less likely that the other major structural differences between GGFHBS5 and GGFHFB1 would influence secretion.
As coding segments 2 and 5 are either present (in heregulins α, β1, β2 and NDF) or absent (from GGFHBS5) in these secreted (and released) recombinant proteins, these regions apparently are not involved in regulating secretion.
Receptor tyrosine kinase activation
Many peptide growth factors mediate mitogenic responses as a result of activation of receptor tyrosine kinases.
The HER-2/neu oncogene encodes a receptor tyrosine kinase, p185 erbB2  (ref. 32), which is structurally related to the EGF receptor and to erbB3 (ref. 34).
Additionally, p185 erbB2  is expressed on the surface of Schwann cells and is upregulated during wallerian degeneration and also by exposure to forskolin, which potentiates the mitogenic response to GGF.
As the recombinant GGFs described here and several putative p185 erbB2  ligands are products of the same gene, we reasoned that bovine pituitary GGFs and rhGGF-II might activate a p185 receptor tyrosine kinase (perhaps erbB2) on Schwann cells.
Therefore we analysed tyrosine phosphorylation of Schwann cell protein by western blotting (Fig. 3).
This demonstrated that Schwann cells treated with either native or recombinant GGFs phosphorylated (on tyrosine) a protein of 185K.
A simple hypothesis that unifies these observations is that GGF-II (or other GGFs) stimulates Schwann cells to divide by activating the tyrosine kinase of p185 erbB2 or a closely related subtype of that receptor.
Tissue-specific expression
Because glial growth factors could be involved in the development of the peripheral nervous system, we have localized, by preliminary in situ hybridization experiments, the sites of GGF transcription in the developing rodent nervous system (Fig. 4).
Sections of mouse embryos from E11 to E15 were labelled with probes derived from the common EGF-like region of the GGF gene.
The first detectable  expression of GGF mRNA was in the nervous system, beginning at embryonic day (E) 10.5 to 11.
The highest levels of GGF mRNA are in the spinal cord (Fig. 4 a)in the ventral region, coincident with the position of newly differentiated motor neurons.
In addition, high levels of GGF mRNA are expressed in dorsal root ganglia (Fig. 4 a).
The region of the dorsal root ganglion nearest to the spinal cord, the boundary cap region and the peripheral nerve, which contains non-neuronal satellite cells and primitive Schwann cells, do not express GGF mRNA.
We therefore suggest that GGF mRNA is localized to neuronal cells present in the ganglion.
The pattern of expression in the spinal cord and dorsal root ganglia is maintained at later stages of development (Fig. 4 b, c).
In E13 embryos, the dorsolateral migration of visceral motor neurons is detected as a small cluster of cells expressing GGF mRNA dorsolateral to the ventral motor column (Fig. 4 c).
Both somatic and visceral motor neurons seem to express GGF mRNA.
GGF mRNA is also expressed in cranial sensory ganglia and in the embryonic brain (Fig. 4 d-f).
Prominent sites of GGF mRNA expression at E11-E13 include the trigeminal ganglion (Fig. 4 e)and other primary motor neuron groups, such as those in the oculomotor nucleus of the midbrain (Fig. 4 d)and in the region of newly differentiated neurons in the diencephalon (Fig. 4 f).
Other regions of the forebrain, including the retina (Fig. 4 e)and telencephalon (Fig. 4 f)do not express detectable levels of GGF mRNA at this stage of development.
Discussion
Using peptide sequence information derived from purified bovine glial growth factors, we have isolated several clones that encode Schwann cell mitogenic activities.
The group of proteins encoded by these transcripts includes the three described glial growth factors (ref. 22, and A.D.J.G. et al.,manuscript submitted) and several proteins (heregulins and Neu differentiation factor) that have various activities on cultured breast tumour cells.
The heregulins and NDF are specific activators of the p185 erbB2 receptor and rhGGF-II activates the phosphorylation of a Schwann cell protein that is similar in size to p185 erbB2 .
Based on several lines of evidence, including the data presented here, we suggest that various p185 erbB2 ligands, such as the GGFs, are important in development, regeneration and tumour formation in the nervous system.
A critical stage in the development of the peripheral nervous system is the projection of axons to their targets, the ensheathment of these axons and their subsequent myelination by Schwann cells.
Aspects of the expression of the GGF gene presented here suggest that proteins encoded by this gene have important functions in these events.
The two cell types that express GGF mRNA at the highest levels are motor neurons and primary sensory neurons.
At later stages of embryonic development, other differentiated neurons in the spinal cord also express low levels of GGF mRNA.
As axons of central neurons, dorsal root ganglia and sympathetic ganglia can induce proliferation of Schwann cells in vitro,we suggest that GGF gene products probably support the postnatal proliferation of Schwann cells in vivo .
The GGFs may also influence other events such as Schwann cell migration, ensheathment and myelination.
The recent report that acetylcholine-receptor-inducing activity (ARIA) is associated with the product of the same gene also implicates neuronally produced GGFs in later developmental events in the peripheral nervous system, specifically the formation of the neuromuscular junction.
Many features of regeneration in the peripheral nervous system recapitulate development.
Following injury and wallerian degeneration, axons regrow and reinnervate their targets.
Here also, various Schwann cell functions essential for regeneration can be regulated by GGF gene products.
Several lines of evidence point to specific components of the peripheral nerve environment that support regeneration.
These components include the basal lamina as well as the trophic factors released by neurons and Schwann cells following injury.
Several forms of the GGF (and related) proteins could be involved as normally secreted, or injury-released, activities that regulate the number of Schwann cells and their gene activity.
Neuronal membrane-bound forms might function only in close association with target Schwann cells or may be proteolytically clipped and released.
A membrane-associated Schwann cell mitogen extracted from neurites of dorsal root ganglia has been described: this mitogen could be a membrane bound form of GGF.
Some GGF variants might interact with basal lamina, matrix proteins, or with carrier proteins through specific domains such as the immunoglobulin-like domain.
Because the glial growth factors and specific activators of the p185 erbB2 receptor are encoded by the same gene, we suggest that the formation of tumours derived from Schwann cells, and perhaps from other glial sources, is regulated by the supply of glial growth factors and by the activity of the p185 erbB2  receptor tyrosine kinase.
For example, several tumours of glial cell origin produce GGF-like activities.
Moreover, glial tumours express p185 erbB2 (refs 43, 44), a candidate receptor for these proteins that is also associated with adenocarcinoma formation.
Some GGFs might also inhibit Schwann cell proliferation, for example the isoform represented in part by the splicing pattern of GGFBPP1.
We propose here a name for the gene we have partly described, and for the protein products (GGFs, NDF, ARIA, heregulins) derived from it.
Based on the activation by these proteins of the receptor encoded by neu,the neuronal pattern of in vivo expression, and the names already given to these proteins (Neu differentiation factor and heregulins), we name the gene neuregulin and refer to the proteins collectively as the neuregulins.
Our findings support the concept that the GGFs and other neuregulins have important functions in the paracrine and autocrine mechanisms that are fundamental to normal development and regeneration in the nervous system and in tumour formation.
Analysis of development and regeneration of peripheral nerve tissue using isoform-specific molecular probes should further the understanding of the function of the different forms of GGF.
It seems that some of these proteins might have a significant part to play in the treatment of nerve injury, neuropathies and tumours of glial cell origin.
Protein sequences were obtained from proteolytic digests of GGF-I, GGF-II and GGF-III, purified as described (A.D.J.G. et al.,manuscripts in preparation).
The proteases were trypsin, protease V8 (V8), and Achromobacter lyticus lysylendopeptidase (Lysyl).
N-terminal lysine residues were assumed to be present in lysylendopeptidase digests because of the high specificity of this enzyme.
Peptide was completely sequenced.
Proteins were digested directly, or after reduction, alkylation and desalting (), or after reduction and purification by gel electrophoresis ().
Gel-purified GGF-III was digested directly in the excised gel slice (J.H., unpublished results) and GGF-II was electroeluted before digestion.
Peptides from these digests were separated by reverse phase or tandem ion exchange-reverse phase HPLC.
Peaks detected by a diode array were sequenced by a modified automated pulsed liquid Edman system.
Cysteine residues in the GGF-III digests were only identified later by recognition of a phenylthiohydantoin-cysteine derivative (N.T., unpublished results).
Schwann cell mitogenic activity was measured in quadruplicate and the level of [125 I]uridine incorporation associated with mock-transfected samples (mean plus one standard derivation) was subtracted from the activity (mean minus one standard derivation) in the cell lysate and in the conditioned medium to calculate total GGF activity in each sample.
Total volumes were 150μl for lysate samples and 7ml for conditioned medium samples.
Expression from all GGF transfections was judged to be comparable by northern blot analysis of RNA.
ND, not detected.
β- Galactosidase (β- gal) co-transfections were analysed by a colorimetric assay (Promega), in which 1 unit β- galactosidase activity is represented by one absorbance unit at 410nm.
The value from a mock-transfected sample was subtracted to calculate the distribution of activity.
Mitogenic responses of cultured Schwann cells were measured in the presence of 5μM forskolin after an 18–24h exposure to materials obtained from transfected or mock-transfected cos cells.
cDNAs (Fig. 1) were cloned into pcDL-SR α 296 (ref. 50), and COS-7 cells were transfected in 100-mm dishes by the DEAE-dextran method.
Cell lysates or conditioned media were collected at 3 or 4 days post-transfection.
To prepare lysates, cell monolayers were washed with PBS, scraped from the dishes, and lysed by three freeze-thaw cycles in 150μl 0.25M Tris-HCl, pH8.
Cell debris was pelleted and the supernatant recovered.
Conditioned media samples (7ml) were collected, then concentrated and buffer exchanged with 10mM Tris, pH7.4 using Centriprep-10 and Centricon-10 units as described by the manufacturers (Amicon, Beverly, MA).
Rat sciatic nerve Schwann cells were assayed for incorporation of DNA synthesis precursors, as described.
FIG. 1
a,
Deduced sequences of three human and bovine glial growth factor clones.
Sequences from the human brain stem cDNA clone GGFHBS5 (top), the human fetal brain cDNA clone GGFHFB1 (middle) and the bovine posterior pituitary cDNA clone GGFBPP5 (bottom; only differences from human sequence) are shown.
The boundaries (▾) of coding segments (1–6, 8, 9, bold face; see also Fig. 2) are designated, as are the positions (overline) of bovine GGF peptides listed in Table 1.
Discrepancies between the deduced amino-acid sequence in this figure and peptide sequences in Table 1 can be ascribed to difficulties in the assignment of some derivatized amino acids, or due to divergence of bovine and human coding sequences.
Coding segments absent from GGFHBS5 are shown as dotted lines; segments of identity between GGFHBS5 and GGFHFB1 are shown as a solid line.
A hydrophobic stretch (double underline) is indicated near the N terminus.
Cysteine residues are indicated that belong to putative kringle-like (○), immunoglobulin-like () and epidermal growth factor-like (○) folds.
Sites of potential covalent modification include N-terminal myristylation (), and N- linked (––) or O- linked (dashed line) carbohydrate attachment.
Accession numbers are L12259–61.
b,
Bovine gene sequences at intron/exon boundaries.
Splice junction sequences are shown from three bovine exons (1,3 and 4) and from the cDNA sequence in coding segment 2 of GGFBPP5 (a).
Exon sequences (upper-case letters), amino-acid sequences (three-letter code) and intron sequences (lower-case letters) are shown.
Despite the absence of genomic sequence for coding segment 2, the intron/exon boundaries indicated account for all of the nucleotides in this region of the three cDNA clones shown in a. c,GGFBPP1 encodes a truncated protein.
Nucleotide and deduced amino-acid sequences of two bovine cDNAs, GGFBPP1 and GGFBPP5, are shown in the areas of exon 4 and coding region 5.
The 3' end of GGFBPP1 includes genomic sequence (lower-case letters) from the adjoining intron, which is spliced out of all other transcripts (Fig. 2).
A canonical polyadenylation sequence (underlined) is followed by a 22-nucleotide poly (A) tail.
METHODS.
A set of ten overlapping degenerate probes representing bovine GGF-II peptide 12 were radiolabelled and used to screen a bovine genomic library (Stratagene).
One genomic DNA hybridized to two probes.
Sequences that encode GGF peptides were extended by PCR amplification of RNA prepared from frozen bovine tissue (Pelfreeze) according to ref. 46.
Polyadenylated RNA was selected and converted to cDNA (Perkin Elmer PCR/RNA kit).
Amplification was by RACE reaction or as an anchored PCR reaction.
Specific amplification products detected on Southern blots with a radiolabelled internal probe were subcloned and sequenced.
Fragments from these cDNAs and unique oligonucleotides were radiolabelled and used for probing cDNA libraries constructed in the λ Zap II vector (Stratagene) by standard techniques, or were purchased from Clonetech and Stratagene.
FIG. 2 The GGF gene and its products.
The figure (5' to 3', left to right) represents a composite of our knowledge of the GGF gene based on sequence analysis of 14 different mammalian mRNAs and on partial characterization of the bovine gene structure.
Recognizable domains include a hydrophobic region (shown as a deleted H 2 O symbol), a putative kringle-like fold, an immunoglobulin-like fold (lg), a cluster of carbohydrate attachment sites (glyco), an EGF-like motif (EGF), a membrane-spanning α- helical segment (TM) and a cytoplasmic extension.
Coding sequences are divided into segments by comparing the structures of the known mRNAs.
Coding segments 1, 3 and 4 have been characterized as exons (Fig. 1b).
Genomic mapping has yet to resolve the order of coding segments 1 and 2, or 9 and 10; these are assigned tentatively as shown.
Based on nucleotide sequence and amino-acid sequence comparisons, coding segments 7 and 8 seem to represent a partial internal gene duplication.
Their relative order (5' to 3') was determined from the analysis of bovine PCR product GGFBPP2, which probably represents an aberrant splicing pattern.
Approximate locations of fifteen GGF peptides are indicated (see Fig. 1 and Table 1 for details).
The mRNAs represent nine distinct splicing patterns and are grouped according to the sources used for isolation of cDNA clones (GGFBPP4, 5, GGFHBS5, 14, GGFHFB1, GGFRP3) and of PCR products (GGFBPP1–3) as described in Fig. 1; four heregulin clones (HRG α,HRG β1–3)were isolated from the human breast line MB-MDA-231 (ref. 23) and Neu differentiation factor (NDF) was cloned from the ras- transformed fibroblast cell line RAT-1J (ref. 24).
Partial cDNA clones are shown by dotted lines at the 5' end; translation termination codons are indicated by an asterisk.
FIG. 3 Tyrosine phosphorylation in Schwann cells treated with recombinant glial growth factors.
Rat sciatic nerve Schwann cells were treated for 15min at 37°C in the presence (+) or absence (-) of 5μM forskolin with serum-free medium (DMEM), partially purified bovine pituitary GGF I, II and III (native GGF), or with unconcentrated (1x) or 30-fold concentrated (30x) conditioned medium (20μl added to 200μl culture medium) obtained after transient expression (or mock-transfection) of GGFHBS5.
METHODS.
Tyrosine phosphorylation was assayed by western blotting as described, using precast 4–12% gradient gels (Novex, San Diego).
Membranes were blocked in 4% bovine serum albumin/1% ovalbumin in Tris-buffered saline containing 0.05% Tween-20, pH7.5 (TBST), for a minimum of 2h before incubating with an 125 I-labelled monoclonal antibody against  phosphotyrosine (ICN, Irvine, CA) for 2h.
Blots were washed in TBST and visualized by  autoradiography .
Protein size standards are myosin (200K), phosphorylase b (97K), bovine serum albumin (63K), ovalbumin (46K), carbonic anhydrase (30K), trypsin inhibitor (21K) and lysozyme (14K).
FIG. 4 Localization of GGF mRNA by in situ hybridization histochemistry.
a,
Dark-field micrograph showing a section through the caudal region of an E11 embryo.
Silver grains are concentrated in the ventral region of the spinal cord, which is consistent with the position of motor neuron cell bodies (mn), and in dorsal root ganglia (drg).
Non-neural tissues do not express detectable GGF mRNA.
b and c,
Dark-field micrographs of sections through E13 mouse embryos showing high GGF expression in the motor columns of the spinal cord and the dorsal root ganglia.
Low levels of hybridization are also detectable in other regions of the spinal cord.
In addition, a low level of hybridization is detectable in the region forming sympathetic ganglia (sg).
d,
Dark-field micrograph showing expression of GGF mRNA in the region of the oculomotor neurons (mn) in the ventral midbrain.
e,
Dark-field micrograph showing expression of GGF mRNA in the trigeminal ganglion (tg) in an E11 mouse embryo.
The retina (r) does not express detectable GGF mRNA.
f,
Dark-field micrograph of a hybridization of an E11 mouse embryo showing hybridization to cells in the marginal zone of the diencephalon (d).
Telencephalic regions (t) are negative at this stage.
All sections are counterstained with cresyl violet.
Scale bar, 200μM in a-d;250μM in e and f.
METHODS.
The analysis was done as described in ref. 49, with minor modifications; mice and rats gave essentially similar results.
Mouse embryos were fixed by immersion for 2–3h in 4% paraformaldehyde in 0.1M phosphate-buffered saline (PBS).
Tissue was cryoprotected in PBS containing 20% sucrose at 4°C overnight, frozen in OTC Tissue-Tek slides, and 10–12μm paraffin sections cut and thaw-mounted onto slides coated with gelatin and poly-L-lysine.
A single-stranded RNA probe (specific activity, 0.5–1.0x10 9 c.p.m. perμg RNA) was derived from rat cDNA clone GGFRP3 (Fig. 2).
The specificity of hybridization was tested using other RNA probes from unrelated transcripts under identical conditions.
The spectrum of cosmological density fluctuations and nature of dark matter
A. N. Taylor & M. Rowan-Robinson
COSMIC structure is thought to have arisen by the gravitational amplification of small density fluctuations in the early Universe.
The evolution of fluctuations with specified magnitude and spectrum is controlled by a few fundamental parameters: the cosmic density, the cosmological constant , and the relative contributions of radiation and of dark and visible matter to the density of the Universe.
Maps and statistical descriptions of the large-scale distribution of galaxies, from the QDOT IRAS redshift survey, along with the COBE measurements of the microwave background fluctuations have recently transformed our understanding of large-scale structure, for which the growth of fluctuations is linear and well understood.
These two sets of data effectively determine the density fluctuation spectrum in the present Universe on scales from 10 to 1,000Mpc.
Here we examine an array of structure formation models, and show that most are ruled out by the COBE and QDOT observations.
We find only one completely satisfactory model, in which the Universe has density , with 69% in the form of cold dark matter, 30% provided by hot dark matter in the form of a stable neutrino with mass 7.5eV, and 1% baryonic.
Certain ‘grand unified theories’ may provide a physical basis for such hybrid models.
A Hubble constant of 50kms -1 Mpc -1 is preferred to one of 100.
On large angular scales, temperature fluctuations in the cosmic microwave background radiation (CMBR) are produced by the Sachs-Wolfe effect at the end of recombination.
Photons, no longer coupled to matter by Thomson scattering, climb out of the potential wells produced by the mass fluctuations, resulting in small temperature anisotropies in the surface of last scattering.
The predicted correlation function of temperature inhomogeneities can be expressed in terms of the power spectrum of density fluctuations as   where C l  is the angular power spectrum of temperature fluctuations and P (k,)is the power spectrum of density fluctuations at the present epoch.
We assume both statistically isotropic and homogeneous perturbations.
It is generally, and reasonably, assumed that the primordial density fluctuation spectrum is well approximated by a power law,P(k)  k n  (where k is the comoving wavenumber).
 is a filter function representing smearing due to a finite beam size, and  is the conformal time, where a(t) is the cosmological scale factor.
In the matter-dominated regime,(where z is redshift).
The Hubble radius is defined as  formula; and j l  (x)are the Legendre polynomial and spherical Bessel functions of order l , respectively.
We adopt the convention .
Angular scales, on the microwave background can be related to linear scales,λ,at the present epoch by .
The COBE satellite is sensitive to scales , corresponding to fluctuations on scales  at the present.
At recombination these scales were larger than the Hubble radius, and because microphysical processes can act only on scales less than the Hubble radius, these fluctuations must have been produced by the Sachs-Wolfe effect.
The subsequent growth of these perturbations is linear, so they have retained the imprint of the primordial perturbations from their epoch of formation.
In the context of inflationary scenarios this formation takes place at a time  (refs 14, 15).
Post-recombination reionization could also produce fluctuations in the CMBR, but would lead to fluctuations larger than observational limits on small scales (but see Fukugita and Kawasaki who discuss reionization in unstable neutrino models).
On smaller scales,, the shape of the fluctuation spectra is determined by the physics of the matter and radiation components of the Universe, introducing characteristic length scales into the power-law spectrum, which should be reflected in the distribution of galaxies today.
Defining the relative fluctuations in mass density as  where  is the mean mass density of the Universe, we can relate the variance,, of mass-density fluctuations on a scale R to the power spectrum by Rayleigh's theorem  where  is the Fourier transform of a window function on a scale R .
As it is not obvious that fluctuations in the galaxy distribution should exactly match those of the mass density field (for example, if galaxies form at the peaks of the mass-density field they will be more correlated than the mass), we allow the variance of the two distributions to vary on large scales by the square of a bias factor,b , defined as 
Finally, on intermediate scales () the power spectrum can be probed by the large-scale velocity field generated purely by the self-gravitation of the density field.
Here the variance in velocity fluctuations on a scale R is related to the power spectrum by  where  is the ratio of the rate of growth of fluctuations compared with the expansion rate.
It is possible to produce velocity fields by nongravitational processes, but the observed agreement between the amplitudes of perturbations in the CMBR, galaxy and velocity fields supports the gravitational instability theory.
To place constraints on the power spectrum, and hence on fundamental parameters, we shall use data on clustering in the range , and constraints placed on the mass density of the Universe and linear bias parameter by the distribution of IRAS galaxies.
We convert the data to a quantity related to the power spectrum at the present epoch, the fractional variance in density per ln k (refs 20, 21)
In Fig. 1 we plot the square-root of this quantity for the QDOT redshift survey, correcting the results for redshift-space distortion.
We also show the variance in cells derived from cross-correlating the distribution of QDOT with its parent, the QIGC angular catalogue.
This requires no redshift corrections.
The data cover the range .
We have not attempted to include the two-dimensional angular correlation data for the APM galaxy survey or the covariance function data for radio galaxies because of uncertainty about the appropriate normalization.
Similarly, we can obtain an estimate for the power spectrum on scales  from bulk-flow studies.
In a spherical volume of radius , Bertschinger et al.
find a bulk flow of , and for a radius , a bulk flow of .
The bulk flow is defined by 
The velocity variance on these scales, can be estimated by assuming that it is equal to the squared bulk flow measured on this scale,.
Although far from satisfactory, this is the best estimate available for perturbations on these scales.
The COBE results now allow us to constrain the very-large-scale range of fluctuations.
The fractional variance in density per ln k is  where C 2 is the angular power spectrum for l =2 (equation (1)) and is related to the observed quadrupole by 
As the temperature fluctuations appear the same on all scales, the spectral index on these scales is constrained to be  (ref. 9), and we shall discuss only the asymptotically scale-invariant  form, originally introduced to explain galaxy clustering, and later shown to be a consequence of inflationary models.
Data points corresponding to the bulk-flow and COBE results are shown in Fig. 1.
The transformation of primordial spectra from radiation to matter domination and through recombination can be described by a transfer function,T k ,giving the post-recombination spectrum  where  is the initial epoch when perturbations were generated.
The form of T k  has been given for a variety of cosmological models in refs 19, 28.
In the absence of a theoretical prediction, the amplitude of the power spectrum of perturbations is fixed by observation, conventionally by normalizing the variance of linear perturbations on a scale where optical galaxies have unit variance, 8 h -1 Mpc.
Equation (3) then tells us that , where b 8 is the bias factor for optical galaxies on .
But given the complexity of galaxy formation processes and small-scale dynamics, it is doubtful whether this scale is securely in the linear regime.
The best recent estimates of the variance of perturbations on large scales come from the QDOT redshift survey.
Three dynamical tests now give similar values for the parameter , where b I is the linear bias factor for infrared selected galaxies, on a scale of .
Dipole studies, least-squares fitting of predicted and observed peculiar velocities and the analysis of the covariance tensor of reconstructed differential motions give , and , respectively.
These results support the  prediction of inflationary models with very little bias.
A similar result has been found by Strauss et al..
The variance of perturbations on a scale of  is then  (ref. 6), where we adopt .
We shall also assume that nucleosynthesis calculations imply , where , and where  b is the mass-density of baryonic matter.
We have calculated the power spectrum at the present epoch, using COBE, QDOT and the bulk-flow measurements, and compared it with a range of cosmological models:(1) adiabatic cold dark matter (CDM),(2) adiabatic hot dark matter (HDM, for one stable massive neutrino species),(3) warm dark matter,(4) isocurvature CDM,(5) texture plus CDM,(6) CDM plus vacuum energy density, and (7) CDM plus HDM (one stable neutrino species).
Each model was tested using a Hubble parameter of h =0.5 and h =1, and model (7) was tested over a range of neutrino masses.
The Sachs-Wolfe formula (equation (1)) for isocurvature perturbations is amplified by a factor of  6 (ref. 32), and the CMBR fluctuations for model (5) are estimated from ref. 31.
Our criterion for assessing the models is simple.
Having fixed the normalization, we require a good fit (using a  test) to the combined data for .
The COBE data for only two scales, the quadrupole and the r.m.s. fluctuations on , are included.
Most models are strongly ruled out by the poor  fit.
The models with lowest  are listed in Table 1 and several are illustrated in Fig. 1.
We can immediately rule out the adiabatic HDM model as it predicts insufficient structure on small scales, even taking into account nonlinear evolution.
The adiabatic warm dark matter with  fits the COBE fluctuations but predicts excessive galaxy fluctuations, requiring strong antibiasing, on small scales.
The isocurvature CDM model with  (Fig. 1 a ) is ruled out at the 99% level and exceeds the COBE fluctuations at the  level (compare with ref. 32).
Cosmic textures with CDM and  (Fig. 1 a ) is also ruled out at the 99% level and exceeds the COBE fluctuations at the  level.
The model with adiabatic CDM plus vacuum energy (), with  put forward to reconcile the angular correlation excess in the APM galaxy survey, requires an unphysical low bias factor () for consistency with the QDOT inferred velocity field data.
Although an acceptable  is obtained with this model (), if , it exceeds the COBE fluctuations at the  level (Fig. 1 b ).
Given that there is no physical reason for either the strong antibiasing () required on all scales, or for the non-zero value of , we do not consider this option further (but see ref. 35 for an alternative view).
The adiabatic CDM model with , is also shown in Fig. 1 a .
The fit to the COBE data is excellent.
Unfortunately it predicts far too much power on small scales so that a significant degree of antibiasing would be needed.
Such a model has been advocated by Carlberg et al.
and Couchman and Carlberg, who argue that increased mergers in cluster haloes on a scale  produced antibiasing.
More seriously for this model, it does not predict high enough values for the bulk flow on scales , by .
The most satisfactory fit to the data is for the hybrid model with CDM and three neutrino species, two massless and one massive (HDM).
We have not considered the case of three equally massive neutrinos because of the strong limits on the electron neutrino mass.
Figure 1 c shows the fit for two cases, with  (solid curve) and 0.1 (broken curve).
In both cases  and , with  and 0.89, respectively.
The  model gives an excellent fit to all the data, whereas the  case is marginally ruled out at the 99% level.
This improved fit over the pure CDM model is due to the additional ingredient of damping on small-scales by neutrino free-streaming.
The neutrino density parameter provides us with an estimate of the neutrino mass  with a  uncertainty of 92eV, well below the observational limits of 250keV for the μ- neutrino and 35MeV for the  -neutrino.
This model also gives an excellent fit to the shape of the APM angular correlation function,w ()(ref. 23).
Although the neutrinos provide 30% of the mass in this model, they are responsible for the fit on scales  30 h -1 Mpc.
It would be interesting to see whether other mechanisms, besides CDM, are capable of reconciling HDM with observations.
Provided that there has been no reionization, measurement of microwave background fluctuations on small angular scales (1') would help to characterize nonlinear processes responsible for galaxy formation and small-scale clustering.
After submitting this paper for publication we received a copy of the paper by M. Davis et al.
(preceding paper), which argues that a mixed hot and cold dark matter cosmology gives an excellent fit to galaxy clustering data.
FIG. 1
a,
Square root of the fractional variance in mass density per unit ln k (equation (5)) as a function of ln k .
All theoretical curves are normalized as described in the text.
Plots a and c show only the curves for .
The data points shown are for QDOT (, ref. 6; ○, refs 2, 3), the bulk-flow field (i) and the power spectrum extrapolated from the COBE quadrupole measurement, assuming a scale-invariant spectrum (○), with 1  error bars.
The models are:(solid line) the adiabatic CDM with  (dot-dashed line) the isocurvature CDM, model (the CMBR points for this model are a factor of 6 smaller than those plotted for the adiabatic model);(dotted line) the model with texture plus CDM,.
b,
As a , for the adiabatic model with CDM plus vacuum energy (),,,.
c,
As a , for:(solid line) the CDM plus HDM model with one species of stable massive neutrino,,,,;(broken line) as above, but with ,.
No evidence for variable duration of sympatry between the great spotted cuckoo and its magpie host
Jesus M. Zuñiga & Tomas Redondo
BROOD parasites and their hosts are thought to engage in a coevolutionary arms race in which parasitism selects for adaptive defences by the host (such as egg rejection), which in turn select for counter-adaptations by the parasite (such as egg mimicry).
Soler and Möller have tested whether the duration of coevolution (measured by the duration of sympatry at three different geographic areas) in a host-cuckoo system affected egg-rejection behaviour by hosts.
They found that the extent of both rejection and recognition of parasitic eggs covaried positively with the duration of sympatry.
Here we show that, in the absence of strong historical evidence, field data do not support the existence of variations in the duration of sympatry at the two areas where the distributional ranges of the cuckoo and its hosts overlap.
The reported differences in egg rejection by hosts might alternatively reflect flexible behavioural responses to the presence of the adult parasite near the nest.
Brood parasitic birds are becoming favoured examples in studies of coevolution.
Experiment has shown that mimicry in cuckoo eggs has evolved as a counter-adaptation to egg discrimination by hosts, which in turn evolved as a behavioural defence against parasitism.
Some have tested host responses towards real or model cuckoo eggs with different degrees of mimicry in areas where the host is sympatric with the parasite and in areas where the host has (presumably) never been parasitized.
This work found that rejection rates were lower by hosts in allopatry.
In addition, hosts in sympatry were less likely to reject a mimetic model egg than a non-mimetic one.
Recently Soler and Möller provided a putative example of coevolution in action.
They claimed that rejection of eggs of the great spotted cuckoo Clamator glandarius by magpie Pica pica hosts varied according to the duration of sympatry.
In a population of presumed ancient sympatry (in Santa Fe, Spain), magpies readily rejected both mimetic and non-mimetic eggs; in an area of presumed recent sympatry (Guadix, Spain), 60km away from Santa Fe, magpies were less discriminating, particularly of mimetic eggs; and in allopatry (Uppsala, Sweden), magpies showed no rejection at all.
The key comparison here involves the areas of sympatry, which allows us to catch a glimpse of the dynamics of evolution and to test the view that cuckoos and hosts are engaged in a coevolutionary arms race, with cuckoos being one step ahead in areas of recent sympatry.
Soler argued that the higher altitude of the Guadix area (900–1100m above sea level) had prevented cuckoos from colonizing it in the past, as the species seems to favour lowland below 500m (but see ref. 9).
However cuckoos are very abundant in the Santa Fe area, which is 700–800m above sea level.
We collected data on cuckoo parasitism from the Guadix area during 1982–1984, and from the Santa Fe area during 1985 and 1989–1991.
Despite its altitude, local parasitization rates at Santa Fe were high (Table 1), actually among the highest ever recorded for any species of parasitic cuckoo.
In the absence of detailed historical information other than a claim made by local hunters that great spotted cuckoos were absent from Guadix until 1962 (ref. 8), Soler and Möller assumed that cuckoos had only recently colonized the Guadix area.
Apparently, this conclusion is based on the fact that cuckoos were expanding their host niche and exploiting magpie hosts more successfully in the area of recent sympatry.
They argued in favour of this possibility on the following grounds:(1) cuckoos ‘regularly parasitized three other corvid species in the Guadix area, whereas the magpie was the only commonly parasitized species in nearby areas of ancient sympatry, although all corvid species bred in both areas of recent and of ancient sympatry’.
This statement is erroneous.
No study has been conducted in other areas in Spain where the cuckoo is sympatric with several potential hosts, and no corvids other than magpies have been observed to breed at Sante Fe.
In fact, when describing the Santa Fe area, Soler explicitly states that ‘only magpies nest in this area’.
(2)‘The number of great spotted cuckoos laying in each host nest was larger at Guadix than in other areas’.
Although Soler did not provide any comparative evidence, our data show the opposite pattern.
The number of female cuckoos laying in each nest, and the proportion of nests containing eggs from more than one female, were both larger at Santa Fe (Table 1).
(3) In the putatively recently colonized area, ‘individual female great spotted cuckoos frequently laid more than one egg in each host nest’.
Our estimate of the percentage of multiparasitized nests containing more than one egg of the same female at Guadix is close to that given by Soler, but significantly lower than that obtained at Santa Fe (Table 1).
(4)‘The three [above]behavioural changes among great spotted cuckoos in the areas of recent sympatry all led to increased reproductive success of the parasite’.
As above, no comparative data were given but we found that cuckoos fledged more chicks both per nest and per egg laid at Santa Fe than at Guadix (Table 1).
Independently of whether such arguments have any bearing on the duration of sympatry between cuckoos and magpies, it is clear that with the larger sample sizes of our data, many of the trends oppose those claimed by Soler and Möller.
Even if Guadix is a recently occupied area, our data show that the supposed characteristics of a recent area do not apply.
In any case, the differences between the two areas are probably unrelated to duration of sympatry.
The occurrence of great spotted cuckoo parasitism on magpies was reported at Iznalloz (800–1,400m above sea level, 40km away from Guadix) as early as 1885 (ref. 10).
Differences between the two areas may simply reflect the fact that the density of cuckoos relative to that of their hosts is larger at Santa Fe than at Guadix (Table 1).
This could in turn explain why a higher proportion of experimental eggs were rejected at Santa Fe than at Guadix, because hosts are known to be more likely to reject alien eggs when they are alerted by encounters with the adult parasite in the vicinity of their nest.
Phenotypic flexibility might thus provide an alternative explanation for relatively low rates of rejection in allopatry found in other studies.
Nests were checked 2–6 times a week.
Four clutches where we suspected that hosts had ejected cuckoo eggs before we detected them (as judged by the damage of host eggs) were excluded from calculations of the number of cuckoo eggs per nest.
The number of cuckoo females laying in each host nest was determined on the basis of egg characteristics and laying dates.
Ten clutches where the number of females could not be accurately determined were excluded from analyses.
n , Number of nests;P , two-tailed probability levels in the comparison of proportions (Fisher's test) or means (Mann-Whitney test) between areas within studies; n.s., not significant.
Cooperative interaction between c- myc and bcl-2 proto-oncogenes
Abdallah Fanidi, Elizabeth A. Harrington & Gerard I. Evan
THE bcl -2 proto-oncogene is activated by translocation in a variety of B-lymphoid tumours and synergizes with the c- myc oncogene in tumour progression.
The mechanism of synergy is unclear but bcl-2 expression inhibits apoptosis, a property presumably pertinent to its proto-oncogenic mode of action.
We have shown that the c -myc gene is a potent inducer of apoptosis, in addition to its established role in mitogenesis.
Here we show that expression of the bcl -2 protein, Bcl-2, specifically abrogates c- myc -induced apoptosis without affecting the c- myc mitogenic function.
This provides a novel mechanism for oncogene cooperation, of potential importance both in carcinogenesis and in the evolution of drug resistance in tumours.
Rat-1 fibroblasts that constitutively express a chimaeric protein, comprising a full-length c-Myc polypeptide fused to part of the human oestrogen receptor (Rat-1/c-Myc-ER cells), show demonstrable c-Myc activity only in the presence of β- oestradiol.
Thus, in the absence of β -oestradiol, serum-deprived Rat-1/c-Myc-ER cells arrest in a stable G0-like state, whereas addition of β -oestradiol prevents arrest and induces rapid apoptotic death.
This apoptosis is dependent on c-Myc expression; its extent is proportional to the level of intracellular c-Myc protein, and it requires the same regions of the c-Myc protein as are required for co-transformation and autosuppression.
The role of c-Myc in apoptosis is not confined to fibroblasts, having also been described in haematopoietic cells.
To investigate the effect of bcl-2 expression on c-Myc-induced apoptosis, we infected Rat-1/c-Myc-ER cells with a retrovirus directing constitutive expression of human bcl-2α together with a puromycin-resistant marker.
Puromycin-resistant cells that expressed Bcl-2 protein (Rat-1/c-Myc-ER/Bcl-2 cells) were identified by immunoblotting (Fig. 1 a)and immunocytochemistry (data not shown) using anti-Bcl-2 monoclonal antibodies.
Proliferating Rat-1/c-Myc-ER/Bcl-2 fibroblasts and control cells were then assayed for c-Myc-induced apoptosis by microscopic inspection 48h after serum depletion.
Constitutive Bcl-2 expression effectively abolished c-Myc-induced apoptosis under these conditions (Fig. 1 b).
Essentially identical results were observed with 10 individual clones and one, clone 5, was the example used here.
To quantify more accurately the inhibition of c-Myc-induced apoptosis by Bcl-2, we caused Rat-1/c-Myc-ER and Rat-1/c-Myc-ER/Bcl-2 cells to arrest in phase G0 by serum depletion and then activated c-Myc by addition of β -oestradiol.
This induced the rapid onset of apoptosis which can be quantitated by time-lapse cinemicroscopy.
Time-lapse cinemicroscopy also enables each death to be confirmed as apoptotic: apoptosis is characterized by its extreme rapidity, taking about 30–60min to proceed through a diagnostic sequence of cytoplasmic blebbing, vesicularization and nuclear condensation.
Expression of Bcl-2 completely inhibits the onset of apoptosis in serum-deprived Rat-1 cells after c-Myc activation, as shown in Fig. 2.
It is important to determine whether Bcl-2 blocks c-Myc-induced proliferation as well as apoptosis: the synergy between c-Myc and Bcl-2 can easily be rationalized if Bcl-2 blocks only the apoptotic function of c-Myc and leaves its mitogenic activity unaffected.
We examined the mitotic rate of Rat-1/c-Myc-ER cells that were proliferating in low serum under the influence of β -oestradiol-activated c-Myc, with and without Bcl-2 expression.
A proportion of the cells without Bcl-2 died before undergoing division, as previously described, and thus could not be scored.
We excluded such cells from our analysis and studied 100 of the remaining cells, chosen at random, through their first divisions.
The results (Fig. 3) show that the mitotic rates of cells are similar, irrespective of Bcl-2 expression, demonstrating that Bcl-2 expression does not prevent cell proliferation.
Bcl-2 does not, therefore, inhibit all c-Myc functions but specifically blocks c-Myc-induced apoptosis.
Deregulated c-Myc expression induces the rapid onset of apoptosis in cells arrested by a variety of cytostatic and cytotoxic drugs.
Many primary tumours also respond to such drugs by initiating apoptosis and, because myc gene activation is so widespread in human tumours, we have suggested that this is also c-Myc-induced.
If we are correct, this implies that lesions in the apoptotic pathway, such as Bcl-2 activation, might contribute towards drug resistance in tumours.
We therefore investigated the effect of Bcl-2 expression on c-Myc-induced apoptosis in Rat-1/c-Myc-ER cells arrested either with thymidine, which causes a block in the S phase, or with the epipodophyllatoxin etoposide (VP16), a topoisomerase II inhibitor that arrests cells in S/G2 and is frequently used in cancer chemotherapy.
In both cases, Bcl-2 expression substantially delayed and reduced c-Myc-induced apoptosis (Fig. 4), effectively increasing the resistance of cells to each drug.
In neither case did Bcl-2 expression overcome the cytostatic effect of the drugs (data not shown).
Deregulated expression of c-Myc in tumour cells is extremely common, indicating that its acquisition may be essential during carcinogenesis.
But the potency with which c-Myc induces apoptosis suggests that deregulated c-Myc expression by itself is likely to be lethal because it kills any cell that encounters growth-limiting conditions, an almost invariable outcome in vivo.
In such a situation, any additional mutation that blocks apoptosis will strongly promote survival of the affected cell and so allow its continued proliferation, mutation and carcinogenic evolution.
Our results demonstrate that acquisition of constitutive Bcl-2 expression is an example of such a mutation.
Bcl-2 mitigates the apoptotic effects of deregulated c-Myc expression without affecting its ability to promote continuous cell growth, so providing a mechanistic basis for the oncogenic synergy between these two proto-oncogenes.
The interaction between c-Myc and Bcl-2 differs from the usual form of oncoprotein cooperation as observed between c-Myc and activated Ras in that, although c-Myc/Bcl-2 fibroblasts proliferate continuously in the absence of mitogens, they neither appear to be morphologically transformed nor to form foci in monolayer culture (Fig. 1).
The interaction between c-Myc and Bcl-2 thus represents a novel type of oncogene cooperation, undetectable by classical transformation-focus assays.
Further characterization of the growth and death of cells containing various combinations of activated c- myc, ras and bcl -2 oncogenes should provide insights as to how the various attributes of these three classes of oncogene interact.
The emergence of drug-resistant mutations in tumours reflects the fact that carcinogenesis is a continuous evolutionary process, often exacerbated by the increased genetic instability of cancer cells.
Our results indicate that, just as activated c-Myc expression may be important in determining the initial sensitivity of tumours to drugs, so Bcl-2 deregulation, by blocking programmed cell death, may lead to drug resistance.
This is a mechanism of drug resistance distinct from amplification and multidrug-resistance described previously.
The interaction between c-Myc and Bcl-2 thus represents a novel model for oncogene cooperation which has implications for the genesis and the progression of neoplastic disease.
FIG. 1 A,Determination of expression of Bcl-2 α protein by immunoblotting.
Lysates from control Rat-1/c-Myc-ER cells (lanes 1 and 2) and a representative Rat-1/c-Myc-ER/Bcl-2 clone (clone 5)(lanes 3 and 4) were fractionated on a 15% SDS-polyacrylamide gel, blotted onto nitrocellulose paper and probed with either mouse (Bcl-2/100; lanes 1 and 3) or a hamster (6C8; lanes 2 and 4) anti-Bcl-2 monoclonal antibodies.
B,Constitutive Bcl-2 expression prevents c-Myc-induced apoptosis in serum-deprived Rat-1 fibroblasts.
Various Rat-1-derived cell lines were transferred into medium containing 0.05% fetal calf serum either with or without 2μM β -oestradiol and observed after 48h.
a,
Rat-1/c-Myc-ER, no β -oestradiol (c-Myc inactive),
b,
Rat-1/c-Myc-ER plus β -oestradiol (c-Myc active),
c,
Rat-1/c-Myc-ER/Bcl-2, no β -oestradiol,
d,
Rat-1/c-Myc-ER/Bcl-2 plus β -oestradiol.
METHODS.
Production and maintenance of Rat-1 fibroblasts stably expressing the c-Myc-ER fusion protein and the defective c-Myc mutant protein  106–143c-Myc-ER have been described.
A retrovirus vector directing constitutive expression of Bcl-2 α was made by expressing a full-length bcl-2α complementary DNA in pBabe PURO.
Infectious ecotropic Bcl-2/PURO virus was prepared from culture supernatants of  E cells, transfected with the Bcl-2/PURO vector and this was used to infect Rat-1/c-Myc-ER cells.
Infected clones were selected in 5μgml -1 puromycin.
Immunoblotting of bulk cultures of puromycin-resistant cells was as described, using either the Bcl-2/100 mouse monoclonal antibody (gift from D. Y. Mason) or the 6C8 hamster monoclonal antibody (gift from S. J. Korsmeyer).
FIG. 2 Time-lapse cinemicroscopic quantitation of apoptosis in Rat-1 cells.
Rat-1 cells expressing either wild-type c-Myc-ER or the defective c-Myc mutant  106–143 fused to the human oestrogen receptor, and either with or without Bcl-2, were growth-arrested by culture in 0.05% fetal calf serum (FCS) for 48h.
Activation of c-Myc was by addition of β -oestradiol (2μM) to the culture medium, and cells were observed by time-lapse cinemicroscopy.
The cells did not reach confluence.
Apoptotic cell deaths were scored as described and cumulative deaths plotted against time.
Each field started with 95 cells and images were taken at a rate of 12 frames per hour.
FIG. 3 Time-lapse cinemicroscopic analysis of the effect of Bcl-2 expression on c-Myc-induced proliferation of Rat-1 cells.
Rat-1/c-Myc-ER and Rat-1/c-Myc-ER/Bcl-2 cells were cultured in 0.05% FCS containing 2μM β -oestradiol, and mitotic events observed by time-lapse cinemicroscopy at 12 frames per hour.
Cells that underwent apoptosis before division were excluded from the analysis.
Of the remaining cells, 95 were randomly picked and their fates followed.
Only first divisions in each lineage were counted to allow comparison between experiments.
Cumulative divisions are plotted against time.
FIG. 4 Constitutive Bcl-2 expression protects Rat-1/c-Myc cells from thymidine and VP16/etoposide-induced apoptotic cell death.
a,
Thymidine block.
Exponentially growing Rat-1/c-Myc-ER and Rat-1/c-Myc-ER/Bcl-2 cells were arrested in S phase by addition of 2mM thymidine to the growth medium for a period of 24h as  described .
c-Myc was then activated by addition of β -oestradiol to a final concentration of 2μM and the cells were monitored by time-lapse cinemicroscopy at a rate of 12 frames per hour.
Cumulative apoptotic deaths, of 100 cells of each type, are shown plotted against time.
b,
Etoposide/VP16 block.
Exponentially growing Rat-1/c-Myc-ER and Rat-1/c-Myc-ER/Bcl-2 cells in 10% FCS were incubated for 24h with 0.1μM etoposide/VP16 (Sigma).
Activation of c-Myc and cinemicroscopy are described in a .
Pulsed high-energy γ -rays from the radio pulsar PSR1706–44
D. J. Thompson, Z. Arzoumanian, D. L. Bertsch, K. T. S. Brazier, N. D'Amico, C. E. Fichtel, J. M. Fierro, R. C. Hartman, S. D. Hunter, S. Johnston, G. Kanbach, V. M. Kaspi, D. A. Kniffen, Y. C. Lin, A. G. Lyne, R. N. Manchester, J. R. Mattox, H. A. Mayer-Hasselwander, P. F. Michelson, C. v. Montigny, H. I. Nel, D. Nice, P. L. Nolan, K. Pinkau, H. Rothermel, E. J. Schneid, M. Sommer, P. Sreekumar & J. H. Taylor
OF the more than 500 known radio pulsars, only three have been detected as γ -ray sources.
Using the Energetic Gamma Ray Experiment Telescope (EGRET) on the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory satellite, we have detected pulsed γ -radiation, above 100MeV in energy, from a fourth radio pulsar, PSR1706–44.
Within the pulse period of 102ms, the γ -emission forms a single broad peak, in contrast to the two narrow peaks seen in the other high-energy γ -ray pulsars.
The emission mechanism in all cases is probably the same, the differences arising from the geometry of the magnetic and rotation axes and the line of sight.
In these pulsars,γ -ray emission accounts for as much as 1% of the total neutron star spin-down energy, much more than emerges at optical or radio frequencies, so study of this emission is important in understanding pulsar emission and evolution.
Following the SAS-2 and COS-B high-energy γ -ray observations of the Crab (0531+21) and Vela (0833–45) pulsars, searches were made for additional γ -ray pulsars.
No other positive results were then found, but calculations have indicated that γ -ray emission is likely from other rotation-powered pulsars.
PSR1509–58 has recently been seen at γ -ray energies below 2MeV by the Burst and Transient Source Experiment (BATSE) on the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory (GRO), and the high-energy γ -ray source Geminga (2CG195+04) has been found by EGRET to have periodic emission characteristic of an isolated pulsar.
EGRET has the conventional components used in high-energy γ -ray telescopes: an anticoincidence system to discriminate against charged particles, a spark chamber system with interspersed pair conversion material to determine the trajectories of the secondary electron-positron pair, a triggering telescope that detects the presence of charged particles with the correct direction of motion, and an energy-measuring device, which in the case of EGRET is a NaI(Tl) crystal.
The telescope covers energies from  20MeV to over 20GeV with more than an order of magnitude greater sensitivity than the SAS-2 or COS-B instruments, as well as improved resolution in energy, angle and timing measurements.
Because of the very low flux level of the high-energy γ -rays, observing periods are typically about 2 weeks.
From 12–26 July, 1991, EGRET viewed a region encompassing the Galactic Centre.
Because of its wide field of view, EGRET had good sensitivity in the direction of the γ -ray source identified by COS-B as 2CG342–02, and this source was readily visible in the EGRET data.
In addition to this primary observation, EGRET had three limited exposures to this region: 12–27 December, 1991, 19 March-2 April, 1992, and 28 April-7 May, 1992.
The source is detectable in all these observations.
The radio pulsar PSR1706–44 is positionally coincident with this source.
This pulsar was discovered in a search of the southern galactic plane (well after the end of the COS-B mission) using the Parkes radiotelescope at the relatively high frequency of 1,500MHz (ref. 15).
PSR1706–44 has a short period, 102.4ms, a rapid spin-down rate giving it a characteristic age of only 17,300 years and considerable timing noise (S.J., R.N.M., V.M.K., A.G.L. & N.D'A., manuscript in preparation).
The radio pulse is narrow, with a half-power width of 6ms or  6% of the period.
On the basis of its dispersion measure of 75.68cm -3 pc, its distance is  1.5kpc, about three times the distance to the Vela pulsar.
It is therefore plausible that this pulsar should be detectable as a γ -ray source; if its γ -ray luminosity is the same fraction of its total energy-loss rate as for the Vela pulsar, then it should be about a factor of 20 less bright than Vela.
PSR1706–44 is being monitored regularly as part of a coordinated program involving radioastronomers and the Compton GRO instrument teams.
Radio timing based on a series of radio observations made at Parkes, overlapping the times of the γ- ray observations, gives the following parameters: frequency f= 9.7610186961045Hz, frequency derivative  Julian day 2448658.5.
For all four observations,γ -rays from the direction of the source were selected within a cone of radius  with energy  in MeV, which reflects the energy-dependent angular resolution of the EGRET instrument.
Figure 1 shows the arrival times of γ -rays with energy above 500MeV folded using the specific radio parameters, after correction to the Solar System barycentre.
A broad pulse structure, with a width of  35% of the phase, was seen in the primary observation, and the phase plots of the secondary observations are consistent with that distribution in both phase and width.
The  value for the light curve in Fig. 1 is 127 for 19 degrees of freedom, giving a formal probability of chance occurrence of less than 10 -17 .
The H -test, an unbinned statistical method, gives a value of 98, which indicates that the formal probability (O. C. DeJager, personal communication) of this being a random distribution is 10 -17 .
Below 500MeV, the pulsed radiation is harder to recognize above the diffuse galactic radiation, and no pulsed emission is visible below 100MeV.
No statistically significant time structure is seen within the envelope of the pulse, although the shape suggests two wide pulses separated by 0.2 in phase.
This pulse shape is markedly different from those of the Crab, Vela and Geminga γ -ray pulsars, all of which show two narrow peaks with a separation of 0.4–0.5 period.
Figure 1 also shows the arrival time of the radio pulse, which occurs 0.22  0.02 phase before the leading edge of the γ -ray pulse.
This is a larger offset than seen for Vela, where the radio pulse leads the peak of the first γ -ray pulse by 0.126  0.006 phase.
Figure 2 shows a preliminary energy spectrum of the pulsed γ -radiation above 100MeV, based on the primary observation in July 1991.
Pulsed emission is seen to at least 5,000MeV.
The spectrum during this fraction 0.35 of the pulse period can be fitted with a power law  with  in MeV.
The energy scale factor, 622.4MeV, is chosen so that the statistical errors in the power law index and the overall normalization are uncorrelated.
This spectrum is considerably flatter than the pulsed spectrum seen from the Crab (ref. 19; and P.L.N. et al.,manuscript in preparation), which has a spectral index  -2.0.
The pulsed emission from Vela, although time-variable, has been seen to have a flat spectrum similar to that of PSR1706–44 during some observations (ref. 20; and G.K. et al.,manuscript in preparation).
The time-averaged spectrum has the same form as equation (1), but with a normalization of .
The time-averaged flux of PSR1706–44 above 100MeV is (1.0  0.3) x10 -6 photonscm -2 s -1 , where the quoted uncertainty includes both the statistics and an uncertainty from the spectral fitting.
Between 100 and 5,000MeV, the energy flux is (8.2  2.5) x10 -10 ergcm -2 s -1 .
For a distance of 1.5kpc and beaming into 3.4 steradian (an assumed value based on the pulse width), this represents 6.1x10 34 ergs -1 or about 1.8% of the spin-down energy loss of 3.4x10 36 ergs -1 , comparable to that seen in the Vela pulsar for similar assumptions.
Except for the shape of the light curve, therefore, the observed features of PSR1706–44 strongly resemble those of the Vela pulsar.
Gamma-ray emission from fast pulsars can be interpreted as radiation (curvature radiation, inverse Compton scattering or synchrotron radiation) from particles accelerated in the pulsar magnetosphere, either near the surface or in vacuum gaps in the outer magnetosphere.
The broad pulse seen for PSR1706–44 implies that the geometry of the spin axis and magnetic axis relative to the direction of the observer differs from that for the Crab, Vela or Geminga.
Future observations may reveal timing structure within the PSR1706–44 pulse which will clarify the geometry.
The phase diagram does not preclude the possibility of a double-pulse structure with a narrower separation than those seen for the Crab and Vela γ -ray pulsars.
FIG. 1 Gamma-ray phase plot (light curve) for PSR1706–44.
Arrival times of EGRET γ -rays above 500MeV were converted to pulsar phase using the radio period and period derivative.
The R in the figure shows the arrival time of the radio pulse relative to the γ -rays.
FIG. 2 Energy spectrum of PSR1706–44 during the pulsed phase (0.55–0.90 from Fig. 1).
The error bars shown are statistical only.
Lead isotope evidence for young trace element enrichment in the oceanic upper mantle
Alex N. Halliday, Gareth R. Davies, Der-Chuen Lee, Simone Tommasini, Cassi R. Paslick, J. Godfrey Fitton & Dodie E. James
ISOTOPIC heterogeneity in ocean island basalts has generally been ascribed to processes related to the long-term cycling of mantle material.
A recent study of Cameroon line lavas reported higher 208 Pb/ 204 Pb and 206 Pb/ 204 Pb ratios towards the continent/ocean boundary (c.o.b.), but no corresponding increase in 207 Pb/ 204 Pb, indicating large in situ fractionations of uranium and thorium relative to lead in the upper mantle  years ago.
Here we present neodymium, strontium and lead isotope data for a variety of central Atlantic islands, and show that similar offsets in lead isotope ratios are found in lavas from the islands of Madeira and Trinidade.
Like the Cameroon line c.o.b.
lavas, these lavas are characterized by high U/Pb and Ce/Pb, low K/U and are located in areas of old oceanic lithosphere.
But in contrast to the Cameroon line, the Madeira lavas are derived from an enriched MORB-type source with low 207 Pb/ 204 Pb and 87 Sr/ 86 Sr and high 143 Nd/ 144 Nd.
The lead isotope data can be explained if the U/Pb ratios in the sources are comparable to those observed for the lavas and the U/Pb fractionation occurred at the time of formation of the local oceanic lithosphere.
Although we do not have a satisfactory explanation for the U/Pb fractionation, it must have occurred at shallow depths in the mantle, near a spreading ridge; and the resulting enriched source regions have since remained fixed relative to the migrating lithosphere.
Isotopic compositions of continental intraplate mantle-derived magmas commonly vary as a function of lithospheric age.
Oceanic lithosphere, however, is young and effectively of uniform age relative to continental lithosphere.
As a consequence any isotopic effects generated by in situ decay are likely to be small compared with those inherited from asthenospheric heterogeneities.
The central Atlantic is an ideal location in which to study the relationships between the lithosphere and isotopic compositions in basalts because the range in lithospheric age is large, there are no recent subduction zones nearby and the area is well away from the effects of the Dupal anomaly in the Southern Hemisphere.
The locations of the main intraplate volcanic centres in the central Atlantic region are shown in Fig. 1.
The age of the adjacent oceanic lithosphere ranges from close to zero (Ascension) to  160Myr (Canary Islands).
New Nd, Sr and Pb isotope data, together with parent/daughter ratios for basaltic lavas, from several of these islands are presented in Table 1, and plotted in Fig. 2, along with previous data for a variety of other ocean island basalts (OIBs) and mid-ocean-ridge basalts (MORBs).
Details of the geology of the islands studied here can be found elsewhere (refs 8, 13–15, 20–24 and refs therein).
The least well known are Trinidade and Madeira.
Trinidade is a volcanic cone rising 5,500m above sea level and is dominated by rocks undersaturated in silica, in the form of pyroclastic deposits, domes, dykes and plugs, together with subordinate lava flows that include nephelinite, ankaratrite and phonolite, all of which are dated at  4Myr (ref. 21).
Madeira is the main island of an archipelago, and the rocks are dominated by alkaline olivine basalts and their differentiates (chiefly hawaiites and mugearites) that are unusually rich in Na, and have been dated at  3Myr (refs 22, 23).
The Nd and Sr isotopic compositions for Madeira, the Cameroon line and Trinidade, situated in areas of old lithosphere, are not significantly different from those for islands closer to the Mid-Atlantic Ridge such as the Azores, Ascension and St Helena (Fig. 2 a ).
For example, both Ascension and Madeira are characterized by very radiogenic Nd and unradiogenic Sr plotting within the MORB field, and the Cameroon line c.o.b.
samples show similarities to HIMU or Lo-Nd islands such as St Helena.
But although Madeira, Trinidade and the Cameroon line c.o.b.
show correlated variations in 208 Pb/ 204 Pb and 206 Pb/ 204 Pb and plot within the general MORB-OIB array (Fig. 2 b ), there is no correlation with 207 Pb/ 204 Pb.
Instead, these volcanic centres define fields that are displaced to the right of the array for other OIB and MORB in Fig. 2 c .
This is evidence of both extreme and young source enrichments in U and Th relative to Pb (ref. 7).
The shorter half-life of 235 U results in it having a much lower abundance at present relative to 238 U. Because U and Th are believed to have similar distribution coefficients during mantle melting, a large fractionation in U/Pb is associated with change of similar magnitude in Th/Pb.
The time-integrated effect of these fractionations in the recent past (say 100Myr ago) will be correlated changes in 206 Pb/ 204 Pb and 208 Pb/ 204 Pb, at relatively constant 207 Pb/ 204 Pb.
Because U and Th are more incompatible than Pb during mantle melting, limits can be placed on the time needed to generate the offsets shown in Fig. 2 c , given an upper limit for the source U/Pb ratio corresponding to the measured values for the lavas (Table 1).
The lavas of these three regions are characterized by unusually high measured U/Pb (Fig. 3 a ).
It is possible to achieve the largest offsets in Pb isotopic composition at Madeira with U/Pb as high as measured in the lavas in  130Myr, the age of the lithosphere (Fig. 2c ).
It is difficult, however, to explain these offsets with much lower U/Pb in the source and longer times, as this enhances the 207 Pb/ 204 Pb as well as the 206 Pb/ 204 Pb ratios.
A similar case was previously made for the source regions of the Cameroon line c.o.b..
We therefore interpret the isotope data for these two regions as indicating that the high U/Pb ratios of the lavas are also features of the source, with the age of U/Pb fractionation being comparable to the age of the lithosphere.
The similarity between modelled and measured U/Pb ratios indicates that there was only minor fractionation of U/Pb during the partial melting that produced the lavas, consistent with the very low mineral-melt partition coefficients that have been measured for U and Pb (refs 25, 26).
The Trinidade data display less pronounced offsets despite having high U/Pb, consistent with the younger age of the lithosphere at this location (Fig. 1).
But the measured U/Pb ratios are variable and not correlated with 206 Pb/ 204 Pb, implying some additional recent U/Pb fractionation, presumably associated with magma generation and differentiation.
The Pb isotope data for other islands located in areas of old lithosphere, Fernando de Noronha, Cape Verdes and the oceanic Cameroon line (Fig. 1), tend to be only slightly high in 206 Pb/ 204 Pb for a given 207 Pb/ 204 Pb (Fig. 2 c ), as expected given the lower average U/Pb ratios of lavas from these islands (Fig. 3 a ).
The respective portions of precursor mantle for Madeira and the Cameroon line c.o.b.
before their enrichment in trace elements were radically different from each other.
The Cameroon line basaltic magmas have OIB-like isotopic compositions and are thought to be derived by melting of a fossil plume, the head of which became fractionated in U/Pb about 125Myr ago.
In contrast, the Madeira basalts have 87 Sr/ 86 Sr,143 Nd/ 144 Nd and 207 Pb/ 204 Pb ratios that are similar to modern MORB (Fig. 2 a ), and among the most extreme yet measured for OIB.
Therefore, the most likely origin for the Madeira basalts is in upper-mantle MORB source material that was enriched  10 8 yr ago.
Clearly the trace-element enrichment process responsible for the offsets in Pb isotopic composition in Fig. 2 c is largely independent of the exact precursor material and the longer-term heterogeneity of the mantle.
The incompatible element ratio K/U is considered uniform in MORB, a feature that is thought to reflect similar bulk partition coefficients for K and U such that there is negligible fractionation during melting.
In contrast, U is generally considered significantly more incompatible than Pb during melting.
Therefore, if the degree of melting is such that U/Pb ratios of OIB reflect their source compositions, the K/U ratios must also do so, unless there are phases in the OIB source that selectively fractionate K from U. A similar argument can be made for Ce/Pb ratios.
Lavas from Ascension and the Azores, close to the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, have K/U ratios that are similar to average MORB (Fig. 3b ), whereas St Helena and centres from areas of old oceanic lithosphere have considerably lower ratios.
The centres in oldest lithosphere (100Myr) with higher average U/Pb also have lower average K/U, suggesting that the process that fractionates the former may also be responsible for fractionation of the latter.
Overall the average K/U and U/Pb ratios define a broad hyperbolic trend that may reflect mixing, but is more likely to indicate a process that fractionates both K and Pb relative to U (Fig. 3b ).
The centres with high U/Pb also have higher average Ce/Pb than most basalts (Fig. 3 c ) If the U/Pb ratios are representative of their sources and were fractionated at the time of formation of the oceanic lithosphere, this must also be true of the Ce/Pb ratios.
The average Nd isotopic compositions of central Atlantic OIB correlate with their respective average Sm/Nd (Fig. 3 d ), although the average Madeira composition lies away from the trend defined by the other islands.
Unlike combined Pb isotope data, Nd isotopic compositions cannot uniquely define both parent/daughter ratios and time.
Assuming that average measured Sm/Nd ratios are lower than those of their source regions, the trend for most of the islands suggests that the age of the Nd isotopic heterogeneity is less than  1Gyr.
To generate the range in Nd isotopic composition over the 130Myr modelled for the Pb isotope data, however, requires excessively large variation in source Sm/Nd and does not explain the collinearity for islands with different lithospheric age.
Therefore the Nd isotope data reflect long-term heterogeneity, and provide evidence that the process that fractionated U/Pb resulted in little fractionation of Sm/Nd.
Similarly the melting that produced most of the erupted lavas resulted in a limited and/or systematic fractionation of Sm/Nd.
This may be the result of low-pressure melting.
The deviation of the average Madeira composition from the correlation for the other islands supports the view that the origins of the Madeira magmas are distinct in being derived by small degrees of partial melting at high pressure in the garnet stability field, as garnet would cause fractionation of the rare earth elements.
Several processes may be considered potentially responsible for the fractionations in U/Pb, Ce/Pb and K/U at the time of lithospheric growth.
The melt regimes under ridges and hotspots are usually modelled as regions that are zoned laterally and vertically with respect to degree of partial melting.
Plume heads may be re-enriched by percolation of small-degree partial melts, such as nephelinitic magmas.
But there is little evidence that the U/Pb ratios of the source regions of the lavas studied here were fractionated simply by enriched small-degree partial melts.
The inverse correlation of measured Sm/Nd and U/Pb for individual samples in the Cameroon line, and Trinidade (Table 1), implies that the fractionation of these trace element ratios is linked, but the average measured U/Pb and Sm/Nd ratios shown in Fig. 3 are not correlated, although both are source-related.
Furthermore, small-degree partial melting in the presence of only the main upper-mantle mineral phases (assuming plagioclase is not involved) should not produce a positive correlation between U/Pb and Ce/Pb (Fig. 3 c ) on the basis of published mineral-melt distribution coefficients.
Minor buffering phases such as phlogopite and carbonates, which may play a role in low-degree partial melting of the mantle, have been invoked as an explanation for high U/Pb in areas of old continental lithosphere, but there is no obvious phase that will buffer K and Pb to produce the effect observed in Fig. 3 b , without also affecting Ba or Ti; Ba/Ce ratios of central Atlantic OIB are in fact relatively uniform.
Low-viscosity carbonatitic liquids may separate from immiscible nephelinitic liquids at small degrees of melting with concomitant fractionation of incompatible elements.
This might explain the extreme U/Pb and Sm/Nd fractionations found in Trinidade and Cameroon line nephelinites.
Nevertheless, although carbonatitic liquids may transport incompatible elements efficiently through the mantle, calculated compositions using experimental partition coefficients cannot reproduce the fractionations shown in Fig. 3.
A more speculative explanation is that there is a low-density, low-viscosity, subsolidus fluid phase associated with nephelinite magma generation but at greater depth below the melt zone, analogous to that suggested for Hawaii into which, in the absence of phlogopite, K and Pb may preferentially partition relative to U and the light rare earth elements.
This fluid phase may migrate and be consumed in melting reactions elsewhere, or rise as a low-viscosity fluid, causing metasomatism in refractory lithosphere away from the melt zone.
The low concentrations of volatiles in MORB glasses argue against this explanation.
Whatever the exact mechanism for U/Pb fractionation, it seems to occur at shallow depths in the mantle at about the time of formation of the local oceanic lithosphere.
The mantle currently being sampled at a distal ocean island must have undergone fractionation of U/Pb when it was located close to a cooling ridge (in the case of Madeira) or a cooling plume head (in the case of the Cameroon line).
The sources of the Cameroon line, Trinidade and Madeira magmas have clearly resided in the upper mantle since the oceanic lithosphere was formed, and have not been displaced laterally by asthenospheric flow relative to the lithosphere since that time.
These portions of the mantle may now be melted preferentially in relatively undiluted form, away from the present ridge, by rising plumes or hot zones because they are enriched in low-temperature melting fractions incorporated at the time of U/Pb fractionation, and because of a lower geothermal gradient in areas of old thick lithosphere where the peridotite solidus is at greater depth.
Elsewhere, such components are diluted by the larger volumes of magma generated at ridges and by rising plumes capable of ascending to shallower depths where the lithosphere is thin.
The trace-element fractionations cannot, however, be explained simply as the product of small degrees of partial melting in areas of thicker lithosphere.
Rather, storage of fractionated components for tens of millions of years is required.
Such a model is endorsed by 3 He/ 4 He ratios lower than in MORB for the Cameroon line, suggesting a history of U enrichment.
Finally, it should be noted that high U/Pb does not survive for long in the convecting mantle; otherwise the magnitude of Pb isotopic heterogeneity in basalts would be greatly increased.
All isotopic ratios measured at the University of Michigan using a VG Sector multicollector mass spectrometer. 147 Sm/ 144 Nd and 238 U/ 204 Pb measured by isotope dilution at the University of Michigan.
MgO and 87 Rb/ 86 Sr determined by X-ray fluorescence at the University of Edinburgh.
Uncertainties in isotopic ratios refer to least significant digits and represent  2  mean run precisions.
Sr and Nd isotopic compositions are presented normalized to 86 Sr/ 88 Sr=0.1194 and 146 Nd/ 144 Nd=0.7219, respectively, and were measured in multidynamic mode.
Pb isotopic ratios are presented normalized to NBS SRM981 using a fractionation correction of 0.101% per a.m.u.
and were measured in static mode.
The 87 Sr/ 86 Sr of NBS SRM987 was  and the 143 Nd/ 144 Nd of the La Jolla Nd standard was  at the time of these analyses.
FIG. 1 Map of the central Atlantic Ocean showing locations of OIB volcanic centres.
Numbers indicate the age (in Myr) of the local lithosphere.
FIG. 2 Plots of a , Sr and Nd, and b ,c , Pb isotopic compositions of lavas from the central Atlantic islands plus data for other OIB and MORB from the literature (Table 1 and refs. 7, 12–19).
Where possible, we have plotted only samples for which U, Pb, Nd, and Sm data from isotope dilution, and major- and trace-element data from X-ray fluorescence were available.
Comparisons with published data for central Atlantic islands are restricted to samples of common rock types, mainly transitional basalts, alkali basalts and basanites with a few nephelinites.
Inserts to b and c show the changes expected in the Pb isotopic composition of a model array of data over a period of 130Myr with μ (238 U/ 204 Pb) values comparable to those found in the erupted basalts.
The array to the far left mimics the lead isotopic compositions at 130Myr.
The series of arrays to the right are present-day arrays produced by variable increases in μ and  (232 Th/ 238 U) at 130Myr.
It is assumed that the μ and  ratios in the precursor source, that is before enrichment, were variable in proportion to their respective Pb isotope ratios.
The μ and  produced in the source during enrichment at 130Myr vary in proportion to the precursor source ratios, so the resultant Pb isotope arrays have different slopes.
The average μ and  are shown for each of the two most extreme arrays.
FIG. 3 Average U/Pb for each central Atlantic island as a function of lithospheric age;b , average K/U ratio against U/Pb ratio;c , average Ce/Pb ratio against U/Pb ratio and d , Nd isotope composition against Sm/Nd ratio.
Data are from refs 7, 12–16, 20, 24 from Table 1 and our unpublished work.
Transcriptional activation by the human c-Myc oncoprotein in yeast requires interaction with Max
Bruno Amati, Stephen Dalton, Mary W. Brooks, Trevor D. Littlewood, Gerard I. Evan & Hartmut Land 
THE c- myc protein (Myc) contains an amino-terminal transcriptional activation domain and a carboxy-terminal basic helix-loop-helix-leucine zipper (bHLH-Z) domain that directs dimerization of Myc with its partner, the max protein (Max), and promotes DNA binding to sites containing a CACGTG core consensus sequence.
Despite these characteristics and the observation that Myc can modulate gene expression, a direct role for Myc or Max as transcription factors has never been demonstrated.
Here we use Saccharomyces cerevisiae as an in vivo model system to show that the Myc protein is a sequence-specific transcriptional activator whose DNA binding is strictly dependent on dimerization with Max.
Transactivation is mediated by the amino-terminal domain of Myc.
We find that Max homodimers bind to the same DNA sequence as Myc+Max but that they fail to transactivate and thus can antagonize Myc+Max function.
We also show that the Max HLH-Z domain has a higher affinity for the Myc HLH-Z domain than for itself, and suggest that the heterodimeric Myc+Max activator forms preferentially at equilibrium.
Analysis of transcriptional regulation by Myc and Max proteins in mammalian cells is limited by endogenous Myc and Max.
As there is no evidence for Myc and Max homologues in S. cerevisiae,this organism seems ideal for such a study.
Co-expression of human Myc with Max1, Max2 or one of several Max deletion derivatives (Fig. 1) in yeast cells leads to transcriptional activation from a CACGTG-CYC1-LacZ reporter, whereas no activation is observed with either Myc or Max alone (Fig. 2 a , lanes b).
To assess whether the failure of Myc or Max alone to transactivate was due to an inability to bind DNA, we tested their function when fused to a heterologous transactivation domain (VP16; Fig. 2 b ).
As seen with Myc, VP16-Myc  N (retaining Myc residues 180–439) transactivates only when co-expressed with Max.
This is consistent with the idea that DNA binding and therefore transactivation by Myc requires association with Max (either Max1 or Max2) or at least the Max bHLH-Z domain (Max85; Figs 1 and 2 a ).
Unlike VP16-Myc  N, Max103-VP16 by itself transactivates the CACGTG-CYC1 promoter (Fig. 2 b ).
Thus, Max can bind DNA in the absence of Myc but does not significantly activate transcription in our system unless tagged with a heterologous transactivation domain.
Accordingly, all Max proteins tested (Fig. 1) bind DNA as homo-oligomers in yeast extracts (ref. 9, and data not shown), as recently reported for bacterially expressed Max.
Transactivation of the CACGTG-CYC1 promoter is sequence-specific, as much less or no transactivation by Myc+Max (Fig. 2 a , lanes a), VP16-Myc  N+Max or Max103-VP16 (Fig. 2 b ) is observed from a control reporter lacking the CACGTG binding site (see also Fig. 2 a legend).
Although yeast bHLH proteins that bind to the same DNA sequence as Myc and Max have been described, they are unlikely to play a significant role in our experiments.
Because of their apparent lack of transcriptional activity, we expected Max+Max dimers to antagonize transactivation by Myc+Max through competition for the same DNA target site.
Consistent with this idea, introducing an additional Max plasmid into the cells leads to a reduction of transactivation by Myc+Max or Myc+Max85 (Fig. 2 c ).
Introduction of an additional Myc plasmid enhances transactivation levels in the presence of Max or Max85 (Fig. 2 c ), supporting the conclusion that Myc provides the activation domain.
Thus, the activities of different Myc+Max dimers primarily reflect the equilibrium between Myc+Max and Max+Max complexes rather than their absolute efficiencies (Fig. 2).
For example, Max  C and Max85 proteins seem to allow better Myc+Max function than full-length Max (Fig. 2 a ), although all Max proteins were expressed at similar levels (data not shown).
Both truncated proteins lack the C-terminal nuclear import sequence and may therefore be less effective as homodimeric competitors, whereas the respective heterodimers with Myc are efficiently transported into the nucleus.
Given that Max can interact both with itself and with Myc, we investigated the relative affinities of the Myc and Max HLH-Z domains for themselves and for each other using a yeast assay that monitors protein-protein interactions in vivo (Fig. 3 a ).
We observed efficient Myc-Max HLH-Z interaction but no Myc-Myc and weak Max-Max HLH-Z interactions (Fig. 3 b ).
Our results in yeast are similar to observations from a similar assay in mammalian cells, although in that case no Max-Max interactions were detected.
The relative dimerization affinities of Myc and Max HLH-Z domains are reminiscent of the interactions between Jun and Fos leucine zippers (reviewed in ref. 17).
We suggest that, as for Jun and Fos, Myc and Max preferentially form heterodimeric complexes at equilibrium.
The functional domains of Myc were analysed by measuring the dimerization of various Myc mutants with SRF-Max72 (see Fig. 3 a ), and their DNA-binding properties with Max (Fig. 3 c ).
Mutants with substitutions in the basic region (Asn  Pro at residue 360, and Arg  Ala at residues 364, 366 and 367) are unable to transactivate the CACGTG reporter but retain dimerization activity.
Thus, as in other bHLH proteins, the basic region of Myc is essential for DNA binding but dispensable for dimerization, which is mediated by the HLH-Z domain alone (Fig. 3 b ).
Consistent with this idea, Myc mutants with deletions of either helix-loop-helix or leucine zipper domains did not show any activity, though positive controls are not available for these mutants (data not shown).
The transactivation domain of Myc maps to the 177 N-terminal residues, consistent with the mapping of this domain in GAL4-Myc chimaeras in mammalian cells.
The deletion mutant Myc  N (retaining residues 178 to 439) fails to activate in dimerization and in DNA-binding assays (Fig 3 c ), but efficiently enhances transactivation by Max-VP16 (Fig. 2 b ).
This shows that Myc  N can dimerize with Max-VP16 and bind DNA but does not transactivate.
The Myc transactivation domain also functions in yeast when fused to heterologous DNA-binding domains (LexA-Myc (ref. 22) and 1–235Myc-SRF, data not shown).
Our observations are summarized in Fig. 4.
In yeast, DNA binding and therefore transactivation by Myc are dependent on dimerization with Max.
As both the transactivation and bHLH-Z domains are essential for Myc function  (Fig. 3 c ) and Myc and Max are expected to interact in mammalian cells, our results further suggest that the growth-regulatory and oncogenic activities of Myc may depend on gene activation by Myc+Max dimers.
Max homo-oligomers bind to the same DNA sequence yet they do not detectably transactivate, and they can antagonize the function of Myc+Max by occlusion of DNA binding sites.
These findings are consistent with the lack of transactivation by GAL4-Max fusions in mammalian cells, although a transactivation function for Max cannot be entirely eliminated.
Unlike Myc, Max is a stable protein that is expressed in resting as well as in growing cells (T.D.L., D. Hancock and G.I.E., unpublished results).
As Myc and Max should preferentially form heterodimers (Fig. 3 b ), we suggest that mitogenic induction of Myc expression leads to a shift in the equilibrium from Max+Max to Myc+Max.
This transition may be an important growth-regulatory step, as Myc activity is sufficient to commit cells to the cell cycle or the apoptotic pathway, although Myc and Max may also be regulated by phosphorylation.
FIG. 1 Schematic representation of human c-Myc, Max, and Max deletion derivatives, and of the CACGTG-CYC1-LacZ reporter gene.
The bHLH-Z domains of Myc and Max are aligned.
Max1 and Max2 are the natural Max variants without and with the 9-amino acid (9aa) insert, respective.
The Max  C and Max85 mutants are truncated at the position in Max equivalent to the Myc carboxy-terminus.
METHODS.
Max2, Max1  C, Max2  C, and Max85 were generated by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) with appropriate primers from a Max1 complementary DNA template (a gift from D. Gillespie).
All the coding regions were subcloned into galactose-inducible CEN-ARS plasmids of the pSD series of yeast expression vectors, with either TRP1, LEU2 or HIS3 as selective markers.
Because we used the CYC1 ATG initiation codon, the following N-terminal extensions precede the proteins: MTGFPGLQEFELAPTM (Myc), MTGFELE (Max1 and Max103-VP16; Fig. 2), MTGFT (Max2, Max1  C, Max2  C), and MTGFTMG (Max85), and MTGFPG (Myc  N; Fig. 2)(single-letter amino-acid code).
Additional experiments with proteins initiated at their own start codons indicated that the extensions do not significantly alter the behaviour of Myc, Max1, Max2, Max1  C and Max2  C (data not shown).
All chimaeric fusions and inserts generated by PCR were verified by DNA sequencing.
As a reporter gene we used a 2μ-CYC1 promoter-LacZ plasmid derived from pLG  312 (ref. 28) containing the adenovirus major late promoter element GTAGGCXCACGTGACCGGGTGT (ref. 29) inserted between the Sma I and Xho I sites.
Two other Myc binding sequences (CM1; ref. 6 and the PHO4 promoter) gave similar results.
FIG. 2 Transcriptional activation by Myc and Max in yeast. a , β-Galactosidase units in cells containing the indicated proteins and reporters.
Residual transactivation of the control reporter may be due to two CACXATG boxes in the CYC1 promoter.
CACXATG is the only half-site change permitting DNA binding by Myc+Max, Max1 or Max2, albeit with decreased affinity (D. Solomon, B.A. and H.L., unpublished data).
All Max proteins tested were expressed at similar levels, whereas Myc levels were too low to be detected by immunoblotting (not shown).
The relatively higher efficiencies of Myc with Max2, Max2  C or Max85, compared with Max1 or Max1  C, may in part be due to differences in affinity for DNA (ref. 9, and data not shown).
b , Transactivation by VP16-Myc  N and Max103-VP16 together with Max or Myc  N. VP16-Myc  N and Max103-VP16 activities cannot be directly compared as their relative expression levels are unknown and VP16-Myc  N+Max is antagonized by Max+Max in cells (see text).
c , Effect of a third Myc or Max plasmid on transactivation of the CACGTG reporter.
Myc plasmids with different genetic markers were used for Myc+Max and Myc+Max85 (LEU2 in a , HIS3 in c ).
METHODS.
Max103-VP16 was constructed by replacing Max sequences 3' of codon 103 with a VP16 fragment (residues 410–490) from pSD.06a (ref. 15).
VP16-Myc  N contains the VP16 fragment upstream of Myc codons 180 to 439.
Myc  N retains codons 178 to 439.
Myc and Max plasmids were transformed into the yeast strain W303–1B (MAT α ho ura3 his3 trp1 ade2 leu2 can1–100 ) and reporter plasmids into the isogenic strain W303–1A (MATa).
Protein/reporter combinations were generated by crossing transformants.
Relative β -galactosidase units (U) in cultures induced for 12h with galactose were measured as described and normalized to cell numbers as U=1,000A 420  (CVt)-1 ,where A 420  is the absorbance at 420nm,C is the density of the cell suspension (in A 600  ml -1 ),V is the volume of cell suspension (ml), and t is the total incubation time (min).
FIG. 3 Myc-Max interactions in vivo. a,Assay for interactions between Myc and Max HLH-Z domains.
In this assay, activation of the serum-response element (SRE) -LacZ reporter gene is strictly dependent on the interaction between chimaeric proteins containing the serum-response factor (SRF) DNA-binding and the VP16 transactivation domains, respectively.
Schematic representations of the fusion proteins and reporter gene that were used.
The SRE-CYC1-LacZ reporter gene is integrated into the genome of the indicator yeast strain S62L (ref. 15).
b , Relative β -galactosidase units (as defined in legend to Fig. 2) in S62L cells expressing the indicated proteins.
The reciprocal combinations used provide an internal functional control for expression of the fusion proteins.
Furthermore, all the SRF derivatives used here recruit equally well a SAP1-VP16 fusion protein that binds to the SRF moiety (not shown).
c , Wild-type Myc and the indicated mutant derivatives were assayed for transactivation of SRE-CYC1-LacZ through dimerization with SRF-Max72 and of CACGTG-CYC1-LacZ through dimerization and DNA binding with max.
The activity of each Myc protein in both assays is normalized to wild-type Myc activity (100%).
Wild-type Myc does not interact with SRF alone (not shown).
METHODS.
Myc92-, Myc73- and Max72-encoding DNA fragments were generated by PCR and subcloned in frame downstream of VP16 or SRF412 (residues 1–412 of SRF) in vectors pSD.06a and pSD.08, respectively.
SRF412 alone was expressed from a modified version of pSD.08.
Myc point mutants were generated by site-directed mutagenesis using standard methods.
The reading frames of all fusions, the point mutations and all the PCR-generated inserts were verified by DNA sequencing.
FIG. 4 Schematic summary of Myc and Max interaction and function.
Myc and Max form stable heterodimers in the absence of DNA (in solution).
Weak Max+Max interactions can also be detected, but Myc+Myc homodimers do not form at physiological concentrations in vitro or in vivo .
Both Myc+Max and Max+Max bind to the same DNA sequence.
However, only the Myc+Max heterodimer detectably functions as a sequence-specific transcriptional activator in yeast.
Evidence from Re-Os isotopes for plume-lithosphere mixing in Karoo flood basalt genesis
R. M. Ellam, R. W. Carlson & S. B. Shirey
THERE is abundant evidence to link continental flood basalt provinces with mantle plume activity; however, flood basalts often have radiogenic isotope signatures that are outside the range for plume sources as recorded in ocean-island basalts.
These signatures are more readily attributed to source regions within the continental lithosphere, and there are strong indications that it is often the mantle lithosphere that contributes isotopically ‘enriched’(low- 143 Nd/ 144 Nd) material.
There are objections, however, to models that propose cold, refractory mantle lithosphere as an important source of basaltic magma.
The rhenium-osmium system may provide new constraints on the relative importance of plume and sub-continental lithospheric mantle (SCLM) in basalt genesis: samples of SCLM brought to the surface as xenoliths commonly have low 187 Os/ 188 Os ratios, whereas ocean-island basalts tend to have higher than chondritic 187 Os/ 188 Os, and old continental crust has even higher (more radiogenic) ratios.
Here we report initial 187 Os/ 188 Os ratios for 190-Myr-old picrite basalts from the Nuanetsi region of the Karoo flood basalt province, which are most readily explained as mixtures between enriched SCLM and sub-lithospheric material, most probably derived from a mantle plume.
Picrite basalts from the Karoo flood basalt province have been the subject of extensive geochemical study, in part because they are considered to represent primitive magmas similar to parental liquids that evolve to form the abundant, tholeiitic basalts typical of this and other flood basalt provinces.
The radiogenic isotope and incompatible trace element compositions of these rocks have been attributed to mixing between asthenospheric melts that are poor in incompatible trace elements and material derived from the SCLM that is rich in incompatible trace elements.
Even small amounts of the lithospheric component are rich enough in most incompatible trace elements to dominate the composition of the hybrid magmas.
The incompatible elements, and in particular Nd and Pb isotope ratios, are of limited efficacy as indicators of sub-lithospheric source regions, because they are easily overwhelmed by the SCLM endmember.
By contrast, the Re-Os system does not seem to be strongly influenced by the processes that cause the SCLM to be enriched in incompatible trace elements.
From the numerous Re-Os isotope analyses now available for peridotite mantle xenoliths it seems that the SCLM consistently preserves a history of low Re/Os ratio recorded by low 187 Os/ 188 Os values.
Furthermore, even samples that have  undergone ancient enrichment in incompatible trace elements retain the low Re/Os signature, so that enriched portions of the SCLM become characterized by both low γ Os and low  Nd .
where ‘mantle’ implies the chondritic estimate for the bulk mantle.
Thus, even portions of the SCLM rich in incompatible trace elements are unlikely to vary greatly in Os concentration or isotopic composition, so 187 Os/ 188 Os is potentially a much more useful tracer of sub-lithospheric source materials than the isotopic compositions of incompatible elements such as Sr, Nd and Pb.
Furthermore, the association of low γ Os with low  Nd  in mantle xenoliths seems to be a unique isotopic signature; if this signature were found in basalts, it would provide compelling evidence that SCLM was involved in their genesis.
To test these assertions, we determined Os isotope compositions and Re and Os concentrations for eight of the Karoo picrite basalts whose elemental and isotopic parameters have previously been well characterized.
Three of these samples are from a single area close to the Gomakwe intrusion and are represented by open symbols in the figures, whereas the remainder (solid symbols) are from more widely spaced localities.
The initial Os isotope ratios of the picrite basalts lie within the range recorded for oceanic island basalts (OIB), mid-ocean ridge basalts (MORB) and abyssal peridotites (Fig. 1).
This contrasts markedly with their Nd isotope ratios , which are largely outside the present-day OIB-MORB range .
The picrite basalts show a broad positive correlation  between γ Os  and  Nd which improves if the three samples from the Gomakwe area are considered separately, and may even represent two discrete correlations.
Complementary relationships are found between γ Os and major and trace element criteria (Fig. 2).
Higher γ Os values are associated with higher  Nd , elevated abundances of ‘basaltic’ major elements (such as Ca, Fe), lower concentrations of incompatible trace elements (such as Ba), and lower ratios of highly incompatible trace elements to moderately incompatible elements (such as Ce/Yb).
The observed correlations are perhaps most simply attributed to mixing between components with differing isotopic composition and elemental abundances.
To the low- 187 Os/ 188 Os end of the arrays, the picrite basalts have γ Os values that overlap those of MORB and approach the characteristic negative γ Os of lithospheric mantle xenoliths.
These low γ Os values are associated with low  Nd ratios (Fig. 1), ruling out MORB-like material as a possible endmember but consistent with a low-Sm/Nd lithospheric endmember.
Continental-crust rocks often carry a low  Nd signature, but are unlikely to have low γ Os ,because Re/Os ratios are expected to be high in evolved crustal litholigies.
Even mafic crust, for which  Nd could range from high to low values, would still have a fairly high γ Os .
Crustal contamination is therefore unlikely to generate both low  Nd and low γ Os .
Rhenium concentrations for the low- γ Os picrite basalts are significantly below those typical of asthenospheric melts including MORB, and this suggests that a Re-depleted component, such as SCLM, is involved.
Moreover, the low- γ Os , supposed lithospheric, endmember is also associated with enhanced concentrations of incompatible trace element and lowered abundances of ‘basaltic’ major elements.
The combination of ‘basaltic’ major element depletion and incompatible trace element enrichment is a common feature of mantle xenoliths and therefore strongly suggestive of SCLM source material.
Furthermore, with the exception of one sample (N55, for which we can offer no explanation), there is a strong correlation between γ Os and 206 Pb/ 204 Pb, suggesting a low- 206 Pb/ 204 Pb component similar to the source of group II kimberlites and some lamproites for which a SCLM origin is favoured.
Thus, on several grounds, the most likely endmember to carry the combined low- γ Os , low -Nd signature is Re-poor, lithophile-element-enriched SCLM.
The highest initial 187 Os/ 188 Os recorded in the picrite basalts are within the range recorded for OIB, and therefore consistent with a sub-lithospheric, plume-related, origin.
The precise nature of the presumed sub-lithospheric endmember remains more enigmatic.
It might be imprudent to attach strong significance to compositional variations that are based on relatively few data, particularly when the trends identified occur in diagrams for which mixing curves are not necessarily linear (Figs 1–3).
Unfortunately, in this case, diagrams of 187 Os/ 188 Os against 1/Os and so on do not help to constrain mixing hypotheses further, presumably because concentrations of Os are affected by its compatible behaviour during magma generation and differentiation processes.
Tentative conclusions about the likely plume endmember may, however, be drawn.
Mixing between a high-degree partial melt of a plume and a low-degree, incompatible-element-rich, osmium-poor melt of the SCLM will result in strongly convex-downward mixing curves in Fig. 1 (see Fig. 3).
Because the picrite basalts show only a shallow correlation between Nd and Os isotope variation, the data neither require nor rule out the hyperbolic mixing curves (Fig. 3).
The fact that incompatible element concentrations increase with decreasing  Nd (ref. 12) and γ Os (for example, Fig. 2 d)is at least consistent with the illustrated mixing trends.
It is worth emphasizing that the proposed plume endmember is relatively poor in incompatible trace elements compared with the lithospheric component.
Previous work has used this characteristic to suggest a sub-lithospheric component that is more akin to MORB than to OIB, whereas the Os isotope data seem to favour an OIB-like component.
It is important, however, not to confuse the trace element and isotope evidence.
The isotopic distinction between MORB and OIB is a source distinction, whereas the trace element differences may in part reflect different conditions of melting.
Ocean island and continental flood basalt occurrences represent different expressions of plume activity.
In particular, very high degrees of melting are most probably required to generate flood basalts with MgO contents of  15wt%.
It is therefore expected that the Karoo plume component would carry an OIB-like isotope signature, but would have lower abundances of incompatible trace element than typical OIB.
Finally, we should contrast the broad correlations between γ Os and elemental abundances with the highly significant correlations observed previously between the  Nd values and the concentrations of several major and trace elements for these samples.
Several explanations could be proposed, including variation in Os/Nd ratio of the endmembers, existence of a third endmember distinguished only by Os isotope composition, and open-system behaviour of Os, but all are speculative.
Although our data set shows that such complexity is necessary, it cannot differentiate between a variety of possibilities, nor constrain further the likely source components.
The new Os isotope data strongly indicate that SCLM has a role in the petrogenesis of Karoo flood basalts.
Above all, the association of low γ Os with low  Nd seems to confirm that a trace-element-rich portion of the mantle lithosphere is involved in the formation of these basalts.
Endmember γ Os compositions are not well constrained and mixing models are therefore schematic.
A lithospheric component based on the probable low Os content of low-melt-fraction magmas such as kimberlite or lamproite is, however, broadly consistent with the new data, and can support the large proportions (up to 50%) of lithospheric component inferred from Nd isotope and elemental data for the most incompatible-element-enriched picrite basalts.
The Os isotope data apparently also support the idea that OIB-like plume material has a role in Karoo petrogenesis.
The role of plume-lithosphere mixing in the petrogenesis of flood basalts is thus firmly substantiated by the new Os isotope data.
This is an important observation: first because it begins to reconcile the geochemical constraints on magma source region with geophysical models of large-scale plume-related magma generation, and second because it confirms the importance of the SCLM as a substantial contributory source region for basaltic magmatism.
Data represent the results of separate sample digestions where groups (I),(II) and (III) indicate separate analyses done sequentially.
Early analyses of Re (group I) were affected by high and variable blanks associated with the solvent extraction technique then used for Re purification following Os distillation.
Consequently, Re concentration data are not reported for these analyses, but the Os data are reported to illustrate the level of reproducibility of these measurements.
Re and Os concentrations are expressed as 10 -12 g per g.
Errors on isotope ratios are 2 standard errors of the mean (2s.e.).
For additional isotope and elemental data see refs 9 and 11.
Subscript (i) indicates initial isotope ratio.
FIG. 1 Plot of  Nd against γ Os , showing correlation for the Karoo picrite basalts.
In this and all other figures, samples for which duplicate γ Os  values are available are represented by the average values of these duplicates.
Error bars (2 standard error) are illustrated when they exceed the symbol size.
Errors on concentration determinations are not propagated to the age-corrected initial isotope ratios (i), and therefore represent minimum error estimates.
Histogram illustrates published γ Os values for Kaapvaal mantle xenoliths (solid), mid-ocean ridges basalts and abyssal peridotites (dotted), Gorgona Island komatiites (cross-hatched) and ocean island basalts (open).
Isotope data are corrected to 190Myr using ; where λ is the decay constant and the most recent experimentally determined value of .
METHODS.
Os and Re were separated from acid digestions of samples (2–4g) of whole-rock powder using distillation and anion exchange respectively.
Total procedure blanks ranged from 5 to 10pg for Os and averaged 20pg for Re.
Measurements were made by negative thermal ionization mass spectrometry on a 15-inch-radius mass spectrometer at the Department of Terrestrial Magnetism, Carnegie Institution.
Repeat analyses of standard solutions show reproducibility of better than 2% and 0.5% for Re and Os concentrations, respectively.
But as seen in the results, powder heterogeneity of the samples can contribute to the variation of replicate measurements beyond these limits.
Here we have broken with the convention of presenting 187 Os/ 186 Os in favour of 187 Os/ 188 Os. 188 Os can be measured with greater precision than 186 Os and has fewer isobaric interferences.
Furthermore, there is a possible  contribution to 186 Os from the decay of 190 Pt.
Although this is not considered to be very significant here, the improved measurement precision afforded by negative thermal ionization mass spectrometry over previous methods will exacerbate problems with 186 Os normalization, making a switch to 187 Os/ 188 Os desirable.
γ Os values are not affected by this change, and the ‘mantle’187 Os/ 188 Os value adopted here (0.12776) is consistent with 187 Os/ 186 Os=1.060 at the present day.
FIG. 2 Plots of γ Os against geochemical parameters.
Broad correlations exist between γ Os and major (a-c)and trace (d, e)element parameters, and with the exception of one sample (for which we offer no explanation), a strong relationship between γ Os and 206 Pb/ 204 Pb (f)is also suggested.
FIG. 3 Proposed mixing relationships illustrated on a plot of  Nd against γ Os .
Isotope data are corrected to the appropriate age for each sample (or field).
Symbols for picrite basalts as in Fig. 2.
The most important point is that rather flat-lying arrays can be generated by feasible mixing models despite the involvement of a plume endmember with fairly high  Nd .
Fields for MORB (largely based on abyssal peridotite data), OIB and lithospheric peridotites are illustrated to emphasize the likely sub-lithospheric and lithospheric endmembers, respectively; thus, although lithospheric peridotites extend to positive  Nd values, we illustrate a range that is consistent with the required low-  Nd endmember.
Also shown is a field for the HIMU 29 subset of OIB showing highly elevated γ Os 30 .
Mixing curves are ticked to represent 20% increments, and were calculated using the following parameters.
Plume endmember:γ Os , +12; Os, 1,000pg per g; Nd , +3; Nd, 10μg per g.
Mantle lithosphere endmember: model 1;γ Os , -20; Os, 200pg per g; Nd , -5; Nd, 50μg per g: model 2;γ Os , -20; Os, 200 pg per g, Nd , -10; Nd, 50μg per g: model 3;γ Os , -20; Os, 500pg per g; Nd , -10; Nd, 50μg per g.
Os and Nd concentrations were chosen to represent asthenospheric melts and small-volume lithospheric melts, such as lamproite or kimberlite, respectively.
Crystal structure of the met repressor-operator complex at 2.8Å resolution reveals DNA recognition by β -strands
William S. Somers & Simon E. V. Phillips
The crystal structure of the met repressor-operator complex shows two dimeric repressor molecules bound to adjacent sites 8 base pairs apart on an 18-base-pair DNA fragment.
Sequence specificity is achieved by insertion of double-stranded antiparallel protein β -ribbons into the major groove of B-form DNA, with direct hydrogen-bonding between amino-acid side chains and the base pairs.
The repressor also recognizes sequence-dependent distortion or flexibility of the operator phosphate backbone, conferring specificity even for inaccessible base pairs.
GENE regulation both in prokaryotes and in eukaryotes is achieved largely by proteins that bind to specific sequences in the DNA.
The source of this specificity is recognition by the protein of the pattern of functional groups on the edges of the base pairs in the DNA major groove, mediated by hydrogen-bonding, together with a contribution from the sequence-dependent conformational preferences of the DNA backbone.
Structural studies of a number of prokaryotic repressors and activators, and eukaryotic homeodomain complexes, have demonstrated that insertion of one of the α -helices of a conserved helix-turn-helix motif into the major groove is a frequent method of interaction.
The structures of two types of zinc-finger-DNA complexes also show α -helices lodged in the major groove.
We report here the crystal structure of the Escherichia coli met repressor-operator complex, where β -strands rather than α -helices interact with the DNA bases to mediate sequence recognition.
Expression of many of the structural genes in the methionine biosynthetic pathway of E. coli (reviewed in ref. 18) is controlled largely by the met repressor protein, the product of the metJ gene.
One of the products of the pathway,S -adenosylmethionine (SAM), acts as a corepressor in vitro and, presumably,in vivo.
The repressor is a dimer (M r 23,992) of identical 104-amino-acid subunits, which binds two molecules of SAM non-cooperatively; its three-dimensional structure has already been reported in the presence and absence of corepressor.
The repressor binds cooperatively to a number of operators, all of which share sequence homology to an underlying 8-base-pair (bp) repeating unit (AGACGTCT), referred to as the ’ met box', in two to five tandem copies.
We proposed that arrays of dimeric met repressor molecules bind to these extended operator regions, with a stoichiometry of one repressor per met box, to form a left-handed superhelix around the DNA.
The structure of the specific repressor-operator complex described below is consistent with this proposal.
Each repressor molecule interacts directly with the bases through a pair of antiparallel β -strands inserted into the major groove of B-form DNA.
The structure of the complex also shows evidence for recognition by the repressor of sequence-dependent distortions or flexibility of the phosphodiester backbone, which could mediate sequence specificity where the base pairs themselves are inaccessible.
Studies of operator binding in vitro and repression efficiency in vivo indicate that the structure observed in the crystal represents the specific repression complex in solution.
Structure determination
The met repressor protein was overexpressed and purified as before.
A self-complementary 19-base oligonucleotide, with sequence 5'-TTAGACGTCTAGACGTCTA-3' (that is, two tandem consensus met boxes flanked by T.A base pairs and one unpaired 5'-T), was synthesized on an Applied Biosystems 381A oligonucleotide synthesizer, purified by anion exchange and reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), and annealed by heating to 80°C for 5min, followed by slow cooling to room temperature, for use in crystallization trials.
Oligonucleotide fragments recovered from these trials are bound specifically by repressor in gel retardation assays (I. Manfield, personal communication).
Crystals were grown by hanging-drop vapour diffusion over wells containing 10mM sodium cacodylate buffer, pH7.0, 1mM sodium azide and 30–35% (v/v) freshly distilled 2-methyl-2,4-pentanediol.
The drops contained equal volumes of well solution and solutions containing 5mgml -1 oligonucleotide, 6–12mgml -1 met repressor, 15–30mM calcium chloride, 10mM sodium cacodylate buffer, pH7.0, 6mM sodium chloride and 1mgml -1 SAM (p -toluenesulphonate salt; Sigma).
Crystals grew in space group P6 2  22 as hexagonal rods, up to 0.7mm in length.
The unit cell parameters are a=b=121.35, c=84.81 , with one repressor dimer and one oligonucleotide strand (that is, half a duplex) in the asymmetric unit, corresponding to a solvent content of 58%.
The diffraction patterns of fresh crystals extend to 2.6  resolution, but radiation damage rapidly reduces their quality.
Intensity data were collected on oscillation films and processed to a final dataset with a merging R factor of 0.074 for 50–2.8  resolution.
The structure was solved by molecular replacement and refined to a  crystallographic R factor of 0.22.
Crystallographic details are shown in Table 1.
Overall structure of the complex
The structure of the complex (Fig. 1) shows two repressor dimers bound to a single duplex oligonucleotide, with the noncrystallographic 2-fold axes of the dimers roughly coincident with local DNA 2-fold axes passing through the centres of met box sequences, between base pairs 4 and 5, and 12 and 13, respectively (see legend to Fig. 4 for DNA numbering scheme).
An exact crystallographic 2-fold axis passes through the centre of the complex between base pairs 8 and 9, relating the two dimers and the strands of the DNA.
The ends of the oligonucleotide interact with adjacent duplexes in the crystal lattice to form pseudocontinuous helices.
The unpaired 5'T(-1) lies in the major groove of the next duplex, where it makes a Hoogsteen base pair with A17 to form a T.A.T triple helical interaction.
Similar interactions have been observed for G.C.G and I.A.T in the lattices of the CAP and glucocorticoid receptor complexes, respectively.
Each repressor binds with its double-stranded antiparallel β -ribbon inserted into the major groove of the DNA (Fig. 2).
Side chains Lys23 and Thr25 on the ribbon surface of each subunit make direct hydrogen bonds to the edges of base pairs (Figs 1 b and 2c),making the major contribution to sequence specificity in the complex.
There are also numerous contacts to the phosphate backbone, mainly from the amino termini of the B helices and the flexible loops at residues 12–20.
The two repressor dimers interact with each other, forming a tight contact between their A helices, across the crystallographic 2-fold axis (Fig. 1 a).
This contact would account for the observed cooperativity of binding of multiple repressors to extended tandem repeats of met box sequences in natural operators.
The SAM molecules bind to the faces of the repressors, remote from the DNA, with their positively charged sulphur atoms lying at the carboxy termini of the B helices, as in the holorepressor structure.
Corepressor binding does not cause significant structural change in the protein, though it greatly increases the affinity for the operator.
S -adenosylhomocysteine, a SAM analogue lacking the S -methyl group, and with a neutral rather than positively charged sulphur atom, binds to the repressor but does not affect its affinity for the operator (T. McNally, personal communication).
Structure of the repressor
The overall structure of the repressor when bound to DNA is little changed from that of the holorepressor (Fig. 2 a),or indeed of the free aporepressor.
The repressor has a relatively rigid core, but two flexible loops, residues 12–20 and 78–83, have high-temperature factors in the absence of DNA, and adopt different conformations in different crystal environments.
When bound to DNA, the 12–20 loop has a completely different conformation from the β -hairpin it adopts in the holorepressor, and wraps around the phosphate backbone (Fig. 2 b).
Glycine 15 has a positive  angle in both conformations, as residue 2 of a type II' turn in the holorepressor, and residue 3 of a type II turn in the complex, allowing it to donate a hydrogen-bond to a phosphate oxygen in the latter.
Apart from the two N-terminal residues of each protein monomer, the entire protein and DNA chains are well ordered in the complex.
Operator conformation
The DNA in the complex is B form, with the central 10 base pairs as a straight 10.66-fold helix.
This is flanked by bends in the helix axis of about 25° towards the major groove (Fig. 3 a).
The bends lie at the centres of the met boxes, and correspond to compression of the major groove to a width of 9.4  around the bound repressor β -ribbons, and opening of the opposite minor groove to 8.3 .
Major and minor groove widths would be 11.7 and 5.7, respectively, for ideal B-form DNA.
The bends and groove width variations are essential to the complementarity of fit to the repressor surfaces, and to establishment of the tight protein-protein contact.
Roll and tilt angles for the bases in the central region are low, remaining within 3° and 4° of zero, respectively.
Bending is accompanied by an increase of these parameters to about 5° at the met box centres, and higher values towards the ends of the duplex.
Propeller twist angles are also low, averaging -8.8°, but peak at -17° for base pair A3, which is also associated with the bend.
Ribose ring puckers are not well defined at this resolution, and were not specifically restrained during refinement, but deviate little from their original C2'- endo conformation in the initial model.
Although phosphate positions are well defined, the backbone torsion angles are not, and little dependable information can be derived from the latter.
The helical twist angle between base pairs averages 34.1° overall, giving a helix order of 10.6, corresponding closely to that of random sequence DNA in solution.
Deviations from this average are small, with one important exception.
The central T8-A9 step is overwound to 44°, whereas the flanking C-T and A-G steps are underwound to 28°.
This is associated with the anomalous position of the G10 5' phosphate, which is displaced by 2  from its expected position in regular B-form DNA (Fig. 3 b).
This displacement allows a strong interaction with the N terminus of the repressor B helix.
The conformation of the central CTAG sequence is reminiscent of the alternating B-form DNA structure proposed for polyd(A-T), where alternating T-A and A-T dinucleotide steps are successively over- and underwound, respectively, as a result of weak stacking interactions in the T-A steps.
In the absence of a three-dimensional structure for the free operator, it is impossible to tell how much of the twist variation and backbone movement is due to sequence-dependent conformation, as opposed to distortion induced by protein binding or crystal packing forces.
T-A steps in the structure of the dodecamer CGCATATATGCG show phosphate positions intermediate between those in our complex and regular B-form DNA, whereas that of the B DNA decamer CGATTAATCG shows low twist at the central T-A, emphasizing its deformability rather than inherent high-twist nature.
Repressor-operator interactions
The high affinity of the repressor-operator complex arises from exclusion of solvent and ions from the interface, and formation of a large number of hydrogen-bond and salt-bridge interactions.
Computer graphics docking of a single repressor dimer to ideal B-form DNA in the correct orientation results in a loss of static solvent-accessible surface of 208  2 , but the bending of the DNA in the observed structure of the complex raises this to 648  2 .
Binding of two repressors, with extensive solvent exclusion in the protein-protein contact, raises the total to 1,732  2 for the whole complex.
This is in the range expected for similar-sized macromolecular complexes, but less than the 2,900  2 observed for the trp repressor-operator complex.
Direct contacts to the DNA originate mainly from three regions of the protein, and are summarized in Fig. 4, with detailed interactions shown in Fig. 5.
The first region includes the only direct contacts to the bases, made by side chains of the β -strands lying in the major groove (Figs 1 b and 2c ).
The hydroxyl groups of Thr25 and Thr25' donate hydrogen-bonds to N7 of A3 and A11', respectively.
The Lys23 side chain hydrogen-bonds to O6 and N7 of G10', whereas Lys23' only bonds to O6 of G2, reflecting a slight departure from the local 2-fold symmetry.
Both lysines also make water-mediated hydrogen-bonds to adjacent base pairs, to N7 of A9' and O4 of T14', respectively.
The van der Waals surface of the β -strands makes a loose fit to the major groove, leaving room for a number of solvent molecules to intrude.
Only four ordered solvent molecules are visible at this resolution, sandwiched between the protein and the major groove, but there must be others filling the remaining volume.
The second major contact region is the N terminus of the B helix, which interacts strongly with the 5' phosphate of G10'.
This is similar to the commonly observed phosphate-binding sites at helix termini in other proteins and, in particular, other repressor-operator complexes.
There are hydrogen bonds from the main-chain amides of Asn53 and Ser54, and the side-chain hydroxyl group of the latter (Fig. 3 b).
As described above, this phosphate group lies in an anomalous position as a result of the base-stacking properties of the CTAG sequence, and the interaction can therefore be regarded as sequence-dependent.
An identical interaction occurs between the end of the B' helix of the other subunit and phosphate G2.
The third major region of protein-DNA interactions is the flexible loop, residues 12–20.
The main-chain amides of Gly15 and Lys17 interact directly with the phosphate of T8', and the side-chain hydroxyl of Ser18 makes a water-mediated contact.
This phosphate lies directly across the DNA duplex from the one interacting with the B helix of the adjacent repressor.
The other subunit of the repressor makes similar, but more extensive, contacts to the phosphate of T0.
In addition to these interactions, there are a number of other side-chain contacts to phosphate groups, including Lys17 and 17' from the flexible loop, Lys78 from an adjacent loop and Lys22 and 22' at the ends of the β -ribbon.
Arginine 40 and 40' extend from the A helices towards the minor groove, and contact phosphates G10' and G2.
The complete complex has eight direct hydrogen bonds from the two protein dimers to base pairs, and 38 to phosphates.
Cooperative protein-protein interactions
The cooperative interaction between adjacent repressors is mediated by an extensive hydrophobic contact between the crystallographically related antiparallel A helices, interspersed with a network of water-mediated hydrogen-bonds.
Hydrophobic interactions predominate near the ends of the helices, with a lattice of hydrogen-bonds in the centre linking Thr37 to Gln44, and Arg40 to Arg40 by water molecules.
One water lies on the crystallographic 2-fold axis, making four tetrahedrally arranged bonds to Thr41 and 41, and Asp38 and 38.
Discussion
The validity of the crystal structure as a model for the repression complex has been tested by site-directed mutagenesis of both repressor and operator.
For instance, mutations of residues in direct contact with bases, such as Lys23 (to Glu, Ala or Arg) or Thr25 (to Val or Gln) result in large losses of affinity in vitro ,and repression efficiency in vivo ,whereas mutations on the outer surface of the complex have little effect.
The mutation Thr37 to Ala results in large reductions in affinity and repression efficiency, presumably owing to loss of cooperativity resulting from destabilization of the protein-protein contact between repressors.
Systematic mutation of each base in a double met box operator also yields consistent results (T. McNally, personal communication).
The largest reductions in affinity result from mutation of G2 or A3, and their symmetry equivalents, which form direct hydrogen bonds to the protein.
It is also noteworthy that A3, and the related T6, are the most conserved bases in the natural operators.
The phosphates interacting with the B helix termini in the crystal structure correspond exactly to those whose ethylation most strongly interferes with complex formation in solution.
There are two broad principles of sequence-specific recognition in protein-DNA complexes, and Otwinowski et al.
coined useful terms to describe them: ‘direct readout’ arises from complementary hydrogen bonding between protein groups and the DNA bases exposed in the grooves, as suggested by Seeman et al.,and ‘indirect readout’arises from detection of the sequence-dependent conformational variation or flexibility of the DNA itself.
Each met repressor dimer recognizes a met box by direct interactions at base pairs G2, A3, T6 and C7 through Thr and Lys side chains.
There are no specific hydrophobic contacts to thymine methyl groups such as those observed in other complexes, but there are sites in the operator where a mutation to thymine could not be accommodated owing to steric hindrance.
There is evidence of indirect readout of the CTAG sequence across the central boundary between met boxes, which is due to the overwound T-A dinucleotide step, and the binding of the displaced phosphate group by helix B. Mutation of the central T-A step to A-T or G-C results in 76-fold loss of affinity in gel retardation assays (T. McNally, personal communication), despite the lack of direct contacts between the repressor and these base pairs.
This interaction mediates recognition of A1 and T8 of the met box, but probably only in the presence of adjacent met boxes with bound repressors.
The sequence CTAG also occurs in the trp repressor-operator complex, where the T-A step is not overwound but has high positive roll.
The central bases of the met box, C4 and G5 make no direct contacts to the protein, but form the centre of the 25° bend in the DNA, which allows it to wrap tightly round the repressor.
They have positive roll angles, which favour bending into the major groove, as predicted for C.G base pairs by Drew and Travers, and may therefore contribute to indirect readout.
Mutation of these bases results in moderate losses of affinity (T. McNally, personal communication).
The importance of DNA conformation in the recognition of met boxes is also implied by the sequences of the natural operators where, although the base conservation at some positions is low, the sequence of purines and pyrimidines is highly conserved.
A major contribution to specific affinity in the system originates from the cooperative effect of two (or more) repressor dimers binding to adjacent sites, forming protein-protein contacts.
The minimum specific operator complex consists of a dimer of repressor dimers bound to the DNA, as observed in the crystal structure.
Single met box sites have very low affinity.
The Arc repressor of bacteriophage P22 has been shown by NMR spectroscopy to be structurally similar to residues 15–72 of met repressor, the DNA-binding region.
Studies of the binding of Arc to its operator are consistent with formation of a similar dimer of repressor dimers, and also show high cooperativity.
Mnt repressor of phage P22 is homologous to Arc, and also binds its operator as a tetramer.
The three repressors belong to a family of proteins bearing the same DNA-binding motif, the TraY protein from E. coli F episome probably being a fourth.
We describe this motif as a ‘ribbon-helix-helix’, corresponding roughly to the portion of met repressor shown in Fig. 2 b.
Its essential components are a two-stranded antiparallel β -ribbon that lies in the DNA major groove, two outer A helices available to make cooperative interactions with adjacent proteins along the DNA, and two inner B helices forming the subunit interface.
The B helices also serve to lock the motif down onto the phosphate backbone by their N termini.
Note that the complementarity of β -ribbons and nucleic acid duplexes has been demonstrated by model building.
Sequence specificity in these complexes is the result of overall complementarity between each repressor and its site, and between adjacent repressors bound to neighbouring sites at specific spacings.
This is analogous to complexes involved in transcriptional activation, when several proteins bind to the DNA and interact with each other to form higher-order complexes.
The met repressor may serve as a useful model for such systems.
Crystallographic statistics for data used in the refinement of the repressor-operator complex.
Data were collected at room temperature on film using an Arndt-Wonacott Oscillation camera at station 9.6 of the SERC Daresbury Synchrotron Radiation Source with wavelength 0.91Å.
Two crystals were used for the complete dataset, collected as 1.8° oscillations with crystallographic c -axis roughly aligned along the rotation axis.
Films were digitized using a Joyce-Loebl Scandig densitometer, and the images processed with the program MOSFLM using the profile-fitting option.
Further processing was done using the CCP4 suite of programs except where noted, leading to the statistics quoted in the table.
The structure of the protein component was solved using molecular replacement, with the refined holorepressor structure as search model.
POLARRFN was used to solve the rotation function, and MERLOT the translation function, the resulting model being optimized by rigid-body refinement to give R =0.51 to 3.5Å resolution.
The diffraction pattern shows clusters of high-intensity spots at 3.4Å resolution, lying roughly in the hk0 plane.
This indicates that the DNA duplexes lie roughly in this plane, and that this region of the pattern would be poorly phased by calculation from the protein model alone.
Accordingly, difference and Sim-weighted Fourier maps phased from the protein model were calculated at 20–4Å resolution, and inspected using the computer graphics program FRODO.
Difference electron density corresponding to the phosphodiester backbone of the oligonucleotide was visible near the surface of the repressor molecules bearing the antiparallel β -ribbons.
An idealized B-form DNA duplex, corresponding to the central 16 base pairs of the oligonucleotide, with helix order 10.5, was fitted to this density, with its central axis of 2-fold symmetry coincident with a crystallographic dyad.
Refinement was initially with the minimization option of X-PLOR, and subsequently with the TNT package, with restrained individual B factors allowed to vary in the later cycles.
All residues of both the protein and DNA components were located in Fourier maps, and included in the refinement, together with 36 ordered water molecules, giving 2,166 nonhydrogen atoms in the final model.
250 refinement cycles were done, leading to a final R factor of 0.220 for all data in the resolution range 10–2.8Å, and 0.197 for data with F obs 3  (F obs ).
The r.m.s. deviations from ideal geometry are 0.018Å for bond lengths, 1.68° for bond angles, 0.007Å for planar groups and 6.6Å for B factors of bonded atoms.
No residues in the final model deviate significantly from the allowed areas of the Ramachandran plot.
Coordinates have been deposited in the Brookhaven Protein Data Bank.
& fm ; where h are unique reflection indices.
Crystallographic R factor: & fm ;
FIG. 1
a,
Stereo view of the overall structure of the complex, with the two repressor dimers, one at the upper left and the other lower right, shown as ribbon representations.
The DNA and SAM molecules are shown as ball-and-stick models.
The repressors are coloured gold, with the faces of their β -strands pale green, the DNA blue and the SAM molecules green.
The view is along a crystallographic 2-fold axis that passes through the centre of the DNA and relates the two repressor dimers, and the two halves of the oligonucleotide.
The repressor antiparallel β -ribbons occupy the major groove of the DNA, whereas the A helices (see Fig. 2 for helix labelling) of adjacent dimers form a long, antiparallel protein-protein contact above the minor groove in the centre of the diagram.
The SAM molecules lie on the outer surface of the complex, distant from the DNA.
b,
Similar view to a but with repressors shown as α- carbon traces, and side chains that contact the DNA as ball and stick.
The only residues that interact directly with the bases in the major groove are Lys23 and Thr25 from each of the four subunits, which lie on the β -strands.
The other side chains shown are in contact with the phosphate backbone.
FIG. 2
a,
Stereo diagram of a ribbon representation of the holorepressor structure determined in the absence of operator, viewed along the molecular 2-fold axis.
One subunit is darkly shaded, with the three α -helices (A, B and C) and the β -strand labelled.
Some residue numbers are indicated.
The other subunit is lightly shaded.
Ball and stick SAM molecules lie on the upper surface, with the positively charged sulphur atoms marked with a plus sign.
The β -strands, one from each subunit, that form the antiparallel β -ribbon lie on the far side of the repressor.
Residues 12–20 form flexible loops immediately preceding each β -strand.
b,
Stereo diagram of part of the repressor-operator complex in the same orientation as a.
Only residues 10–58 of the repressor are shown, together with the part of the operator in contact with it.
The DNA is shown as a ball-and-stick model, with filled bonds for the sugar-phosphate backbone, and open bonds for the remainder of the ribose rings and the bases.
The central region of the DNA shown corresponds to one met box, and the bases have been labelled along one strand.
The non-crystallographic 2-fold axis of the repressor coincides with the central 2-fold of the met box.
The β -ribbon lies in the major groove, which faces the reader, whereas the minor groove lies to the upper left and lower right.
c,
Detailed view of the β- ribbon residues 21–29 (yellow) lying in the major groove of the DNA (blue), in a similar orientation to b.
Hydrogen-bonds are shown as dotted lines.
The side chains of Lys23 and Thr25 from each strand interact with the bases G2 (and G10') and A3 (and A11').
FIG. 3
a,
DNA in the complex (blue) superimposed on idealized 10.66-fold B DNA (red).
The view is perpendicular to that shown in Fig. 1, with the central crystallographic 2-fold axis in the plane of the paper.
The repressors, if shown, would lie in the major groove at the upper right, slightly in front of the DNA, and lower right, slightly behind.
The central 10 base pairs superimpose well.
The 25° bends centred on the repressor sites correspond to compression of the major groove around the bound proteins.
In the central region, the sugar-phosphate backbones superimpose well, except on the right-hand side near the centre.
This corresponds to G10 and G10' and their 5' phosphates.
b,
View of phosphate G10 and its interaction with the N terminus of the repressor B helix.
DNA colouring as in a,with the protein yellow.
Phosphate oxygens accept hydrogen-bonds from main-chain amides of Asn53 and Ser54, and the side-chain hydroxyl of Ser54.
The position of the equivalent phosphate group in idealized B DNA is displaced, and could not accept these hydrogen-bonds.
FIG. 4 Schematic diagram of protein-DNA contacts for one half of the complex, in a similar orientation to Fig. 2.
The local 2-fold axis (represented by the diamond) passes through one repressor dimer and the centre of the first met box.
The symbol below base pair 9' represents the crystallographic dyad viewed obliquely.
Phosphate positions on the DNA-ribbon backbone are shown as circles, and the bases as horizontal bars.
Solid and dashed arrows indicate direct and water-mediated protein-DNA hydrogen-bonds, respectively.
Curved arrows show contacts to phosphates on the back surface of the DNA.
Bold characters signify residues making direct hydrogen-bonds to the bases.
The two subunits of the repressor dimer are numbered 1–104 and 1'-104', whereas residues from the symmetry-related dimer are marked with a star.
The numbering scheme for the top strand of the oligonucleotide is shown below.
The bottom strand is numbered in the same way from the 5' end, but with primes on the numbers.
As the crystallographic 2-fold axis passes between base pairs 8 and 9 in the complex, any base n' is symmetry-related to base n,and has an identical environment.
Bases 1–8 (bold type) and 9–16 correspond to met boxes.
FIG. 5 Stereo diagrams of some of the base pairs, showing important interactions with the repressor, viewed along the DNA helix axis.
Each base pair is shown with filled bonds, and the following base pair with open ones.
Protein residues in contact are also shown, with hydrogen bonds as dotted lines.
Double circles indicate ordered water molecules.
a,
Base pair A3.T14', and its contact to Thr25.
b,
Base pair C7.G10', with contacts to Lys23.
Also shown is the contact from the phosphate to Asn53 and Ser54 of the B helix.
c,
The central T-A dinucleotide step showing the interactions of the phosphate backbone with the flexible 12–20 loop.
The lack of base stacking at this step is clear in this view.
Evolution of sex determination and the Y chromosome:SRY- related sequences in marsupials
Jamie W. Foster, Francine E. Brennan, Gregory K. Hampikian, Peter N. Goodfellow, Andrew H. Sinclair, Robin Lovell-Badge, Lynne Selwood, Marilyn B. Renfree, Desmond W. Cooper  & Jennifer A. Marshall Graves
IN mammals, testis determination is under the control of the testis-determining factor borne by the Y chromosome.
SRY , a gene cloned from the sex-determining region of the human Y chromosome, has been equated with the testis-determining factor in man and mouse.
We have used a human SRY probe to identify and clone related genes from the Y chromosome of two marsupial species.
Comparisons of eutherian and metatherian Y-located SRY sequences suggest rapid evolution of these genes, especially outside the region encoding the DNA-binding HMG box.
The SRY homologues, together with the mouse Ube1y homologues, are the first genes to be identified on the marsupial Y chromosome.
Marsupials (mammalian Infraclass Metatheria) diverged from eutherian (’ placental') mammals 80–180Myr before present.
In marsupials, as in eutherian mammals, the Y chromosome is testis-determining, although scrotum development and some other sexual dimorphisms may be controlled by X chromosome dosage.
A gene regulating testis determination and derived from a common mammalian ancestor would be expected to be conserved in sequence between eutherians and marsupials and to map to the marsupial Y chromosome.
Sminthopsis macroura (Order Polyprotodonta, Family Dasyuridae), and Macropus eugenii (Order Diprotodonta, Family Macropodidae) are representatives of two major Australian marsupial Orders, which diverged from each other 40–80Myr ago.
A human SRY probe, a 0.9-kilobase (kb)Hinc II subclone of pY53.3 (ref. 3), was used to identify homologues of this gene by Southern hybridization in these two species.
The probe detects male-specific restriction fragments in both species as well as several fragments shared by males and females (Fig. 1 a ).
The male-specific fragments were presumed to represent marsupial SRY- homologous genes borne on the Y chromosomes, and the shared fragments, autosomal SRY -like sequences (SOX).
These genes have been described previously in mouse, rat, man,Drosophila and birds.
The human SRY probe was used to screen a complementary DNA library constructed from S. macroura adult testis RNA.
One positive clone, pcSmY1.4, was isolated and used to probe genomic Southern blots.
At high stringency it hybridizes to DNA from male but not female S. macroura,suggesting it represents a transcript from a Y-located gene.
A 0.6-kb subclone, which contains all the homology with human SRY , hybridizes to the same male-specific marsupial fragments identified by the human SRY probe (Fig. 1 b ).
A single clone, pSmY2.6, which overlaps with the 3' end of pcSmY1.4, was obtained from a S. macroura genomic library.
Three positive clones were also obtained from a M. eugenii genomic library.
One clone has an insert equivalent in size to one of the male/female shared bands of 4.6kb, and two have inserts equivalent to the male-specific band of 4.3kb.
One of the latter clones (pMeY4.3) hybridizes only to the male-specific 4.3-kb Eco RI band identified by the human SRY probe (Fig. 1 a ).
The cDNA clone pcSmY1.4 was sequenced and a 624-base-pair open reading frame was found (Fig. 2).
The conceptual polypeptide contains an HMG box DNA-binding motif characteristic of this class of genes.
The S. macroura genomic clone pSmY2.6 was also sequenced and the final 464bp of the 3' end of the cDNA corresponded precisely with the genomic clone.
The M. eugenii genomic clone, pMeY4.3 was sequenced across the region of homology with human SRY and an open reading frame encoding an HMG box was found.
Within the 79-amino-acid HMG box, both marsupial genes show extensive homology to the human sequence (Fig. 3).
The S. macroura motif shows 65% identity and 82% similarity with the human gene.
The M. eugenii sequence shows 70% identity and 86% similarity.
No significant homology could be detected between the human and marsupial proteins outside this motif.
Homology between the two marsupial genes reaches 84% with conservative substitutions, but falls below 50% outside the HMG-box region.
The low level of sequence conservation raises the question of the precise relationship between the Y-located sequences in metatherians and eutherians.
We propose that the SRY -related sequences on the Y chromosomes are homologues.
The sequences cloned from the marsupials are the only Y-located sequences detected either with the human SRY probe or with the marsupial sequences themselves.
The isolation of a cDNA clone from testis of S. macroura and the long open reading frame in the M. eugenii genome suggest that these marsupial genes are not pseudogenes.
The pattern of sequence conservation within the marsupials and between the two classes of mammals is the same as that previously noted in eutherians: average levels of conservation in the region encoding the HMG box and little or no conservation outside the box.
Finally, an analysis performed on all the available SRY and SOX gene sequences identifies the Y-located genes as a more closely related subset (P.N.G., R.L.-B., J. Collignon and D. Jackson, unpublished observations).
A sequence signature unique to the Y-located genes has not been found, but critical amino acids within the human DNA-binding motif, identified by their association with XY female sex reversal, are invariant throughout all known mammalian Y-borne SRY genes (Fig. 3).
By analogy to the testis-determining function of mouse Sry , the Y-linked marsupial SRY homologue is expected to be necessary for testis determination, but confirmation of this hypothesis will require functional studies.
Our data are consistent with gonadal sex being determined by the same gene in all mammals and, together with the evidence for a marsupial Y-borne homologue of the mouse Ubely , provide support for a monophyletic origin of the mammalian Y chromosome.
FIG. 1 Identification of male-specific and male/female shared marsupial sequences related to the human SRY gene.
Southern blots of Eco RI-digested genomic DNA from male and female pairs of S. macroura and M. eugenii were hybridized with human and S. macroura Y-linked SRY homologues.
Lane 1,S. macroura male; lane 2,S. macroura female; lane 3,M. eugenii male; lane 4,M. eugenii female.
Sizes are given in kb.
Male-specific bands at 2.6 and 4.3kb are arrowed.
a
, A 0.9-kb Hin cII fragment of pY53.3 containing the human SRY ORF detects several bands shared between males and females of each species, as well as male-specific bands of 2.6kb (in S. macroura)and 4.3kb (in M. eugenii).
b,
A 0.6-kb Eco RI fragment derived from pcSmY1.4, containing sequences homologous to pY53.3, detects a 2.6-kb fragment in S. macroura male DNA, and a 4.3-kb fragment in M. eugenii.
This probe also detects additional fragments not homologous to the human probe.
METHODS.
For Southern blots genomic DNA was digested with Eco RI, electrophoresed through a 0.8% agarose gel, transferred with 20xSSC to Hybond N+ (Amersham) and fixed in 0.4% NaOH.
Probes were labelled with [32 P]dCTP and added to the filter in 5xSSPE (1xSSPE: 0.15M NaCl, 0.01M NaH 2 PO 4 .
H 2 O, 0.1mM EDTA, pH7.4), 5xDenhardt's solution, 0.5% SDS, 200μgml -1 denatured salmon sperm DNA (10% dextran sulphate was used in the case of the human probe) and hybridized for 20h at 65°C.
Filters were washed in 2xSSC, 0.2% SDS at 65°C and autoradiographed for 10–40 days (pY53.3) or 1–3 days (pcSmY1.4).
FIG. 2 Nucleotide sequence and translation of the S. macroura SRY- homologous cDNA pcSmY1.4.
The coding region is arranged in triplets, starting with an ATG codon at nucleotide 86 and terminating with a stop codon at nucleotide 710.
The HMG box motif is boxed.
The potential polyadenylation signal (AATAAA) is represented in bold-face and underlined.
The bottom line shows 60bp of the S. macroura genomic clone pSmY2.6, demonstrating the overlap with the cDNA.
METHODS.
cDNA clone pcSmY1.4 was isolated from an S. macroura testis cDNA library.
Total testis RNA was isolated and poly(A) + RNA was then purified using PolyATtract (Promega).
cDNA was produced and cloned into lambda Zap II following the manufacturer's instructions (Stratagene).
Recombinant cDNA was packaged using Gigapack II plus (Stratagene).
The cDNA library comprised 7.0x10 5 plaque forming units and was screened without amplification using the human SRY probe.
Genomic clones pSmY2.6 and pMeY4.3 were isolated from size-selected genomic libraries of S. macroura and M. eugenii respectively.
Eco RI-digested DNA in the size range 2.2–2.7kb (S. macroura)and 4.0–4.4kb (M. eugenii)was recovered from a 0.8% agarose gel using Geneclean (Bio 101, Inc.), ligated into lambda gt10 (BRL) and packaged with the Lambda In Vitro packaging kit (Amersham) following the manufacturers' instructions.
The S. macroura library, consisting of 1x10 6 PFU, was screened unsuccessfully with the human SRY probe and then pcSmY1.4.
The M. eugenii library, consisting of 1.2x10 6 PFU, yielded three positive clones when screened with the human SRY probe.
Clones were subcloned into pUC18 and sequenced with the dideoxy chain termination method using synthetic oligonucleotide primers and Sequenase version II (USB).
FIG. 3 Protein sequence alignments of the 79-amino-acid (single-letter code) highly conserved DNA-binding motif from the Y-borne SRY homologues of S. macroura, M. eugenii,human, rabbit and mouse.
A dash was introduced into the S. macroura sequence to maintain alignment.
Arrows above the figure indicate the amino-acid positions implicated in sex reversal of human XY females: these are invariant throughout all mammals.
Sequence comparisons were performed using the Macvector analysis software (IBI).
To calculate percentage similarity, conserved amino acids were grouped as follows: HRK, GASTP, QEDN, MLVI and FYW.
A heavy bar below the figure represents identity across the five genes; a light bar represents a position of conservative change.
Spin-up and recovery in the 1989 glitch of the Crab pulsar
A. G. Lyne, F. Graham Smith & R. S. Pritchard
THE rotation of the Crab pulsar, as measured by pulsed radio and optical emission, has been monitored almost continuously since its discovery in 1968.
A steady decrease in the rotation rate has been interrupted at intervals of about five years by glitches: discontinuous increases in rotation speed followed by partial recovery in the form of an exponential return to a new slowdown rate on a timescale of about 20 days.
The recovery is usually interpreted as the re-establishment of stable differential rotation between the neutron star crust and part of its superfluid interior.
Here we describe the largest glitch so far recorded in the Crab pulsar.
It occurred in 1989 while observations were being made, and the recovery was followed in unprecedented detail.
The spin-up itself was also partly resolved in time, and the whole event, glitch plus recovery, is now seen to include three distinct exponential components, with timescales of 1, 20 and 300 days.
The physical interpretation of these distinct components is unclear.
The 1989 glitch, like the 1975 one, caused a permanent increase in the slowdown rate, of a magnitude that is difficult to reconcile with current neutron star models.
The 1989 glitch occurred at 09:36UT on 29 August during a long series of 610-MHz radio observations at Jodrell Bank.
This 11-year series combined with earlier observations of the pulsar gives us a fairly complete account of the rotational behaviour of this pulsar over a period of 23 years, including the glitches of 1969, 1975 and 1986 (refs 4–6).
The pulse arrival times at the observatory were corrected for the Earth's rotation and orbital motion using the Jet Propulsion Laboratory barycentric ephemeris DE200 (ref. 7) to refer them to the Solar System barycentre.
Barycentric rotational frequencies were obtained by fitting to a set of corrected arrival times, typically over intervals of  6h close to the glitch and 50 days away from it.
The glitch itself is a small perturbation on the normal slowdown of rotation, whose character may be determined from our long series of data.
The normal slowdown is represented by  The parameters of this normal pre-glitch behaviour were obtained from a best fit for rotation rate  and its first derivative ,made over the preceding 400 days; the value of the second derivative  was obtained from the full data set from 1969 to 1992.
The plot of rotation rates in Fig. 1 a shows the residuals relative to this normal slowdown.
The immediate effect of the glitch is a step increase in rotation speed; in this respect the glitch is similar to those observed in other pulsars such as the Vela pulsar.
Remarkably, the subsequent behaviour leaves the pulsar rotating more slowly after 50 days than it would have done in the absence of the glitch.
This is because on a long timescale the main effect of the glitch is an increase in slowdown rate, which is responsible for the slope in the later part of Fig. 1 a .
The slowdown rate can be seen to approach a constant value after  500 days.
We now show that there are also three transient components on timescales of  300 days, 20 days and 1 day; of these, only the second has previously been reported.
Figure 1 b shows the rotation rate residuals after allowing for the increased value of slowdown rate which fits the later part of Fig. 1 a .
The two longer transients are now seen, one as an exponential decay and the other as an asymptotic exponential rise with 265-day time constant.
Figure 1 c shows the residuals after removing the 265-day component.
Except for the first two days, the decaying component is well fitted by an exponential with 18-day time constant, but we now see that the glitch also leaves a nondecaying increase in rotation rate.
Finally, in Fig. 2 a we plot with higher time resolution the residuals obtained from all our observations in the first 15 days after the glitch; as in Fig. 1 c , the effects of the increased slowdown rate and the 265-day component have been removed.
The onset of the glitch is now seen to comprise an unresolved step followed by an exponential asymptotic rise to meet the 18-day exponential decaying component.
The time constant of this asymptotic rise is 0.8 day.
The amplitude of the initial unresolved step is 1.85x10 -6 Hz, and that of the short-term asymptotic rise is 0.7x10 -6 Hz.
The amplitude of the decaying exponential (2.3x10 -6 Hz) is less than the sum of these, leaving a net increase of 0.25x10 -6 Hz.
The long-term asymptotic rise eventually adds a further increase of 2.1x10 -6 Hz to the rotation rate.
The amplitudes and time constants of these components of the glitch are given in Table 1.
The values, obtained by a best-fitting process, are accurate to  10%.
They are, however, not completely independent of each other; for example , satisfactory fits can be obtained with time constants between 16 days and 20 days for the main recovery component, with small adjustments to the other values.
Other equally valid fits might also be obtained by allowing the 18-day decay to depart from a pure exponential; it would then be possible, for example, to obtain a solution in which the two asymptotic increases account for the whole of the increase in rotation rate.
Delayed increases in rotation rate have not previously been observed in glitches in any pulsar, on either a short or a long timescale.
It is remarkable that simple exponentials provide good fits to all three time-varying components, indicating that three distinct physical processes, possibly in three distinct regions, occurred in the superfluid of the neutron star.
The exponential decay is regarded as the re-establishment of the normal differential rotation between the crust and the superfluid; the two delayed spin-ups have as yet no explanation.
The largest and most significant effect of the glitch is seen to be the persistent change in slowdown rate, amounting to 0.04%.
It has already been pointed out that the 1975 glitch left a persistent increase of  0.05% in slowdown rate; the available data between 1975 and 1989 show no indication of a decay in this increase.
The change in 1989 was 0.04%, so that the cumulative effect of the two glitches is an increase in slowdown rate of  0.1% over 20 years.
The rotational slowdown rate is determined by the torque due to electromagnetic radiation and particle outflow, and by the effective moment of inertia of the star.
We are not yet able to say which of these two parameters changed at the glitches.
It is difficult to account for so large a change in terms of a decrease in effective moment of inertia due to a change in the shape of the crust of the star, because for a rotation rate of 30Hz the equilibrium ellipsoid has a moment of inertia only 10 -4 greater than that of a sphere.
Alternatively the decrease might be due to a progressive increase in vortex pinning in the superfluid as the neutron star slows down and cools.
If this glitch activity has continued over the lifetime of the pulsar, roughly 5% of the moment of inertia of the neutron star must now be effectively removed in the form of pinned vortices; but according to current models, only  1% of the total moment of inertia is involved in the whole of the superfluid that interpenetrates the inner crust, where pinning might take place.
The alternative explanation, involving a change in the rate of momentum loss through electromagnetic radiation or particle outflow might be accompanied by an observable change in the radiation pattern or the braking index; we intend to search for these in our continued monitoring programme.
FIG. 1 The 1989 glitch in the Crab pulsar.
Daily values of residuals in (a ) the rotation rate ,(b)the rotation rate after subtracting the change of slope  after also subtracting the 265-day asymptotic exponential.
All rotation rates have been corrected for the Earth's rotation and orbital motion, and are referred to a best fit for rotation rate and its first derivative made over 400 days immediately preceding the glitch.
FIG. 2
a,
Observed values of rotation rate for the first 15 days; as in Fig. 1 c , all values are residuals after allowing for the normal slowdown rate, the persistent increase in slowdown rate, and the 265-day component.
b,
The residuals after subtracting all four components described in the text.
Oxidative stress and heat shock induce a human gene encoding a protein-tyrosine phosphatase
Stephen M. Keyse & Elizabeth A. Emslie
REACTIVE oxygen species have been implicated both in the ageing process and in degenerative diseases, including arthritis and cancer.
Bacteria adapt to the lethal effects of oxidants such as hydrogen peroxide by inducing the expression of protective stress genes.
Analogous responses have been identified in human cells.
For example, haem oxygenase is a major stress protein in human cells treated with oxidants, and reactive oxygen intermediates activate NF-  B, a transcriptional regulator of genes involved in inflammatory and acute-phase responses.
We report here the isolation and characterization of a novel complementary DNA (CL100) corresponding to a messenger RNA that is highly inducible by oxidative stress and heat shock in human skin cells.
The cDNA contains an open reading frame specifying a protein of M r 39.3K with the structural features of a non-receptor-type protein-tyrosine phosphatase and which has significant amino-acid sequence similarity to a Tyr/Ser-protein phosphatase encoded by the late gene H1 of vaccinia virus.
The purified protein encoded by the CL100 open reading frame expressed in bacteria has intrinsic phosphatase activity.
Given the relationship between the levels of protein-tyrosine phosphorylation, receptor activity, cellular proliferation and cell-cycle control, the induction of this gene may play an important regulatory role in the human cellular response to environmental stress.
To isolate cDNAs corresponding to genes induced by oxidative stress, a cDNA library was prepared from human skin fibroblasts treated with 100μM hydrogen peroxide.
This library was differentially screened with a probe of total cDNA from peroxide-treated cells and a probe from untreated cells.
One clone (designated CL100) reproducibly showed a much higher hybridization signal with the induced probe relative to control and was characterized further.
Northern blot analysis shows that the cDNA insert from CL100 hybridizes with a single, highly inducible mRNA of about 2.4kilobases (kb)(Fig. 1 a ).
This mRNA accumulates rapidly after treatment with hydrogen peroxide, reaching levels up to 40-fold greater than those seen in untreated cells within 2h.
Elevated levels of the transcript persist for at least 6h before returning to normal.
Cells were treated with a range of chemical and physical insults before analysis of mRNA (Fig. 1 b ) and the pattern of induction of CL100 mRNA was compared with that for haem oxygenase, a gene transcriptionally induced in human cells by oxidant stress.
In addition to hydrogen peroxide, CL100 mRNA is strongly induced by two other oxidants: menadione, a superoxide-generating drug; and radical-inducing ultraviolet A (320–380nm) radiation.
CL100 mRNA levels are also increased in response to heat shock.
Although both CL100 and haem oxygenase mRNAs are induced by oxidants they are not coordinately induced by other stress treatments.
A number of genes have been identified as inducible in mammalian cells by agents that cause DNA damage and growth arrest.
These include DNA polymerase- β , c- fos and c- jun .
Because oxidants damage DNA and are also mutagenic it was of interest to determine whether DNA damage might be causing induction of the CL100 gene.
Cells were treated with different DNA-damaging agents and assayed for induction of CL100 mRNA.
As several well characterized DNA-damaging treatments led to no induction (Table 1), we conclude that damage to DNA following treatment with oxidants is not the trigger for the induction of this gene.
The nucleotide sequence of the CL100 cDNA was determined (Fig. 2 a ).
The insert is 2kb long excluding the poly(A) + tail.
The first ATG in from the 5' end is located at nucleotide 234 in a sequence context favourable to translation initiation.
A continuous open reading frame extends to nucleotide 1,334 and specifies a polypeptide of 367 amino acids with a predicted molecular mass of 39,302.
By using the MOTIFS search for protein patterns defined in the PROSITE dictionary, we have found that the carboxy terminal portion of the CL100 polypeptide contains a single copy of the highly conserved active-site sequence of protein-tyrosine phosphatases (PTPases) Ile/Val-His-Cys-X-Ala-Gly-X-X-arg (amino acids 256–264).
The putative CL100 protein thus has the structural features of an expanding family of non-receptor-type protein-tyrosine phosphatases which include the cdc25 M-phase inducer, placental PTPase1B and T-cell PTPase.
To determine whether the CL100 protein possesses phosphatase activity, the open reading frame (nucleotides 234–1,421) was subcloned into the bacterial expression vector pET-15b (Novagen) and recombinant protein was isolated in a highly purified form (Fig. 3 a ).
This protein rapidly hydrolyses p- nitrophenyl phosphate (pNPP), a chromogenic molecule that is structurally related to phosphotyrosine (Fig. 3 b ).
The dephosphorylation of pNPP by the CL100 protein displays many of the properties typical for the known protein-tyrosine phosphatases.
Sodium vanadate (a potent inhibitor of protein-tyrosine phosphatases) abolishes the enzyme activity (Fig. 3 b ).
Zinc ions also strongly repress the CL100 phosphatase.
Activity is dependent on the presence of reducing agent and shows no requirement for divalent cations (data not shown).
A search of the EMBL/GenBank and SwissProt databases using the FASTA program reveals that the CL100 nucleotide sequence is 86.6% identical to a recently characterized mouse cDNA (3CH134) for a growth factor-inducible immediate early gene and has significant amino-acid sequence similarity to the Ser/Tyr-phosphatase encoded by the late gene H1 of vaccinia virus.
The mouse cDNA encodes a protein of 367 amino acids which is 96.5% identical to the CL100 polypeptide and is clearly the mouse homologue of our human gene.
The presence of the PTPase active-site sequence and similarity to the vaccinia protein has also been noted.
The relationship between the amino-acid sequences of CL100, 3CH134 and other non-receptor protein-tyrosine phosphatases is shown in Fig. 2 b .
The region of similarity between the CL100 protein and the vaccinia H1 sequence extends from residue 182 through the active-site sequence, ending at residue 274.
Although over this region there is significant similarity between the vaccinia protein and other human non-receptor PTPases (placental and T cell) these residues (with the exception of the conserved phenylalanine at position 243) are not present in the CL100 sequence.
The significance of the sequence similarity between our gene and the vaccinia protein is as yet unclear.
Unlike other PTPases the vaccinia protein is able to dephosphorylate proteins modified both at serine and at tyrosine residues, but the structural basis of this altered specificity and its biological significance are unknown.
We conclude that the CL100 gene and its mouse homologue represent a new subclass of mammalian PTPase in that they show no significant similarity to any human PTPase yet discovered other than the presence of the highly conserved active-site sequence.
Tyrosine phosphorylation and dephosphorylation are central to the process of growth regulation, differentiation and oncogenesis.
We speculate that the PTPase encoded by the CL100 gene may play an important regulatory role in the cellular response to adverse environmental challenges, including oxidants and hyperthermia.
Further study of the biological activity of the CL100 protein and the identification of its physiological substrates should yield vital information as to the nature of the signal transduction pathways involved.
Levels of CL100 mRNA were determined 2h after the above treatments by northern blotting, exactly as described in Fig. 1.
Hybridization signals were quantified by densitometric scanning of these blots and levels of induction are expressed as fold increase over the signals in untreated controls.
The figures given are readings from from single experiments, typical of 2 or more independent determinations.
H 2 O 2 , Hydrogen peroxide; UVC, far ultraviolet radiation (254nm); UVA, near ultraviolet radiation (320–380nm); MNNG,N -methyl- N' nitro- N- nitrosoguanidine;cis- DDP,cis -diamminedichloro-platinum(II).
FIG. 1 a , Time course of CL100 mRNA accumulation in human skin fibroblasts (strain EK4) following treatment with 200μM hydrogen peroxide. b , The accumulation of CL100 mRNA in EK4 fibroblasts 2h after various chemical and physical treatments compared with the levels of mRNA for the stress-inducible haem oxygenase (HO) gene.
Lanes 1 and 7, control; lane 2, 200μM hydrogen peroxide; lane 3, 500μM menadione; lane 4, 8x10 5 Jm -2 of ultraviolet A (320–380nm) radiation; lane 5, 50μM sodium arsenite; lane 6, heat shock 45°C for 5min.
Both blots were reprobed with the Pst 1 fragment of the glyceraldehyde phosphate dehydrogenase gene (GAPDH) as a loading control.
METHODS.
Cells were treated with chemicals for 30min at 37 °C or as stated and then incubated for the indicated times before isolation of total RNA.
Northern blot analysis was done using standard techniques.
FIG. 2 a , Nucleotide and predicted amino-acid sequences corresponding to the CL100 partial cDNA.
Nucleotides are numbered on the left beginning at the first nucleotide of the cDNA.
Amino acids are numbered in italics on the left beginning at the first predicted Met.
The termination codon is denoted by a full stop.
A direct repeat of a message destabilization signal at nucleotide 1,441–1,449 is underlined and a polyadenylation signal at nucleotide 1,980–1,985 is shaded.
The position of the conserved active-site sequence of protein-tyrosine phosphatases at amino-acids 256–264 is indicated by a black background.
b , Sequence alignment of the predicted CL100 open reading frame with those of the mouse 3CH134 cDNA, the vaccinia virus H1 gene, human placental PTP-1B (HPTP) and T-cell PTP (TPTP).
Amino-acid residues that are completely conserved are shown in bold type.
Sequence identity between CL100/3CH134 and the vaccinia H1 gene is indicated by a black background and amino acids conserved in the vaccina, placental and T-cell enzymes are shaded.
Spaces represent gaps inserted to maximize matches.
Full stops indicate the end of an amino-acid sequence.
METHODS.
Poly(A) + RNA was isolated from normal human skin fibroblasts 2h after treatment with 100μM hydrogen peroxide for 30min and used to construct a cDNA library in λ gt10 (ref. 27).
This cDNA library was then differentially screened using the method of Leonard et al .
and the CL100 cDNA was isolated after several rounds of rescreening for recombinants that showed reproducibly higher hybridization signals with the induced, relative to the control probe.
The partial CL100 cDNA was completely sequenced in both strands by using Sequenase 2.0 (USB), essentially as described by the manufacturer.
Amino-acid sequences were aligned using a combination of the FASTA program and visual inspection.
FIG. 3 a , SDS-PAGE of purified His-Tag CL100 fusion protein.
M r s of standards (K) are shown on the left side of the gel.
b , The CL100 protein has intrinsic phosphatase activity.
The purified protein was assayed at the indicated concentrations for its ability to hydrolyse p- nitrophenol phosphate (pNPP) either in the absence (○) or presence (○) of 200μM sodium vanadate.
METHODS.
The CL100 cDNA was used as a template in a polymerase chain reaction to generate an Nde I- Xho I fragment containing the CL100 open reading frame (nucleotides 234–1,421).
This was then inserted into Nde I- Xho I digested pET-15b (Novagen) vector DNA and the reading frame verified by DNA sequence analysis.
This plasmid was used to express CL100 as a His-Tag fusion protein which was purified in a denatured form as described.
The purified protein was then refolded by gradual removal of the denaturant by dialysis and analysed by SDS-PAGE.
Hydrolysis of pNPP was in a reaction volume of 200μl containing 50mM imidazole, pH 7.5, 0.1% β -mercaptoethanol, 20mM pNPP and enzyme at 30°C for 30min.
The reaction was stopped by addition of 800μl of 0.25M NaOH and the absorbance at 410nm (A 410 ) was measured.
Probing met repressor-operator recognition in solution
Yi-Yuan He, Teresa McNally, Iain Manfield, Oldrich Navratil, Iain G.Old, Simon E.V.Phillips, Isabelle Saint-Girons & Peter G. Stockley
THE three-dimensional crystal structure of the Escherichia coli methionine repressor, MetJ, complexed with a DNA operator fragment is described in an accompanying article.
The complex exhibits several novel features of DNA-protein interaction.
DNA sequence recognition is achieved largely by hydrogen-bond contacts between the bases and amino-acid side chains located on a β -ribbon, a mode of recognition previously hypothesized on the basis of modelling of idealized β -strands and DNA, and mutagenesis of the Salmonella phage P22 repressors Arc and Mnt.
The complex comprises a pair of MetJ repressor dimers which bind to adjacent met- box sites on the DNA, and contact each other by means of a pair of antiparallel α -helices.
Here we assess the importance of these contacts, and also of contacts that would be made between the C-helices of the protein and DNA in a previous model of the complex, by studying mutations aimed at disrupting them.
The role of the carboxy-terminal helix face in operator binding was unclear, but we demonstrate that recognition of operator sequences occurs through side chains in the β -strand motif and that dimer-dimer interactions are required for effective repression.
We produced mutations in the MetJ subunit to disrupt the contacts for DNA binding or the interaction between dimers (Fig. 1).
The mutant proteins were screened in vitro using a gel retardation assay (Fig. 2) and in vivo using the assay described in Table 1, where the results are listed.
Mutations in the β -strand DNA-binding motif fall into three groups, corresponding to changes at three residues.
These are mutations of Lys22 (to Glu, Ala or Arg), whose side chain in the crystal structure makes contact with the phosphate backbone of the DNA; Lys23 (to Glu, Ala or Arg), which is hydrogen-bonded to the guanine residue at operator positions 2, 7, 10 and 15 (see Table 1 and ref. 1 for details of numbering system); and Thr25 (to Val, Gln or Asn), which is hydrogen-bonded to N7 of the adenines at positions 3, 6, 11 and 14 of the operator.
The data for Lys23 and Thr25 are consistent with both residues being involved in sequence-specific recognition.
Mutations at Lys22 suggest slight deleterious effects on operator recognition in vitro of the Glu and Ala mutations, with somewhat better than wild-type affinity for Arg substitution.
But in vivo these mutants are all wild-type within experimental error, suggesting that this contact does not contribute significantly to the overall stability of the operator complex.
Mutations in the A-helices, which mediate the interaction between adjacent repressors, were at two positions, Thr37 in the dimer-dimer interface and Arg40 which makes a contact with the DNA phosphate backbone.
The results suggest that both contacts are important for effective repression, confirming the requirement for protein-protein cooperativity in operator binding.
Mutations that affect corepressor binding are of two types.
The first includes residues that contact the bound corepressor,S -adenosylmethionine (SAM), directly (His63 and Leu70).
Replacement of these side chains, by Gln and Arg, respectively, results in significantly lower affinities for operators both in vitro and in vivo,presumably by lowering the affinity for SAM, although the K d s for SAM binding were not determined.
The second type of mutation is at Phe65, the side chain that must rotate out of a hydrophobic pocket in the apoprotein to allow SAM to bind.
Replacement by Ala has a deleterious effect in vitro but essentially acts as the wild type in vivo .
Three mutations directed at the C-helix face of the protein have also been analysed.
Met95 to Trp substitution yields a slightly lower affinity for the operator fragment than wild type in vitro,but essentially acts as the wild type in vivo .
Mutation of residues Glu94 (to Arg) and Asp72 (to Arg) yield unexpected behaviour.
In the in vivo assay both mutations behaved as the wild type, but they had slightly lower affinities than wild type in vitro as judged by gel retardation assays.
But in nitrocellulose filter-binding assays, both mutant proteins apparently had increased affinities for DNA compared with the wild-type protein, and altered ionic strength dependencies of operator affinities (Fig. 3).
We believe that the differences in affinities determined by the different techniques may be due to the relatively rapid sampling of the filter-binding assay.
This could trap transient complexes, which would have time to dissociate during electrophoresis into the gel at the start of a gel retardation experiment.
Both mutations result in a net increase of four positive charges per repressor dimer, which is consistent with the observed increase in electrostatic attraction to the DNA.
Clearly more experiments are required to probe the role, if any, of the C-terminal helix face in operator binding.
But the results with the other MetJ mutations demonstrate that side chains in the β -strand motif mediate recognition of operator sequences, and also that dimer-dimer interaction is important for effective repression.
These data, together with the results of in vitro binding assays, chemical and enzymatic footprinting, and systematic variation of operator sequences (P.G.S. et al.,unpublished results), confirm the essential features of the repressor-operator interaction seen in the crystal structure.
The in vivo data are the ratios of β -galactosidase activities in E. coli GT1008 (metJ -) carrying two plasmids: the metF'-lacZ + reporter construct pIP86 (ref. 6) and either pGW11 (control) or pGW11-tacmetJ (metJ + ).
The β -galactosidase activity of the wild-type repressor results in the production of 37.6nmol of O -nitrophenol per min, per mg protein at 28°C, pH 7.0.
The DNA substrate for operator binding in vitro is the anti- met- box construct, designed to assay binding of repressor to two, tandem 8bp met- box sites.
Relative affinities were determined in gel retardation assays and were normalized to a wild-type (WT)K d of 1.
The sequence numbering of the met operator is as the description of the DNA fragment in the crystal, where bases 1–8 and 9–16 correspond to consensus met boxes
Site-directed mutagenesis was done using the phosphothioate method (Amersham).
Cloned mutated genes were fully sequenced to ensure that the only changes were those required.
The DNA fragments were then subcloned into an expression vector and overexpressed in E. coli GT1008 (metJ185am).
Cell extracts were prepared by sonication, treated with DNaseI to remove nucleic acids and the met repressor concentration estimated using a combination of the Bradford assay and SDS-PAGE.
Although the extent of expression varied between different mutant proteins the extracts contained between 20 and 50% of total protein as met repressor.
Several of the mutants have been purified to homogeneity (indicated by) and used in gel retardation assays.
The values for operator affinities determined for these mutants were identical (within experimental error) to those determined in the extracts.
Native gels, circular dichroism spectra and differential scanning calorimetry (C. M. Johnson, personal communication) of purified mutant proteins show that the mutations have little or no effect on the stability and folding of the dimers, suggesting that changes in binding affinity result only from elimination of the intended intermolecular contacts.
Where possible the purified proteins have been sequenced at the amino terminus to confirm the presence of the expected mutation.
Complexes were formed between protein and DNA in the presence of the corepressor, SAM (1mM) at 37°C for 15min before electrophoresis in 10% (w/v) polyacrylamide gels containing 0.1mM SAM.
The affinity of each repressor mutant was estimated by serial twofold dilution of the cell extracts across the range where retardation of the DNA fragments was observed.
Autoradiographs of the gels were then analysed by densitometry and the met repressor protein concentration at which 50% of the input DNA was retarded from its unshifted position was estimated.
FIG. 1
a,
Ribbon representation of the backbone of a MetJ dimer in the conformation adopted when bound to DNA.
One subunit is shaded and the corepressor is shown as a stick model.
The DNA binds to the β -strands on the left-hand face of the molecule in this view.
b,
A single subunit of the dimer showing the locations of the residues mutated in this study.
FIG. 2 Results of gel retardation assays using several of the mutant MetJ repressors.
Open arrowheads indicate the position of free operator-fragment DNA, solid arrowheads mark the position of sequence-specific retarded complexes.
Samples were diluted serially, twofold from right to left.
Samples (and initial protein concentrations) were as follows:
a,
wild-type MetJ (2.28μM),
b,
Q94R (1.47μM),
c,
K22R (4.83μM),
d,
K23R (10μM),
e,
T25N (8.95μM),
f,
T37A (13.33μM),
g,
R40E (170μM).
FIG. 3
a,
Nitrocellulose filter-binding assays of purified mutant repressors.
Assays were carried out using a radiolabelled restriction fragment containing the anti- met- box construct (00186).
Wild type (sl;); Glu94  Arg (); Asp72  Arg (○).
b,
Salt-dependence of operator binding.
Equilibrium binding experiments were done under standard assay conditions.
The ionic strength of the binding buffer was changed by altering the KCl concentration.
Labels as in a .
Lines are the linear regressions through the data.
Saharan exploitation of plants 8,000 years BP
Fred Wendorf, Angela E. Close, Romuald Schild, Krystyna Wasylikowa, Rupert A. Housley, Jack R. Harlan  & Halina Królik
SORGHUM and millets are among the world's most important food crops and, for the inhabitants of the semi-arid tropics, they are the main sources of protein and energy.
Little is known about the history of these crops; their domestication is thought to have occurred in the African savannah, but the date and precise location are unknown.
Excavations at an early Holocene archaeological site in southernmost Egypt, 100km west of Abu Simbel, have yielded hundreds of carbonized seeds of sorghum and millets, with consistent radiocarbon dates of 8,000 years before present (BP), thus providing the earliest evidence for the use of these plants.
They are morphologically wild, but the lipid fraction of the sorghum grains shows a closer relationship to domesticated than to wild varieties.
Whatever their domestic status, the use of these plants 8,000 years ago suggests that the African plant-food complex developed independently of the Levantine wheat and barley complex.
Recent excavations at an early Holocene archaeological site in the Egyptian Sahara have yielded several thousand carbonized remains of plant foods.
They represent more than 40 different plants, including sorghum, millets, legumes, fruits, nuts and tubers that are presumed to be wild (although there are some suggestions of cultivation in the sorghum).
Accelerator mass-spectrometric C dates on 11 of the seeds all fall within one standard deviation of 8,000yrBP.
The early Holocene plants were found at Site E-75–6, at Nabta Playa, near the Egyptian-Sudanese border.
The site had been excavated in 1975 and 1977, when almost 1,000m 2 were cleared, revealing cultural deposits belonging to two phases of Early Neolithic, of which the earlier was dated to 8,800–8,500yrBP.
The upper horizon of the site showed an arrangement of two rows of features, including the shallow basin-floors of huts, hearths, storage pits and walk-in wells; it gave several C dates on charcoal of 8,100–8,000yrBP.
The site was re-excavated in 1990 and 1991, in an area south-east of the earlier excavations (in the direction of the two lines of features) and sealed beneath playa clays, unlike the areas of the 1970s.
Removal of the clays uncovered four houses, two oval and two round, and twelve pits within a 10x15m area; only two quadrants of each house have been excavated.
The two oval houses were large (8.3x4.5m and 7x2.5m), shallow basins.
The floor of one of them had traces of six hearths (1m 2 in area) and, separate from them, at least 74 small hemispherical depressions, or cooking-holes, usually 10–20cm in diameter (Fig. 1).
The excavated portion of the other oval house had four hearths and 18 cooking-holes.
The shallow, circular houses are about 4m in diameter.
One had three hearths and seven cooking-holes plus an irregular bell-shaped storage pit, and the other had a single hearth and 23 cooking-holes.
Two pits crossed the edge of one of the oval houses, indicating more than one occupation of the site; however, the accelerator dates indicate that all the houses and pits were used around 8,000yrBP (Table 1).
In all the houses, a burned, ashy sediment had been piled up around some of the cooking-holes while they held containers, and this sediment was particularly rich in plant remains.
This suggests that containers of food were placed in the cooking-holes and that hot ash was piled around them to cook the contents, which sometimes boiled over or fell into the ash, leading to carbonization and preservation.
The plant taxa identified thus far are listed in Table 2.
The collections are dominated by seeds probably of the mustard and caper families,Zizyphus stones, grass grains, and seeds of leguminous plants; the unidentified material consists of many examples of a few types.
There is very marked patterning in the association of different taxa with different cooking-holes.
Some holes yielded predominantly Leguminosae (sometimes a single taxon, sometimes several taxa); some yielded Gramineae (including sorghums and millets); some Cruciferae, Cucurbitaceae, Cyperaceae or Boraginaceae (Arnebia);some Zizyphus fruits; and some yielded mixtures in differing proportions (Fig.2).
Several grasses were collected, as they still are today by Saharan nomads.
These included primarily Sorghum (which biometrically represents a single, fairly homogeneous population), and the smaller-grained grasses resembling Panicum, Digitaria, Brachiaria, Urochloa, Echinochloa and Setaria.
Several species of Leguminosae were also collected for their seeds, and probably for tubers as well.
The abundance and diversity of the plants indicate that the local vegetation was rich in species and, in some seasons, relatively luxuriant.
All the plants represented are members of the natural sub-desertic or sahelian flora.
The sorghum and millets correspond in size and structure to modern wild varieties of these plants and thus seem to be parts of an economy based on gathering wild plant foods.
But preliminary investigation by infrared spectroscopy of the lipids in the sorghum grains suggest the possibility of some cultivation.
Five archaeological specimens from four features were compared with specimens (from the herbarium at Kew) of three cultivated races of Sorghum bicolor and four wild species of Sorghum: S. arundinaceum, S. aethiopicum, S. verticilli florum and S. virgatum.
The spectrographic results for the archaeological specimens are all very similar, and are closer to the cultivated specimens than to the wild, particularly in the hexane extracts.
Considerably more work will be required to investigate this possibility, but it is particularly intriguing as it has been suggested that sorghum and millet were domesticated somewhere in the African savannah zone.
The wild relatives of most of the plants of the African savannah complex grow today in the savannah and it has been assumed that they were domesticated somewhere within that zone.
There are several theories of where and when this occurred, but there has been no direct archaeological evidence.
This absence results primarily from the assumption that the domestication of African plants was a late and secondary development, which began well after wheat and barley agriculture was established in Egypt, about 6,400yrBP.
The problem is compounded by the poor preservation of organic (especially plant) materials in the recent savannah.
The history of plant domestication in south-western Asia is comparatively well known.
Cereals and pulses began to be used intensively in many areas around 12,000yrBP, and shortly after 10,000yrBP domestic varieties of peas, lentils, barley and emmer wheat occur in several sites.
The subsequent transformation to a food-producing economy was rapid but not uniform; some localities continued to use wild plants long after the domestic forms were used in adjacent areas, but by 8,000yrBP domestic wheat and barley were in general use throughout the Levant.
There is no evidence, however, that these Levantine plants were introduced into Africa until much later: in Egypt, the earliest known wheat and barley are in the Fayum Neolithic, with radiocarbon dates of about 6,400yrBP.
Today, the northern boundary of the savannah runs east-west, just north of the latitude of Khartoum in central Sudan, and generally coincides with the 100mm isohyet.
The northward movement and intensification of the monsoons during the early Holocene were apparently sufficient to shift this boundary 600–700km northwards into southern Egypt.
The evidence for the intensive use of sorghum and millets some 8,000 years ago indicates that such use first occurred much earlier than previously thought, and took place in what is today a rainless desert.
It is a short step from intensive use of wild plants, to planting and protecting those plants, and thus to the genetic changes involved in domestication.
Dates are expressed in radiocarbon years before the present (AD 1950), using the half-life of 5,568 years.
Isotope fractionation has been corrected for by measuring the 13 C (to within  0.5–1.0  relative to the standard rock, PDB), except for OxA-3214 and OxA-3215, for which an assumed value of -26  was used.
All age determinations have been normalized to -25  in accordance with international convention.
Errors are quoted  1s.d. and represent the total error of the accelerator mass-spectrometric system, including the sample chemistry.
Chemical pretreatment was as described in ref. 13; C measurement as ref. 14.
Locations as Fig. 1.
NA, not applicable.
FIG. 1 Detailed plan of the areas of Site E-75–6, Nabta Playa, excavated in 1990 and 1991, showing the outlines of the house floors (features) with hearths and cooking-holes (or potholes).
FIG. 2 Charred plant remains from Site E-75–6.
a-c,
Grains of Sorghum sp. showing the ventral (a ) and dorsal (b, c)surfaces.
d,
Grain of Panicum- type.
e,
Grain of Echinochloa- type.
f,
Complete fruit-stone of Zizyphus sp.
g,
Inner surface of a fragment of a Zizyphus fruit-stone, showing two cells.
h,
Seed of Zizyphus sp.
Each scale bar, 1mm.
(Photographs by A. Pachonski.)
Deletion polymorphism in the gene for angiotensin-converting enzyme is a potent risk factor for myocardial infarction
François Cambien, Odette Poirier, Laure Lecerf, Alun Evans, Jean-Pierre Cambou, Dominique Arveiler, Gerald Luc, Jean-Marie Bard, Lucienne Bara, Sylvain Ricard, Laurence Tiret, Philippe Amouyel, François Alhenc-Gelas & Florent Soubrier
FACTORS involved in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis, thrombosis and vasoconstriction contribute to the development of coronary heart disease.
In a study comparing patients after myocardial infarction with controls, we have explored a possible association between coronary heart disease and a variation found in the gene encoding angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE).
The polymorphism ACE/ID is strongly associated with the level of circulating enzyme.
This enzyme plays a key role in the production of angiotensin II and in the catabolism of bradykinin, two peptides involved in the modulation of vascular tone and in the proliferation of smooth muscle cells.
Here we report that the DD genotype, which is associated with higher levels of circulating ACE than the ID and II genotypes, is significantly more frequent in patients with myocardial infarction (n=610)than in controls (n=733)(P=0.007),especially among subjects with low body-mass index and low plasma levels of ApoB (P= 0.0001).
The ACE/ID polymorphism seems to be a potent risk factor of coronary heart disease in subjects formerly considered to be at low risk according to common criteria.
The level of plasma angiotensin-converting enzyme is stable in an individual but is highly variable between individuals.
About 50% of this inter-individual variability of plasma ACE concentration is determined by a major gene effect.
After the ACE gene was cloned it was shown that this major gene effect is associated with an insertion (I) /deletion (D)polymorphism situated in intron 16 of the ACE gene (ACE/ID polymorphism); the mean plasma ACE level in DD subjects was about twice that of II subjects, with ID subjects having intermediate levels.
As the ACE gene is a candidate gene for cardiovascular disease, any possible association between the ACE/ID polymorphism and myocardial infarction was investigated in the ECTIM (Etude Cas-Témoin de l'Infarctus du Myocarde) study, a multicentre study designed to identify variants of candidate genes predisposing to myocardial infarction.
This study included male patients and appropriate controls recruited in different European populations at highly contrasting risk for coronary heart disease.
The ACE/ID polymorphism was analysed by DNA amplification.
The distributions of the ACE genotypes (Table 1) in cases and controls in the different populations were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, except in the control group of Toulouse where, for unknown reasons, an excess of heterozygotes was observed.
In the whole population, the genotype characterized by two short alleles (genotype DD)was associated with an excess of cases with myocardial infarction compared with the two other genotypes (ID and II)(P=0.007).
This association was not significantly heterogeneous across populations and the frequency of the two alleles was similar in the different control groups.
In view of the association between the ACE/ID polymorphism and myocardial infarction, different variables potentially related to the disease were compared between ACE/ID genotypes.
As shown in Table 2, no difference could be detected between genotypes for plasma lipid variables, fibrinogen, body mass index (BMI), cigarette consumption or blood pressure.
Moreover, the prevalence of hypertension, as defined by a diastolic blood pressure higher than 100mmHg or by antihypertensive treatment, was similar in the three genotypes: 22.0%, 17.7% and 20.3% in genotypes DD, ID and II respectively (nonsignificant differences).
As the influence of the DD genotype seemed to be independent of classical risk factors, we considered that it might be particularly important in myocardial infarction patients considered to be at low risk according to the usual criteria.
Hyperlipidaemia and obesity are important contributors to the coronary heart disease epidemic in western countries, so a low-risk group was defined according to plasma ApoB level and BMI.
This low-risk group included subjects with a plasma ApoB level lower than 125mgdl -1 (roughly the median level of ApoB in controls), those not undergoing treatment with hypo-lipidaemic drugs and those with a BMI  26kgm -2 (the roughly median BMI in controls).
In this group (Table 3), the association between the ACE/ID polymorphism and myocardial infarction was highly significant and was homogeneous across the populations; the overall odds ratio (an estimate of relative risk), adjusted for population, was 3.2 (P= 0.0001).
Conversely, in the high-risk group, which included all subjects who were not in the low-risk group already defined (Table 3), the ACE/ID polymorphism was not related to myocardial infarction.
In the whole population, after adjustment for age, cigarette consumption, plasma ApoAI, plasma Lp (a ), blood pressure and social class, the DD genotype and its interaction with the risk status were still highly significantly associated with myocardial infarction (P 0.0005 and P=0.02,respectively).
The ACE/ID polymorphism is thus an independent risk factor for myocardial infarction in low-risk individuals.
We defined our low-risk group by reference to plasma ApoB level, hypolipidaemic treatment and BMI; the results were very similar (but slightly less significant) when total cholesterol or cholesterol in low-density lipoproteins (LDL) was used instead of ApoB.
In contrast, the association between the DD genotype and myocardial infarction was similar in the groups defined according to the median of cigarette consumption, ApoAl, Lp (a ) or fibrinogen.
Furthermore, as many of the patients received potent drugs likely to affect blood pressure, we were unable to define a normotensive low-risk group.
It is unlikely that population heterogeneity could explain our results: in each population, cases and controls were carefully selected to minimize ethnic heterogeneity.
All subjects participating in our study were caucasians; we have studied other samples from general populations of caucasian origin and found that the frequency of the ACE/ID polymorphism was fairly similar to that in the ECTIM study.
The fact that the association was homogeneous across populations also provides a strong argument against a possible confounding effect of population heterogeneity.
The frequency of the ACE/DD genotype in the general population was 0.27.
If we assume that the relative risk is well approximated by the odds ratio, the percentage of cases that could be attributable to this genotype was 8% in the whole population and 35% in the low-risk group.
The values of these estimates indicate a strong impact of the ACE/ID polymorphism on myocardial infarction in the population.
ACE exists predominantly as an ectoenzyme of vascular endothelial cells and plays a key part in the renin-angiotensin and kallikrein-kinin systems by activating angiotensin I into angiotensin II and inactivating bradykinin.
These two peptide hormones have opposite effects on vascular tone and on smooth muscle cell proliferation, and as neointimal proliferation and vasospasm may be involved in the pathogenesis of coronary heart disease, the most likely mechanism by which the ACE polymorphism affects the risk of myocardial infarction is by modulating the level of these peptides in the coronary arteries.
This hypothesis is compatible with earlier results and with a study of hypertensive patients with high renin profiles, a condition likely to be associated with increased angiotensin II, who were found to be at higher risk of coronary heart disease than those with low renin profiles.
But we cannot exclude an effect of ACE on the metabolism of other peptides in view of its wide substrate specificity, nor can we exclude the possibility that a variant of another gene, closely linked to the ACE gene, causes the observed association.
The fact that the ACE polymorphism is unrelated to blood pressure and hypertension agrees with results obtained from hypertensive sibs.
An association between the ACE/ID polymorphism and blood pressure might have been expected from its anticipated effect on vascular tone and architecture.
But the deleterious effect of the DD genotype might be restricted to certain vascular territories like the coronary circulation or might develop preferentially in atheromatous arteries.
Also, regulatory mechanisms such as increased natriuresis may counteract the effect of ACE on peripheral resistance.
Results from a family study combining linkage and segregation analyses have indicated that the ACE/ID polymorphism is unlikely to be the locus directly affecting the variability of plasma ACE, but that it could be a marker in strong linkage disequilibrium with this locus.
We have inferred that the sensitivity and specificity of the ACE/D allele as a marker of the postulated ‘susceptibility’ allele were 1 and 0.77, respectively.
So the ACE/D allele seems to be a very good marker for the susceptibility allele in that population, which may not be the case in non-caucasian populations.
Characterization of the molecular basis of the susceptibility genotype should help explain why the risk of myocardial infarct is increased in DD individuals and improve the specificity of risk assessment.
The plasma ACE level could turn out to be more useful for risk assessment than identifying the ACE genotype.
In conclusion, the ACE/DD genotype is a new potent risk factor for myocardial infarction in middle-aged men, particularly in subjects normally considered to be at low risk.
The genetic nature of this risk factor does not preclude the possibility of prevention because ACE blockers are available, but their effectiveness and safety for preventing myocardial infarction remain to be established.
As with any newly proposed risk factor, independent confirmation of our results will be necessary.
Statistical analysis of association between myocardial infarction (MI) and ACE polymorphism (logistic regression analysis):
ACE genotype (DD more frequent in cases than in controls): Population (different relative frequency of cases and controls in the 4 populations): Heterogeneity of ACE genotype effect across populations:
The populations participating in the ECTIM study have been described and their representativity analysed in detail.
Briefly, cases were recruited from the MONICA registers in Belfast (Northern Ireland), Lille (northern France), Strasbourg (eastern France) and Toulouse (south western France).
Patients aged 25 to 64 who survived a myocardial infarction (MI) according to the MONICA diagnostic category I over the study period (December 1988-June 1991) were eligible.
Patients were recruited in hospitals and blood samples taken at least 3 months and at most 9 months after their MI.
The samples were obtained from controls, from electoral rolls in Strasbourg, Lille and Toulouse and from the lists of General Practitioners held by the Central Services Agency in Belfast.
Informed consent was obtained from the subjects.
To increase the ethnic homogeneity within the regions, families of patients and controls had to have been resident in the region for at least two generations and all their grandparents had to have been born in Europe; all participants were caucasians.
The numbers of patients with MI and controls included in this analysis of the ACE gene polymorphism were, respectively, 201 and 180 from Belfast, 58 and 148 from Lille (the relatively small number of cases in this centre was due to unexpected difficulties of recruitment), 204 and 194 from Strasbourg, and 147 and 211 from Toulouse.
The mean age of cases and controls was similar: 53.9 (s.d. 8.8) and 53.1 (s.d. 8.5), respectively, and the mean cholesterol level in the control groups was identical to those obtained in the random samples of the first MONICA survey.
The distribution of ACE genotypes was independent of age and social class.
Significant departure from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium:P= 0.005.
The odds ratio is a measure of relative risk of MI between subjects with the DD genotype and subjects with the ID or II genotype.
Odds ratio adjusted on population.
This analysis was performed in the control groups to avoid the potential bias that might result from lifestyle changes (particularly treatment) occurring after myocardial infarction.
No statistically significant difference was detected between ACE genotypes.
The techniques used in the ECTIM study to measure lipid variables have been described.
Fibrinogen was measured by the thrombin time method.
Blood pressure is the mean of two measurements made at 5-min intervals with a random zero sphygmomanometer on subjects in the sitting position at rest.
Crystal structure of a streptococcal protein G domain bound to an Fab fragment
Jeremy P. Derrick & Dale B. Wigley
PROTEIN G is a cell-surface protein from Streptococcus which binds to IgG molecules from a wide range of species with an affinity comparable to that of antigen.
The high affinity of protein G for the Fab portion of IgG poses a particular challenge in molecular recognition, given the variability of heavy chain subclass, light chain type and complementarity-determining regions.
Here we report the crystal structure of a complex between a protein G domain and an immunoglobulin Fab fragment.
An outer β -strand in the protein G domain forms an antiparallel interaction with the last β -strand in the constant heavy chain domain of the immunoglobulin, thus extending the β -sheet into the protein G. The interaction between secondary structural elements in Fab and protein G provides an ingenious solution to the problem of maintaining a high affinity for many different IgG molecules.
The structure also contrasts with Fab-antigen complexes, in which all contacts with antigen are mediated by the variable regions of the antibody, and to our knowledge provides the first details of interaction of the constant regions of Fab with another protein.
To investigate the molecular basis for the wide specificity of protein G for IgG, we prepared crystals of the complex between the third IgG-binding domain of protein G and an Fab fragment from mouse IgG1 (ref. 5).
The structure was solved by molecular replacement using the model for the HyHel-10 Fab/lysozyme complex (Brookhaven; accession number 3HFM) with the lysozyme coordinates removed.
Refinement of the structure used a combination of molecular dynamics (X-plor) and least-squares minimization; the final R -factor was 20.9% for all data between 10 and 2.6  resolution (Table 1).
Density corresponding to the protein G domain appeared during the refinement adjacent to the CH1 domain in the immunoglobulin.
In the final structure it is clear that protein G binds exclusively to this domain and there are no direct contacts between protein G and either the light chain or the variable region of the heavy chain (Fig. 1).
The CH1 domain is relatively invariant between different Fabs derived from IgG and therefore represents the most attractive binding site for protein G.
The interaction between protein G and CH1 is accomplished by an alignment of β -strands in the two proteins, extending the β -sheet from the immunoglobulin domain into protein G (Fig. 2).
Protein G has an α/β structure in solution, which is preserved on binding to Fab.
The complex is stabilized through a network of hydrogen-bonds extending from the last β -strand in the CH1 domain (residues 209 to 216) to the second β -strand in protein G (residues 16 to 22).
This includes a pattern of hydrogen bonding at the centre of this region which is typical of antiparallel β -sheet, from residues 212 to 214 in the heavy chain and 18 to 20 in protein G. In addition, there are also hydrogen-bonds from the side chains of threonines 16, 21 and 22 in protein G to heavy chain residues.
A second, minor region of contact occurs between the C-terminal end of the α -helix in protein G (residues 42 and 38) and the first β -strand of the CH1 domain (residues 128 and 126).
The atoms that are involved in these interactions are predominantly from the heavy chain backbone, but use both main chain and side chain atoms from protein G. The complex is stabilized further by the association of exposed nonpolar residues from Fab and protein G, providing a continuous hydrophobic core which is shielded from solvent.
All the side chains from the heavy chain involved in hydrogen bonding or hydrophobic interactions are highly conserved in all four gamma heavy chain subclasses in mouse and human.
The nature of the interactions between the proteins in the complex provides a possible explanation for the wide specificity of protein G for IgG.
First, this is achieved by recognition of the CH1 domain, the portion of Fab that is most highly conserved.
Second, the recognition of Fab by protein G is mediated largely by backbone atoms in the immunoglobulin, a feature which minimizes the effects of sequence variability.
In cases where side chain atoms from the heavy chain are involved, these residues are highly conserved.
Every aspect of the binding of protein G to Fab has been optimized to extend the range of IgG subtypes that are recognized.
This has important implications for the study of protein-protein interactions because it demonstrates how one protein can bind to all members of a class of highly variable proteins by means of secondary structural interactions and recognition of highly conserved residues.
The model for the protein G/Fab complex contrasts with the crystal structure of Staphylococcus protein A bound to human Fc, where contacts are mediated by side chain/side chain interactions between protein A and Fc (ref. 11).
Protein G also binds to Fc with high affinity, and it will be particularly interesting to determine whether this interaction is mediated by association of β -strands, or through the α -helix in an analogous fashion to protein A.
We anticipate that the association between protein G and the CH1 domain is unlikely to be affected by the binding of antigen to Fab (refs 13,14), so that protein G can be used to mediate the labelling of Fab fragments with a variety of fluorophores and detection enzymes in enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay procedures.
Recent developments in the production and antigen-directed selection of recombinant Fab fragments from Escherichia coli indicate that the Fab-binding properties of protein G could find extensive application in the future.
Data were collected from a single crystal on beam line X-31 at the EMBL outstation at Hamburg using the image plate scanner and were processed using MOSFLM (Imperial College, London) and the CCP4 program suite (Daresbury, UK).
The structure was solved by molecular replacement using CCP4 programs.
The solution was found initially using the entire Fab molecule, and confirmed using two half-molecules comprising the constant and variable regions.
Rigid-body refinement (as implemented in X-plor) was used to define precisely the position and orientation of each separate immunoglobulin domain.
The R -factor at this stage was 48.3%, using all data between 10 and 3Å resolution.
At this stage the model was modified to the correct amino-acid sequence.
Initial refinement used Hendrickson-Konnert least-squares minimization.
A few rounds of model building using FRODO, followed by cycles of least-squares refinement reduced the R -factor to 33%.
At this stage, density corresponding to protein G was clearly visible.
The model for protein G used to fit the density was derived from the structure of the same domain solved at 1.1Å resolution (J.P.D. and D.B.W., manuscript in preparation).
The orientation and position of the model was refined as a rigid body in X-plor; after this procedure the R -factor had fallen to 30%.
A cycle of molecular dynamics refinement reduced the R -factor to 23.5%, after which further rounds of model building and least-squares refinement were applied to insert solvent molecules.
FIG. 1 Overall structure of the Fab/protein G complex.
The variable and constant domains of both the heavy and light chains of the Fab are labelled.
Protein G interacts with the constant domain of the heavy chain (CH1).
FIG. 2 Structural details of the complex.
Heavy chain residue numbers are followed by H and protein G residues by A. a , Stereoscopic view of the hydrogen-bonds (dashed lines) formed by the last two β -strands in the CH1 domain (thick lines) and the first two β -strands in protein G (thin lines).
Selected residues are indicated at the beginning and end of each strand.
b , Stereoscopic view of the interaction between the C terminal end of the α -helix in protein G (thin lines) and the first β -strand in the CH domain (thick lines).
Residues involved in the two hydrogen-bonds are marked.
c , Stereoscopic view of the hydrophobic core in the complex.
Side chains are shown for some of the residues that contribute to this core, superimposed on the framework of C α atoms.
Absence of aluminium in neuritic plaque cores in Alzheimer's disease
J. P. Landsberg, B. McDonald & F. Watt
CONTROVERSY exists over whether aluminium has a role in the aetiology of Alzheimer's disease.
Alzheimer's disease is neuropathologically characterized by the occurrence of a minimum density of neurofibrillary tangles and neuritic plaques in the hippocampus and the association cortex of the brain.
The purported association of aluminium with Alzheimer's disease is based on:(1) the experimental induction of fibrillary changes in the neurons of animals by the injection of aluminium salts into brain tissue;(2) reported detection of aluminium in neuritic plaques and tangle-bearing neurons;(3) epidemiological studies linking aluminium levels in the environment, notably water supplies, with an increased prevalence of dementia; and (4) a reported decrease in the rate of disease progression following the administration of desferroxamine, an aluminium chelator, to clinically diagnosed sufferers of Alzheimer's disease.
Here we use nuclear microscopy, a new analytical technique involving million-volt nuclear particles, to identify and analyse plaques in post-mortem tissue from patients with Alzheimer's disease without using chemical staining techniques and fail to demonstrate the presence of aluminium in plaque cores in untreated tissue.
The most direct evidence for the link between aluminium and Alzheimer's disease (AD) stems from reports of granular alumino-silicates found in neuritic plaque cores.
Neuritic plaques are extracellular structures measuring up to 200μm in diameter, and classical core-containing neuritic plaques are composed of amyloid cores surrounded by a halo of abnormal neurites (Fig. 1).
Several authors report the presence of aluminium and silicon in the plaque cores, although others have been unable to detect any increase in the level of these elements in neuritic plaques.
Duckett and Galle using energy dispersive electron probe microanalysis, a technique with an analytical sensitivity of between 100 and 1,000p.p.m., have reported finding aluminium in some plaque cores using fixed embedded tissue; Candy et al.
used the electron probe on silver-stained tissue and other microanalytical techniques and reported that most neuritic plaque cores contained aluminium co-localized with silicon.
Studies by others on stained tissue using the electron probe and the proton probe, which is more than an order of magnitude more sensitive, have failed to confirm these findings.
Stern et al.,
using toluidine blue-stained tissue also failed to find aluminium or silicon in the plaque cores, despite using a technique (laser microprobe mass analysis) capable of parts-per-million sensitivity, although they consistently find aluminium in neurofibrillary tangles using this technique.
We describe the application of nuclear microscopy to the analysis of in situ neuritic plaque cores using both stained and unstained AD tissue.
Nuclear microscopy uses a focused MeV ion beam (for example, 3MeV protons) and employs a group of analytical techniques that can be simultaneously applied to a sample.
These include particle-induced X-ray emission (PIXE) which provides quantitative analytical information down to the parts-per-million level for elements above sodium in the periodic table by measuring the characteristic X-ray emission following proton/electron collisions; Rutherford backscattering spectrometry (RBS), which when applied to thin biological specimens, provides information on the matrix elements C, N and O by measuring the energy of the backscattered incident ion after a nuclear collision; and scanning transmission ion microscopy (STIM) which gives information on the structure and density of the sample by monitoring the energy loss of the transmitted ions.
Table 1 gives the results of the analysis of 105 neuritic plaques in stained tissue from the temporal cortex and hippocampus of five clinically and pathologically characterized cases of AD and two aged controls, and shows that less than 10% of plaque cores contain aluminium deposits, which are usually co-localized with silicon.
Aluminium and silicon were also detected in the background and in the control tissue, and indicate that there is a possibility of contamination.
A significant fraction of airborne dust is composed of alumino-silicates up to about 4μm in size, and these elements are ubiquitous as contaminants.
PIXE analyses of the reagents (many of them ARISTAR quality) used in both immunohistochemical staining and silver-staining procedures showed trace levels of contaminants, despite filtering through 0.2-μm filters.
Scans of residues from evaporated filtrates showed accumulations of inorganic elements (including alumino-silicates) up to 4μm across.
These analyses have shown that many commercial reagents, including embedding medium, contain alumino-silicate contaminants in low concentrations (p.p.m.), present either as a fine suspension of particles or in solution, when they crystallize out as the solvents evaporate; they may also preferentially locate on the sulphate and phosphate moieties present in the plaques.
Nuclear microscopical investigations using unstained tissue were carried out on more than 80 plaque cores from the temporal cortex and hippocampus of four cases of AD and two aged controls.
The plaques were located using STIM imaging and unambiguously identified using the following criteria.
(1) The shape of the core and associated corona from the STIM image is consistent with the optical images in stained sections;(2) the core is more dense than the corona, which in turn is more dense than the surrounding tissue;(3) the elemental distribution of the plaque as measured by PIXE and RBS shows similar minor and major elemental composition to those analysed in stained plaques, that is, increased levels of elemental sulphur, phosphorus and nitrogen; and (4) examination of stained serial sections shows similar plaque density per area of tissue, and the plaques are located in a similar position with respect to more obvious common features such as blood vessels.
As a control, nearly 30mm 2 of plaque-free tissue was scanned and although numerous corpora amylacea were identified, no features were observed that fitted the plaque identification criteria.
Figure 2 shows a typical STIM image of a plaque in unstained tissue, together with the corresponding elemental maps of S, P, C and N. The results of analyses on unstained tissue is shown in Table 2, which indicates that aluminium was not observed in any of the neuritic plaque cores scanned, at a sensitivity of 15p.p.m.
This detection limit was determined from analysis of aluminium standards made from solutions of aluminium nitrate in poly (ethyl methacrylate) resin.
Because the analysis of unstained AD tissue using the sensitive techniques of nuclear microscopy does not indicate increased levels of aluminium in neuritic plaque cores, we now believe that previous evidence that aluminium is involved in the aetiology of Alzheimer's disease should be reviewed to take into account the probable contamination of tissue by alumino- silicates present in most reagents.
FIG. 1 Optical micrograph of immunohistochemically stained core containing neuritic plaque.
Tissue blocks were dissected at post-mortem from the hippocampus (at the level of the lateral geniculate body) and the middle temporal gyrus (Brodman's area 21) of both the AD and control cases.
Brain tissue was placed on cryostat cork discs using a small amount of embedding medium (OCT compound, Miles).
The tissue was then snap-frozen by immersion in liquid nitrogen before storage at -70°C for up to six months.
Sections (10μm) were cut using a cryostat microtome, transferred onto 0.5-μm pioloform-coated cleaned glass slides and stored at -20°C.
Immunohistochemical staining using antiserum reacting against complement factor C3d was used to visualize neuritic plaques.
This organic staining method was chosen to minimize the risk of contamination by inorganic elements.
Double-distilled water (milli-Q quality) and ARISTAR grade reagents were used throughout; all immunostaining procedures were undertaken in a closed container to minimize airborne contamination.
Brain sections were incubated for 1h with rabbit polyclonal C3d antiserum (Dakopatts) at a dilution of 1 in 100 in 50mM Tris-HCl, pH7.4, containing 200mM NaCl in a closed chamber at room temperature, followed by three 5-min washes in the same Tris buffer.
The sections were then overlaid with peroxidase-conjugated swine anti-rabbit antiserum (Dakopatts) at a dilution of 1 in 100 in Tris buffer for 1h at room temperature, washed three times with Tris buffer and the bound antibody complex visualized using diaminobenzidine (Sigma; 60mg per 100ml in Tris containing 40μl 30% v/v H 2 O 2 ).
Substrate was applied to the sections and incubated for 3–5min, resulting in a brown reaction product.
The reaction was terminated by washing the sections in milli-Q water.
FIG. 2
a,
STIM image of a core-containing neuritic plaque from freeze-dried unstained tissue.
The map is shown in false colour, where yellow represents the most dense and blue the least dense areas.
b,
Elemental maps of the core-containing plaque shown in a;the sulphur (S) and phosphorus (P) maps were obtained using PIXE and the carbon (C) and nitrogen (N) maps using RBS.
The 100x100μm maps are shown in false colour, with yellow representing the highest elemental concentration and blue the lowest.
The maps were obtained using the Oxford Scanning Proton Microprobe operating with 3-MeV protons focused to a 1-μm spot.
Electrical signalling and systemic proteinase inhibitor induction in the wounded plant
D. C. Wildon, J. F. Thain, P. E. H. Minchin, I. R. Gubb, A. J. Reilly, Y. D. Skipper, H. M. Doherty, P. J. O'Donnell & D. J. Bowles
THE wound response of several plant species involves the activation of proteinase inhibitor (pin ) genes and the accumulation of pin proteins at the local site of injury and systemically throughout the unwounded aerial regions of the plant.
It has been suggested that a mobile chemical signal is the causal agent linking the local wound stimulus to the distant systemic response, and candidates such as oligosaccharides, abscisic acid and a polypeptide have been put forward.
But the speed of transmission is high for the transport of a chemical signal in the phloem.
The wound response of tomato plants can be inhibited by salicylic acid and agents like fusicoccin that affect ion transport, and wounding by heat or physical injury produces electrical activity that has similarities to the epithelial conduction system used to transmit a stimulus in the defence responses of some lower animals.
Here we design experiments to distinguish between a phloem-transmissible chemical signal and a physically propagated signal based on electrical activity.
We show that translocation in the phloem of tomato seedlings can be completely inhibited without effect on the systemic accumulation of pin transcripts and pin activity, and without hindrance to propagated electrical signals.
Mechanical damage applied to the lamina of one of the cotyledons of a tomato seedling with one expanded leaf (Fig. 1 a ) leads to electrical activity (Fig. 1 b ) which can be detected by extracellular electrodes placed on the stem and on the petiole of leaf 1, morphologically the lowest (first-formed) leaf (Fig. 1 a ).
The electrical activity propagates beyond the cotyledon and through the plant at a speed of between 1 and 4mms -1 .
We refer to this activity as a systemic electrical signal.
Chilling the petiole of the wounded cotyledon to 3°C has little effect on the electrical signal recorded on the petiole of leaf 1 (Fig. 1 c ), a result that is consistent with observations on action potential conduction at low temperature in cold-blooded animals and plants.
Chilling a petiole is, however, a recognized means of inhibiting phloem transport.
In these experiments chilling is necessary, given that the maximum reported speeds of phloem transport (35–250mmmin -1 ) are such that a chemical signal might exit the wounded cotyledon in a time comparable to that for an electrical signal.
As the effects of chilling and their duration are dependent on plant species, we analysed the effect of the treatment on tomato seedlings.
As shown in Fig. 2, chilling of the cotyledonary petiole to 4°C completely stops translocation of 11 C-labelled photosynthate through the chilled region for a period of at least ten minutes before a spontaneous recovery.
Chilling the cotyledonary petiole to 0.5°C extends the time for spontaneous recovery to about 25 minutes.
Similar results are obtained on chilling the petiole of leaf 1 to 3°C, except that translocation is inhibited for at least 20 minutes.
Given the spontaneous recovery of the petiole tissue from chilling, it was necessary to excise the wounded cotyledon within the period in which phloem transport is inhibited in order to prevent any delayed movement of a chemical signal from the wound-site through the phloem.
Leaf excision alone has little effect on pin induction in tomato plants.
In the experiments shown in Table 1,pin activity was assayed by the inhibitory effect of leaf extracts on chymotrypsin activity (Table 1 legend).
Untreated tomato seedlings (line 1) contain negligible pin activity and the chymotrypsin is not inhibited.
Chilling of the cotyledonary petiole (line 2) and excision of the cotyledon after chilling (line 3) do not induce detectable systemic pin activity.
Unwounded seedlings subjected to these conditions (lines 1–3) also did not exhibit any systemic electrical signal, either spontaneously or on excision of the cotyledon.
A mechanical wound to the cotyledon (lines 4–6) led to a systemic accumulation of pin activity and levels of this activity were identical whether the cotyledon was excised five minutes after wounding or left attached to the plant for 48 hours.
The systemic induction of pin activity by wounding was correlated on 46 out of 49 occasions with a systemic electrical signal.
On one occasion (line 6) the mechanical wound led neither to pin activity nor to systemic electrical activity.
The induction of systemic pin activity by mechanical wounding of the cotyledon was highly reproducible, in contrast to the systemic response of pin activity to mechanical wounding of leaf 1 of larger tomato seedlings with two expanded leaves.
For these larger seedlings, we observed much greater reproducibility when a heat stimulus was applied to leaf 1.
As chilling of the petiole of leaf 1 inhibited phloem translocation for about 20min, we assayed the effects of chilling the petiole on heat stimulus-induced systemic accumulation of pin activity in leaf 2 and on the systemic electrical signal.
The data in Table 1 (lines 7–9) show a close correspondence between the systemic pin activity and the systemic electrical response; chilling of the petiole did not affect these responses.
Thus, whether the wound stimulus arises from mechanical wounding to the cotyledon, or heat injury to leaf 1, a systemic accumulation of pin activity can be correlated with a systemic electrical signal and neither response is affected by the inhibition of phloem translocation.
To confirm that the changes in pin activity were due to changes in the level of a characterized gene product of tomato, we followed changes in steady-state levels of pin 2 messenger RNA by northern analysis.
The results are shown in Fig. 3:pin transcripts are below the level of detection in leaf 1 of untreated tomato seedlings and also after chilling of the cotyledonary petiole.
Even in the presence of a cold block,pin 2 mRNA levels increase in the unwounded leaf 1 in response to a mechanical wound to the cotyledon, as anticipated, and the increase is substantially greater than the trace increase in level induced by excision of the unwounded cotyledon.
Steady-state levels of pin 2 mRNA were identical whether the cotyledon was excised 5min after wounding (Fig. 3 D ) or left attached to the plant for 4 hours (Fig. 3 E ) and are comparable to those observed in other studies of wound-inducible pin mRNA levels.
Each mechanically wounded plant also exhibited a systemic electrical signal.
Our data show that the systemic responses of wound-induced pin activity and electrical signals occur when phloem translocation is inhibited.
Equivalent and high levels of pin activity and pin transcripts were found in the systemically responding leaf 1, whether the wounded cotyledon was excised rapidly or left attached to the plant.
This indicates that the causal agent of the systemic response has exited the wound site within 5 minutes and contrasts with studies on older plants in which systemic pin levels increased as the time from wounding to excision increased until 120 minutes after wounding.
Our results show that the causal agent exits the wounded cotyledon when phloem translocation is blocked, so the systemic effect must either arise from a chemical signal travelling through a route that does not involve the transport of photosynthate, or a physical signal.
Movement of a chemical signal could be through the xylem, although this would require a reversal in the direction of transpirational water flow.
To analyse this possibility we measured stomatal resistance by diffusive porometry (Automatic Porometer Mk 3, Delta-T Devices) before and after wounding.
Stomatal resistance increased by  30% in the 5min after mechanical wounding of the cotyledon, and by  80% in the 10min after a heat stimulus to leaf 1.
However, these resistances, either before or after wounding, are less than 20% of the resistance of closed stomata.
These data confirm that the direction of transpiration is not reversed during the wound response and preclude movement of a chemical signal out of the wounded tissue via the xylem.
Transport through the symplast is also a possibility for the movement of a chemical signal, but the speed of this process, up to 15μms -1 in higher plants, is much too slow to account for our observations.
There are two leading possibilities for a physical signal: a hydraulic signal with secondary electrical consequences, or a propagated electrical signal (action potential).
There is evidence in wheat leaves for a hydraulic signal that propagates at a speed of at least 100mms -1 from the site of wounding and is associated with electrical events recorded at the plant surface.
A hydraulic pressure wave would propagate rapidly through the plant, possibly at speeds as high as that of sound in water (1,500ms -1 ).
We detected no systemic pin activity when the wounded cotyledon was excised before the electrical signal had exited to the stem (Table 1, line 10).
In these measurements, the mean time from wound to excision was 28s, which should be sufficient for passage of a hydraulic signal.
We conclude that the systemic response is caused by an electrical signal propagating through the plant.
We believe that an appropriate model for the electrical signal conduction pathway in plants may be provided by the well established epithelial conduction system of animals.
Epithelial conduction was first demonstrated using nerve-free and muscle-free epithelia of siphonophores and hydromedusae and has now been found in at least four animal phyla.
This mechanism involves the cell-to-cell conduction of action potentials through gap junctions at speeds of 2 to 500mms -1 .
Although plants lack any structures comparable to animal nerves, cells in a plant tissue are linked by plasmodesmata that have solute permeabilities and electrical conductivities nearly identical to those of gap junctions in animal tissues.
Thus plant tissues consisting of cells linked by plasmodesmata are analogous, in terms of their ability to conduct electrical signals, to animal epithelia.
An electrical mechanism for long-distance signalling in plants may be much more general than has previously been recognized.
Recent work has shown that many plant species can transmit action potentials and variation potentials.
Such propagated electrical responses can often be instigated by stimuli such as osmotic shock, heat shock, cold and touch, which also elicit stress responses in plants.
To our knowledge, our results provide the first definite evidence for a link between an electrical signal and a biochemical response in plants.
We conclude that an electrical signal is the underlying mechanism of the systemic wound response in our experimental system and are now investigating the relationship between the electrical signal and the wider range of chemical agents known to lead to pin induction.
A mechanical wound was produced by crushing an area of  1cm 2 at the distal end of the cotyledon of a tomato seedling at the stage of development shown in Fig. 1 a , followed immediately by crushing a similar area on the proximal side of the first wound.
The heat stimulus was provided by a stainless steel block (contact area, 3cm 2 ) heated in a boiling water bath and positioned on the tip of the terminal leaflet of leaf 1 of seedlings at the two-leaf stage.
After treatment the tomato seedlings were incubated at 30°C for 48h under fluorescent lights providing 200μmolm -2 s -1 of photosynthetically active radiation.
After incubation the terminal leaflet of leaf 1 or leaf 2, as required, was harvested and immediately frozen in liquid N 2 .
Proteinase inhibitor preparations were made by extracting leaf tissue with TES buffer (n -Tris(hydroxymethyl)methyl-2-aminoethane-sulphonic acid, 100mM, pH7.8) at 4°C in proportions of 100mg fresh weight to 1ml TES.
Chymotrypsin activity was determined spectrophotometrically by conversion of N -benzoyl-L-tyrosine p- nitroanilide to p -nitroaniline.
Stock chymotrypsin solution (Sigma; product code C4129) was made up in HCl (25mmoldm -3 ) and the concentration adjusted with TES (100mM, pH7.8) to produce a rate of change of absorbance of 0.025 units min -1 at 405nm and 20°C in a control assay consisting of chymotrypsin (7–8μg in 0.6ml); 0.3ml TES (100mM, pH7.8); and 0.3ml of a solution of substrate (1.2mM) in 50% dimethylsulphoxide/TES.
In assays of proteinase inhibitor, plant extract (0.3ml) was preincubated with the chymotrypsin solution (0.6ml) at room temperature for 30min before addition of substrate.
Chymotrypsin activity is given as per cent of activity in non-plant controls.
FIG. 1 A typical tomato seedling as used in the mechanical wounding experiments.
a , Experimental arrangement.
The seedling has one expanded leaf, labelled leaf 1, which is morphologically the lowest (first-formed) leaf.
b , Recording on the petiole of leaf 1; mechanical wound to one of the cotyledons; petiole of cotyledon not chilled.
c , Recording on the petiole of leaf 1; mechanical wound to one of the cotyledons; petiole of cotyledon chilled (3°C) from 5min before wounding until 5min after wounding.
METHODS.Electrical recordings were made between two thread electrodes (electrode A and the reference electrode), both attached to leaf 1 of a tomato seedling.
Recordings (not shown) were also made between the same reference electrode and the thread electrode (B) connected to the stem between the cotyledonary node and leaf 1.
A 10-mm cooling block was located on the petiole of the cotyledon and operated to give a petiole temperature of either  22°C (b ) or  3°C (c ).
For details of plant material, growth conditions and electrical recording methods, see ref. 9.
Details of wounding are given in the legend to Table 1.
FIG. 2 Translocation of 11 C-labelled photosynthate out of one of the cotyledons of a tomato seedling which had been pulse-labelled with 11 CO 2 at time zero.
Radioactivity (corrected for decay) was measured as counts per second in the plant beyond the cooling block, which was located on the petiole of the cotyledon.
A 5-mm-long cold block was applied at 29min and removed at 68min.
Methods as in ref. 14; plant material obtained as in ref. 9.
FIG. 3 Five conditions were applied to the tomato seedlings.
A,No treatment;B,the petiole of the cotyledon was chilled as described in Fig. 1 legend, but no further treatment was applied;C , the petiole of the cotyledon was chilled as in B , and the cotyledon was then excised;D,the petiole of the cotyledon was chilled as in B , a mechanical wound was applied to the distal end of the cotyledon (see Table 1 legend), and the cotyledon excised 5min after wounding;E , the petiole of the cotyledon was chilled as in B , a mechanical wound was applied as in D , but the cotyledon was not then excised.
Following these conditions, seedlings were incubated at 30°C for 4h under fluorescent lights providing 200μmolm -2 s -1 photosynthetically active radiation before the terminal leaflet of leaf 1 was harvested and immediately frozen in liquid N 2 .
RNA was extracted and analysed by northern blotting using a 32 P-labelled complementary DNA probe to tomato pin 2 (ref. 28).
Equivalence of RNA loading in each track was confirmed spectrophotometrically.
Each track is the analysis of 10μg leaf RNA from a single plant that had also been analysed (conditions B-E ) for electrical activity.
A systemic electrical signal was recorded with all of the plants shown in D and E ; no systemic electrical signals were observed with any of the plants shown in B and C .
Proteasome subunits encoded by the major histocompatibility complex are not essential for antigen presentation
Frank Momburg, Vianney Ortiz-Navarrete, Jacques Neefjes, Els Goulmy, Yvonne van de Wal, Hergen Spits, Simon J. Powis, Geoffrey W. Butcher, Jonathan C. Howard, Peter Walden  & Gûnter J. Hâmmerling
MAJOR histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules bind and deliver peptides derived from endogenously synthesized proteins to the cell surface for survey by cytotoxic T lymphocytes.
It is believed that endogenous antigens are generally degraded in the cytosol, the resulting peptides being translocated into the endoplasmic reticulum where they bind to MHC class I molecules.
Transporters containing an ATP-binding cassette encoded by the MHC class II region seem to be responsible for this transport 1-8 .
Genes coding for two subunits of the ‘20S’ proteasome (a multicatalytic proteinase) have been found in the vicinity of the two transporter genes in the MHC class II region, indicating that the proteasome could be the unknown proteolytic entity in the cytosol involved in the generation of MHC class I-binding peptides.
By introducing rat genes encoding the MHC-linked transporters into a human cell line lacking both transporter and proteasome subunit genes, we show here that the MHC-encoded proteasome subunits are not essential for stable MHC class I surface expression, or for processing and presentation of antigenic peptides from influenza virus and an intracellular protein.
The 20S proteasome consists of about 20–30 subunits with M r s between 15,000 and 30,000 that are encoded by distinct sets of genes.
We used the human lymphoblastoid B cell-derived mutant T2 line to investigate whether or not the MHC-linked proteasome subunits are essential for MHC class I expression and antigen presentation.
T2 has a large homozygous deletion of the MHC class II region, which encompasses the genes for the two ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter polypeptides, TAP1 and TAP2, and the two genes for the MHC-encoded proteasome subunits, Lmp2 and Lmp7.
In the absence of transporters, most HLA class I molecules are devoid of the peptides necessary for stable assembly of the class I heavy chain with β 2  -microglobulin and for expression at the cell surface.
Therefore the T2 cell line shows strongly decreased expression of HLA-B5 and partially decreased expression of HLA-A2.1 molecules and is deficient in antigen presentation.
We transfected the T2 cells with the rat ABC transporter complementary DNAs rat TAP1 a  and rat TAP2 a ,previously named mtp1 a  and mtp2 a ,respectively.
The resulting transfectants were analysed for class I cell-surface expression.
Parental T1 cells, from which T2 cells were derived, were positive for HLA-A2.1 and -B5 and also for HLA class II molecules, whereas T2 cells did not stain for HLA-B5 and only weakly for HLA-A2.1 (Fig. 1).
Transfection with rat TAP1 a  alone did not alter HLA expression.
Transfection with TAP2 a  resulted in a slight increase of HLA-A2 and HLA-B5 expression, which we are investigating at present.
But when both TAP1 a  and TAP2 a  rat transporter genes were transfected into T2 cells, HLA-A2.1 and HLA-B5 expression was restored to levels two to three times higher than on T1 cells.
Expression of class I in this bulk culture was improved by sorting for cells expressing high levels of HLA-B5 (bottom panel).
Western blots using sera raised against rat TAP1 and TAP2 showed that the T2/TAP1+2 transfectant expressed the TAP polypeptides in amounts comparable to rat strain PVG.R19 lymphoblasts stimulated by concanavalin A (Fig. 2 a).
The absence of the MHC-encoded proteasome subunits in the T2transfectants was confirmed by immunoprecipitation (not shown) and messenger RNA analysis (Fig. 2 b).
It is possible that in the absence of Lmp2 and Lmp7, peptides of inappropriate length are generated, which would result in a decreased stability of the assembled class I molecules.
Lysates of biosynthetically labelled cells were incubated at 37°C for different times.
Class I molecules were then immunoprecipitated with monoclonal antibody W6/32, which only recognizes class I molecules associated with β 2 -microglobulin.
Class I molecules devoid of peptides are unstable under these conditions and lose the epitope recognized by W6/32 (ref. 22).
HLA-A2 and B5 were separated by one-dimensional isoelectric focusing (Fig. 2 c).
Most HLA-A2 molecules expressed in T2 cells are unstable to exposure at 37°C, whereas most HLA-A2 molecules in T1 cells and T2 cells reconstituted with TAP1 and TAP2 are stable over a 4-h exposure to 37°C.
A more drastic effect of temperature on the stability of HLA-B5 is evident.
HLA-B5 in T2 cells is unstable at 37°C, whereas it is stable both in T1 cells and in T2/TAP1+2 cells.
Thus, expression of TAP1 and TAP2 in T2 cells results in proper stabilization of both HLA-A2 and -B5 molecules.
These results demonstrate that expression of transporter polypeptides alone, in the absence of the MHC-encoded proteasome subunits, is sufficient for apparently normal and stable class I expression.
Next, T2 cells transfected with rat TAP1 a  and rat TAP2 a  were investigated for their ability to process and present endogenous proteins.
For this purpose T2 transfectants were tested with an HLA-A2.1-restricted cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) clone recognizing a minor histocompatibility antigen (HA-2).
Control cells, including T1, were lysed, but not T2 cells or T2 transfected with only one transporter gene (Table 1).
In contrast, T2 cells transfected with both transporter genes were lysed efficiently.
An HLA-A2.1 alloreactive CTL clone included as a positive control strongly lysed all transfectants, including the parental T2 cells.
As the HLA-A2.1 molecules on T2 cells appear to carry only a limited variety of peptides derived from signal sequences, our data suggest that the anti-HLA-A2.1 CTL clone recognizes such a signal sequence-derived peptide.
Because the nature of the HA-2 antigen is not yet known, we analysed the processing of a well-defined antigen, influenza virus matrix protein.
Cells were infected overnight with influenza virus and then used as targets for the CTL clone Q66.9, which recognizes the influenza matrix-derived peptide epitope M58–66 restricted by HLA-A2.1.
Representative experiments in Table 2 a show that infected T1 cells, the HLA-A2.1-positive cell line JY, and X and Y targets were killed, but not T2 cells or T2 transfected with the individual transporter genes.
In contrast, the T2/TAP1+2 cells expressing both transporter polypeptides were lysed.
This lysis (26 and 33% at a 5:1 effector to target ratio) was weaker than the lysis of T1 cells (50% and 62%, respectively) but with the other influenza virus-infected cell lines, JY, X and Y, only 28 to 33% lysis was again obtained.
Results were comparable when target cells were infected with a recombinant vaccinia virus making the influenza M1 matrix protein (M1-vac) and the M1-specific CTL line 4–30 was used (Table 2b).
Lysis of M1-vac-infected T2/TAP1+2 cells was again less than lysis of M1-vac-infected T1 cells.
All transfectants were able to present the synthetic matrix peptide M58–66 when it was added exogenously.
It is clear from these data that the capacity to form and present this influenza epitope has been returned to the T2/TAP1+2 transfectant, although it is possible that this capacity is suboptimal.
We conclude that the heterodimeric MHC-encoded transporter is alone sufficient for MHC class I-mediated antigen presentation, at least for the two antigens tested here.
Thus, there does not seem to be an absolute requirement for the MHC-linked proteasome subunits Lmp2 and Lmp7.
Our observations could mean that the presence of genes encoding two of the proteasomes in the MHC may be fortuitous and that the 20S proteasome does not play a role in antigen presentation.
It is also possible however that the proteasome is only one of several proteolytic enzymes with the capacity to digest cytosolic antigen into class I-binding peptides.
A proteasome lacking the MHC-encoded subunits may well have adequate proteolytic activity and could be the source of peptides assembled in our T2/TAP1+2 transfectant.
The MHC-encoded proteasome subunits, which are inducible by interferon- γ,may nevertheless function to increase the overall proteolytic activity or the range of peptides generated by the proteasome from antigens in the context of an immune response, to a virus for example.
Investigation of T2 cells restored with transporters and of the MHC-encoded proteasome subunits will help to clarify this issue.
T2 cells transfected with rat TAP1 a  and TAP2 a  cDNAs were tested for their capacity to present the endogenously synthesized minor histocompatibility antigen HA-2 to an HLA-A2.1-restricted minor histocompatibility antigen HA-2-specific CTL clone.
T2 cells transfected with both transporter genes but not the untransfected T2 could present the HA-2 antigen.
An alloreactive CTL clone specific for HLA-A2.1 and the influenza matrix-specific CTL clone Q66.9 (see Table 2a)were included as controls.
The HA-2-specific CTL clone, designated HA-2 (ref. 25), and the HLA-A2.1 alloreactive CTL clone were mixed with chromium-labelled targets at effector-to-target ratios of 10:1 and 1:1, and specific lysis was measured in a 4-h chromium release assay; values represent per cent specific lysis.
X and Y are lymphoblastoid cell lines transformed by Epstein-Barr virus and obtained from HLA-A2.1-positive healthy individuals.
Control cells and T2 cells transfected with rat TAP1 a  and TAP2 a  were infected overnight with influenza virus Hongkong 68 and then tested for HLA-A2.1-mediated presentation of the influenza matrix antigen using the CTL clone Q66.9.
The results from two representative experiments are shown (a).
In additional experiments using recombinant vaccinia virus producing matrix protein (M1-vac) and the M1-specific CTL line 4–30, similar results were obtained (b).
Table 2 also shows that all cell lines function as targets after preincubation with exogenously added influenza matrix peptide M58–66 (sequence ILGFVFTLTV).
(a)Where indicated, target cells were infected overnight with influenza virus Hongkong 68.
Q66.9 is a CTL clone recognizing the influenza matrix-derived peptide M58–66 restricted by HLA-A2.1.
This clone was raised against the synthetic peptide M58–66 (H.S., unpublished).
Lysis was determined in a 4-h chromium-release assay at effector-to-target ratios of 5:1 and 0.5:1.
For presentation of exogenously added peptide, target cells were preincubated with M58–66 peptide at 1μgml -1 for 2h before addition of the CTL clone Q66.9. (b)Target cells were infected with M1-vac (20 PFU per cell) for 3h. 4–30 is a fresh CTL line from an HLA-A2.1-positive donor raised against the synthetic peptide M55–73 (P.W., unpublished).
Lysis was determined in a 5-h chromium-release assay at effector-to-target ratios ranging from 10:1 to 0.3:1.
M58–66 peptide was added as a control 15min before addition of CTL at 2.5μgml -1 .
FIG. 1 Restoration of HLA class I expression on T2 cells transfected with transporter genes.
The cDNAs for the two rat transporter chains TAP1a and TAP2a were used individually or as a mixture to transfect T2 cells.
HLA cell-surface expression was measured by cytofluorometry.
In five independent cotransfections with TAP1 and TAP2 we always obtained a substantial fraction of cells expressing high levels of HLA class I, similar to the example shown here.
METHODS.
In each experiment, 10 7 T2 cells were transfected by electroporation with  2μg each of rat cDNAs TAP1 a  (mtp1 a ,clone 510–15) or TAP2 a  (mtp2 a ,clone 441–11) in the pH β APr-1-neo expression vector.
Both plasmids contain the β- actin promoter and the neomycin-resistance gene.
Selection was in 1mgml -1 G418 (Gibco).
After 4 to 6 weeks, cytofluorometry was done with the bulk cultures using a FACScan (Becton and Dickinson).
Antibodies used were Tû101 against HLA-A2 (ref. 28), Tû109 against HLA-Bw4 (ref. 29), and 2.06 against HLA-DR, -DP and -DQ (ref. 30), detected by fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) -conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG (Sigma).
Staining with antibodies Tû48 (HLA-Bw4; ref. 31) and BB7.2 (HLA-A2; ref. 32) yielded comparable results, except that BB7.2 stained HLA-A2 antigens on untransfected T2 cells more strongly than antibody Tû101.
The unseparated bulk culture of T2 cotransfected with both transporters yielded a broad peak containing both negative and positive cells.
Bottom row shows staining profiles of T2/TAP1+2 enriched by cell sorting for high expression of HLA-B5 using antibody Tû109 and FACStar Plus cell sorter.
FIG. 2 Expression of TAP1 and TAP2 in T2 cells results in stabilization of HLA-A2 and HLA-B5 molecules.
a,
Expression of ABC transporters in transfectant cells.
Rat PVG.R19 lymphoblasts stimulated with concanavalin A and lysed in NP40 detergent, and T2 and the single and double transfectant cells were probed with rabbit antisera raised against synthetic peptides of the carboxy termini of rat TAP1 a and TAP2 a .
The antisera fail to recognize material in T2 cells but detect rat TAP products in the transfectants.
Cell lysis and western blotting were done as described; each track contains lysate equivalent to 20,000 cells.
Antisera recognizing rat TAP1 (ref. 5) and a new, previously undescribed antiserum raised against the rat TAP2 C-terminal sequence EQDVYAHLVQQRLEA were used at a 1/1,000 dilution.
b,
Northern blot analysis was used to verify that the T2 cells expressing rat TAP1 a and TAP2 a transporters were indeed negative for expression of the MHC encoded subunit Lmp7.
Lanes show 20μg (lanes A) or 40μg (lanes B) total RNA extracted from each cell line and probed with a cDNA specific for Lmp7 (isolated by Uwe Grâf and V.O.N., unpublished).
The absence of the MHC-encoded proteasome subunits was also verified by immunoprecipitation (not shown) using a rabbit serum against the 20S proteasome.
c,
Stability of MHC molecules was assayed by exposing cell lysates to 37°C for different times.
Stable class I molecules were recovered with the monoclonal antibody W6/32.
Both HLA-A2 and -B5 molecules are stabilized by expressing TAP1 and TAP2 in T2 cells and regain a similar stability as class I molecules in T1 cells.
We labelled 14x10 6 T1, T2 or T2/TAP1+2 cells for 15min with 200μCi 35 S-methionine and cysteine, respectively.
Cells were lysed in NP40 lysis mixture and their nuclei removed.
Lysates were precleared with normal rabbit serum and equal amounts incubated at 37°C for the times indicated.
After preclearing again with normal rabbit serum, class I molecules were immunoprecipitated with monoclonal antibody W6/32.
Immunoprecipitates were analysed by one-dimensional isoelectric focusing; only HLA-A2 and -B5 molecules are shown.
Disappearance of coronal X-ray emission in stars with cool dense winds
Bernhard Haisch, J. H. M. M. Schmitt & A. C. Fabian
THE Einstein Observatory survey of cosmic X-ray sources a decade ago showed that coronae were common among diverse types of star, and were in many cases more energetic than the Sun's corona.
Such coronae seemed, however, to disappear abruptly across a ‘dividing line’ in the Hertzsprung-Russell (H-R) diagram describing the evolution of intermediate-mass stars towards the red giant phase.
Here we use results from the Rosat all-sky survey, which increases by an order of magnitude the number of X-ray stars, to show that the dividing line is not an artefact of poor sampling.
Optical and ultraviolet observations show that the dividing line in the H-R diagram coincides approximately with the onset of cool, massive stellar winds, but we show that these winds are not sufficiently dense for simple X-ray absorption to be the cause of the disappearance of coronal emission.
We conclude, therefore, that the dividing line represents a true evolutionary transition in these stars, at which the hot coronae are replaced by cool winds.
The concept of a dividing line in the H-R diagram was proposed to describe the apparently abrupt disappearance of coronae as stars evolve towards the giant branch at early K spectral type.
As the ubiquity of stellar coronae had only just been discovered with the Einstein Observatory, the absence of coronae for stars of this type was tantalizing, especially as they seemed to disappear rather rapidly (on an evolutionary timescale).
This was expected to be a clue to changes in stellar magnetic fields.
The Rosat X-ray All-Sky Survey has now achieved roughly the same sensitivity over the entire sky () as the typical Einstein Imaging Proportional Counter fields, which covered less than 10% of the sky.
The preliminary analysis of the 70% complete survey has been discussed.
Almost 900 single GKM giants/supergiants in the Bright Star Catalogue were not detected in the X-ray survey; these were well distributed over the H-R diagram (Fig. 1, top panel).
In sharp contrast, only one evolved star out of 65 detected in the 70% complete survey lay to the right of spectral type K3: this was HR4289, a little-studied K5 III showing no evidence of being a binary, whose detection involved a fairly typical 370-s cumulative effective exposure.
We have now examined the complete survey for single GKM I to IV stars, yielding 31 new detections, all of which lie to the left of the dividing line.
The entire sample of 96 detections is shown in Fig. 1 (middle panel), an updated version of the 65 detections shown in ref.17.
The possibility of a connection between the disappearance of coronae and the onset of massive winds has been discussed for many years.
A recent compilation of stellar wind properties shows how closely the two situations may be related (Fig. 1, bottom panel).
It is logical to ask whether attenuation of soft X-rays in such a wind might account for the dividing line.
We test this hypothesis in the most conservative way, by testing the viability of an absorption model with the maximum chance of succeeding: we assume neutral rather than partially ionized hydrogen so that absorption is maximum, and allow for very soft X-ray spectra.
The density of a spherically symmetric wind at radius r is  where  is mass flow rate and  is the local wind velocity.
The mass column density along a line-of-sight for a constant outflow at velocity v is therefore .
Table 1 shows the column densities,N H , calculated from equation (3) for typical stellar parameters and mass loss rates as compiled in ref.13.
For  soft X-ray attenuation is generally considered to be significant.
This would naturally affect the interpretation of the coronal dividing line.
We investigate this quantitatively using emission models for coronal plasmas and the known response function of the Rosat Position Sensitive Proportional Counter (PSPC) telescope system.
To calculate the X-radiation from an optically thin plasma we use the line emissivities of Mewe et al.
and a formula of Mewe for the continuum emission due to free-free and free-bound charged-particle interactions, and two-photon processes.
This yields the function  (T, λ)where T is temperature and λ is wavelength, which is the emissivity per unit differential emission measure,.
Stellar coronae are usually analysed and modelled as either one- or two-temperature plasmas.
The lower-temperature component is typically like a solar active region; the hotter component has flare-like temperature properties.
The flare-like component of a stellar corona is, of course, spectrally harder than the active-region-like component.
Given the steep decrease with wavelength of the extreme ultraviolet/X-ray absorption cross-section,  subl;,it would take a much higher column density N H to attenuate this flare-like component significantly.
To cover this range of possibilities we concentrate on four DEMs: a 10 7 K isothermal one resulting in the hardest spectrum; a solar flare-like DEM taken from ref.21; the solar active region DEM of ref.22, modified at the highest temperature to decrease to zero above 10 7 K; and an isothermal DEM at 10 6 K resulting in a very soft spectrum.
For modelling the absorption, the   subl;function adapted from Paresce in Zombeck is entirely adequate, as we are interested in the overall attenuation across the fairly broad Rosat 0.1–2keV PSPC passband, rather than in detailed modelling of absorption edges and so on.
We note that the PSPC effective area has a minimum at the carbon edge at 0.28keV.
We have folded unattenuated versions of the four spectral distributions through the PSPC effective areas to generate a scale factor which, when applied to the simulation, will result in a predicted output of 10 counts per second.
Next, we attenuate each of the four spectra, normalized by the scale factor, by five different N H column densities.
The results are listed in Table 2 and shown in Fig.2.
In the case of the harder spectra, even high column densities (N H =10 22 ) would only attenuate the coronal emission by a factor of 20–25.
This column density could cause factor of 100 attenuation in an active-region-like spectrum.
Even for the coolest corona (10 6 ) with the softest spectrum,N H 10 21 would be required to attenuate the X-ray luminosity L X by a factor of 100.
In the case of Arcturus, the measured Rosat upper limit (achieved during a 18.6-ks targeted observation) is .
This corresponds to a ratio log , where f X is X-ray flux at Earth and f V is V-band flux at Earth.
As discussed also in ref. 17, Arcturus is the archetypal old population II non-coronal red giant.
On the other hand there are early K coronal giant stars in the Rosat survey and in the Einstein IPC fields having .
If Arcturus did possess such a corona, then the Rosat upper limit would imply attenuation in the range of 10 2 –10 5 , requiring .
As is evident from Table 1 and Fig. 1, this is considerably more mass loss than is thought to occur for early K giants.
What possibilities remain open?
Might red giants (to the right of the dividing line) be on average more distant than yellow giants (left of the dividing line)?
This is unlikely, as the absolute magnitude of these stars does not vary much across the dividing line, and in any case would not affect the xx ratio.
Another possibility that we cannot categorically rule out is that an accelerating wind would have a higher column density than the constant velocity winds modelled here.
Little is known about the actual velocity profiles of winds near the surfaces of stars, so we cannot pursue this further.
What physical processes might explain the dividing line?
On theoretical grounds, it has been proposed that hot coronal loops become unstable in evolved stars because of the combined effects of large size (presumed to scale as the stellar radius ) and low surface gravity, leaving only low-lying cool loops which do not emit X-rays.
But the growing body of evidence that the onset of massive winds occurs right up to the dividing line suggests that a phase transition is occurring from a hot, magnetically confined corona to a cool, open, massive wind outflow.
This was in fact the original explanation proposed by Linsky and Haisch.
Subsequent attempts to model this in terms of winds driven by Alfvén waves met with limited success, but interest is now developing in a theoretical approach involving reflection of Alfvén waves.
The existence of a coronal dividing line remains a challenge to our understanding of dynamo mechanisms and coronal heating.
FIG. 1 H-R diagrams of late-type evolved stars.
Top, Rosat All-Sky Survey non-detections of 868 non-binary stars from the Bright Star Catalogue demonstrating the observational sampling of the various spectral types.
Middle, the 96 X-ray detected non-binary stars showing the cut-off of coronal emission at the dividing line.
Bottom, stars having measurable stellar winds, with the general trend of mass loss in units of solar masses M  and;per year.
FIG. 2 Absorption of coronal X-rays in the Rosat PSPC passband for four types of spectra, 10 7 K isothermal (+), flare-like (x), active-region-like (), 10 6 K (), as a function of N H normalized to 10 counts per second for the unattenuated spectra.
Evolutionary games and spatial chaos
Martin A. Nowak & Robert M. May
MUCH attention has been given to the Prisoners' Dilemma as a metaphor for the problems surrounding the evolution of cooperative behaviour.
This work has dealt with the relative merits of various strategies (such as tit-for-tat) when players who recognize each other meet repeatedly, and more recently with ensembles of strategies and with the effects of occasional errors.
Here we neglect all strategical niceties or memories of past encounters, considering only two simple kinds of players: those who always cooperate and those who always defect.
We explore the consequences of placing these players in a two-dimensional spatial array: in each round, every individual ‘plays the game’ with the immediate neighbours; after this, each site is occupied either by its original owner or by one of the neighbours, depending on who scores the highest total in that round; and so to the next round of the game.
This simple, and purely deterministic, spatial version of the Prisoners' Dilemma, with no memories among players and no strategical elaboration, can generate chaotically changing spatial patterns, in which cooperators and defectors both persist indefinitely (in fluctuating proportions about predictable long-term averages).
If the starting configurations are sufficiently symmetrical, these ever-changing sequences of spatial patterns—dynamic fractals—can be extraordinarily beautiful, and have interesting mathematical properties.
There are potential implications for the dynamics of a wide variety of spatially extended systems in physics and biology.
Although it has a long history, the paradox of the Prisoners' Dilemma has recently been much studied for the light it may shed on the evolution of altruistic or cooperative behaviour.
In its standard form, the Prisoners' Dilemma is a game played by two players, each of whom may choose either to cooperate, C, or defect, D, in any one encounter.
If both players choose C, both get a pay-off of magnitude R;if one defects while the other cooperates, D gets the game's biggest pay-off,T , while C gets S;if both defect, both get P .
With , the paradox is evident.
In any one round, the strategy D is unbeatable (being better than C whether the opponent chooses C or D).
But by playing D in a sequence of encounters, both players end up scoring less than they would by cooperating (because R  P ).
Following Axelrod and Hamilton's pioneering work, many authors have sought to understand which strategies do best when the game is played many times between players who remember past encounters.
These theoretical analyses, computer tournaments, and laboratory experiments continue, with the answers depending on the extent to which future pay-offs are discounted, on the ensemble of strategies present in the group of players, on the degree to which strategies are deterministic or error-prone (for example, imperfect memories of opponents or of past events), and so on .
In this paper, we consider only two kinds of players: those who always cooperate, C, and those who always defect, D. No explicit attention is given to past or likely future encounters, so no memory is required and no complicated strategies arise.
Interesting results emerge when we place these ‘players’ —who may be individuals or organized groups—on a two-dimensional,nxn square lattice of ‘patches’: each lattice-site is thus occupied either by a C or a D. In each round of our game (or at each time step, or each generation), each patch-owner plays the game with its immediate neighbours.
The score for each player is the sum of the pay-offs in these encounters with neighbours.
At the start of the next generation, each lattice-site is occupied by the player with the highest score among the previous owner and the immediate neighbours.
The rules of this simple game among n 2  players on an nxn lattice are thus completely deterministic.
(In ref. 2 spatial arrays were briefly explored, but with a focus on the interplay among tit-for-tat and other explicitly memory-laden strategies in iterated encounters; the interest was in spatial generalizations of earlier results, such as‘if a [strategy]is collectively stable, it is territorially stable’.)
Specifically (but preserving the essentials of the Prisoners' Dilemma), we chose the pay-offs of the Dilemma's matrix to have the values .
That is, mutual cooperators each score 1, mutual defectors 0, and D scores b (which exceeds unity) against C (who scores 0 in such an encounter).
The parameter b , which characterizes the advantage of defectors against cooperators, is thus the only parameter in our model; none of our findings are qualitatively altered if we instead set P=,with  positive but significantly below unity (so that  is strictly satisfied).
In the illustrations below, we assume the boundaries of the nxn matrix are fixed, so that players at the boundaries simply have fewer neighbours; the qualitative character of our results is unchanged if we instead choose periodic boundary conditions (so that the lattice is really a torus).
The illustrations are for the case when the game is played with the eight neighbouring sites (the cells corresponding to the chess king's move), and with one's own site (which is reasonable if the players are thought of as organized groups occupying territory).
As amplified below, the essential conclusions remain true if players interact only with the four orthogonal neighbours in square lattices, or with six neighbours in hexagonal lattices; the results also hold whether or not self-interactions are included.
Using an efficient computer program in which each lattice-site is represented as a pixel of the screen, we have explored the asymptotic behaviour of this system for various values of b , and with various initial proportions of C and D arranged randomly or regularly on an nxn lattice (n=20 and more).
The dynamical behaviour of the system depends on the parameter b;the discrete nature of the possible pay-off totals means that there will be a series of discrete transition-values of b that lead from one dynamical regime to another.
These transition-values and the corresponding patterns are described in detail elsewhere.
The essentials, however, can be summarized in broad terms.
If b  1.8,a 2x2 or larger cluster of D will continue to grow at the corners (although not necessarily along the edges, for large squares); for b  1.8,big D clusters shrink.
Conversely, if b  2,a 2x2 or larger cluster of C will continue to grow; for b  2,C clusters do not grow.
The most interesting regime is therefore 2  b  1.8 , where C clusters can grow in regions of D and also D clusters can grow in regions of C. As intuition might suggest, in this interesting regime we find chaotically varying spatial arrays, in which C and D both persist in shifting patterns.
Although the detailed patterns change from generation to generation—as both C clusters and D clusters expand, collide, and fragment—the asymptotic overall fraction of sites occupied by C, f C , fluctuates around 0.318 for almost all starting proportions and configurations.
Figure 1 illustrates typical asymptotic patterns for two different regimes of b values.
The colour coding is as follows: blue represents a C site that was C in the preceding generation; red, a D site following a D: yellow, D following a C; and green, C following a D. Thus a purely red and blue pattern would necessarily be static.
The amount of yellow and green in a picture indicates how many sites are changing from one generation to the next.
Figure 1 a,for 1.75  b  1.8, is typical of the irregular and relatively static network of ‘D lines’ against a background of C which arises for these b values; one gets less connected fragments of D lines or ‘D blinkers’for lower b values.
Figure 1 b is for the interesting regime 2  b  1.8, and shows the typical patterns of dynamic chaos found for almost all starting conditions in this regime.
Figure 2 a adds a temporal dimension to Fig. 1 b , showing the proportion of sites occupied by C in successive time-steps (starting with 10% D).
The asymptotic fraction,f C , shown in Fig. 2 a is found for essentially all starting proportions and configurations for these b values.
Figure 3 is perhaps more in the realm of aesthetics than biology.
Again 2  b  1.8,but now we begin (t=0)with a single D at the centre of a 99x99 lattice of Cs.
Figure 3 a shows the consequent symmetrical pattern 30 time-steps later, and Fig. 3 b, c and d shows three successive patterns at t= 217, 219 and 221 after the pattern has reached the boundary (which happens at t= 49).
These patterns, each of which can be characterized in fractal terms, continue to change from step to step, unfolding a remarkable sequence, dynamic fractals.
The patterns show every lace doily, rose window or Persian carpet you can imagine.
As Fig. 2 b shows, the asymptotic fraction of C is as for the chaotic pattern typified by Figs 1 b and 2 a.
Many of the dynamic features of the symmetric patterns illustrated in Fig. 3 can be understood analytically.
In particular, we can make a crude estimate of the asymptotic C fraction,f C , for such very large symmetrical patterns.
This approximation is shown by the dashed horizontal line in Fig. 2 b , and it agrees with the numerical results significantly better than we would have expected.
Why the approximation also works for the irregular, spatially chaotic patterns (Fig. 2 a ) we do not know.
Our ‘spatial dilemmas’ game obviously invites comparison with more familiar cellular automata, such as Conway's ‘Game of Life’.
There are, however, qualitative differences.
First, what happens to a site or cell in our lattice depends on the neighbours' scores, and thence on the state of the neighbours' neighbours.
Thus, in the terminology of cellular automata, 25 cells are relevant to specifying the change in a given cell: the transition matrix has 2 25 rules (this contrasts with Life, when 9 cells specify a cell's fate).
That is, the motivating biological metaphor of the Prisoners' Dilemma generates a transition rule that is simple, but it would look horrendous if expressed in canonical cellular automata terms.
Second, the patterns shown in Figs 1 and 3 have a combination of complexity and underlying regularity (exemplified by the asymptotic f C =0.318) unlike any cellular automata with which we are familiar.
Third, we do also have a rich zoo of specific objects (rotators, gliders, blinkers, and an expanding jaw-like configuration of C cells that eats up a universe of D, leaving only structured strings of D (’ eaters')) reminiscent of, but different from, those in Conway's Life.
The taxonomy of this zoo is described elsewhere.
Results similar to these are found if we exclude self-interaction, and consider interactions only with the eight nearest neighbours; here the ‘interesting’ region is .
The symmetrical patterns analogous to Fig. 3 are similarly kaleidoscopic, though different.
The asymptotic C fraction, is now  for both symmetric and random starting conditions.
For interactions only with the four orthogonal neighbours, again the same qualitative regimes are found (here the interesting regime is  if self-interaction is included, and  if not).
Numerical studies suggest that f C is around 0.374.
Hexagonal arrays give complex patterns, but show less of the lacy, fractal character seen above, unless we weight the pay-offs from self-interactions somewhat more heavily than from neighbours (which is biologically plausible).
In short, the above results seem robust.
More generally, we have explored other evolutionary games played with neighbours in spatial lattices along the basic lines laid down above.
They have features, particularly chaotic polymorphisms, similar to those seen for the spatial Prisoners' Dilemma.
The hawk-dove game gives notably beautiful patterns when begun from one hawk (or dove) invading an infinite array of doves (or hawks).
The Prisoners' Dilemma is an interesting metaphor for the fundamental biological problem of how cooperative behaviour may evolve and be maintained; alternative approaches involve, for example, studies of how the patchiness that can be created by limited dispersal or population ‘viscosity’ might favour the evolution of altruism through the elevation of inclusive fitness within kin groups.
Essentially all previous studies of the Prisoners' Dilemma are confined to individuals or organized groups who can remember past encounters, who have high probabilities of future encounters (with little discounting of future pay-offs), and who use these facts to underpin more-or-less elaborate strategies of cooperation or defection.
The range of real organisms obeying these constraints is limited (although there is evidence suggesting ‘tit-for-tat’ strategies among some fish, birds, bats and monkeys).
In contrast, our models involve no memory and no strategies: the players are pure C or pure D. Deterministic interaction with immediate neighbours in a two-dimensional spatial lattice, with success (site, territory) going each generation to the local winner, is sufficient to generate astonishingly complex and spatially chaotic patterns in which cooperation and defection persist indefinitely.
The details of the patterns depend on the magnitude of the advantage accruing to defectors (the value of b ), but a wide range of values leads to chaotic patterns, whose nature is almost always independent of the initial proportions of C and D. We believe that deterministically generated spatial structure within populations may often be crucial for the evolution of cooperation, whether it be among molecules, cells or organisms.
Other evolutionary games (hawk-dove, and so on) which recognize such chaotic or patterned spatial structure may be more robust and widely applicable than those that do not.
More generally, such self-generated and complex spatial structures may be relevant to the dynamics of a wide variety of spatially extended systems: Turing models, 2-state Ising models, and possibly pre-biotic evolution (where it seems increasingly likely that chemical reactions took place on surfaces, rather than in solutions).
Although the motive for this work is primarily biological, we emphasize that ‘spatial dilemmas’ generate patterns of extreme richness and beauty.
These have an aesthetic and mathematical (explaining, for example, why 12log2–8 in Fig. 2 works unexpectedly well) interest of their own.
FIG. 1 The spatial Prisoners' Dilemma can generate a large variety of qualitatively different patterns, depending on the magnitude of the parameter,b , which represents the advantage for defectors.
This figure shows two examples.
Both simulations are performed on a 200x200 square lattice with fixed boundary conditions, and start with the same random initial configuration with 10% defectors (and 90% cooperators).
The asymptotic pattern after 200 generations is shown.
The colour coding is as follows: blue represents a cooperator (C) that was already a C in the preceding generation; red is a defector (D) following a D; yellow a D following a C; green a C following a D.
a,
An irregular, but static pattern (mainly of interlaced networks) emerges if 1.75  b  1.8.
The equilibrium frequency of C depends on the initial conditions, but is usually between 0.7 and 0.95.
For lower b values (provided  persists as line fragments less connected than shown here, or as scattered small oscillators (’ D-blinkers').
b,
Spatial chaos characterizes the region .
The large proportion of yellow and green indicates many changes from one generation to the next.
Here, as outlined in the text, 2x2 or bigger C clusters can invade D regions, and vice versa.
C and D coexist indefinitely in a chaotically shifting balance, with the frequency of C being (almost) completely independent of the initial conditions at  0.318.
FIG. 2 The frequency of cooperators in simulations with random or symmetrical initial conditions, within the interesting region .
The frequency of cooperators,, for 300 generations, starting with a random initial configuration of .
The simulation is performed on a 400x400 square lattice with fixed boundary conditions, and each player interacts with 9 neighbours (including self).
The dashed line represents  (see b).
b,The frequency of C within the dynamic fractal generated by a single D invading an infinite array of C. At generation t , the width for the growing D structure is , and the frequency of C,f C (t)within the square of size (centred on the initial D site is shown as a function of t .
This curve has interesting properties, which can be partly understood by referring to the geometry of the D structure.
The D structures are closed-boundary squares in generations that are powers of 2, hence  has minima at generations that are powers of 2.
These squares now expand at the corners and erode along the sides, returning to square shape after another doubling of total generations.
On this basis, a crude approximation suggests that,i time steps going from t to 2 t , there will be roughly  sites within the D structure of size  hence the asymptotic C fraction,f C , for very large such symmetrical patterns is .
As discussed in the text, this approximation agrees with the numerical results surprisingly well in both parts a and b of the figure.
FIG. 3 Spatial games can generate an ‘evolutionary kaleidoscope’.
This simulation is started with a single D at the centre of a 99x99 square-lattice world of C with fixed boundary conditions.
Again 1.8  b  2 .
This generates an (almost) infinite sequence of different patterns.
The initial symmetry is always maintained, because the rules of the game are symmetrical.
The frequency of C oscillates (chaotically) around a time average of 12log2–8 (of course).
a,Generation .
Cooling and freshening of the subpolar North Atlantic Ocean since the 1960s
J. F. Read & W. J. Gould
LITTLE is known of the interdecadal variability in the thermohaline circulation of the world's oceans, yet such knowledge is essential as a background to studies of the effects of natural and anthropogenic climate change.
The subpolar North Atlantic is an area of extensive water mass modification by heat loss to the atmosphere.
Lying as it does at the northern limit of the global thermohaline ‘conveyor belt’, changes in this region may ultimately have global consequences.
Here we report that in August 1991 the waters between Greenland and the United Kingdom were on average 0.08°C and 0.15°C colder than in 1962 and 1981, respectively, and slightly less saline than in 1962.
The cause appears to be renewed formation of intermediate water in the Labrador Sea from cooler and fresher source waters, and the spreading of this water mass from the west.
Variations in the source characteristics of Labrador Sea Water can be traced across the North Atlantic, with a circulation time of 18–19 years between the Labrador Sea and Rockall Trough.
More recently formed Labrador Sea Water, with even lower temperature and salinity, should cool and freshen the North Atlantic still further as it circulates around the ocean in the coming decade.
A survey of the subpolar North Atlantic was made in August 1991 as a contribution to the World Ocean Circulation Experiment.
The survey (CONVEX-91) was designed to resolve the features of the gyre-scale circulation.
The conductivity-temperature-depth (CTD) stations discussed here were along two roughly zonal tracks at  58°N (north section) and 53°N (south section), linked by a section near 40°W (west section)(Fig. 1).
One of the most striking features of the data was the abundance and extreme characteristics of Labrador Sea Water (LSW) in the western part of the survey.
LSW is one of the main water masses of the North Atlantic.
It is believed to form in the central Labrador Sea by deep convection and spreads out at intermediate depths throughout most of the area north of 40°N.
It is characterized by a marked salinity minimum and has been defined as having potential temperature and salinity characteristics between 3.3–3.4°C and 34.84–34.87, respectively.
The potential temperature and salinity minimum seen during CONVEX-91 was pronounced, reaching 2.83°C, 34.84.
Another distinguishing feature of LSW is its weak vertical density gradient, and during CONVEX-91 this was found between depths of 500 and 2,000m within the density range of  (where  is potential density referenced to a depth of 1,500db).
Changes in LSW and other water masses of the subpolar North Atlantic have already been observed over the past few years.
The characteristics of LSW near the source show considerable variation within tens of years.
The variability is believed to be caused by a combination of changes in the rate of renewal and changes in the properties of the water from which LSW is formed.
Monitoring over the past 50 years has shown that during the 1960s deep convection did not occur and the temperature and salinity of LSW gradually increased.
Deep convection was renewed in 1971–72 9 and resulted in an abrupt drop in temperature.
(J. R. N. Lazier, manuscript in preparation) has updated the time series of ref. 3 of temperature on the density surface  from which we have inferred salinity (Fig. 2 a).
This shows that after a freshening in the early 1970s, the salinity (and temperature) began to increase in the early 1980s, although not to the same level as in 1970.
Since then there has been a further, more extreme freshening (and cooling) on this density surface.
Thus there have been two periods of renewal and change; during 1971–76 and again between 1984–90.
Salinity on density surfaces close to the temperature and salinity minimum of LSW from the CONVEX-91 northern section shows two main features (Fig. 2 b):first, an increase in salinity from west to east (high salinity values over the Mid-Atlantic Ridge and Rockall plateau are probably the result of enhanced mixing over the topography); second, a change in the density surface of the salinity minimum.
LSW seems to be advected around the North Atlantic with modification by mixing and by time changes at the LSW source.
Salinity on the  density surface at the eastern end of the north section (Fig. 2 b)are higher than anything seen at the LSW source (Fig. 2 a)implying that mixing has taken place.
Here we will not examine the mixing processes, but accept their role in modifying the water mass as we seek to relate the time-series (Fig. 2 a)to the spatial distribution (Fig. 2b).
Salinity on the  density surface in the Rockall Trough is  34.925, and we will start by associating this with the highest values in the Labrador Sea, 34.915, seen in 1970–71.
Salinity on the same density surface in the Iceland Basin is fresher, between 34.89–34.90, so it could be older than that in the Rockall Trough, that is before 1970, or it could have originated more recently, when salinity increased between 1981 and 1985.
If the circulation scheme proposed in ref. 3 is adopted, namely cyclonic flow out of the Labrador Sea eastwards across the North Atlantic, with northward branches into the Irminger Basin and into the Iceland Basin and Rockall Trough, then the water in the Iceland Basin should be of more recent origin than that of the Rockall Trough because it is closer to the source.
Therefore we suggest that the LSW in the Iceland Basin formed during the period 1981–85 in the Labrador Sea.
We can corroborate our timescale of the circulation by looking at the changes in density surface of the salinity minimum.
The density of LSW was about  during the 1960s, decreasing to  in the early 1970s, and has since increased again reaching  1.5  =34.66 kgm -3 in 1986 4 and  in 1992 (J. R. N. Lazier, manuscript in preparation).
The CONVEX-91 north section (Fig. 2 b)shows the salinity in the Iceland Basin to be least on the  isopycnal surface.
This suggests that this water must have formed before 1986, but later than the 1960s.
The salinity minimum in the Irminger Basin lies between  and , indicating its recent origin, and is markedly fresher than the rest of the section.
The difference in both salinity and density of the salinity minimum west and east of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge suggests that more recent, denser LSW has not yet spread to the east.
The density surface of the salinity minimum in the Rockall Trough is poorly defined.
Long-term monitoring of a section across the northern end of the Trough has shown little change in the properties of LSW since 1975 (D. J. Ellett, manuscript in preparation).
The variation in salinity at a depth of 1,600m has been less than  standard deviations from the 1975–78 mean.
In 1990, however, there was an unprecedented freshening and cooling of up to 7 standard deviations (Ellett, manuscript in preparation).
If we relate this to the changes in the Labrador Sea we see (Fig. 2 a)that the only time there has been such a long period with little or no change in salinity, followed by a sudden marked freshening, was the period leading up to the renewal in 1972.
This suggests that the effects of the renewal of LSW in the early 1970s have just reached the Rockall Trough, and from this we can deduce that there is a circulation time of 18–19 years between the Labrador Sea and the Rockall Trough.
To expand the discussion to cover the changes in water properties over the entire water column, we have made comparisons with previous data sets.
The CONVEX-91 north and south sections lay close to the Transient Tracers in the Ocean (TTO) 55°N (1981) and Erika Dan 53.5°N (1962) sections respectively (Fig. 1).
We have linearly interpolated each pair of sections onto a common grid with points 40m apart vertically and 0.25° of longitude apart horizontally, and we have subtracted the earlier temperatures from CONVEX-91 temperatures (Fig. 3)(the west sections are not shown).
Care must be taken in interpreting Fig. 3 b because the CTD stations at the eastern end were not worked in the same location (Fig. 1), and some effect from the different topography might account for the eddy-like structure seen between 15–28°W.
Nevertheless the general trend indicated is of a decrease in temperature.
Cooling seems to be more pronounced and more extensive in the west than the east; for example, since 1981 (Fig. 3 a)there has been a decrease of more than -1°C in the upper layers to the west, compared with warming in the intermediate water to the east of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge.
Ignoring measurements above 50m (the mixed layer depth) the mean temperature difference of -0.15°C between 1991 and 1981 shows that cooling has been much greater than since 1962 (-0.08°C).
Previous results showed that the subpolar North Atlantic had warmed between the early 1950s and early 1970s, whereas since then there has been cooling.
It would now appear that cooling has continued to temperatures lower than those of 1962.
Comparison of the CONVEX-91 west section (Fig. 1) with data from Erika Dan (1962) and Knorr (1983) in a similar fashion (but on a 0.25° latitudinal grid) shows that there has been marked cooling since 1962, averaging -0.42°C, whereas since 1983 there has been no change, presumably because the effects of the first renewal of LSW had already reached the Irminger Basin.
The renewal of LSW during 1972 now seems to have reached the Rockall Trough, with a consequent cooling and freshening across the subpolar North Atlantic.
More recently formed LSW, however, is considerably colder and fresher than previously formed LSW and has not yet spread beyond the Irminger Basin.
Given that this was formed in the late 1980s and that our estimated time for previous changes to reach the Rockall Trough was  18–19 years, we predict that the next decade will see continued cooling and freshening of the subpolar gyre as the latest form of LSW circulates around the North Atlantic.
Coupled ocean-atmosphere models show surface cooling and freshening of the subpolar North Atlantic in response to greenhouse warming.
The freshening dominates in such a way as to suppress convective water mass formation.
Our measurements show that cooling is predominant, resulting in renewed convection, and is therefore somewhat at odds with the model results.
FIG. 1 Location of the CONVEX-91 sections, with Erika Dan (1962), TTO (1981), and Knorr (1983) stations, showing the topography of the region.
FIG. 2
a,
Salinity on the density surface  in the central Labrador Sea from Lazier (personal communication).
b,
Salinity on the density surfaces ,, from the CONVEX-91 northern section.
FIG. 3 Smoothed temperature difference (°C) between (a)CONVEX-91 north section and the TTO 55°N section from 1981, and (b)CONVEX-91 south section and the Erika Dan 53.5°N data from 1962.
Shaded areas indicate negative temperature difference.
Sexual dimorphism and distorted sex ratios in spiders
Fritz Vollrath & Geoff A. Parker
SEXUAL dimorphism in body size is widespread in the animal kingdom.
Whereas male giantism has been studied and explained extensively, male dwarfism has not.
Yet it is neither rare nor without theoretical interest.
Here we provide experimental and comparative data on spiders to support the theory that dwarf males are associated with high differential adult mortality, with males at much greater risk.
Species with sedentary (low-risk) females have dwarf, roving (high-risk) males.
Life-history theory could readily explain dwarfing if juvenile, but not adult, male mortality were large.
We present a new model in which high mortality of searching mature males reduces the adult sex ratio (males: females), relaxing male-male competition and reducing the importance of male body size to favour dwarfing by early maturation.
Early maturity also reduces male juvenile mortality and thus opposes adult mortality.
This provides a mechanism that buffers skews in adult sex ratio and which is quite distinct from Fisher's principle and allied mechanisms for the primary sex ratio.
Spiders have long provided a classic example of sexual dimorphism in body size, and provide an ideal opportunity for empirical study.
They comprise a number of families with widely differing life histories and differing extents of sexual dimorphism, which can be highly variable even within a single species.
Thus spiders enable us to analyse the ecology of sexual dimorphism (with empirical investigations of particular species or ecotypes), as well as study its evolution (by using he comparative method to juxtapose different species or ecotypes).
The golden orb web-building spider Nephila clavipes has males which are tiny in comparison to their females.
Detailed life-history studies of this highly dimorphic animal reveal that the reproductive success of large males is much higher than small males.
Yet large males are in the minority among their peers, and are much smaller than the females.
Unidentified selection mechanisms apparently favour small or even dwarfish size in Nephila males.
It was suggested that female spiders, by cannibalizing courting males, have actively selected for small male size.
We argue that selection for dwarfism results from reduced intrasexual competition through high differential adult mortality between the sexes.
This differential is primarily associated with males searching for sedentary females, though it will be exacerbated by cannibalism.
At our field study site in Panama, we found evidence for high mortality of immature Nephila (Fig. 1 a ).
Adult females experienced much lower mortality rates whereas adult males searching for females had even higher mortality rates.
The large difference in mortality of adult males and females has important implications for the adult sex ratio in Nephila.
From the mortality data shown in Figs 1 and 2, we conclude that males mature earlier and that the mature size is smaller in females, but that mortality of the roving male exceeds that of the sedentary female.
Alternative explanations for the observed phenomenon were discounted: males were not localized in areas of high population density, nor was the mortality bias reversed in such areas.
The data indicate that dimorphism in adult size may be associated with mortality bias differences brought about by dissimilar adult life styles.
Our comparative studies provide evidence for such an association.
Correlation of male and female body size demonstrates that most spiders show sexual dimorphism (Fig. 3 a), with males being typically smaller.
The degree of dimorphism varies between the different arachnid families, being most pronounced in those families that typically forage as sit-and-wait predators, and less pronounced in active and roaming hunters.
This difference is illustrated in Fig. 3 b and c , using two pairs of families, each pair matched for female size but contrasting in adult lifestyle.
The actively hunting wolf and jumping spiders show little dimorphism and similar adult life styles, whereas the sedentary orb web-building spiders and the similarly sessile (yet webless) crab spiders have males that are much smaller and much more mobile than their respective females.
Indeed, we can find sedentary spiders like the webless, but sedentary, bolas spider,Mastophora , or the unrelated tangle-web spider,Tidarren , where males have undergone runaway evolution for dwarfism and mature inside the egg sac, clearly a derived character.
The males of Tidarren are so small that they cannot even carry their full complement of mating implements and consequently amputate one of their two pedipalps.
The Linyphiids are the main exception to the hypothesis.
They are web spiders that have large males.
But their mode of mating includes mate guarding with fierce male-male competition, thus strong sexual selection seems to punish small size despite male-biased mortality.
The two spider life-history patterns are summarised in Fig. 4 a .
In type- A patterns, males and females have similar sizes and mortality rates throughout life.
In type B males are smaller (they mature earlier than females) and have higher adult mortality.
Current life-history theory would readily explain the small males in B if juvenile male mortality were higher than that of females, but adult mortality should not affect the timing of maturity or adult size.
Each sex switches from growth to reproduction at an optimal age, t for males and t for females, depending on how size affects fitness for each sex.
Classically it is held that the female optimum depends on how size increases fecundity, whereas the male optimum depends on how size increases mating success.
Both of these size benefits are traded off against juvenile mortality; longer juvenile life increases size, but reduces chances of reaching adulthood.
But it is not clear how adult mortality rates could affect the optimal timing of maturity.
We suggest a new form of link, arising through the influence of operational sex ratio on the benefits of size to male fitness.
Our model analyses size dimorphism with differential adult mortality.
Mortality is random, but dependent on lifestyle (for example mobility pattern); instantaneous death rates for juveniles are d jm ,d jf and for adults are  (for males and females, respectively).
For simplicity, growth is linear.
We seek the optimal age (and hence size) at which fitness (survival reproductive success per breeding) is maximized.
Female reproductive success,R f , increases linearly with body size (Fig. 4 b ), as is typical in invertebrates including spiders.
Male reproductive success R m , is also assumed to increase linearly with size, but more steeply as sexual competition increases (Fig. 4 b ).
For each sex, the solutions are equivalent  for females; for males
that is, at t, t , marginal gains in reproductive success through growth must be balanced by marginal losses to reproduction through mortality.
Thus juvenile mortality readily influences size by tuning the timing of maturity.
Adult mortality exerts no influence, except (in the present model) on males, where R m is a function of operational sex ratio, which depends on differential adult mortality.
Assuming a primary sex ratio (males/females) of unity and that mortality is random and dependent only on mobility pattern, operational sex ratio is  where b is the ratio: time per adult male seeking sexual encounter/time per female.
Assumptions (relevant to spiders) about growth and reproduction are given in Fig. 4 b .
Predictions of sexual dimorphism under differential adult mortality are shown in Fig. 4c , for different values of the constant b .
If , both sexes spend equal proportions of adult life waiting for a mate; if b  1 males spend a greater proportion of adult life seeking females than females spend seeking males, and vice versa for b  1.
Typically,b  1,as each male spends most of its time seeking females, but females have a high ‘time out’ from mate seeking because of their relatively high parental investment.
But in Nephila and many other spiders, the value of b will be low as once a male has located a female's web, he stays there.
Figure 4 c shows that relatively high mortality rates of adult males, coupled with relatively low values of b , favour production of small or dwarf males.
Our hypothesis predicts that, given a primary sex ratio of unity, the smaller sex will more frequently reach maturation but, because of higher adult mortality, may be less numerous in the adult population.
The predictions are supported by evidence that male dwarfism is an evolutionary strategy in solitary, sedentary animals, that it evolves in low population densities (high search costs), and that it correlates with a female-biased adult sex ratio (reduced male competition).
Our theory states that sex differences in life history trade-offs produce, and are produced by, biased adult and operational sex ratios.
Higher male mortality reduces male competition, which favours earlier male maturation, and this in turn increases the proportion of adult males:females, which increases competition until the effects balance out: a form of selective feedback which tends to buffer skews in adult sex ratio at the expense of male body size.
In Nephila,increased male mortality during the adult search phase is almost exactly counteracted by reduction in juvenile male growth stages.
Other examples of sedentary females with dwarf males may be found in barnacles (Crustacea, Cirripedia), the hyperparasitic crab Danalia curvata (Crustacea, Peracaridae) and the angler fish Ceratias (Teleostei, Ceratiidae).
Indeed, it seems usual for bisexual groups with sedentary females to evolve dwarf males.
Such an adult sex-ratio buffer as proposed here is quite distinct from Fisher's principle for sex ratio, which would operate only up to the end of parental care.
Provided that the advantage to males of large size is sufficiently low, there is nothing to prevent ‘over-production’ of adult males whenever early male maturity is not balanced by high adult male mortality.
The eventual sex ratio can vary widely and our mechanism merely buffers its range.
FIG. 1 Mortality, size distribution and maturation of Nephila clavipes in a rich habitat (Panama, Cerro Galera Hill Road).
a , Mortality of immatures (sampled in 3 instars), females and males.
Mortality of immatures (n =791), subadult females (n =451) and mature females (n =355) was calculated from a cohort study (June-September) where a given site was visited every 20 days.
Data of male mortality (n =138) came from a capture-recapture study with marked individuals (daily visits to the site, after 10 days no more males were recaptured).
Note that male mortality is shown as % dying in 10 days whereas the other groups are shown as % dying in 20 days; hence the differences in mortality were even more pronounced than depicted.
b , Size distribution of males and females classified in the field using a chart (1.5 units  1mm).
Size (patella-tibia measured under a binocular microscope) ranged in males from 2.3 to 8.1mm with a mean (s.d.) of 4.9  1.5mm (n =24); dominant males were larger: 6.1  0.9mm (n =10).
Males weighed 19.5  15.6mg.
Female size ranged from 9.5 to 17mm with a mean of 13  2mm, and at maturation they weighed 331.4  184.8mg (n =10).
c , Timing of maturation of subadult and adult male and females in the field.
In the laboratory, males had a significantly slower rate of growth, but still matured earlier than females.
This was also highly significant (P=0.005)and observed whether the diet was rich or poor.
FIG. 2 Diagrammatic representation of mortality in a hypothetical spider with sexual dimorphism, based on data for Nephila.
Gender symbols indicate the timing of maturation.
a , Mature females have a lower mortality than immature females.
b , Mature males have a higher mortality when searching for a female than on a female's web.
The circle indicates the point on which the male finds a female.
The primary sex ratio was unity: 142 spiderlings, selected at random from 2 eggs sacs and raised without loss, yielded sex ratios (proportion male) of 0.49 and 0.47.
The sex ratio of immatures in the field was 0.50 for instar 4 (n=123)and 0.48 for instar 5 (n=93).
Once adult, males no longer build webs, and the adult sex ratio had to be estimated.
At high population densities, when webs interconnect, male travel mortality was low and we observed an adult sex ratio (male:female) of 0.75 (n =711).
Commonly, population density was much lower, and the males travelled considerable distances (upwards of 10 metres) with all the associated risks.
In a typical Nephila habitat (secondary growth in recent clearings) we observed an operational sex ratio of 0.49 (n=59)during the height of the mating season.
In another similar habitat, sampled 9 times over two spider generations, we observed an average sex ratio of 0.52 (n=1,076).
FIG. 3 a , A representative number of spiders from Western Europe, Japan, Singapore and Australia (802 species in 31 families or subfamilies).
The line indicates equal body size, the regression was .
Further analysis regressing log (male body size) on to log (female body size) showed that overall the partial effect of hunting method (the effect once the effect of family size has been accounted for) was highly significant (species that were sit-and-wait predators exhibited a higher degree of size dimorphism than species that were roving hunters.
This is not affected by the average body size of species within the family; the interaction between body size and size dimorphism was not significant ().
Nor was it much affected by  phylogenetic relationships.
Of the 17 major spider families, 7 were mainly hunters (Pisauridae, Lycosidae, Salticidae, Philodromidae, Sparassidae, Clubionidae and Gnaphosidae), 9 were web-builders (Uloboridae, Dictynidae, Linyphiidae, Araneidae, Metinae, Tetragnathinae, Theridiidae, Agelenidae and Atypidae) and in 1 (Thomisidae) most species are ambushers.
The number of species that featured dwarfs (males of half the female length or smaller) as opposed to equally sized partners was 0:41 in the hunters, 93:66 in the web-builders and 17:3 in the ambushers. b ,c , Scattergrams of male (ordinate) and female (abscissa) body size of active hunters (Lycosidae/Pisauridae, wolfspiders; Salticidae, jumping spiders) and sit-and-wait predators (Araneidae, orb spiders; Thomisidae crab spiders).
The four families were chosen for their similarity in female body size and difference in hunting manner.
FIG. 4 Evolution of sexual dimorphism with differential adult mortality of the sexes.
Mortality depends on mobility.
a , The two spider life history patterns.
In type A , both sexes rove throughout life, with similar (high) mortality in juvenile and adult stages.
In type- B,juveniles of both sexes are sedentary and thus have similar (low) mortality, but as adults, males rove and females remain sedentary and cryptic so that mortality is higher in males.
b , the relationship between adult body size (s m ,s f , for males and females) and reproductive success.
Adult body size is a function of age at maturity (t m ,t f ).
Female reproductive success is ); and c f v f are positive constants.
Male reproductive success is assumed to increase more with size as operational sex ratio (OSR;β ) increases: we assume that ).
Growth of sex i is assumed to be linear so that, where K i  is the growth rate.
c , Sexual size dimorphism.
This is calculated from equations (1), using the above assumptions about mortality, growth and reproductive success.
The optimal time of maturity in females is .
Optimal time of male maturity is solved by iteration of , where β (t ) follows equation (2).
If juvenile growth and mortality is similar in each sex (), the ratio of male size to female size is then 
Numerical results of this solution are shown with .
Size ratio is plotted against the adult mortality ratio at different values of b in equation (2).
Pheromone binding to two rodent urinary proteins revealed by X-ray crystallography
Zsolt Bôcskei, Colin R. Groom, Darren R. Flower, Charles E. Wright, Simon E. V. Phillips, Andrea Cavaggioni, John B. C. Findlay & Anthony C. T. North
THE principal protein excreted in male rat urine, urinary α2 -globulin and the homologous mouse protein, major urinary protein, have been well characterized, although their functions remain unclear.
Male rat urine affects the behaviour and sexual response of female rats, leading to the proposal that rodent urinary proteins are responsible for binding pheromones and their subsequent release from drying urine.
Urinary α2 -globulin is also involved in hyaline droplet nephropathy, an important toxicological syndrome in male rats resulting from exposure to a number of industrial chemicals and characterized by the accumulation of liganded urinary α2- globulin in lysosomes in the kidney, followed by the induction of renal cancer.
We now report the three-dimensional structures of mouse major urinary protein (at 2.4Å resolution) and rat urinary α 2-globulin (at 2.8Å resolution).
The results corroborate the role of these proteins in pheromone transport and elaborate the structural basis of ligand binding.
The sequences of rat urinary α 2-globulin (A2U) and mouse major urinary protein (MUP) show them both to be members of the lipocalin protein family.
These are small proteins capable of binding hydrophobic molecules with high affinity and selectivity.
This burgeoning family now contains over 20 different proteins, principally identified through sequence homology.
An alignment showing several lipocalins is given in Fig. 1.
Lipocalins have a wide range of functions and include odour-binding proteins found in the nasal mucosa or excreted in urine.
Some members of this family may possess dual molecular recognition properties—for the ligand bound by the protein and for a receptor cell to which the ligand is transported.
This has been found for retinol-binding protein and the odour-binding proteins (M. Boudjelal, A. Sivaprasadarao and J.B.C.F., unpublished results).
We have previously reported the crystallization of MUP and A2U (ref. 7).
Although sequence analysis shows them to be lipocalins, molecular replacement using other lipocalin structures as search models failed to produce interpretable solutions; we therefore used the multiple isomorphous replacement method and prepared three heavy-atom derivatives of MUP.
The MUP structure was then used as a model to solve A2U by molecular replacement.
The crystallographic procedures, summarized in Table 1, will be reported in detail elsewhere.
The structures of MUP and A2U are similar to those of other lipocalins, consisting of an eight-stranded β -barrel and an α -helix, with loops between the β -strands.
There are no large differences in main-chain conformation between the four molecules of A2U in the asymmetric unit (r.m.s. difference between the α -carbon (C α ) coordinates for any pair of monomers is 0.76 to 1.20 ) or between any of these molecules and MUP (r.m.s. difference between all C α coordinates is 0.96 to 1.20 ).
Their similarity to other lipocalins is typified by an r.m.s. difference in C α positions of 1.21  between equivalent residues in the β -sheet cores of MUP and RBP.
The packing of MUP and A2U in the crystals is, however, different (Fig. 2) and comparison with the packing observed in other lipocalin structures suggests that there is no consistent pattern in their quaternary structures.
The interiors of the β -barrels of MUP and A2U form pockets with a highly apolar lining, ideal for the transportation of small hydrophobic molecules through hydrophilic media.
There is clear electron density in the ligand-binding pocket of MUP and A2U, showing that both have been co-purified and crystallized with a bound ligand.
Gas chromatography of MUP suggests that the principal component bound by MUP in vivo is 2- (sec- butyl) thiazoline (Fig. 3), although this may represent the major species of several present in the crystal, MUP has been shown to bind at least three different ligands in vivo and some or all of these may also be present at low occupancy.
The fit to the electron density of 2- (sec- butyl) thiazoline is good, but difference electron density maps show additional weak positive electron density close to the modelled ligand.
The electron density observed in the ligand-binding pocket of A2U is different in shape, located closer to one side of the barrel and slightly less deep in the binding pocket than in MUP (Fig. 3), although it is still consistent with the size and shape of a number of pheromones.
There are differences in both the identity and positions of amino-acid residues forming the binding pocket of MUP and A2U.
Most noticeable are the substitution of Val 58 and Ala 107 of MUP by phenylalanine in A2U.
With Phe 94 these three residues form the base of the binding pocket of A2U, forcing any bound ligand to occupy a slightly higher position in the pocket.
The substitution of Leu 44 and Ala 122 of MUP by valine in A2U and large movements of the side chains of Phe 60 and Tyr 121 also give rise to important differences in the two binding pockets.
Also of note in the MUP structure is a hydrogen bond from the side-chain hydroxyl group of Tyr 124 to one of two water molecules in the binding pocket.
In A2U the hydroxyl group of Tyr 124 points directly at the electron density corresponding to bound ligand.
These differences help explain why these homologous proteins bind a variety of ligands with different affinities.
The size and hydrophobicity of the binding pocket is also consistent with the ability of A2U to bind a number of environmentally important chemicals found in unleaded petrol and shown to induce A2U nephropathy in rats.
Our results give persuasive support to the proposition that A2U and MUP function as pheromone transport proteins in male rodent urine and will help in understanding the molecular basis of the modification of behaviour in rodents.
They also provide detailed information on the structural basis for ligand binding by these proteins, which may be important in the metabolism of xenobiotic compounds in the rat and the metabolism of fatty acids in the kidney.
Crystals of MUP were grown from a solution of CdCl 2 in malate buffer (), and crystals of A2U were grown from a solution of polyethylene glycol 3350 in citrate buffer (P2 1 , a =56.6Å,b =103.5Å,c =62.7Å,β =95.3°).
No other external ligands were added.
Diffraction data were obtained from these crystals on a Nicolet/Siemens X100A area detector, mounted on a Rigaku RU-200 rotating anode X-ray generator.
The frame data were processed with the program XDS.
Strong anomalous scattering from Cd 2+ ions present in the native crystals of MUP prevented the use of anomalous data for initial phase determination.
With an overall figure of merit for the MIR phases of only 0.48 at 3Å resolution, automatic solvent flattening failed to produce sensible molecular boundaries and we therefore defined the molecular envelope manually using the program MEDIT.
Solvent flattening then produced an interpretable map.
X-PLOR and Hendrickson-Konnert least-squares restrained refinement has led to a final R -factor of 18.7% at 2.4Å, with an r.m.s. bond-length deviation of 0.021Å.
The present model comprises residues 5–161 (of which the side chains of four residues are disordered), two fully and two partially occupied Cd 2+ ions, 70 water molecules and a bound molecule of 2- (sec -butyl) thiazoline.
With this MUP structure, with ligand, water and side-chain atoms uncommon to A2U removed as the basis for a search model, the program MERLOT gave clear, unambiguous solutions for the orientations and positions of the four monomers per asymmetric unit of A2U.
The resulting A2U model was then subjected to rigid body minimization by use of X-PLOR, limited rebuilding by FRODO, simulated annealing refinement with X-PLOR and conventional restrained least-squares refinement by PROLSQ, to an R factor of 23.4% at 2.8Å, with an r.m.s. bond-length deviation of 0.023Å.
This model comprises residues 5–161 of four independent protein monomers (of which 3,2,3 and 6 residues in the four chains respectively cannot yet be modelled).
Solvent molecules have not yet been included.
Per cent of total possible.
FIG. 1 Sequence alignment, made in the light of structural correspondence, of human serum retinol-binding protein (RBP), bovine β -lactoglobulin (BLG), MUP and A2U.
Although only one sequence for MUP and A2U is shown the urinary proteins are encoded by a gene family expressing at least seven closely related forms of the protein.
The alignment was produced with the program SOMAP.
Colours represent the nature of the residues: red, negatively charged; blue, positively charged; green, polar; grey, hydrophobic; purple, aromatic; brown, glycine and proline; yellow, cysteine.
Despite little sequence similarity (typically 30% identity between pairs), the lipocalin family shows a high degree of structural similarity.
RBP, BLG (which also binds retinol and other hydrophobic ligands), insecticyanin and bilin-binding protein, the first examples of known 3-dimensional structure, all comprise similar cup-shaped antiparallel β -barrel frameworks with successive +1 topology, formed from strands linked by loops that differ between the proteins.
FIG. 2 Ribbon diagram of a , the A2U tetramer, and b , the MUP dimer.
A2U crystallizes as a tetramer, with the sides of the β -barrels packing against each other.
The one MUP molecule in the asymmetric unit makes its most extensive interactions to a molecule related to it by a 2-fold rotation about an axis parallel to the axis of the β -barrel.
Two of the four Cd 2+ ions in the asymmetric unit, which are necessary for crystallization, are involved in this interface suggesting the stability of crystal packing in MUP is dominated by the interactions with the metal ions.
FIG. 3 The electron density in the binding pocket of a , MUP with 2- (sec- butyl) thiazoline shown in yellow, and b , A2U.
Aromatic residues lining the binding pocket are shown in purple.
Both are  electron-density maps; the bound ligand was not included in either the refinement or map calculation.
Zebrafish pax[b] is involved in the formation of the midbrain-hindbrain boundary
Stefan Krauss, Malcolm Maden, Nigel Holder & Stephen W. Wilson
AMONG the genes thought to be involved in patterning the nervous system are a family of developmentally regulated paired box-containing (Pax) genes.
Mutations in some of these Pax genes lead to severe developmental abnormalities.
Zebrafish pax[b] (pax[zf-b])is a member of the Pax gene family that is expressed in the presumptive posterior midbrain from the end of gastrulation and, at later stages, in other localized regions of the developing embryo.
Here we show that injection of antibodies raised against the pax[b] protein causes a localized malformation at the midbrain-hindbrain boundary.
In situ hybridizations demonstrate that antibody injection causes downregulation of pax[b] transcripts in the posterior midbrain and alteration of wnt-1 and eng-2 expression in this area.
The data demonstrate an involvement of pax[b] in the formation of the midbrain-hindbrain junction.
Through homology to Drosophila paired box-containing segmentation genes, at least eight members of the vertebrate Pax gene family have been isolated.
Each member of the family shows spatially and temporally restricted expression patterns during embryonic development.
The paired box has recently been established as a DNA-binding element, thus Pax genes are likely to encode transcription factors.
Mutations in several Pax genes lead to severe developmental abnormalities:(1) a mutation in the paired box of murine Pax-1 leads to the undulated phenotype which exhibits distortions of the vertebral column;(2) a mutation in the Pax-6 gene leads to the semidominant Small eye phenotype in mouse and a mutation in the putative human homologue of this gene may be responsible for the aniridia disorder;(3) mutations in the putative human homologue to Pax-3 (HuP2 ) occasionally lead to hearing loss associated with Waardenburg's syndrome, whereas in mouse a deletion in Pax-3 causes the splotch phenotype which is associated with spina bifida, exencephaly, a tail flexion defect and deficiencies in neural crest cell derivatives.
To address the role of pax[b] protein (which has highest homology to murine Pax-2) during zebrafish development, an antibody specific for the putative transcription activation site of the pax[b] protein was injected into fertilized zebrafish eggs.
The antibody exclusively stains nuclei of cells that also express the pax[b] gene.
Furthermore, no crossreactivity was found on western blots as the two unique bands (Fig. 1) correlate well with the predicted relative molecular mass of the two pax[b] splicing products.
Injections of the antibody did not significantly increase mortality rates compared to controls and until 22h of development no obvious morphological defects were observed.
At about this time, when the furrow that separates the midbrain from the hindbrain becomes apparent, 50–60% of the injected embryos showed abnormal development of this region.
The nature of the abnormality varied with the amount of antibody injected.
Smaller injections led to a hypertrophy of the midbrain-hindbrain boundary region (eight cases; 12–15% of the injected embryos), whereas embryos that were injected with a high dose of the antibody failed to form the midbrain-hindbrain boundary (32 cases; 50–60% of the injected embryos).
Instead, the embryos possessed a neuroepithelium that gradually tapered towards the diencephalon (Fig. 2).
Other regions of pax[b] expression did not show major morphological changes, but we cannot rule out that subtle changes have escaped examination.
At 27–28h of development, localized cell death was seen in antibody-injected embryos in the region that would normally form the posterior portion of the midbrain and cerebellum (Fig. 3).
Control injections with preimmune serum produced normal embryos.
To elucidate molecular changes  preceding the morphological abnormalities,in situ hybridizations were done on tissue sections of injected embryos at 14h of development.
In wild-type embryos,pax[b] transcripts are first detected at 9h (at the end of gastrulation) in tissue that will later form the caudal midbrain.
At 14h of development, additional pax[b] expression is detected in the optic stalk, the otic placode, the nephritic primordium and in presumptive commissural interneurons along the hindbrain and the spinal cord.
At 14h of development,pax[b] expression in the posterior midbrain of uninjected embryos was prominent compared to pax[b] expression in the stalk (Fig. 4 b ).
In contrast,pax[b] expression in the posterior midbrain of injected embryos was dramatically reduced, whereas the amount of pax[b] transcript in the stalk did not show major changes (Fig. 4 a ).
To analyse whether other putative developmental control genes expressed at the midbrain-hindbrain boundary were affected by antibody injections, we examined the expression of the zebrafish homologues of murine Wnt-1 and En-2 , genes that are important for the normal formation of this region in mice.
Wnt-1 , a gene that encodes a signalling peptide, is expressed in the neural keel of zebrafish embryos at 14h of development, extending from the region of the presumptive epiphysis to the tail (excluding the presumptive cerebellum), and in a transverse stripe in the posterior midbrain (ref. 25 and Fig. 4d ).
In injected embryos the dorsal portion of the wnt-1 expression appeared to be unaltered, but the expression in the transverse midbrain stripe was strongly reduced (Fig. 4 c ).
In zebrafish (for mouse, see ref. 26), transcripts of engrailed genes are confined to the posterior midbrain and the presumptive cerebellum at 14h of development (Fig. 4 f ).
In situ hybridizations on injected embryos showed that, at this developmental stage, transcripts of eng-2 were only detected in the dorsal portion of the neural keel at the midbrain-hindbrain boundary (Fig. 4 e ).
Our results provide evidence that the pax[b] gene is a key regulatory element in the formation of the posterior midbrain.
The alteration in the level of pax[b] transcripts in antibody-injected embryos suggests that a functional pax[b] protein is required (directly or indirectly) for the expression of its own gene in the posterior midbrain.
Such autoregulatory pathways are known for Drosophila segmentation genes.
A consequence of the reduced pax[b] expression in the posterior midbrain (and the interference of the antibody with the pax[b] protein) seems to be a downregulation of two other genes in this region,wnt-1 (Drosophila homologue:wingless)and eng-2 (Drosophila homologue:engrailed).
This observation may explain the resemblance between the ‘pax[b] - ' phenotype and the Wnt-1 - /Wnt-1 - phenotype, and suggests a regulatory network between pax[b] ,wnt-1 and eng-2 in vertebrates.
In Drosophila the segmentation genes paired and gooseberry are required for a proper wingless and engrailed expression.
Interestingly, both genes contain a paired box and share homology with pax[b] .
Thus comparable networks of interacting factors may have evolved in Drosophila and vertebrates.
FIG. 1 The antibody to the pax[b] protein recognizes two polypeptides that closely correspond to the alternate splicing products of the pax[b] gene.
The arrowheads demarcate the two antibody positive bands with estimated M r of 43 and 45K.
The two bands correlate well to the deduced M r (42,028 and 43,747) of the two pax[b] splicing products.
METHODS.
The rostral portion of the neural keels of 100 micro-dissected 14–16h zebrafish embryos were homogenized in lysis buffer (20mM Tris pH 7.8, 1mM EDTA 1mM PMSF, 0.5mM DTT, 20mM KCl) and aliquots of the homogenate were run on a 10% SDS-polyacrylamide gel.
After transfer of the proteins to a nitrocellulose filter using a BioRad transfer system with a Tris/methanol/glycine buffer, strips of nitrocellulose were incubated in 100mM Tris, 0.9% NaCl, 0.1% Tween-20, pH 7.5 (TTBS) for 1h.
Antibody incubations were done in TTBS overnight at 4°C and control strips were similarly incubated in TTBS containing an equivalent amount of protein from normal rabbit serum.
Second antibody and subsequent incubations were done according to the specifications of a Vectastain ABC Kit (Vector Laboratories) and colour was visualized with 3,3'-diaminobenzidine.
The approximate molecular masses of the bands were calculated from the migration of known standards.
FIG. 2 Injection of the antibody to pax[b] protein leads to abnormal development of the midbrain-hindbrain boundary.
a , Phenotype created by injecting fertilized zebrafish eggs with antibody compared to b , the phenotype of a normal embryo at 24h of development.
Dorsal views of the embryos in which rostral is to the top.
The large arrowhead marks the position of the furrow that separates midbrain and hindbrain in normal embryos (b ) and the position where the furrow is missing in antibody-injected embryos (a).
The small arrowhead indicates the unaffected rhombomere, ro2, as marked by axon staining with an anti-acetylated α -tubulin antibody (kindly provided by G.Piperno).
f, Forebrain; h, hindbrain, m, midbrain.
Scale bars, 25μM.
METHODS.
Fertilized zebrafish eggs were injected on an agarose ramp through the intact chorion and into the yolk.
Injections of  5nl of the antibody (40μgμl -1 ) generated embryos that failed to form the furrow between midbrain and hindbrain in 50–60% of cases, whereas injection of  2nl of antibody led to hypertrophy of the furrow region in 12–15% of cases.
Embryos were raised at 28.5°C.
The antibody was present in the embryos until at least 28h of development as demonstrated by staining embryos with fluorescently labelled secondary antibodies to the injected primary antibody (not shown).
The staining with the anti-acetylated α -tubulin antibody was done using standard procedures.
FIG. 3 a , Localized cell death in antibody-injected embryos at 27–28h of development.
Dorsal is up, rostral is to the left.
The dashed lines demarcate the zone of dying cells.
The embryos have been stained with an anti-acetylated α -tubulin antibody to visualize axon tracts.
Dying cells were identified by their opacity and highly refractile appearance.
The extent of cell death varied between embryos and between the two sides of the neural tube in individual embryos.
The embryo illustrated demonstrates the most marked cell death that was observed.
Note that the affected cells extend rostrally and caudally beyond the region that fails to express pax[b] .
In phenotypically abnormal brains, there was some disorganized differentiation of neurons caudal to the posterior commissure.
The posterior commissure itself (marked by a star) was unaffected.
b , An embryo with normal phenotype.
d , Diencephalon; c, cerebellum; h, hindbrain; m, midbrain.
Scale bars, 25μm.
FIG. 4 In situ hybridizations on tissue sections of 14-h embryos that were microinjected with the antibody against pax[b] protein (a, c, e),and wild-type embryos (b, d, f).
Bright-field (a, b ) and dark-field (c-f ) photographs are shown on sagittal sections (the section in e is slightly parasagittal).
Rostral is to the left.
The following probes were used:a, b,2,409-bp pax[b] cDNA;c, d,503-bp Bam HI- Hind III 3’wnt-1 genomic fragment;e, f,1,116-bp eng-2 cDNA.
The region of the presumptive posterior midbrain is marked by an arrowhead. os, Optic stalk.
METHODS.
In situ hybridizations were done as described in ref. 1.
Slides for tissue sections were treated with 3-aminopropyl-triethoxyl-silane rather than gelatinized.
Sections were exposed for 14 days.
Scale bars, 50μm.
Actin cables and epidermal movement in embryonic wound healing
Paul Martin & Julian Lewis
SKIN wounds in embryos heal rapidly and perfectly.
Even though the epidermis appears to be stretched taut over the surface of a structure such as a growing limb bud, its response to wounding is to close over the lesion, rather than to gape more widely.
In adult wounds, the epidermis seems to migrate by means of lamellipodia, crawling over the exposed connective tissue.
But in embryonic wounds we do not see lamellipodia.
The epidermis at the edge of the wound looks smooth, as though under a circumferential tension.
Here we show that a cable of filamentous actin appears to run continuously around most of the wound margin.
It is confined to the single row of basal cells at the free edge of the epidermis.
We suggest that the actin cable acts as a contractile ‘purse string’ to close up the embryonic wound.
We studied the healing of a standardized lesion on the dorsal surface of a four-day chick embryonic wing bud.
The epidermis at this stage consists simply of a single basal layer of cuboidal cells overlaid by an outer layer of squamous cells, called the periderm.
The lesion is made by dissecting away, using a tungsten needle, a square patch of embryonic skin measuring roughly 0.5x0.5mm and about 0.1mm deep (Fig. 1 a).
The time course of healing can be observed in the egg, from camera lucida drawings of living specimens followed throughout the process.
We found that the wound margin moves in at a steady rate of 10–15μm per hour, and the wound is closed within 18 to 24 hours.
In adult wounds, closure is brought about in part by contraction of the wound connective tissue (the granulation tissue).
It was therefore important to check that in embryonic wounds the epidermis was actively moving over the mesenchyme and not merely riding passively on mesenchymal contraction.
To test this, we marked the boundaries of the exposed mesenchyme immediately after wounding by applying spots of the lipophilic dye DiI, which, once incorporated, remains confined to the cells that have taken it up.
Wounds were then left to heal for 18 hours and the position of the epithelial wound margin was noted in relation to the mesenchymal markers (Fig. 2).
The mesenchyme does seem to contract to a modest extent, but more importantly, the epidermis clearly moves inwards over the marked mesenchyme cells.
We conclude that this movement must be driven by forces generated in the epidermis.
Scanning electron microscopy gives some insight into the behaviour of the epithelium at the wound margin (Fig. 1).
The ragged edges and surfaces of the freshly inflicted wound become smoothed out within an hour to give a more regular cellular organization that persists until the wound is closed.
The exposed mesenchyme flattens to form an almost epithelium-like surface, whereas the free edge of the epidermis forms a smooth arc around most of the perimeter.
The epidermal cells at this edge generally appear to adhere tightly to one another, although in a few places they are individually rounded up as though less tightly coherent.
But in either case, in studies using light microscopy, scanning electron microscopy (which reveals surface details), or transmission electron microscopy (which lets us see the basal epidermal layer), we do not find lamellipodia at the epidermal wound front in either the basal or the peridermal layer.
In cross-section (Fig. 3), the wound front generally has a rounded or only slightly angular profile, rather than the flattened cellular protrusions one might expect at a leading edge that was actively crawling forwards over the exposed mesenchyme.
Neither is there any sign that epithelial cells further from the leading edge are putting out lamellipodia or crawling forward as described in some adult systems.
The absence of lamellipodia tallies with another observation: when we grafted a small patch of embryonic skin onto a denuded region of the limb bud surface, we found that the grafted epidermis, far from expanding over the adjacent vacant territory, actually retracted, leaving its own mesenchyme exposed.
This behaviour seems at first sight to be the opposite of that seen during wound closure.
Both phenomena could, however, be results of the same underlying mechanism: a circumferential tension in the free edge of the epithelium, acting like a purse string, could drive in the one case the contraction of the isolated patch of skin, in the other case the closure of a wound.
Such contractile machinery would be expected to involve actin.
We therefore examined the distribution of filamentous actin in the healing wounds, by staining with fluorescently labelled phalloidin.
We kept our specimens as whole mounts, and used a confocal scanning microscope to view thin optical sections in the plane of the wound.
We find that a thick band, or cable, of actin runs around almost all of the epidermal wound margin (Fig. 4).
This is confined to the free margin of the front row of basal epidermal cells, and appears to be continuous from cell to cell (presumably through adherens junctions).
As seen in optical section, it has typically about five times the actin content of an ordinary band of cortical actin (Fig. 4i).
Transmission electron microscopy of cross-sections of the wound edge confirms the presence of the cable (Fig. 3b).
In some regions, the cable is split into several parallel strands, and at a few points around the margin (typically two or three) the continuity of the cable is broken, the actin distribution appears disorderly, and the wound front is irregular rather than smoothly curved; some of these discontinuities may represent sites of stronger attachment to the substratum.
The cable is well defined within an hour after wounding (Fig. 4 a-c),and other studies (K. Midwinter, J. McCluskey, P. M. and J. L., manuscript in preparation) show that it begins to form within minutes; it then persists until the wound is closed.
The thickness of the established cable, after the first hour or two, does not change noticeably as the cable shortens during healing.
Moreover, there is no obvious change in the average shape of the marginal basal cells in which the cable runs (Fig. 4 g),until the final stages of wound closure (and then only at sites where the wound margin is particularly sharply curved).
Cells must therefore be leaving the marginal row as the wound closes (most probably by slipping back into the epithelium to the rear of this row).
The pattern of junctional contacts through which the actin cable maintains its appearance of continuity must be continually changing to allow the cable as a whole to shorten.
The whole process ends with a ‘pile-up’, as the epidermal wound front converges at the site of final closure.
Instead of stopping immediately, the motile machinery apparently overruns, throwing up a small volcano-shaped mound of epidermal cells (Fig. 1 e).
Although the cable has by this stage disappeared, the cells in the mound still contain a great deal of filamentous actin in a disorganized arrangement (Fig. 4 h).
All of these phenomena, including the formation of an actin cable, are seen also in the healing of analogous types of wounds in the mouse embryo (P.M., J. McCluskey and J. L., manuscript in preparation).
We have as yet no direct proof that the actin cable provides the driving force for epidermal wound closure in our system, but this interpretation seems far more plausible than alternatives such as pushing from the rear or hidden crawling movements of cells behind the wound front.
Indeed, our transmission electron micrographs (Fig. 3) show no lamellipodia or other obvious motile structures extending from the epidermal cells behind the wound front.
A purse-string mechanism based on a contractile cable fits the observations of others who have investigated embryonic wound healing and seen similar patterns of epidermal movement.
But it does not apply to minute epidermal lesions that leave the basal lamina intact, or to embryonic epidermal cells moving on a rigid adhesive substratum in culture: here the conventional mechanism of epidermal crawling seems to operate.
Two central questions arise: what initiates the formation of the actin cable, and what activates its contraction and the associated cell rearrangements?
The experiments of Kolega are illuminating here.
Stress applied to a migrating epidermal cell at right angles to its direction of movement (tangential to the leading edge of its lamellipodium) causes the lamellipodium to retract and brings about a reorganization of the cell's actin into a cable oriented along the major axis of stress.
In our system, we upset the pattern of tension in the epidermis by cutting so as to create a free epidermal edge.
This abolishes the component of tension acting at right angles to the cut, while the tangential tension remains, suppressing lamellipodia and provoking formation of an actin cable, which in turn presumably reinforces the tangential tension.
The act of wounding may also trigger an influx of Ca 2+ , activating contraction of the cable; and we have in fact shown elsewhere that c- fos is rapidly induced in the epidermis at a wound margin in rat embryos.
We do not know how this activated state is subsequently maintained throughout the healing process, although the final overrun and pile-up suggest that it takes some time to switch off.
One attractive hypothesis would be that there is positive feedback, whereby tension in the cable generates an intracellular chemi- cal signal for the maintenance of tension; this would maintain an activated state in every cell containing a segment of the taut cable.
There is indeed direct evidence that mechanical stress can generate intracellular signals that regulate gene expression.
The actin cable provides a novel way for epidermal cells to coordinate their activities so as to close gaps, fulfilling their function as a self-repairing barrier layer.
It will be interesting to see whether similar actin cables also play a part in driving the coordinated movements of normal morphogenesis.
FIG. 1 Scanning electron micrographs showing typical stages in the healing of a wound made by removing a square patch of embryonic skin from the dorsal surface of a chick wing bud at 4 days of incubation (stage 22/23).
a,
A wing bud immediately after wounding.
Scale bar, 1mm.
b,
Detail from a,showing part of the edge of the fresh wound.
Scale bar, 10μm.
c,
A wing bud 12h after wounding.
Scale bar, 1mm.
d,
Detail from c,showing the taut, smooth appearance of the free edge of the epidermis at the wound margin and the flattened, epithelioid surface (littered with a certain amount of debris) formed by the exposed mesenchyme.
Scale bar, 100μm.
e,
Detail from d,showing the appearance of the cells at the wound margin; mesenchyme above, epidermis below.
Scale bar, 10μm.
f,
A recently closed wound, 24h after wounding.
Epidermal cells have been thrown up into a small mound at the site of closure.
Scale bar, 100μm.
METHODS.
The patch of skin was removed with a sharpened tungsten needle, a few drops of Hanks' balanced salt solution were added to keep the wound from drying out, and the egg was then returned to the incubator.
Specimens were fixed in half-strength Karnovsky fixative (2% formaldehyde plus 2.5% glutaraldehyde in 0.075M cacodylate buffer, pH 7.4) at 0, 1, 3, 6, 12, 18 and 24h after wounding, postfixed in osmium tetroxide, and prepared for scanning electron microscopy in the standard way.
At least 3 specimens were examined for each time point.
In all cases scale bars show the sizes of the fixed specimens; living specimens, before fixation shrinkage, are  30% larger in linear dimension.
FIG. 2 Evidence that the wound closes by a movement of the epidermis over the mesenchyme.
a,
A wing bud 18h after wounding.
The boundary of the patch of mesenchyme initially denuded of epidermis has been marked with dots of DiI, applied immediately after the operation; these are still visible as red spots 18h later.
b,
The same wing bud fixed and viewed by scanning electron microscopy to reveal the outlines of the healing epidermis.
The free edge of the epidermis has clearly moved in over the marked wound mesenchyme, leaving less than 10% of it exposed by this stage.
Scale bar, 1mm.
METHODS.DiI was dissolved at a concentration of 1% in ethanol and pressure-ejected onto the exposed mesenchyme, at a series of points around the wound margin, from a glass micropipette with a tip diameter of about 10μm.
Specimens were viewed fresh, by bright-field and epifluorescence optics, before fixation for scanning electron microscopy (see Fig. 1, legend).
FIG. 3
a,
Transmission electron micrograph of a cross-section through the epidermis at the edge of a wound that has had 12h to heal.
Note the rounded contour of the leading edge and the absence of any flattened lamellipodia extending over the substratum, either from the cells at the leading edge or from those further back.
The arrow marks the site where the basal lamina ends; to the rear of this, a normal basal lamina is clearly visible at higher magnification.
Scale bar, 10μm.
b,
Detail of basal epidermal cells at a similar wound edge in a specimen fixed to preserve specifically actin filaments.
The arrow indicates the actin cable, seen in cross-section.
Scale bar, 2μm.
METHODS.
a,
Specimens were fixed in half-strength Karnovsky fixative, postfixed in osmium tetroxide, embedded in Araldite, thin sectioned and stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate in the usual way.
This standard fixation procedure does not perserve actin filaments.
b,
To preserve actin filaments (at the expense of good membrane preservation), we used a protocol from K. McDonald: limb buds were fixed in cacodylate-buffered 1% glutaraldehyde, rinsed in buffer, treated with 0.8% K 3 Fe(CN) 6 in buffer for 30min, postfixed with 0.5% osmium tetroxide in buffer for 1min, embedded in Araldite, sectioned and stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate.
FIG. 4 Optical sections of whole-mount specimens, stained with fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) -phalloidin and 7-aminoactinomycin D to reveal filamentous actin (green) and cell nuclei (red).
The specimens are lightly flattened under a coverslip, bringing the whole wound area, including the exposed mesenchyme surface, into roughly the same focal plane.
a,
Low magnification view of the whole wound 1h after wounding; only the actin fluorescence is shown in this photo.
Note that the corners of the wound have already become rounded, and that there is already an actin cable at the free edge of the epidermis
b,
Detail of a part of the wound margin: a section in the plane of the periderm, whose large flat cells are outlined by their cortical actin.
c,
Same part of wound margin as in b,but a few μm deeper, in the plane of the basal epidermal cells, showing an actin cable at the wound margin, apparently continuous from cell to cell.
Some mesen- chyme cells are also visible.
d,
Low magnification view of the whole wound 12h after wounding.
e,
Detail of the periderm at the wound margin, from the same 12-hour specimen.
f,
Same part of the wound margin as in e,but a few μm deeper, in the plane of the basal epidermal cells, showing the actin cable.
g,
High magnification view of the basal epidermal layer of another sample of 12-h wound margin.
Although the wound circumference has shortened by this stage to about ⅓ of its initial length, the individual cells at the wound margin do not appear narrowed.
h,
A specimen fixed 24h after wounding, showing the large concentration of F-actin in the epidermal cells piled up at the site of wound closure (see also Fig. 1 f).
The dark rim around the bright mound is artefactual: the coverslip has pressed the top of the mound down into the plane of optical section and thereby pushed down the epidermis around the foot of the mound below that plane.
i,
Measurement of the FITC-phalloidin signal (proportional to F-actin concentration) in the same field of view shown in dual-channel mode in g,but scanned here in single-channel mode.
The graph is a plot of signal intensity along the line joining the crosses.
The area under the peak corresponding to the actin cable is about 5 times that for the largest of the peaks corresponding to cortical actin  elsewhere .
Scale bars:a and d, 200 μm (both at same  magnification );b, c, e and f,20μm (all at same magnification);g,20μm;h,100μm.
METHODS.
Specimens were fixed in buffered formalin (4% formaldehyde in PBS) for 1 hour, rinsed in Tris-buffered saline (25mM Tris, 140mM NaCl, 3mM KCl, pH7.4) for 3x20min, soaked overnight in FITC-phalloidin (Sigma; 2.5μgml -1 in Tris-buffered saline), rinsed again, stained overnight in 7-aminoactinomycin D (Molecular Probes; 100μgml -1 in PBS) and mounted in buffered saline.
Some specimens were stained instead with rhodamine-labelled phalloidin alone, with similar results.
Specimens were viewed with a BioRad confocal laser scanning microscope.
The fluorescent signal was measured in i using the LEN facility included in the SOM program provided with the confocal microscope.
Presynaptic release probability influences the locus of long-term potentiation
Alan Larkman, Timo Hannay, Ken Stratford & Julian Jack
THE quantal hypothesis proposes that chemical synaptic transmission involves the probabilistic release of multimolecular packets of transmitter.
Analysis of the resulting trial-to-trial fluctuations in postsynaptic response can provide estimates both of the number of quanta released and of the size of their postsynaptic effect.
This in turn permits the quantification of the relative contributions of pre- and postsynaptic factors to the strength of a given synapse.
Quantal analysis of excitatory synapses in the hippocampus has proved difficult and has led to contradictory conclusions when applied to long-term potentiation.
Here we report the use of a combination of quantal analysis procedures to provide evidence that both pre- and postsynaptic changes can contribute substantially to the maintenance of long-term potentiation in the CA1 region of the hippocampus.
The initial setting of the presynaptic release mechanism seems to determine their relative importance.
A powerful form of quantal analysis for central synapses is the study of amplitude histograms.
The presence of equally spaced peaks in histograms is evidence of quantal behaviour, and the peak spacing gives a direct measure of the quantal size (the postsynaptic effect of a single quantum).
Figure 1 shows an exemplar excitatory postsynaptic potential (e.p.s.p.) that was evoked for 250 trials at 0.1Hz, and whose mean and standard deviation (s.d.) showed little change over time (Fig. 1 b).
The histogram for all the trials shows three clear peaks with a mean separation of 280μV (Fig. 1 c).
For this e.p.s.p. the signal-to-noise level was good (noise s.d. =70μV) and spontaneous events could be resolved (Fig. 1 d).
The distribution of spontaneous amplitudes showed a major peak at 250μV, which is in reasonable agreement with the quantal size of the evoked response.
Monte Carlo simulations indicated that it was extremely unlikely that the peaks in the histogram of evoked responses had arisen by sampling artefact from a distribution that was smooth (Fig.2).
Thus, in favourable cases, amplitude histograms can permit a reliable analysis of quantal size.
If the quantal size changes over time, however, the histogram peaks become smeared and the analysis can, at best, only be done for relatively brief selected periods.
This was our experience for most hippocampal e.p.s.ps, even during stimulation at a constant rate.
We have therefore sought additional analysis strategies that could make use of all the recorded data.
The time courses of changes in the mean and variance of the e.p.s.p. amplitude distribution are essentially independent of the occurrence or spacing of peaks in amplitude histograms, and can provide additional information about release.
We grouped the e.p.s.p. amplitudes into epochs of 100–250 consecutive trials and calculated the mean and variance (corrected for contaminating noise) and hence the coefficient of variation (CV ) for each.
First, we used these to plot 1/CV 2  against mean, as introduced to the long-term potentiation (LTP) field by Malinow and Tsien.
For a wide range of models of release (but not all), trajectories as steep as or steeper than the diagonal in these plots indicate a change in the number of quanta released, whereas trajectories close to the horizontal indicate a change in postsynaptic responsiveness.
To obtain quantitative information from the mean and variance data requires the assumption of a more constrained model of the release process.
We used a simple binomial model, for which 
Thirteen e.p.s.ps that showed an enhancement persisting for at least 15min after tetanic stimulation were analysed as above.
Two examples showing very different behaviour are illustrated in Fig. 3.
Panels a-e show an e.p.s.p. that increased from about 90 to 210μV (a).
The amplitude histograms (b)show that the peak separation increased by less than 10%, indicating only a minor increase in quantal size.
The relative heights of the peaks changed considerably, with the left-hand peak (in this case representing failures) becoming relatively lower whereas the other peaks became higher.
This indicates an increase in the mean number of quanta released per trial.
The trajectory of the 1/ CV 2  plot (c)is steeper than the diagonal, indicating a predominantly presynaptic change.
Using equations (1) and (2) with n=3 showed that P increased from about 0.2 to 0.4 (d),whereas there was only a small increase in v 1  (e).
Thus the various analysis procedures were in good agreement, and the enhancement in this case was predominantly presynaptic.
The e.p.s.p. in panels f-j behaved very differently.
The amplitude increased from about 500 to 950μV then gradually declined (f).
The histograms (g)show an increase in peak separation from 135 to 230μV.
The relative heights of the histogram peaks were virtually identical in the two cases, indicating no appreciable change in the mean number of quanta released per trial.
The trajectory of the 1/ CV 2  plot after the tetanus was horizontal (h),indicating a postsynaptic change.
Using equations (1) and (2) with n=5 showed that v 1  (j)increased from 125 to 250μV, then declined, whereas P remained almost constant (i).
Thus these analysis procedures indicate that this e.p.s.p. showed essentially a purely postsynaptic change.
Of the other e.p.s.ps analysed, some showed changes that were mainly pre- or postsynaptic, others a mixture of both.
This confirms that both factors can contribute to LTP in CA1, as shown by Kullmann and Nicoll using different techniques.
How valid are our assumptions?
We are not suggesting that the good alignment we observed between the results of using equations (1) and (2) and the analysis of amplitude histograms means that release  probabilities are identical at all sites or that n is always invariant.
The alignment of predicted v 1  values with histogram peak spacings makes major changes in n unlikely, but minor changes cannot be ruled out.
Thus we propose that the simple binomial model with constant n is a useful simplification of what is likely to be a more complex process.
What factors might determine the relative contribution of pre- and postsynaptic mechanisms at a given synapse?
The mean changes in P and v 1  for our experimental set are shown in Fig. 4 a.
In Fig. 4b, c the relative P and v 1  changes are plotted as a function of the initial P for each e.p.s.p.
It is clear that e.p.s.ps with a low initial P were likely to show a large change in P,whereas those with a high initial P showed larger v 1  changes.
The conflicting results in the literature about the pre- or postsynaptic locus for the maintenance of LTP may be resolved by this data.
Recent studies showing predominantly presynaptic LTP have used 2.5mM Ca 2+ for slice experiments, and some have reported a high proportion of failures, suggesting low initial release probabilities.
Our e.p.s.ps recorded in 2.5mM Ca 2+ also showed low initial P and mainly presynaptic LTP.
Other studies reporting postsynaptic LTP have used higher Ca 2+ levels.
Our results in higher Ca 2+ showed higher P values and larger v 1  changes.
We expect that this clear correlation between initial release probability and the locus of change will be important for the further understanding of the mechanism of LTP at these synapses.
FIG. 1 Analysis of an e.p.s.p. for which 250 trials were evoked at constant 0.1Hz.
a,
Averaged waveform of all 250 trials.
Horizontal bars above waveform indicate zones used for measuring peak amplitudes on individual trials.
The 10–90% rise time for this e.p.s.p. was 3.6ms.
b,
The time course of e.p.s.p. peak amplitude mean (filled squares) and s.d. (open squares), binned into 5 epochs of 50 trials.
The mean shows a slight increase during the recording period.
c,
Amplitude histogram for all 250 trials, binned finely and smoothed (thick line) and binned at 40μV but unsmoothed (open circles and thin line; relative frequency scale reduced slightly for clarity).
The histogram shows three clear peaks with mean separation 280μV.
The relative heights of the peaks are well described by a simple binomial distribution with n=3 and p=0.34.
d,
Individual records showing evoked (filled arrows) and spontaneous (open arrows) e.p.s.ps.
Scale bars, 500μV and 20ms.
e,
Smoothed histogram of the peak amplitudes of the 34 spontaneous events recorded for this e.p.s.p.
The histogram was well fitted by the sum of two gaussians, each of s.d. 70μV, with their means and relative heights indicated by the vertical bars.
Note that the major peak is at 250μV whereas the smaller peak is at about twice this amplitude.
This is consistent with the quantal size of 280μV obtained from the histogram of evoked responses shown in c.
METHODS.
Transverse hippocampal slices from young adult albino rats (Sprague-Dawley strain; 140–200g) were maintained in an interface-type recording chamber at 34°C.
Conventional sharp-electrode voltage recordings were made from pyramidal neurons in the CA1 region.
For most experiments, the Ca 2+ and Mg 2+ concentrations in the bathing medium were elevated to 4mM, and picrotoxin (100μM) and glutamine (0.5mM) were added.
Some experiments were done using 2.5mM Ca 2+ and 2.5mM Mg 2+ .
Small e.p.s.ps were evoked by bipolar wire electrodes placed in the stratum radiatum, with the stimulus strength adjusted to give the smallest e.p.s.p. that seemed to be evoked reliably.
The e.p.s.ps were recorded on computer disk and their amplitudes measured using an automated computer routine that measured the average voltage difference between two zones, one in the pre-stimulus baseline period ( avoing the stimulus artefact if necessary) and the other straddling the peak of the averaged.
e.p.s.p.
The positions and durations of these zones were chosen by inspection of the averaged e.p.s.p. waveform (see a).
The noise amplitude distribution was obtained using zones of the same duration and separation, but both located in the pre-stimulus period.
Amplitude histograms were routinely binned finely (5μV) and smoothed using a moving gaussian filter or by low-pass filtering in the Fourier domain.
The locations of peaks in the amplitude histograms were determined visually, making use of an interactive computer routine.
FIG. 2 Illustration of the Monte Carlo computer simulations performed to assess the likelihood that peaky histograms could have arisen by sampling error from an underlying smooth distribution.
The procedure made use of autocorrelation as an objective measure of the peakiness and equality of peak spacing in histograms.
For a given histogram (in this case the histogram from Fig. 1 c),an ‘autocorrelation score’ was calculated by subtracting the best-fitting smooth distribution (in this and many other examples a single gaussian provided a good fit), filtering the resulting difference function in the Fourier domain, then detecting peaks in its autocorrelation function.
The height of the first peak in the autocorrelation function was taken as the autocorrelation score for that histogram.
Amplitude histograms with evenly spaced peaks and a high ‘peak-to-valley’ ratio will give relatively high positive scores.
The amplitude histogram shown in Fig. 1 c scored 190 using this procedure.
The left-hand histogram shows the distribution of autocorrelation scores of 50,000 samples, each of 250 trials, drawn from a smooth generator distribution, in this case a single gaussian of the same mean and s.d. as the e.p.s.p. histogram.
The mean autocorrelation score for the random samples from this generator was 38  28, and only a very small proportion of samples (less than 1 in 1,000) scored as highly as the recorded e.p.s.p. histogram.
In contrast, the right-hand histogram shows the distribution of autocorrelation scores of 50,000 samples of 250 trials drawn from a quantal simple binomial generator similar to the data (n=3; P=0.34).
The mean of this distribution is 270  97.
Thus the data for this e.p.s.p. are very unlikely to have been generated from the smooth distribution, but are more typical of samples drawn from the quantal simple binomial generator.
FIG. 3 Analysis of two e.p.s.ps showing different forms of LTP following tetanic stimulation.
Tetanus was given after trial 500 in both cases (arrowed).
a-e,E.p.s.p. showing predominantly an increase in the probability of release.
The e.p.s.p. mean (a,squares) shows a roughly two-fold increase after the tetanus.
Amplitude histograms (b)taken from epochs before (dashed line; 200 trials) and after (solid line; 700 trials) the tetanus show a small increase in peak separation, but a major change in the relative heights of the peaks, with right-hand peaks relatively higher after the tetanus.
The likelihood of these histograms having arisen by random sampling from smooth generator distributions was 1 in 35 before and 1 in 26 after the tetanus.
The trajectory of the 1/ CV 2  plot (c)is steep and above the diagonal as the mean changes after the tetanus (arrowed).
Using equations (1) and (2) with n=3 indicates that P (d)was initially low (0.2) and roughly doubles, whereas v 1  shows only a minor increase (e).f-j,E.p.s.p. showing predominantly an increase in quantal size.
The e.p.s.p. mean (f)again shows a roughly twofold increase after the tetanus, but then declines.
Amplitude histograms (g)taken from epochs before (dashed line; 100 trials) and after (solid line; 80 trials) the tetanus show an increase in peak separation, but very little change in the relative heights of peaks.
In spite of the small numbers of trials, the chances of these histograms having arisen from smooth distributions are less than 1 in 100 before and 1 in 60 after the tetanus.
The 1/CV 2  plot (h)shows a virtually horizontal trajectory following the tetanus.
Equations (1) and (2) with n=5 indicate that P was initially high (0.8) and shows very little change (i),but v 1  almost doubles after the tetanus (j).
METHODS.
A small e.p.s.p. was evoked at 1Hz for usually 500 trials.
There followed a pause of 1min before the tetanic stimulation which consisted of five trains, each of 20 shocks at 100Hz, repeated at 15s intervals.
The tetanus of the small e.p.s.p. was paired with the simultaneous tetanus of additional fibres at a similar depth in the stratum radiatum, together producing an e.p.s.p. usually large enough to cause the neuron to fire action potentials during each tetanus.
There was then a further 1-min pause, after which 1-Hz test stimulation of the small e.p.s.p. was resumed.
The success rate for obtaining an enhancement that persisted for more than 15min was less than 10%.
The mean 10–90% rise time for the 13e.p.s.ps analysed was 2.8  0.9ms before LTP induction and 3.0  1.1ms after.
Use of the e.p.s.p. mean and variance to estimate P and v 1  is invalid if the amplitude distribution is bimodal, as can be produced if there are failures of stimulation.
Offsets, perhaps caused by extracellular field potentials, will, if uncorrected, also introduce errors.
We have encountered both these difficulties with some hippocampal e.p.s.ps, but they were not serious for those analysed here.
FIG. 4
a,
Summary of the time course of the relative changes in e.p.s.p. peak amplitude (open squares),P (open circles) and v 1  (filled diamonds) for the 13e.p.s.ps analysed.
Data from equations (1) and (2) have been binned into 100-trial epochs, and each point shows the mean for the 13e.p.s.ps, each normalized by its mean value during the 500-trial period before the tetanus.
The change in v 1  was, on average, relatively greater than the change in P immediately after the tetanus, but it showed greater decrement over time.
b, c,
Graphs showing the relative enhancement of P (b)and v 1  (c)following the tetanus as a function of the initial P. The P and v 1  ratios were calculated as the mean value for the 500 trials immediately after the tetanus divided by the mean for the 500 trials before the tetanus.
Each point represents an individual e.p.s.p.
For c,least-squares linear regression gave r 2  =0.716 (P=0.001).
e.p.s.ps with low initial P values show greater increases in P,but smaller increases in v 1 .
e.p.s.ps recorded in the lower Ca 2+ concentration had generally low initial P values and showed only minor changes in v 1 .
Preserved figure-ground segregation and symmetry perception in visual neglect
Jon Driver, Gordon C. Baylis & Robert D. Rafal
ACENTRAL controversy in current research on visual attention is whether figures are segregated from their background preattentively, or whether attention is first directed to unstructured regions of the image.
Here we present neurological evidence for the former view from studies of a brain-injured patient with visual neglect.
His attentional impairment arises after normal segmentation of the image into figures and background has taken place.
Our results indicate that information which is neglected and unavailable to higher levels of visual processing can nevertheless be processed by earlier stages in the visual system concerned with segmentation.
C.C. is a 69-year-old man with right-hemisphere damage and severe left neglect (see Fig. 1 for case details).
He ignores information on the left even though he has no left visual field loss.
His neglect can therefore be characterized as an attentional rather than sensory deficit.
We examined whether this deficit applied to the left side of unsegregated space, as would be predicted by purely spatial models of visual attention, or to the left of perceptual figures derived by preattentive segregation processes, as would be predicted by object-based models of attention.
He was presented with displays such as those in Fig. 2.
A rectangle presented on a black screen was divided by a pseudorandom contour into a small bright green section and a large dimmer red section.
The green section could be on the far left (upper panel of Fig. 2) or the far right (lower panel of Fig. 2).
With appropriate colouring, normal observers see such displays as green shapes against a shapeless red background.
This figure-ground segregation arises because the green shapes are smaller and brighter.
C.C.'s task was to remember the dividing contour between the red and green section on each trial, deciding whether it matched a probe line presented after each display (for example, in Fig. 2 the probe matches for the upper panel but not the lower panel).
If his attentional deficit applies to the left side of an unsegregated representation of visual space, C.C. should perform less well when the green shape appears at the left of the rectangle (as in the upper panel of Fig. 2) as the dividing contour is further to the left of the display and the patient in this case.
But the opposite prediction follows if C.C.'s neglect applies to the left side of perceptual figures after the normal operation of figure-ground segregation.
He should perform worse when the green shape is on the right of the rectangle (as in the lower panel of Fig. 2) because the dividing contour now falls to the left of the perceptual figure, although the contour is further to the right of the display and the patient.
The results supported the figural prediction (see legend to Fig. 2), demonstrating that the critical variable was the location of the dividing contour in relation to the green figure, rather than in relation to the patient or to the display as a whole.
This implies that, like normal observers, C.C. saw the green shapes as the perceptual figures whether they appeared on the right or the left, implying that figure-ground segregation operated normally across the display (his phenomenal descriptions of ‘green shapes at either side’ on debriefing are also consistent with this).
Thus, C.C.'s left neglect arises at a stage of attending to figures provided by a preceding, and unimpaired, segregation stage.
This two-stage account of his neglect is in accordance with recent two-stage characterizations of normal vision.
Our results are consistent with a recent report that visual neglect can apply to the contralateral side of objects.
They go beyond this by demonstrating that the ‘objects’ concerned are figures derived by segregation processes operating normally in both visual fields.
The intact segregation between green and red shapes is also consistent with a previous report that colour perception can be preserved in the contralateral field for some neglect patients.
Our data extend this to show that such preserved perception can support figure-ground segregation.
Our next experiment tested directly whether C.C.'s visual system represents left-sided information at a preattentive stage of figure-ground segregation, but subsequently loses this information for the derived figures at an attentional stage.
Symmetry about the vertical exerts powerful effects on figure-ground segregation in normal observers; other factors being equal, symmetrical shapes are seen as figures against asymmetrical grounds.
We examined whether C.C. also showed this effect.
Because symmetry depends on the correspondence between reflected sides, sensitivity to symmetry requires representation of both the right and left sides of shapes at the segregation stage.
We presented C.C. with displays of alternating red and green pseudorandom shapes (Fig. 3).
Either the red shapes or the green shapes were symmetrical.
C.C. was told: ‘Sometimes we are going to show you red shapes on a green background, sometimes green shapes on a red background.
Just tell us which colour the shapes are, red or green’.
He showed the usual effect of symmetry on figure-ground segregation, tending to report the colour of the symmetrical shapes, with no bias towards reporting the rightmost colour (see legend to Fig. 3).
This normal effect of symmetry demonstrates that, at the preattentive segregation stage, both sides of perceptual figures must be represented in C.C.'s visual system.
But our first experiment found that he neglects the left side of perceptual figures at a subsequent stage of attending to them.
C.C.'s phenomenal descriptions of the present displays suggest that this applied for the symmetrical figures as well.
When asked to explain his responses at the end of the study, he replied that his chosen shapes ‘looked closer and brighter’, but did not mention the symmetry which is so striking to a normal observer.
In the next task, we required C.C. to judge explicitly the symmetry of individual shapes from the figure-ground displays (Fig. 4 a and b ).
His responses were at chance level (see legend to Fig. 4).
This inability to make explicit symmetry judgements contrasts dramatically with the preserved effect of symmetry on figure-ground segretation.
The contrast arises because the two tasks reflect distinct stages of visual processing.
Figure-ground segregation occurs preattentively, at a stage where left-sided information is represented.
Explicit symmetry judgements require a subsequent stage of attending to perceptual figures, at which the patient neglects left-sided information.
His inability to make explicit vertical symmetry judgements was not due to failure to understand the task, as he was able to judge whether our nonsense shapes were symmetrical about the horizontal axis (Fig. 4 c and d ).
This task requires comprehension of comparable instructions, but does not require left-sided information.
C.C. retains intact figure-ground segregation despite his severe left neglect.
He segregates figures from their background normally, even when they appear on his left (our first study), and even when their segregation depends on vertical symmetry (our second study) which requires that both the right and left sides of these figures are represented.
His deficit arises in a subsequent stage of attending to these figures, at which he neglects the left of figures wherever they appear, and thus cannot judge explicitly whether they are symmetrical about the vertical.
The dissociation between severe left neglect and intact figure-ground segregation strongly supports recent models of normal visual function, which postulate a preattentive segregation stage providing candidate objects to a subsequent attentional stage.
Our findings about symmetry perception also demonstrate that neglected information that is unavailable for verbal report may nevertheless be represented implicitly, confirming previous reports which have remained controversial.
This conclusion is in accordance with comparable dissociations between implicit processing and verbal report in other areas of neuropsychology.
FIG. 1 Reconstructed computerized tomographic scan for C.C., a right-handed retired plumber who suffered a right-hemisphere stroke and sustained left hemiparesis and left neglect.
The method for reconstruction is described elsewhere.
A right lateral view and transverse sections are shown, with shading indicating damage.
The scan reveals infarction of the watershed territory of the right anterior and middle cerebral arteries.
The damage extends  anteriorly into area 8 and  posteriorly into the superior parietal lobule.
C.C. had no visual-field loss, but consistent left-sided extinction on double simultaneous stimulation.
He showed severe left neglect on the conventional measures of line bisection and line cancellation, and in a new measure; when asked to detect the presence or absence of a small crack on either side of two-dimensional block shapes, he detected the crack for 37/40 shapes with a crack on the right, but for only 5/40 shapes with a crack on the left.
All studies were conducted in the month following the stroke in the sequence described.
FIG. 2 Two example displays from the first experiment.
The task was to report verbally whether the dividing contour in the 9.5°x3.2° rectangle matched the probe line, which was presented immediately below the rectangle following its offset as shown.
The smaller region of the rectangle (on average 3.2° wide) was always bright green (3.8 footlamberts (ftL)), the larger region a dimmer red (2.4ftL) against a black background (0.15ftL).
In the upper panel, the small green figure is on the left, and a matching probe is illustrated.
In the lower panel the small green figure is on the right, and a mismatching probe is illustrated.
The green figure was equally likely to be on the left or right, and 50% of the probes matched in both cases.
The dividing contours and probes always had 5 pseudorandom ‘steps’.
Using an IBM PC-AT microcomputer and a Mini-Micro VGA monitor, the rectangle was presented for 2s, followed by a gap of 100 ms, and then the probe until a same/different response was made.
Central  fixation was required during each rectangle display.
There were 160 trials in random sequence.
C. C. correctly rejected mismatching probes on 33/40 trials when the green figure was on the left, but on only 21/40 trials with green figures on the right.
He correctly accepted matching probes on 31/40 trails when the green figure was on the left, and on 19/40 trials with green figures on the right.
Thus, C.C. performed well above chance for displays with the green figure on the left, as in the upper panel, but was at chance when the green figure was on the right, as in the lower panel.
This difference in performance is significant (P= 0.01).
FIG. 3.
Two examples of displays from the second study.
Readers should be able to experience the effect of symmetry on figure-ground segregation for themselves.
With the lower example covered, the upper figure is typically seen as green shapes against a red background because of the symmetry.
Conversely, with the upper example covered, the lower is typically seen as red figures against a green ground.
Each display comprised 6 pseudorandom shapes, alternating red and green, and subtended 13.4°x6.3° in total.
With equal probability, either the red shapes were three different symmetrical shapes, and the green shapes asymmetrical, or the reverse.
The rightmost shape was equally likely to be symmetrical or asymmetrical, and to be red (4.3ftL) or green (3.8ftL).
The colours were roughly matched for salience in pilot studies with healthy observers.
The displays were presented until a response was made, and there were 120 trials.
With red symmetrical shapes, C.C. responded ‘red’ on 21/30 trials when the rightmost shape was red, and 26/30 trials when the rightmost shape was green.
With green symmetrical shapes, he responsed ‘green’ on 29/30 trials when the rightmost shape was green, and 20/30 trials when the rightmost shape was red.
Thus, there was no significant tendency to pick one colour rather than another (58/120 red responses, 62/120 green responses), or to respond with the colour of the rightmost shape (64/120), but a strong tendency to pick the colour of the symmetrical shapes (96/120,P= 0.01).
This effect of symmetry was indistinguishable from that observed in the speeded responses of two age-matched, neurologically healthy men.
The colour of the asymmetrical shapes is chosen on a small proportion of trials where other factors (such as relative size) override symmetry because of pseudorandom fluctuation in the shapes employed.
FIG. 4 a, b , Two example displays from the explicit vertical symmetry task.
Each display comprised a single shape from the figure-ground displays of the preceding study.
The shapes were 6.3° tall and on average 2.2° wide, and were equally likely to be red or green.
In either case, 50% were symmetrical.
A green asymmetrical shape (a ) and a red symmetrical shape (b ) are shown.
Individual displays were presented until a response was made, and there were 120 trials.
C.C.'s performance was at chance; he responded ‘symmetrical’ to 31/60 symmetrical shapes, and ‘asymmetrical’to 34/60 asymmetrical shapes, with no effect of display colour.
c, d,Two examples of displays from the explicit horizontal symmetry task, conducted immediately after C.C.'s chance performance in judging vertical symmetry.
A red asymmetrical shape (c)and a green symmetrical shape (d)are shown.
The displays were exactly as for the vertical symmetry task, except that the monitor was rotated 90° clockwise.
Normal observers find symmetry judgements harder around the horizontal than vertical.
But C.C.'s abnormal difficulty in judging vertical symmetry is caused by his neglect for the left of figures, which should not disrupt judgements of symmetry about the horizontal axis.
C.C. responded ‘symmetrical’ to 56/60 symmetrical shapes, and ‘asymmetrical’to 59/60 asymmetrical shapes.
This performance is significantly better than that for vertical symmetry (P=0.01).
Lifespan of human lymphocyte subsets defined by CD45 isoforms
Colin A. Michie, Angela McLean, Christopher Alcock & Peter C. L. Beverley
THE lifespan of thymic-derived or T lymphocytes is of particular interest because of their central role in immunological memory.
Is the recall of a vaccination or early infection, which may be demonstrated clinically up to 50 years after antigen exposure, retained by a long-lived cell, or by its progeny?
Using the observation that T lymphocyte expression of isoforms of CD45 corresponds with their ability to respond to recall antigens, we have investigated the lifespan of both CD45R0 (the subset containing responders, or ‘memory’ cells) and CD45RA (the unresponsive, or ‘naive’subset) lymphocytes in a group of patients after radiotherapy.
Here we report rapid loss of unstable chromosomes from the CD45R0 but not the CD45RA pool.
Immunological memory therefore apparently resides in a population with a more rapid rate of division.
Differing survival curves for the two subsets are best described by a model in which there is also reversion in vivo from the CD45R0 to the CD45RA phenotype.
Expression of CD45R0 in T cells may therefore be reversible.
Estimates of the lifespan of human lymphocytes in vivo have been based on the persistence of unstable chromosomal lesions in peripheral circulating lymphocytes after radiotherapy.
Dicentric chromosomal lesions with accompanying dissimilar chromosomal fragments result in cell death in mitosis, and their frequency therefore gives a measure of intermitotic time.
Studies of a group of patients after radiotherapy demonstrated that 50% of cells with dicentric lesions disappeared from the periphery in a little less than 3 years (the lymphocyte half-life).
Using the correlations now established between phenotype and function, lymphocytes may be divided in order to investigate lifespan further.
Both CD4 and CD8 human peripheral T lymphocytes can be separated into further subsets based on their expression of different isoforms of the CD45 (leucocyte common) antigen.
At birth, most T cells express isoforms of high relative molecular mass (M r ) which are detected with CD45RA monoclonal antibodies.
The number of cells expressing the lowest- M r  isoform detected by the CD45R0 antibody (UCHL1) increases thereafter, to reach the adult level of about 50% by the age of 10–20 years.
Functional studies have shown that CD45R0 cells respond in vitro to recall antigens, whereas CD45RA positive cells do not.
This, together with the demonstration that CD45RA-positive cells express CD45R0 and lose CD45RA after mitogenic stimulation in vitro,has led to the suggestion that CD45RA are naive, and that CD45R0 are memory T lymphocytes.
Although recent human and rat data call into question a straightforward association between expression of low- M r isoforms and memory, the existence of CD45RA and CD45R0 subsets with very distinct properties prompted us to re-examine the question of their lifespan, and in particular to determine the survival of cells capable of responding to recall antigens.
We studied persistence of dicentric chromosomes in the CD45RA and CD45R0 subsets after therapeutic X-ray irradiation in a group of 19 cancer patients.
At various times after irradiation, CD3+ CD45RA and CD45R0 lymphocytes were separated from peripheral blood samples and stimulated with phytohaemagglutinin.
After mitotic arrest at 48h with colchicine, the percentage of cells with dicentric chromosomes was determined (Fig. 1).
Two conclusions were drawn.
First, the rate of disappearance of dicentric lesions from the two populations is very different.
Thus by a year the dicentric lesions have been lost from the CD45R0 subset, whereas they persist to some 10 years in the CD45RA subset.
A shorter half-life of lymphocytes expressing the lower- M r isoforms has also been observed in sheep, whereas cells with a ‘naive’ phenotype persist for long periods in mice after adoptive transfer.
The mean lymphocyte half-life calculated from our data, ignoring the division into subsets, is 729 days (95% confidence interval 584–971 days), approximating the published data.
Second, steady loss, albeit at differing rates from the two populations, did not account for the observed pattern.
This would produce exponential curves, which do not fit the data, particularly in the first 3 months after radiotherapy.
A possible resolution of this difficulty is suggested by recent observations in rats.
These show that T-cell subsets expressing either higher- M r (CD45RC+) or lower- M r (CD45RC-) isoforms of CD45 are capable of interconversion.
Thus human lymphocytes may be capable of similar switching, from lower to higher- M r isoforms of CD45.
This led us to test a model in which cells of both subsets died, but in which cells were also allowed to revert from the CD45R0 to CD45RA phenotype without cell division.
We assume also that cells do not convert from CD45RA to CD45R0 without cell division.
Such a model generates survival curves fitting the observed data more closely (Fig. 2 b ).
We suggest therefore that the rates of loss of dicentric chromosomes from the two subsets support the idea that reversion from the CD45R0 to CD45RA phenotype occurs in vivo.
How does a model in which CD45R0 memory cells appear to have a shorter lifespan accord with the long persistence of immunological memory?
We have already proposed that memory is maintained by long-lived clones rather than individual cells with a long lifespan, and mechanisms capable of driving continued division in these clones have been suggested.
Therefore a more puzzling question is that of the history of cells which in these patients revert from CD45R0 to RA phenotype.
Are these cells that were originally recruited to the CD45R0 pool by antigen, or do some enter this pool during non-antigen-driven cell division in order to maintain the size of the peripheral lymphocyte pool, an idea supported by the rat experiments?
Irrespective of what maintains the size of the total peripheral T-cell pool, mechanisms that maintain a T-lymphocyte clone in cell division, and concomitantly expressing CD45R0, are likely to be the most important factors determining the frequency of T lymphocytes responsive to a given recall antigen.
The lifespan of the individual lymphocyte is probably not significant, but the persistence of CD45R0-positive progeny with the appropriate repertoire will determine the length of an immunological memory.
Our data show that just as there is functional heterogeneity in the periphery, there is heterogeneity of intermitotic time (lifespan).
Those lymphocytes responsible for recall responses have a more rapid turnover, implying that long-lived memory is not maintained by long-lived T-lymphocytes.
FIG. 1 Lymphocytes in each subset disappear at differing rates from the periphery.
Nineteen consenting patients attending a radiotherapy follow-up clinic donated 20ml venous blood for a full blood count (processed on a Technicon H-1 analyser) and investigation of their chromosomal morphology.
All patients had received between 40 and 60Gy radiation in fractionated doses over 2–4 weeks for the treatment of epithelial tumours; none had received chemotherapy or  steroids .
None received antibiotics or antiviral agents between radiotherapy and the time of sampling.
Venous samples were separated immediately on Ficoll hypaque.
After depletion of adherent cells, a T-lymphocyte preparation was made by removing cells expressing CD14, CD15, CD16 and CD20 antigens using monoclonal antibodies and magnetic beads.
CD45RA-positive (open squares) and CD45R0-positive T cells (filled squares) were purified from this preparation using magnetic beads.
Only those samples containing less than 5% contaminants by FACS scan analysis were used to prepare chromosomes.
From each venous sample, 100 sets of chromosomes were examined, and counts made of the frequency of cells containing dicentric chromosomes with dissimilar chromosome fragments.
FIG. 2 Lymphocytes of CD45R0 phenotype can revert to CD45RA phenotype.
a,Data recording the per cent of lymphocytes damaged over time does not take into account the fact that in the period immediately after radiotherapy, the peripheral lymphocyte count in the majority of patients falls.
Shown are total lymphocyte counts of the patient group and the best fit curve ).
Best estimates (2s.e.) for these variables are .
We used the predicted total lymphocyte count to calculate the absolute numbers of lymphocytes in each subset in b.
The numbers of lymphocytes of CD45R0-positive phenotype with unstable chromosomal damage (filled diamonds) follows an exponential decay with time, whereas those with CD45RA-positive phenotype and unstable damage follow a differing decay pattern (open squares) with an increase in cell numbers, followed by a decrease.
Given that all cells with unstable chromosomal damage die on cell division, the increase can only be accounted for by reversion of CD45R0-positive lymphocytes to CD45RA-positive phenotype.
This possibility was formally tested using nonlinear parameter estimation.
Curves predicting the numbers of damaged lymphocytes were constructed so as to allow for three possibilities: CD45RA cells die, CD45R0 cells die and CD45R0 cells change into CD45RA cells.
These curves are the solution to the following pair of differential equations which describe the populations of naive (A)and memory (O)lymphocytes: and .
The five parameters required for these curves were derived from the data: the initial numbers of damaged cells in each subset, the death rate for each subset, and the conversion rate from one subset to the other.
If there is conversion from memory to naive phenotype, the conversion rate will be significantly greater than zero.
The best estimates (2s.e.) for the death rates from these data were 3.8 (0.3) per 1,000 CD45R0 cells per day; 1.1 (0.8) per 1,000 CD45RA cells per day; the conversion rate was 3.6 (2.8) per 1,000 CD45R0 cells per day.
As the conversion rate is significantly different from zero, we must reject the possibility that both populations decay exponentially, and conclude that CD45Ro phenotype cells do revert to CD45RA phenotype in vivo.
The lines on the graph show predicted population sizes using the best estimates of the parameter values.
NMR study of parallel-stranded tetraplex formation by the hexadeoxynucleotide 
Fareed Aboul-ela, Alastair I. H. Murchie & David M. J. Lilley
MULTISTRANDED DNA structures based upon guanine association have been proposed to be important in the structure of chromosome telomeres and in immunoglobulin class switching.
Nucleic acids containing runs of guanine bases form a number of structures in vitro,including fold-back structures (Fig.1 a)and parallel-stranded quadruplex structures in DNA and RNA.
The features of fold-back structures have now been determined at high-resolution.
The different structures are probably based on a tetrad of hydrogen-bonded guanine bases (Fig.1 b),with buffer conditions and sequence effects mediating isomerization between the different forms.
Here we use NMR spectroscopy to investigate the solution structure of the complex formed by the hexadeoxynucleotide d (TG 4 T) in the presence of sodium ions.
We have observed the formation of a parallel-stranded quadruplex containing hydrogen-bonded tetrads of guanine.
The parallel-stranded form differs significantly from the fold-back form, with individual nucleotide conformations being closer to those of B-form DNA.
In the 1 H NMR spectrum of d (TG 4 T) we observe two sets of six aromatic proton resonances (Fig.1 c),with one form predominating at high temperature and the other at low temperature.
This is indicative of a slow exchange between two conformations; the rate of quadruplex formation is known to be slow.
We have concluded (see Fig.1) that the high-temperature form is an unfolded single strand, whereas the low-temperature structure involves the formation of multimers.
Because of the number of peaks, the structured form must contain a twofold symmetry if duplex, or fourfold if tetraplex.
In the presence of 100mM K + and 10mMNa + ions at 38°C, only the six aromatic resonances with identical chemical shift to those of the low-temperature form in 100mMNa + alone were observed (data not shown).
We felt that it was inadvisable to use peak assignment pathways previously established for B-form DNA as those methods rely on prior assumptions regarding the structure.
Instead we used through-bond couplings (data not shown) to assign proton resonances within each deoxyribose, and 1 H- 31 P couplings (Fig.2 a)to connect them.
By this procedure we obtained an unambiguous assignment of the complete backbone (without reference to models), and from these we were able to use nuclear Overhauser effects (NOEs; Fig. 2 b)to assign aromatic proton resonances.
Assignments of G-imino and G-amino protons involved in base pairing (Fig.3 a)made use of cross-strand NOE interactions whose interpretation was complicated by the symmetry properties of the quadruplex.
Therefore the assignment scheme shown in Fig.3 a was tested by observing the spectrum of the hexadeoxynucleotide analogue d (UG 4 T)(data not shown).
As expected, the imino proton resonance assigned to G2 showed a significant change in chemical shift; the remaining G-imino resonances exhibited much smaller shifts.
The observation of an unbroken path of GH8-ribose H1'-GH8 NOE connectivities along the DNA (in marked contrast to those observed in the fold-back structure) suggests that the backbone conformation is similar to that of normal duplex DNA.
The relative intensities of NOEs observed between GH8 and ribose H2' compared with H1' indicates that all glycosidic torsion angles are anti,and the polarity of the connectivities (GH8 to the ribose protons on the 5' side only) is indicative of a right-handed helix.
As shown in Fig. 3 a,imino and amino resonances show unusual chemical shifts and NOE connectivities.
Broad peaks were observed in these regions in d5'GMP at 7.2°C, although no assignment was reported for the peaks near 10p.p.m..
We observe non-hydrogen-bonded amino protons at 5.6–5.8p.p.m., with NOE connectivities to the imino and the hydrogen-bonded amino protons (data not shown).
These observations indicate that the rotational rate about the C2-N bond in the tetraplex is slow on the NMR timescale.
The fact that individual G imino proton resonances show NOEs to two adjacent aromatic resonances (for example, the imino at 11.6p.p.m. has NOEs to T1 H6 and G2 H8) indicates that at least one of these NOEs is likely to be an intra-base-pair or intra-tetrad contact.
This is consistent with the hydrogen-bonding scheme of the tetrad (Fig. 1b),and all other base associations that we have been able to devise are not consistent with all the data.
From the number of resonances observed we conclude that d (TG 4 T) associates as a tetraplex with fourfold symmetry.
Because the parallel-stranded structure is fourfold symmetric, imino-imino contacts within the tetrad will be between magnetically equivalent protons, which will not lead to observable NOEs.
In contrast, an antiparallel structure will lead to two sets of intra-tetrad NOEs (associating G3 with G4, and G2 with G5).
In the nuclear Overhauser enhancement spectrum recorded in H 2 O we observe a sequential pattern of NOEs (Fig.3 b),probably arising from inter-base-pair or inter-tetrad contacts, rather than the associations predicted for an antiparallel structure.
Moreover, although we observed apparent intra-tetrad imino-aromatic spin diffusion NOEs (Fig. 3a)at 6°C, these did not involve the associations predicted for an antiparallel structure.
Thus we find that the structure is a parallel-stranded tetraplex.
This conclusion emerges from the NMR data alone, but is fully consistent with available biochemical data.
Sugar conformations and glycosidic rotation angles have been estimated as described in the legend to Table 1.
Unlike the fold-back structure in which a pattern of alternating anti-syn glycosidic angles has been observed, we find all the nucleotides in the parallel-stranded structure are in the anti conformation associated with A- or B-form DNA.
This suggests that syn guanines in the fold-back structure are linked to the steric constraints introduced within antiparallel strands.
Sugar conformation is also very similar to that observed in B-form rather than A-form DNA.
In conclusion, we have found that d (TG 4 T) forms a parallel-stranded tetraplex with guanines involved in hydrogen-bonded tetrads.
This demonstrates that the most stable G 4 tetrad structure involves parallel (rather than antiparallel) association of strands, in the absence of the entropic advantage inherent in intramolecular folding which may force an antiparallel association.
The parallel structure differs substantially from the fold-back structure at the individual nucleotide level.
The structural polymorphism of these sequences may be biologically important.
Predominant sugar conformer and per cent of the time that the individual sugar is in that conformation have been estimated from multiplet widths measured from DQF-COSY (Fig.2 a)according to the method described in Rinkel and Altona.
The glycosidic angle, describing the orientation about the bond connecting the base to the sugar has been estimated by integrating intranucleotide cross peaks from NOESY data, such as that shown in Fig.3 a at a number of mixing times (50, 100, 200, 300ms), thus allowing for different degrees of build-up of the through-space interaction as well as second-order spin diffusion effects.
The results were then compared to those obtained from simulations using the program NOEMOL for the full range of glycosidic angles assuming a south sugar conformation.  1' and 3' are the multiplet widths of the H1' and H3' proton resonances respectively,S is the proportion of south conformer, and  is the glycosidic torsion angle.
FIG. 1
a,
Schematic illustrations of structures proposed to form in G-rich DNA sequences: folded back intermolecular structures, parallel-stranded quadruplex, and antiparallel-stranded quadruplex.
b,
Guanine tetrad structure, first proposed for 3' GMP fibres.
This arrangement has been observed in fold-back structures by NMR and X-ray crystallography.
c,
Aromatic spectra of d (TG 4 T) in 100mM sodium chloride, 10mM sodium phosphate, pH7.1, 1mM EDTA in D 2 O as a function of temperature.
Each spectrum contains  twelve aromatic resonances divided into two sets each comprising six resonances, corresponding to two conformations in slow exchange.
In addition, four strong and two weak imino resonances (data not shown) disappear together with the broad set of aromatic resonances at high temperature (70°C).
The narrow lines therefore probably correspond to single-stranded DNA, and the broad lines (7Hz) indicate the presence of a multimeric, hydrogen-bonded structure at temperatures below 60°C.
FIG. 2
a,
Assignments of backbone resonances using through-bond coupling.
Proton-detected heteronuclear correlation spectrum of d (TG 4 T) in the same buffer and temperature conditions as above.
This experiment provides unambiguous identification of each group of sugar resonances determined from the COSY (correlation spectroscopy) experiment (not shown) through the correlation between each of the five phosphorus resonances and the H3' proton of the sugar attached to the 5' neighbouring residue and to each H4' of the sugar attached to the 3' neighbour.
128 data sets containing 2,048 complex data points (1282K data sets) were acquired with a sweep with of 1,200Hz in the 1 H dimension, and 160Hz in the 31 P dimension.
b,
Pattern of through-space interactions confirms the presence of right-handed parallel strands.
Nuclear Overhauser enhancement spectroscopy was done under conditions identical to those of COSY experiments.
The section of the 300ms NOESY containing aromatic (GH8 and TH6) resonances on the horizontal axis, and H1', H3' sugar protons on the vertical axis is shown.
Sugar protons have been assigned unambiguously from J- coupling experiments.
A sequential connectivity pathway is observed between aromatic and H1' protons, and between aromatic and H2', H2  protons (data not shown) as expected for right-handed helical DNA.
Some arotmatic to H3' cross-peaks are not present at shorter mixing times, and are probably caused by spin diffusion. 5122K data sets were acquired with a sweep with of 4,237Hz.
FIG. 3
a,
NOE spectrum in H 2 O of d (TG 4 T) in buffer conditions identical to those described in Fig.1 legend, but at a temperature of 6°C.
Assignments of exchangeable protons are shown.
In previous observations of duplex DNA, guanine amino protons have resonated further upfield.
Guanine imino protons appear further upfield from their usual position in Watson-Crick G.C base pairs in a chemical shift region (10.5–12p.p.m.) similar to that observed for G imino protons hydrogen-bonded to carbonyl groups, but also for those that are not hydrogen-bonded.
These unusual chemical shifts for imino and amino protons are indicative of novel hydrogen bonding.
Spin diffusion is the most likely mechanism for the appearance of the intranucleotide imino-GH8 crosspeaks, according to the base tetrad scheme (Fig.1 b).
If these strands were antiparallel spin diffusion crosspeaks would be expected to be visible between G2H1 and G5H8, and vice versa. 5122K data sets were acquired using time proportional phase incrementation (ref. 31) in phase-sensitive mode, with a sweep width of 7,812.5Hz.
b,
Imino-imino crosspeak region of the NOESY spectrum shown in a.
Imino assignments are those shown in a.
A sequential pattern of NOEs is observed between imino protons: G5-G4 and G4-G3.
Any possible G3-G2 crosspeak would be too close to the diagonal to be observed.
This sequential pattern is consistent with a parallel structure.
An antiparallel structure would result in an NOE between G2 and G5 imino protons, which is not observed.
The spatial arrangement of cones in the primate fovea
J. D. Mollon & J. K. Bowmaker
THE retinae of Old World primates contain three classes of light-sensitive cone, which exhibit peak absorption in different spectral regions.
But how are the different types of cone arranged in the hexagonal mosaic of the fovea?
This question has often been answered with artists' impressions, but never with direct measurements.
Staining for antibodies specific to the short-wave photopigment has revealed a sparse, semiregular array of cones; but nothing is known about the arrangement of the more numerous long- and middle-wave cones.
Are they randomly distributed, with chance aggregations of one type, as Hartridge postulated in these columns nearly 50 years ago?
Or do they exhibit a regular alternation, recalling the systematic mosaics seen in some non-mammalian species?
Or, conversely, is there positive clumping of particular cone types, as might be expected if local patches of cones were descended from a single precursor cell?
We have made direct microspectrophotometric measurements of patches of foveal retina from Old World monkeys, and report here that the distribution of long- and middle-wave cones is locally random.
These two cone types are present in almost equal numbers, and not in the ratio of 2:1 that has been postulated for the human fovea.
Post-mortem tissue was made available to us from talapoin monkeys (Cercopithecus talapoin)that had been used in unrelated endocrinological studies.
When the fresh retina was dissected under dim red light, the fovea was usually visible as a dark spot.
A retinal fragment that included the fovea was mounted on a slide, was divided by two or three strokes of a razor blade, and was then partially dispersed by gentle pressure on a cover slip.
On occasion we were able to produce small fragments of intact retina that were suitable for microspectrophotometry and yet were extensive enough to answer the present question.
The absorbance spectra of individual receptors were measured with a modified dual-beam Liebman microspectrophotometer under computer control; the numerical apertures of the condenser and objective were 0.4 and 0.9, respectively.
With the help of an infrared converter, the measuring beam (2μm square cross-section) was aligned so as to pass axially through a given cell while the reference beam passed either outside the retinal fragment or in a space between photoreceptors.
The spectrum was scanned from 750 to 370nm and back to 750nm.
To minimize the effects of bleaching, only one absorption spectrum was usually obtained from a given cell, but two independent estimates of the baseline absorbance spectrum were always obtained by arranging both beams to pass outside the cell.
In the case of cells that absorbed at short wavelengths, we checked that the pigment was photolabile by repeating the absorbance measurements after bleaching the cell with white light for 5min.
We were able to measure 30–40 receptors in a given patch.
Although microspectrophotometric measurements are usually made by passing the beam transversely through the outer segment, our measurements of cells in these foveal patches were necessarily axial; the absorption spectra may thus be subject to minor distortion by inert pigments in the inner segments, by waveguide effects, or by scattering in other retinal tissue.
Nevertheless, we were always able to assign a cone to one of three categories without ambiguity.
In Fig. 1 we plot the wavelength of peak sensitivity (λ max ) for each of the long- and middle-wave cones recorded in the present study, including those used to construct Fig. 2: there is a clear separation of cones into two distinct classes and so we can be confident that our axial records are adequate for the present purpose of classification.
In Fig. 2 we show at the upper right a typical fragment of foveal retina from one of our preparations.
The solid outline encloses the subset of the array that we were able to characterize fully.
To the left are shown examples of individual absorbance spectra for the three types of cones: the λ max values lie close to 565, 535 and 430nm, as is typical for Old World primates.
On the basis of similar spectra, we assigned each of a sample of 183 cones to one of three classes and so derived the matrices shown symbolically in the remainder of Fig. 2.
The patches shown are drawn from five eyes from four female monkeys.
It is at once clear from Fig. 2 that the long- and middle-wave cones of the primate retina do not form the regular, systematically alternating array that has sometimes been postulated.
Clumping of cones of the same type is apparent, but is this more than the chance aggregation that arises in any random distribution?
For the five patches shown, we have counted the transitions between two middle-wave cones, between two long-wave cones, and between cones of different types.
The counts were made in one, arbitrary, direction (corresponding to the long axis of the fragment) and transitions involving short-wave cones were excluded.
A  test showed that the frequencies of the three possible types of transition did not differ significantly from the values expected if the identity of a cone were independent of the identity of its neighbours and reflected only the absolute probability of that cone type ().
If there is any bias, it is towards aggregation rather than alternation.
Our finding that the foveal matrix is random rather than ordered has implications for the nature of the post-receptoral channels that subserve spatial and chromatic resolution.
It would not be possible for the same midget ganglion cells to be optimized for both functions.
Chromatic specificity of centre and surround inputs would require that the ganglion cell's opposing inputs are not always drawn from cones that are nearest neighbours.
Conversely, if spatial resolution is optimized in the sense that opposing inputs are drawn from neighbouring cones, then the surround inputs cannot always be drawn from a single class of cone.
In either case, the random clustering of cones of one type must constrain colour discrimination at high spatial frequencies, and also has implications for chromatic aliasing.
Of the 183 cones in our sample of intact retinal patches, long-wave, middle-wave and short-wave cones are present in the ratios 86:92:5 (47%, 50%, 3%).
These records from intact patches are a subset of a total of 557 cones recorded from four male and six female talapoin monkeys.
If we include all records (from intact patches and from isolated receptors) the corresponding ratios are 256:289:12 (46%, 52%, 2%).
The rarity of short-wave cones is concordant with earlier estimates, using direct and indirect means of identifying these receptors, but we have not ourselves seen any indication that the short-wave cones occur as interruptions to the regular foveal matrix, as has sometimes been reported.
The ratio of long- to middle-wave cones ranges from 1.6 to 0.42 for samples from individual animals and for the total sample has a value (0.89) that does not differ significantly from unity ().
This value is consistent with our earlier results for a number of catarrhine species and with the results of Hárosi and of Baylor, Nunn and Schnapf for macaques, but it is extremely unlikely () that our sample could be drawn from a population with a ratio of 2:1, the ratio that has been proposed for man on the basis of psychophysical measurements.
If this species difference proves to be real, two questions arise.
First, what ecological factors have led to a more balanced proportion of long- and middle-wave cones in monkeys than in man?
(Is it that good colour vision at small visual angles has been more important for frugivorous monkeys than for our own recent ancestors?)
Second, what is the molecular genetic mechanism that in monkeys leads to a near 1:1 ratio but in man to a strong bias in favour of long-wave cones?
If we knew the answer to this question, we should be close to understanding the clinically important issue of how the expression of opsin genes is controlled.
FIG. 1 The distribution of λ max values for all middle- and long-wave cones in our sample, including those used in the construction of the schematic matrices of Fig. 2.
For each individual record, the λ max was estimated by fitting a template to the long-wave limb of the absorbance spectrum.
Note that we have included in this sample some records that would not pass our standard criteria if our purpose were to establish the exact form of the mean absorbance spectrum.
Nevertheless, the records fall into two distinct groups and there is no ambiguity in classifying individual cells as middle- or long-wave.
FIG. 2 The photograph at the upper right is of a fragment of fresh retina focused at the level of the outer segments and recorded on video by means of an infrared television camera permanently mounted on the microspectrophotometer.
Scale bar, 10μm.
The solid outline encloses the area within which we measured each individual receptor.
Immediately below the photograph, we show schematically the corresponding array of cones: long-, middle- and short-wave cones are represented by red, green and blue discs, respectively.
For the three cones indicated, we show to the left their individual absorbance spectra, which are typical of those on which we base our classification; the solid curves fitted to the data are templates based on the Dartnall nomogram displaced on a log frequency abscissa.
The lower part of the figure shows four other retinal patches that have been similarly analysed.
Molecular cloning of ICAM-3, a third ligand for LFA-1, constitutively expressed on resting leukocytes
Jonathan Fawcett, Claire L. L. Holness, Lindsey A. Needham, Helen Turley, Kevin C. Gatter, David Y. Mason & David L. Simmons
THE co-ordinated function of effector and accessory cells in the immune system is assisted by adhesion molecules on the cell surface that stabilize interactions between different cell types.
Leukocyte function-associated antigen 1 (LFA-1) is expressed on the surface of all white blood cells and is a receptor for intercellular adhesion molecules (ICAM) 1 and 2 (ref.3) which are members of the immunoglobulin superfamily.
The interaction of LFA-1 with ICAMs 1 and 2 provides essential accessory adhesion signals in many immune interactions, including those between T and B lymphocytes and cytotoxic T cells and their targets.
In addition, both ICAMs are expressed at low levels on resting vascular endothelium; ICAM-1 is strongly upregulated by cytokine stimulation and plays a key role in the arrest of leukocytes in blood vessels at sites of inflammation and injury.
Recent work has indicated that resting leukocytes express a third ligand, ICAM-3, for LFA-1 (refs 11,12).
ICAM-3 is potentially the most important ligand for LFA-1 in the initiation of the immune response because the expression of ICAM-1 on resting leukocytes is low.
We report the expression cloning of a complementary DNA, pICAM-3, encoding a protein constitutively expressed on all leukocytes, which binds LFA-1.
ICAM-3 is closely related to ICAM-1, consists of five immunoglobulin domains, and binds LFA-1 through its two N-terminal domains.
To identify constitutively expressed LFA-1 ligands, monoclonal antibodies raised against human leukocytes were selected on the basis of three criteria: a pan-leukocytic reactivity profile, high expression on unstimulated leukocytes, and no assignment to an existing cluster of differentiation (CD 1–75; ref. 13).
One monoclonal antibody, KS128, demonstrated high expression on freshly prepared peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBL), monocytes and granulocytes (data not shown) and was selected for further study.
cDNA expression libraries constructed from U937 and Daudi cell lines were screened with KS128 antibody and a single clone with a 1.7-kilobase (kb) insert was isolated by three rounds of COS cell transfection, panning and episomal rescue.
A protein with M r 110K was immunoprecipitated from COS cell transfectants and from the promonocyte cell line U937 (Fig.1).
A control anti-ICAM-1 antibody precipitated a 90K protein from ICAM-1 transfectants and from U937 cells.
RNA expression analysis (Fig. 2) reveals a single 1.7-kb transcript in most leukocytic cell lines, but most prominently in those of B-lymphocytic lineage and those with myeloid properties, such as U937 cells.
Expression was low or absent in cell lines of more primitive phenotype like the promyelocytic line HL60 and those with erythroid features such as the erythroleukaemic line K562.
No endothelial cell expression was detected even after activation with interleukin IL-1 β and TNF- α.
The cDNA insert consists of 1,739 nucleotides (Fig. 3a)and has a poly(A) + tail.
A single 1,641-base pair (bp) open reading frame gives a predicted polypeptide sequence of 554 residues and has the typical features observed in a type I integral membrane protein.
A potential initiating methionine at nucleotide position 11 (ref. 15), is followed by a putative signal peptide which may be cleaved between Gly26 and Glu27 (ref.16), leaving 450 residues in the extracellular domain of the mature protein.
A stretch of 25 hydrophobic residues (Phe480 to Phe504) is a likely transmembrane region and there are 37 residues in the cytoplasmic domain.
The difference between the predicted core peptide M r of 59K and that observed on immunoprecipitation (110K) indicates that many of the 15 potential N- linked glycosylation sites (Asn-X-Ser/Thr) are utilized.
A search of the National Biomedical Research Foundation protein database disclosed a strong homology to human ICAM-1 and -2 and the intervals between cysteine residues are conserved between the presented sequence and ICAM-1.
In view of the degree of homology this cDNA has been named ICAM-3 and is predicted to encode a member of the immunoglobulin superfamily with five C2 domains.
Multiple alignments of ICAM-1, ICAM-2 and ICAM-3 (Fig.3 b)reveal that ICAM-3 is most closely related to ICAM-1, with an overall 47% amino-acid identity rising to 77% in domain II.
The least sequence conservation between the ICAMs is observed in the cytoplasmic region.
Recent work delineating the LFA-1 binding sites in the first two domains of ICAM-1 (refs17,18) indicate the importance of the residues Asp26, Glu34, Gly46 and Gln73 in domain I. With the exception of the first, these residues are found in ICAM-3.
Two (Asn175 and Ser177) of the four key residues in domain II are conserved in ICAM-3.
The distribution and structural data strongly suggested the possibility that ICAM-3 would be a third ligand for LFA-1 and experiments were undertaken to test this hypothesis.
Specific adhesion of the promonocytic LFA-1 + cell line THP-1 to ICAM-1- and ICAM-3-transfected COS cells was observed (Fig. 4a).
Binding was inhibited by an anti-LFA-1 blocking antibody specific for CD11a, monoclonal antibody 38 (ref.19)(Fig.4 a).
Antibody KS128 did not inhibit ICAM-3/LFA-1 adhesion (data not shown).
To assess LFA-1 binding to ICAM-3 further, solid-phase assays where done using soluble recombinant ICAMs containing the two N-terminal immunoglobulin domains (Fig.4 b).
THP-1 cells bound to these chimaeric proteins, and binding was blocked by the anti-LFA-1 antibody 38.
Thus, the LFA-1 binding site is contained within domains I and II of ICAM-3.
Our results show that the pICAM-3 cDNA encodes a third ligand for LFA-1 and the LFA-1 binding site has been localized to domains I and II.
Are the three ICAM ligands for LFA-1 functionally equivalent, or does each one have a unique role?
The strict delineation of expression of the ICAMs (ICAM-1 is expressed on activated leukocytes, endothelium and epithelium; ICAM-2 is constitutively expressed on leukocytes and endothelium; ICAM-3 is constitutively expressed only on leukocytes) suggests that each serves a specific purpose rather than acting as a ‘failsafe’ for the other ICAMs.
Furthermore, differences in ligand binding were observed in comparison with ICAMs 1 and 2.
ICAM-3 was found to bind LFA-1-expressing cells more weakly than ICAM-1 and ICAM-2.
The residues identified as playing a key role in ICAM-1/LFA-1 interactions are conserved in ICAM-3, although other subtle differences may affect interaction with LFA-1.
One specific possibility is the presence of N- linked carbohydrate groups in domain I of ICAM-3 not found in ICAM-1.
The question of whether ICAM-3 binds Mac-1 or p150/95 also remains to be addressed.
In T lymphocytes, engagement of the antigen receptor (TCR) by antigen leads to rapid but transient upregulation of LFA-1 affinity for ICAM-1 (ref.20) and this secondary adhesion event is one of the triggers for the lymphocyte-activation cascade.
The biological corollary of this is that blocking antibodies against ICAM-1 have been shown effectively to prevent allograft rejection.
ICAM-1 expression is only seen, however, in cells that have already undergone some degree of activation and therefore the actual initial adhesion event supporting antigen presentation to the antigen receptor may be between LFA-1 and ICAM-3.
Significantly, we have found the highest expression of ICAM-3 messenger RNA in cell types implicated in antigen presentation to T cells, namely B cells and those with monocytic/macrophage phenotype.
In these cases, the constitutive expression of ICAM-3 would be pivotally important in the genesis of immune responses.
FIG. 1 Immunoprecipitation analysis of KS128 antigen.
a,
Immuno-precipitations were done with control monoclonal antibody 7B4 (lanes 1,2,3); anti-ICAM-1 antibody (11C8; British Biotechnology)(lanes 4,5,6); or antibody KS128 (lanes 7,8,9) from surface-iodinated COS-1 cells transfected with pICAM-1 (lanes 1,4,7), KS128 cDNA (lanes 2,5,8), or pCDM8 vector only (lanes 3,6,9).
b,
Phorbol ester (12- O -tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate; TPA) -induced U937 cells precipitated with: lane 1, KS128; lane 2, 11C8 (anti-ICAM-1); lane 3, 7B4 (negative control).
Cells (10 7 ) were surface-iodinated with Iodogen (Pierce) according to the vendor's instructions, washed and lysed; lysates were precleared before immunoprecipitating with 10μg antibody and agarose-coupled goat anti-mouse IgG (Sigma).
After washing, samples were resolved on 10% SDS-PAGE and autoradiographed.
FIG. 2 RNA expression in leukocyte cell lines as determined by RNA blot hybridization.
Lane 1, K562; lane 2, TPA induced K562; lane 3, U937; lane 4, TPA induced U937; lane 5, KG1; lane 6, TPA-induced KG1; lane 7, THP-1; lane 8, HL60; lane 9, IM9; lane 10, Ramos; lane 11, Priess; lane 12, Daudi; lane 13, MOLT 4; lane 14, Namalwa: lane 15, Jurkat; lane 16, proliferating human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC); lane 17, HUVEC stimulated with TNF- α and IL- β;lane 18, HUVEC grown on Matrigel.
Total RNA (10μg) was denatured in formaldehyde, electrophoresed, transferred to nylon membranes and hybridized with labelled ICAM-3 cDNA insert; membranes were then washed and autoradiographed.
Cells were induced with 10nM TPA for 24h.
HUVEC were induced with 10Uml cytokines (British Biotechnology) for 6h or cultured on Matrigel (Collaborative Research) for 24h.
FIG. 3 Sequence analysis of ICAM-3.
a,
Nucleotide and deduced amino-acid sequence of pICAM-3 cDNA insert.
The sequence on both strands was determined by the chain termination method using a combination of synthetic oligonucleotide primers and subclones.
The deduced translation is shown beneath the DNA sequence.
The putative signal peptide is indicated by a dashed line starting at Met1.
The heavy underlined sequence shows a likely transmembrane region.
A polyadenylation signal is shown at nucleotide 1,704 (dashed underline).
Potential N- glycosylation sites are indicated by ---N--.
Proposed start points for immunoglobulin domains are indicated above the nucleotide sequence.
b,
Alignment of immunoglobulin domains between ICAM-3 and ICAMs 1 and 2.
Alignments were generated using the program PILEUP from the UWGCG package with gap-weight and gap-length penalties of 0.5.
Domains V of ICAM 1 and 3 were aligned separately.
FIG. 4 Functional analysis of ICAM-3/LFA-1 interaction.
a,
COS cells transiently expressing ICAM-1, ICAM-3 or sham transfected, were plated in 96-well assay dishes.
3 [H]thymidine-labelled THP-1 cells, pretreated with 10mgml heat-aggregated human IgG, were allowed to adhere for 35min at 37°C, then ATP added to a final concentration of 20μM.
After a further 5min incubation, dishes were washed three times and bound cells lysed and counted by scintillation assay.
Cells were pretreated for 30min with blocking antibodies.
Monoclonal antibodies (mAb) were: anti-ICAM-1 11C8 (10μgml as Fab fragments); anti LFA-1 mAb 38 (1:100 as ascites).
Results are presented as the means (standard deviation) of the per cent of input cells bound.
b,
Preparation of soluble recombinant (sr) ICAMs.
Lanes 1 and 2, ICAM-1 Fc; lanes 3 and 4, ICAM-2 Fc; lanes 5 and 6, ICAM-3 Fc; lane 7, vector only control; under reducing (lanes 1,3,5,7) and non-reducing (lanes 2,4,6) conditions.
SDS-PAGE of 35 S-methionine-labelled srICAMs.
Recombinant ICAM-IgG1 Fc genes were transiently expressed in COS-1 cells and secreted protein purified from tissue culture supernatants with protein A-coupled Sepharose.
The chimaeric genes were created by using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to amplify two N-terminal domains of each ICAM, with restriction sites compatible for ligation, into an expression vector, pIg1, containing hinge, CH2 and CH3 exons of human IgG 1 .
A control protein consisting of the whole extracellular domain of MUC18 (ref.26) fused to IgG 1 Fc was also made.
PCR conditions were: 94 °C for 1min, 55°C for 30s and 72°C for 1min, for 30cycles. srICAM-1 and 3 and srMUC18 were amplified from cDNA clones and srICAM-2 from a HUVEC cDNA library.
PCR primers used were: srICAM-1, 5'-CTAGAGAACCCACTGCTTAAC-3' (CDM8FSP) and 5'-GATCGGATCCACTTACCTGTAAAGGTCTGGAGCTGGTAGGGGGC-3; srICAM-2, 5'-GATCAAGCTTTCCCTGCGAGCCCGTGGAGACTGC-3' and 5'-GATCGGATCCACTTACCTGTCTGGCTGTCCGACACAGGCTCATA-3'; srICAM-3, CDM8FSP and 5'-GATCAGATCTACTTACCTGTCGACGGGGGG-GTCACGGGCAGGAC-3'; srMUC-18 (ref. 26), CDM8FSP and 5'-ACGGATCCACTTACCTGTCCGGCTCTCCGGCTCCGGCAGCTT-3'.
c,
Binding of labelled THP-1 cells to wells coated with srICAMs in solid phase.
srMUC18 was included as a negative control.
Assays were performed in quintuplicate and results presented as mean per cent of input cells bound, 1 standard deviation.
25-well dishes (Sterilin) were treated with 10% toluene in ethanol and washed to remove plasticizers before incubating with 250μl goat anti-human IgGFc at 10μgml in 50mM Tris, pH 9.0, for 2–4h; remaining sites were blocked by incubation with PBS containing bovine serum albumin 2mgml overnight.
srICAMs were bound for 1h at 10μgml in PBSA, washed and blocked with heat-aggregated human IgG at 1mgml.
Adhesion assays with labelled THP-1 cells were performed as in a.
Isozyme-selective stimulation of phospholipase C- β 2 by G protein βγ- subunits
Montserrat Camps, Amanda Carozzi, Petra Schnabel, Alexander Scheer, Peter J. Parker & Peter Gierschik
HYDROLYSIS by phospholipase C (PLC) of phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate is a key mechanism by which many extracellular signalling molecules regulate functions of their target cells.
At least eight distinct isozymes of PLC are recognized in mammalian cells.
Receptor-controlled PLC is often regulated by G proteins, which can be modified by pertussis toxin in some cells but not in others.
In the latter cells, PLC- β1,but not PLC- γ1 or PLC-  1,may be activated by members of the α q -subfamily of the G protein α- subunits.
An unidentified PLC in soluble fractions of cultured human HL-60 granulocytes is specifically stimulated by G protein βγ subunits purified from retina and brain.
Identification of a second PLC- β complementary DNA (PLC- β2)in an HL-60 cell cDNA library prompted us to investigate the effect of purified G protein βγ subunits on the activities of PLC- β1 and PLC- β2 transiently expressed in cultured mammalian cells.
We report here that PLC- β1 and PLC- β2 were stimulated by free βγ subunits and that PLC- β2 was the most sensitive to βγ stimulation.
Thus stimulation of PLC by βγ subunits is isozyme-selective and PLC- β2 is a prime target of βγ stimulation.
Activation of PLC- β2 by βγ subunits may be an important mechanism by which pertussis toxin-sensitive G proteins stimulate PLC.
Transfection of COS-1 cells with the mammalian expression vector pMT2 containing the cDNAs of PLC- β1 and PLC- β2 led to a marked increase in inositol phosphate formation by the corresponding cell lysates relative to the formation observed for cells transfected with pMT2 alone (Fig. 1 a).
Inositol phosphate formation by lysates of cells transfected with pMT2-PLC- β1 or pMT2-PLC- β2 was absolutely dependent on and greatly stimulated by free Ca 2+ .
The Ca 2+ sensitivity was similar for both lysates.
The immunochemical analysis of lysates from transfected cells using monospecific antisera reactive against PLC- β1 and PLC- β2 revealed that the two PLC isozymes were synthesized in significant quantities as native polypeptides with apparent M r s of  165K and 155K, respectively (Fig. 1 b).
The lysates also contained several immunoreactive polypeptides with smaller M r s, which presumably correspond to proteolytic degradation products of the two native PLCs.
The effect of purified G protein βγ subunits on the activities of PLC- β1 and PLC- β2 expressed in COS-1 cells was determined using hydrophilic, detergent-free βγ subunits of retinal transducin (βγ t )(Table 1).
βγ t had no effect on the inositol phosphate formation by lysates of non- or pMT2-transfected cells.
In contrast,βγ t clearly stimulated the formation of inositol phosphates by lysates of cells transfected with pMT2-PLC- β1 and pMT2-PLC- β2.
Most interestingly, however, the degree of stimulation by βγ t was considerably higher for the cells transfected with pMT2-PLC- β2 than for those transfected with pMT2-PLC- β1.
A summary of the results accounting for the differences in expressed PLC activities is shown in Fig. 2 a;this shows that the net increase in inositol phosphate formation induced by βγ t was about fivefold higher for cells expressing PLC- β2 than for cells expressing PLC- β1.
The dependence of inositol phosphate formation by lysates of cells expressing PLC- β1 or PLC- β2 on the concentration of βγ t is shown in Fig. 2 b. βγ t did not affect the inositol phosphate formation by extracts of pMT2-transfected cells.
In contrast,βγ t led to an increase in the activity of extracts from pMT2-PLC- β2- transfected cells, which was  20-fold at 3μM βγ t .
In lysates from cells expressing PLC- β1,the stimulation by this concentration of βγ t was only about threefold.
Saturation of the effect of βγ t on inositol phosphate formation by PLC- β1 or PLC- β2 was not achieved even at higher concentrations of βγ t .
To examine the specificity of the stimulation of PLC- β2 by βγ t , we determined the effect of GDP-liganded α t (α t.GDP) on βγ t -stimulated phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate hydrolysis by PLC- β2 (Fig. 3).
α t.GDP completely eliminated the stimulatory effect of βγ t .
In contrast,α t.GDP had no effect on inositol phosphate formation by lysates of PLC- β2- transfected cells when tested at the same concentrations in the absence of βγ t (results not shown).
Thus, PLC- β2 is specifically stimulated by free βγ,but not by the αβγ heterotrimer.
These results demonstrate that both PLC- β1 and PLC- β2 are stimulated by G protein βγ subunits and that PLC- β2 is a major target of βγ- subunit stimulation.
These findings, together with our previous observation of an unidentified βγ t -resistant PLC in HL-60 granulocytes and our unpublished observation that purified PLC-  1 showed no response to βγ t , strongly suggest that the stimulation of PLC- β2 by βγ t is specific for members of the PLC- β subfamily and is isozyme-selective within this group of PLCs.
Clearly, PLC- β1 is activated by all four members of the α q family (α q ,α 11 , α 14 ,and α 16 ).
PLC- β2 seems to be resistant to stimulation by α q ,α 11 ,and α 14 ,but sensitive to stimulation by α 16  (refs 9, 10).
Our finding that both PLC- β1 and PLC- β2 are stimulated by βγ subunits strongly suggests that these PLCs, similar to the type II and IV adenylyl cyclases, are regulated by both G protein α- and βγ subunits.
An important issue is the relevance of βγ- mediated stimulation of inositol phosphate formation to receptor-mediated transmembrane signalling in native plasma membranes and in intact cells.
Clearly, this signalling pathway is much more likely to occur in cells expressing predominantly PLC- β2 rather than PLC- β1.
Membranes of peripheral blood neutrophils and HL-60 granulocytes contain significant quantities of PLC- β2,but lack PLC- β1 (our unpublished results).
The results shown in Fig. 3 indicate that relatively high concentrations of βγ subunits are required to stimulate inositol phosphate formation by PLC- β2.
But similarly high concentrations of βγ t were required to stimulate retinal phospholipase A 2 (ref. 15).
Differences have been noted in the relative ability of various βγ dimers to stimulate atrial phospholipase A 2 (ref. 16) or adenylyl cyclase.
Will different species of βγ dimers be more potent stimulators of PLC than βγ t ?
In granulocyte plasma membranes, the calculated concentration of βγ subunits is  70μM.
These membranes also contain high numbers of receptors for N- formyl methionine-containing chemotactic peptides, which are coupled to stimulation of PLC through the pertussis toxin-sensitive G proteins G i2 and/or G i3 (ref. 17).
G i2 and G i3 are highly abundant in granulocyte membranes and much of the cellular βγ subunits is probably complexed to α i2 and α i3 .
Agonist occupancy of the formyl peptide receptor may lead to a transient, pertussis toxin-sensitive increase in the concentration of free βγ subunits which is sufficiently high to stimulate PLC- β2.
Thus, in granulocytes, stimulation of PLC- β2 by the free βγ subunit is likely to be the mechanism by which the pertussis toxin-sensitive G proteins G i2 and/or G i3 stimulate PLC.
If this hypothesis is correct, one would predict that other G-protein-coupled receptors capable of inducing the release of a similarly high concentration of βγ subunits are capable of stimulating inositol phosphate formation.
Recent results obtained by expressing a variety of G-protein-coupled receptors in cultured mammalian cells suggest that this may be the case.
For example, several receptors well known to inhibit adenylyl cyclase through G i (for example , the m2 and m4 muscarinic receptors, the 5-HT 1A receptor,α 2  -adrenergic and D2 dopaminergic receptors) and several adenylyl cyclase stimulatory receptors (for example , the TSH, LH, calcitonin and PTH receptors) also stimulate PLC.
Even receptors not usually coupled to phospholipase C may thus interact through G protein βγ subunits with this effector enzyme under certain circumstances, for example in cells expressing PLCs highly sensitive to βγ stimulation such as PLC- β2.
These results indicate that the degree of cross-talk between G proteins and effectors and thus the flexibility of G-protein-regulated transmembrane signalling is much higher than thought.
Even a single G protein may regulate more than one effector by virtue of its subunit structure and that more than one G protein, such as G i2 and G i3 , may regulate the same effector (PLC- β2)by releasing common subunits, the βγ dimers.
Inositol phosphate formation by extracts of COS-1 transfectants.
Cell extracts (0.3μg protein per assay) from non-transfected cells (control) or cells transfected with the indicated plasmid DNAs were incubated in the absence or presence of βγ t (2μM) with phospholipid vesicles containing PtdInsP 2 .
The assay was done for 30 min in the presence of either 0.1μM free Ca 2+ and 0.9mM sodium deoxycholate (+), or 10μM free Ca 2+ and 3.4mM sodium deoxycholate (++).
Each value corresponds to the mean  s.d. of triplicate determinations.
DOC, sodium deoxycholate; ND, not determined.
FIG. 1 Expression of PLC- β1 and PLC- β2 in COS-1 cells.
a,
Effect of Ca 2+ on inositol phosphate formation by extracts of COS-1 cells.
Cells were transfected with the vector pMT2 without insert (○), with pMT2-PLC- β1 (fl) or pMT2-PLC- β2 (i).
Cell extracts (0.3μg protein per assay) were incubated for 30min with phospholipid vesicles containing PtdIns(4,5)P 2 at the concentrations of free Ca 2+ indicated at the abscissa.
b,
Immunochemical analysis of PLC- β1 and PLC- β2 expressed in COS-1 cells.
COS-1 cells were transfected with vector without insert (lanes 2 and 8), or vector containing the cDNAs of PLC- β1 (lanes 3–6) or PLC- β2 (lanes 9–12).
Extracts of non-transfected cells (lanes 1 and 7) and of transfected cells (lanes 2–6 and 8–12) were subjected to SDS-PAGE (150μg protein per lane) and immunoblotting was done using antisera reactive against PLC- β1 (lanes 1–6) or PLC- β2 (lanes 7–12).
The two major  165K and  155K immunoreactive proteins detected by the two sera in lanes 3–6 and 9–12 comigrated on immunoblots with PLC- β1 and PLC- β2 present in bovine brain and HL-60 cell membranes, respectively (results not shown).
METHODS.
The cDNAs encoding bovine PLC- β1 (ref. 22) and human PLC- β2 (ref. 9) were ligated into the mammalian expression vector pMT2 (ref. 23).
COS-1 cells were propagated in DMEM supplemented with 10% FCS.
Equal amounts of plasmid DNA (15μg per 10-cm dish) were transfected into COS-1 cells by lipofection using transfectam (Promega) as  recommended by the manufacturer.
48h after transfection, cells were rinsed 3 times with PBS followed by addition of ice-cold extraction buffer A (500μl per 10-cm dish) containing 20mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 5mM EDTA, 10mM EGTA, 37mM sodium cholate, 3mM benzamidine, 43mM β- mercaptoethanol and 100μM phenylmethylsulphonyl fluoride (PMSF).
Cells were scraped into extraction buffer, incubated for 1h at 4°C with gentle vortexing every 10 min, and then centrifuged at 18,000 g for 20min.
Supernatants were diluted  200-fold with buffer A containing no EDTA and 18.5mM sodium cholate and assayed for PLC activity as described, except that EGTA (3mM) was used as a chelating agent.
The final concentrations of sodium cholate and sodium deoxycholate were 1.3mM and 3.4mM, respectively.
The formation of inositol phosphates was determined as described.
SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting was done as described, except that immunoreactive proteins were visualized using the ECL western blotting detection system (Amersham).
Antisera reactive against PLC- β1 and PLC- β2 were prepared by coupling synthetic peptides representing the carboxy-terminal regions of PLC- β1 (NH 2 -GENPGKEFDTPL-COOH; single-letter amino-acid code) or PLC- β1 (NH 2 -QDPLIAKADAQESRL-COOH) to keyhole limpet haemocyanin and immunizing rabbits.
FIG. 2
a,
Effect of βγ t on inositol phosphate formation by extracts of COS-1 cells expressing PLC- β1 or PLC- β2.
The inositol phosphate formation was determined at 0.1μM free Ca 2+ and 0.9mM sodium deoxycholate and is given in per cent of the maximal activity determined at 10μM free Ca 2+ and 3.4mM sodium deoxycholate.
The values are derived from the results given in Table 1 and correspond to the means  s.e.m.().
b,
Effect of βγ t on inositol phosphate formation by extracts of COS-1 transfectants.
COS-1 cells were transfected with pMT2 (○), pMT2-PLC- β1 (fl),or pMT2-PLC- β2 (i).
Cell extracts (0.3μg protein per assay) were incubated for 40min with phospholipid vesicles containing PtdIns(4,5)P 2 at the concentrations of βγ t indicated at the abscissa.
The reaction mixture contained 0.1μM free Ca 2+ and 0.9mM sodium deoxycholate.
METHODS.
The purification of βγ t and the conditions used to assay the effect of βγ t on PLC activity have been described.
FIG. 3 Reversal of the βγ t -dependent stimulation of PLC- β2 by GDP-liganded α t .
COS-1 cells were transfected with pMT2-PLC- β2.
Aliquots of the cell extracts (0.3μg protein per assay) were incubated for 40min in the absence of βγ t (○) or in the presence of βγ t (2μM) and increasing concentrations of GDP-liganded α t (○) with phospholipid vesicles containing PtdIns(4,5)P 2 .
The reaction mixture contained 0.1μM free Ca 2+ and 0.9mM sodium deoxycholate.
METHODS.
The purification of α t and the conditions used to assay the effect of α t on βγ t -stimulated PLC activity have been described.
Direct measurement of potassium-promoted change in heat of adsorption of CO on 
N. Al-Sarraf, J. T. Stuckless & D. A. King
THE action of alkali metals and their oxides as promoters for many catalytic reactions has been known for nearly a century.
Alkali promotion of carbon monoxide reactivity, for example, forms part of the industrially important synthesis of hydrocarbons, and is thought to follow from a weakening of the internal C-O bond resulting from an enhanced binding interaction between the CO molecule and the catalyst.
Several spectroscopic techniques have been used to examine this effect for CO adsorption on single-crystal metal surfaces, but bond energy changes can only be inferred indirectly from these techniques.
Here we report direct measurements, using a recently designed single-crystal adsorption microcalorimeter, of the change in CO adsorption heat on a Ni  100  surface for a range of potassium precoverages.
We find that the effect of promotion is unexpectedly large, with the adsorption heat increasing from a clean-surface value of 124kJmol -1 to  p310kJmol -1 at high potassium precoverages.
We attribute this effect to a combination of stronger CO binding to the surface and increased ionization of the potassium adatoms.
The ultra-high-vacuum single-crystal adsorption microcalorimeter has three principal features.
(1)
Gas dosing is achieved using a pulsed molecular beam source, with 50-ms pulses, each containing  10 12 molecules, equivalent to  2% of a molecular monolayer.
The dosage and sticking coefficient, and hence the coverage increment, is measured for each pulse.
(2)
The Ni  100  single crystal, 6mm in diameter, is only  2,000  thick; it is mounted on a nickel ring with a 4-mm hole in its centre.
The heat capacity of the central 2-mm-diameter section intersected by the collimated molecular beam is only  1μJK -1 .
(3)
The temperature change in the crystal during adsorption of a gas pulse is measured remotely by focusing infrared radiation from the crystal back face onto a sensitive a.c. coupled detector.
Calibration is done in situ using a chopped laser beam to provide a known heat increment.
Measurements of CO adsorption on the bare nickel surface, for which the adsorption heat is well known, indicate that the calorimeter is accurate to within its precision limit of  5kJmol -1 .
Crystal cleanliness and crystallinity were checked by Auger electron spectroscopy and low energy electron diffraction, respectively.
Potassium was dosed onto the crystal using a getter source, and coverages were obtained by comparing the Auger peak ratios of K and Ni.
All experiments were done with the crystal at room temperature.
The results obtained fall into two categories, depending on the potassium precoverage.
For alkali adsorption on transition metals, the work function initially falls rapidly with increasing alkali metal coverage, then passes through a minimum, and finally increases to that of the alkali metal itself.
This behaviour is attributed to an initial charge transfer from the alkali adatom to the transition metal, which is then reversed at high coverages as the adlayer changes from cationic to covalent or metallic behaviour.
The two categories of CO adsorption heats are based on the K precoverage being higher or lower than that at the work function minimum.
Figure 1 shows the results obtained for the initially clean Ni substrate, and for low and high K precoverages.
When the K precoverage is 0.08 monolayers, the initial heat of adsorption is 190kJmol -1 , which is significantly higher than the clean surface value of 124kJmol -1 .
It remains constant up to a CO coverage of 0.05 monolayers before starting to fall, eventually returning to the clean surface value at a fractional coverage  CO =0.35.
It then falls again, stabilizing at a mean value of 70kJmol -1 , corresponding to reversible CO chemisorption, which occurs at room temperature once steady-state coverage is attained.
The CO adsorption heat at higher potassium coverages reveals very different behaviour, as is seen in Fig. 1 for  K =0.3 monolayers.
The initial heat of adsorption is considerably higher, at 250kJmol -1 , and as the CO coverage increases the adsorption heat increases further, reaching a maximum of 310kJmol -1 at a CO coverage of 0.16 monolayers.
Following this peak, the heat falls steadily to  CO 0.5 monolayers before levelling off as before.
Figure 2 summarizes the overall trend in both the initial and the maximum heats of CO adsorption for several potassium precoverages.
The increase of 66kJmol -1 in the initial CO heat of adsorption for low K coverages correlates well with the reported shift of the CO thermal desorption peak from  450K without K to  700K with pre-adsorbed K (ref.11).
It has, however, been suggested that a similar shift in desorption temperature, after alkali promotion of a Pt  111  surface, is due mainly to a decrease in the desorption frequency factor rather than to an increased activation energy.
Our results show directly that the heat of adsorption is significantly increased.
It should be noted that at low K coverages CO is known to bind preferentially to the promoted sites, so that the heat released at low CO coverages corresponds to adsorption at K-promoted sites, and at high CO coverages to adsorption onto Ni sites far removed from K. There is sufficient mobility to produce the most stable adlayer during the adsorption pulse.
For the high K coverage regime, our results show a very large increase in the heat of adsorption, to  300kJmol -1 , although the simultaneous desorption of K and CO still occurs at 700K (ref. 11).
With such large adsorption heats indicating a very strong interaction, it becomes an important consideration whether the C-O bond is sufficiently weakened to produce dissociative adsorption.
Spectroscopic evidence for similar surfaces indicates, however, that at temperatures below 400K isotopic mixing of CO does not occur, implying that CO is undissociated in the presence of K (ref. 13).
An explanation for the large adsorption heats which does not invoke CO dissociation is discussed below.
At low K coverages charge transfer to the transition metal leaves an ionic species on the surface, which can be theoretically mimicked by an external positive point charge.
CO molecules adsorbed in the vicinity of this charge will, to a first approximation, have their orbital binding energies rigidly downward-shifted, allowing increased electron transfer from the substrate into the lifetime-broadened CO 2  antibonding orbital.
The CO heat of adsorption is thus raised because of strengthened metal-CO bonding, although the C-O bond will, of course, be weakened.
We ascribe the increase in the adsorption heat of CO from 124 to 190kJmol -1 for low  K to this effect, a phenomenon of direct relevance to the reactivity of CO in catalytic processes.
For higher precoverages of K, the adatom bonding is switched to essentially covalent character, with a large decrease in the K adsorption energy as the contribution due to the electrostatic interaction of the point charge with the nickel substrate is lost.
For Na on Ni  100  this decrease was estimated, from experimental desorption rates, as  85kJmol -1 (ref.18).
We propose that adsorption of CO into this essentially covalently bonded K adlayer screens the K adatoms from each other and brings about their re-ionization, hence increasing the K-surface bond energy, as schematically shown in Fig. 3 a .
There will be a significant long-range electrostatic contribution as a charged K-CO lattice is formed (Fig. 3 b ).
This lattice, composed of the cations and anions in the adlayer and their effective image charges in the transition metal substrate, will have a Madelung energy associated with it.
For a K precoverage of 0.2 monolayers, the initial 2% dose of CO is adsorbed with a heat of adsorption of 310kJmol -1 (Fig. 2).
Even for this small CO coverage, mobility in the adlayer is sufficient to generate relatively large K + CO -islands within the 50-ms pulse, and we associate the heat released with the re-ionization of covalently bonded K adatoms and the associated electrostatic interaction terms.
For larger precoverages of K, however, the heat release is smaller when CO is initially dosed onto the surface, as shown in Fig. 1 for  K =0.3 monolayers, and rises with increasing CO coverage to the same maximum value of 310kJmol -1 .
At high K coverages there are relatively few unblocked sites on the surface, and this may reduce the mobility of adsorbed CO across the surface.
Initially, therefore, at relatively high  K it may be that small K + CO -K + islands are formed.
Only as these islands coalesce is the full Madelung energy involved, producing the observed increase in adsorption heat with coverage.
At high K coverages there are, therefore, two dominant contributions to the CO adsorption heat: the increased CO 2  population, which contributes, from our low  K data, a 70kJmol -1 increase; and ionization of K adatoms, contributing a further  125kJmol -1 when large islands are formed.
This second component, consisting of K re-ionization and Madelung terms, is important for understanding catalytic processes as it indicates that the local environment about the CO is ionic, even at high precoverages of K.    
FIG. 1 Calorimetric heats of adsorption, given as the negative value of the enthalpy change, as a function of CO coverage on Ni  100 .
The dashed line represents the heat of adsorption of CO on the clean surface; ○ shows the heat of adsorption at a low potassium coverage, K =0.08; and + shows the heat of adsorption at a high potassium coverage, K =0.3.
FIG. 2 Heat of adsorption results for CO adsorption as a function of increasing potassium coverage, K .
Solid lines (○) represent initial heats of adsorption; dashed lines () represent maximum values.
FIG. 3
a,
Schematic of the CO interaction as  K is increased, and of the related heat of adsorption q .
b,
Image charge ionic bilayer lattice formed at high  K .
Crystal structure at 2.8Å resolution of a soluble form of the cell adhesion molecule CD2
E. Yvonne Jones, Simon J. Davis, Alan F. Williams, Karl Harlos & David I. Stuart
The crystal structure of a soluble form of the T lymphocyte antigen CD2 provides the first complete view of the extracellular region of a cell adhesion molecule.
The topology of the molecule, which comprises two immunoglobulin-like domains, is the same as that of the first two domains of CD4 but the relative domain orientation is altered by a fairly flexible linker region.
The putative ligand-binding β- sheet forms a flat surface towards the top of the molecule.
Crystal contacts between these surfaces suggest a plausible model for the adhesive interaction.
THE four principal families of mammalian cell adhesion molecules are the integrins, the cadherins, the selectins and the immunoglobulin superfamily (IgSF).
These molecules are involved in low-affinity homophilic and/or heterophilic recognition, but little is known of the physical basis for these interactions.
The IgSF molecule CD2, whose expression is largely restricted to the T-lymphocyte lineage, plays a key part in mediating adhesion between human T lymphocytes and accessory or target cells (reviewed in ref.5).
Originally, the lymphocyte function associated LFA-3 (CD58) glycoprotein was identified as the CD2 ligand; these were the first two molecules shown to be involved in heterophilic adhesion and their interaction is likely to be a paradigm for adhesion interactions within the IgSF.
An additional ligand, CD59, the complement-inhibitory glycoprotein, has recently been identified.
Attempts to identify a murine homologue of LFA-3 led to the unexpected finding that mouse CD2 interacts with a different molecule, BCM1 (CD48)49 .
In rats the equivalent adhesion interaction is between MRC OX-45 antigen (rat BCM1) and CD2 (P.A. van der Merwe et al.,manuscript submitted).
An additional role for CD2, involving the cytoplasmic domain in the delivery of mitogenic signals, has been proposed, but recent experiments indicate a dependence on the T-cell antigen receptor (TCR) complex of T cells, with which CD2, at least transiently, physically interacts.
CD2, LFA-3 and BCM1 form a subgroup of the IgSF; the extracellular regions of these molecules are predicted to consist of two IgSF domains, the first of which lacks the canonical disulphide bond.
A low-resolution NMR structure has confirmed this prediction for rat CD2 domain 1 (ref. 16).
All of the LFA-3 binding reactivity resides in domain 1 of human CD2 (ref.17) and mapping by mutagenesis, when interpreted in the context of the NMR structure, indicates that the binding face consists of the β- sheet formed by strands GFCC'C  (ref.16).
The affinity of the monomeric interaction between CD2 and LFA-3 is  2x10 6 M (ref.19), somewhat higher than that for other cell-surface interactions.
The chromosomal organization of the genes encoding human CD2, LFA-3 and BCM1 is consistent with each gene having evolved by duplication from a common precursor, possibly one encoding a two-domain molecule involved in homophilic adhesion.
It has been postulated that the 2-fold rotational symmetry of this homotypic interaction is preserved in evolution for the heterotypic interaction between CD2 and LFA-3.
Thus, by analogy with the dimerization of antibody variable domains, the CD2/LFA-3 interaction is predicted to involve equivalent β- sheets packing with pseudo 2-fold rotational symmetry.
We report here the structure of the soluble, extracellular, region of rat CD2 (sCD2) determined at 2.8  resolution for two crystallographically independent copies of the molecule.
Crystals are held together by homophilic adhesion and the most striking such contact in the sCD2 crystals involves two molecules packed, putative ligand binding-face to binding-face, with 2-fold rotational symmetry.
Thus we also report a possible structural paradigm for IgSF adhesive interactions.
Structure determination
The production and crystallization of sCD2 (residues 1 to 177) is described in ref. 25. sCD2 has four potential N- linked glycosylation sites.
As glycosylation is generally detrimental to crystallization, sCD2 was expressed in a lectin-resistant mutant of the Chinese hamster ovary cell line, Lec3.2.8.1 (ref. 27), resulting in a secreted glycoprotein with oligosaccharides (predominantly Man 5 GlcNAc 2 ) that are amenable to deglycosylation by endoglycosidase H (ref.25).
After purification by immunoaffinity chromatography and gel filtration, the deglycosylated sCD2 readily crystallized.
The crystals belong to space group P4 1  2 1  2,with unit cell dimensions a=b=111.4, c=86.9  and diffract to Bragg spacings of 2.5  when exposed to synchrotron radiation.
Details of the structure determination to 2.8  resolution are given in Table 1.
The crystals contain two sCD2 molecules per asymmetric unit (60% crystal solvent content).
Multiple isomorphous replacement (MIR), phase improvement and extension by solvent flattening and, finally, a single round of 2-fold density averaging (D.I.S.
and J. Grimes, unpublished) yielded unambiguous electron density (Fig.1 a).
The resultant models for the two copies of sCD2 were refined in the program XPLOR.
Clearly there was a relative reorientation between the two domains in copies one and two (i.e. hinge-bending).
The domains were therefore separately restrained to obey the non-crystallographic symmetry during refinement.
The R factor for the current structure (residues 2 to 176) is 21.5% for all data to 2.8  (19.6% for F  3 )with a bulk solvent correction but no model for the ordered solvent or sugars (Fig.1 b).
A test refinement (coordinates not subsequently used), with non-crystallographic symmetry restraints switched off, indicates the accuracy of the atomic positions to be 0.3  (by analysis of the 81% of the molecule considered to be unperturbed by crystal packing forces; Table 1).
The quality of the electron density is sufficient to determine reliable residue positions throughout (B- factors are presented in Table 1) but before residue 5 the electron density clearly indicates two possible conformations for the N terminus, and at present only one has been modelled.
Molecular structure
The extracellular region of CD2, as predicted, consists of two antiparallel β- barrels with immunoglobulin folds.
So far the most comparable structure is that of the NH 2 -terminal two-domain fragment of CD4 (D1D2)(refs 31,32).
A structure-based sequence alignment is given in Fig.2.
In sCD2, as in CD4(D1D2), the domains  abut to give a rod-like molecule, which for sCD2 has approximate dimensions of 20x25x75 .
But in marked contrast to CD4(D1D2), there is a linker region (residues 99 to 103) between the two domains.
When considered in the context of the cell surface, the overall structural arrangement is likely to result in the domain 1 GFCC'C  sheet forming a highly accessible platform some 75  above the cell surface (Fig.3).
The structure naturally divides into four regions: two IgSF domains, the interdomain linker region, and an extended C-terminal tail.
Domain 1.
The crystal structure for sCD2 domain 1 is in close agreement with the polypeptide fold of the single domain in solution as determined by NMR spectroscopy (a detailed comparison will be reported elsewhere).
The topology is that of an immunoglobulin variable (V) domain with two β- sheets of strands conventionally labelled DEB and AGFCC'C  (Fig.3 a).
Superpositions with domain 1 of CD4 and the V  -domain of the Bence-Jones protein REI (ref.33) are shown in Fig. 4 a and b.
Reference may also be usefully made to the recently determined structure of a soluble form of CD8 (ref.34).
Despite the absence in CD2 of the usual disulphide, the positions of all the β -strands in the V domain framework are highly conserved.
However, of the loop regions only AB and EF have similar conformations in CD2, CD4 and REI.
Loop regions CC', C'C  and FG bound the functionally important GFCC'C  sheet.
As in CD4, the C'C  loop is longer than in the classic V domain, represented here by REI, but unlike CD4, the orientation maintains the flat surface of the sheet.
A similar C'C  loop conformation is observed in CD8 (ref.34).
The CC' and FG loops mediate dimerization in antibody V domains and CD8 (ref.34).
Both are shortened in CD4 (which does not dimerize) relative to the classic V domain, but in sCD2 the CC' loop is shortened and the FG loop is greatly lengthened. β- Bulges in the C' and G strands, which introduce a distinctive twist to these strands, are believed to be crucial to V domain dimerization.
Although the conserved immunoglobulin β- bulge sequence motifs are absent, a corresponding pair of β- bulges occurs in CD2 but these features are now positioned immediately after the CC' and FG β- turns (at Leu 38 and Arg 87 respectively).
Thus the characteristic twist is limited to the tips of these loop regions (Fig. 4b).
Linker region.
The participation of β- strand G in the domain 1 GFCC'C  β- sheet ends at Leu 98.
The main chain continues in an extended conformation held at the edge of the domain 2 β- sandwich by hydrogen bonds to strands from both β- sheets until kinked at proline 104 to commence the standard β- strand A of domain 2.
The overall effect is to loosen the tightly abutting domain junction seen in CD4(D1D2) by sliding domain 2 down by 4 residues with respect to domain 1, lengthening the molecule by some 15 .
The run of four buried apolar residues which distinguishes the G-to-A strand transition in CD4 is absent.
The interface is stabilized by some 400  2 of total buried surface area, much less than the 880  2 buried in the more intimate association of CD4(D1D2).
As in CD4(D1D2), domains 1 and 2 of sCD2 are related by a rotation of roughly 160° about the axis of the rod-like molecule (the vertical in Fig.3 b).
But as shown in Fig.3 b for the sCD2 and CD4(D1D2) structures superimposed with respect to their second domains, a tilt of some 45° from this rod axis is required to superimpose their first domains.
This reorientation eliminates the ‘notch’, a structural feature in CD4 that may mediate interaction with the class II major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecule.
Both CD2 and CD4 have very different relative domain orientations to those of immunoglobulins (Fig.3 c).
Slight changes in main-chain torsion angles for the linker residues in sCD2 can generate substantial ‘hinge-bending’ shifts in relative domain orientation.
A 7° hinge-bending effect is observed on comparison of the two independent copies and a similar or greater range of flexion may be expected in vivo.
This linker region establishes a second class for connections between unpaired immunoglobulin domains, the characteristics of which are shown in Fig.3 d.
Domain 2.
The topology of domain 2 has both V-like and C-like features.
It most closely resembles domain 2 in CD4 (Fig.4 c),with a β- barrel comprising sheets EBA and GFCC'.
However, although topologically equivalent, the core strands for CD2 and CD4 cannot be precisely superimposed (the r.m.s. deviation of 1.7  for 58 equivalenced C α atoms being twice as much as that between domain 1 cores; see Fig.4).
Indeed, a classic C-like domain (C L from Fab NEW) superimposes on CD2 equally well (r.m.s. deviation of 1.7, based on 59 equivalenced C α atoms) because the intersheet spacing is more closely matched.
The two disulphide bonds are as predicted.
The bond between Cys117 and Cys157 corresponds to the standard immunoglobulin disulphide, whereas cysteines 110 and 174, linking the ends of the A and G strands, tether the bulk of the molecule to the C-terminal stalk.
CD4 has neither of these bonds, which allows an expansion of the intersheet spacing compared to that of CD2 (Fig.4 c).
Most of the loops adopt similar conformations in CD2 and CD4, the exceptions being the AB and BC loops.
A superposition of CD2 domains 1 and 2 reveals a striking match on the GFCC' strands (r.m.s. deviation of 0.79  for 35 equivalenced C α atoms), emphasizing the partial V-like character of domain 2.
The CC' loops correspond precisely, but the FG loop in domain 2 lacks the β- bulge and accompanying twist seen in domain 1.
The surface of this β- sheet is predominantly composed of charged side chains in both domains, but in domain 2 these are almost exclusively lysine and arginine residues which results in a very pronounced patch of basic potential (Fig.3 e).
C-terminal stalk region.
Glutamic acid 170 forms the final main-chain hydrogen bond in the molecule.
The remaining 7 C-terminal residues of sCD2 adopt an extended conformation.
Valine 172 and the disulphide bridge residues 110 and 174 contribute to the hydrophobic core of domain 2, after which the path of the main chain is locked to continue on into solution by Pro 175.
The base of domain 2 is neutrally charged (Fig.3 e),thus there is no obvious suggestion of an interaction with the cell surface.
The predicted amino-acid sequence for CD2 (ref.38) suggests that a hydrophobic transmembrane helix starts after Pro 180.
If the polypeptide chain is assumed to continue in an extended conformation from Pro 175 to Pro 180, it will span some 16 .
As the polar headgroups of the lipid bilayer will account for some 6 to 10  of this distance, the overall stalk length, from the base of domain 2 to the cell surface, is likely to be less than 10 .
The implications of this limitation for the relationship between CD2 and the cell surface will be considered elsewhere.
Glycosylation
sCD2 contains four potential N- linked glycosylation sites (asparagines at positions 67, 77, 84 and 112), which after endoglycosidase H digestion retain single N- acetyl glucosamine  moieties .
Clear electron density for the residual sugar is present at each of these residues in at least one of the two independent copies of the molecule (Fig.1), indicating the orientations of the roots of the oligosaccharides on this glycoprotein (Fig.3 a).
The three domain-1 oligosaccharides lie on the perimeter of the β- sheet believed to be involved in the adhesive interaction, leaving the face of the sheet relatively free for protein-protein interactions.
The only site conserved between rat and human CD2 (Asn 112) places the oligosaccharide at the bottom of domain 2, where it might interact with the cell surface, opposite the highly basic surface of the GFCC' sheet.
Molecular association in the crystal
Of the contacts between sCD2 molecules in the crystal, the packing of molecules related by crystallographic 2-fold rotational symmetry is notable for the large area (650 to 690  2 buried per molecule) and intimacy of the association (Fig.5).
There are two crystallographically independent copies of the sCD2 molecule in the crystal and it is striking that this association occurs, in similar forms, for pairs of both copy 1 and copy 2 molecules (the two versions are compared in Fig.5 a).
The interaction is mediated by the domain 1 GFCC'C  sheet, specifically the CC' and FG loops, and as such shows some similarity to antibody V domain and CD8 dimerization, but there are also substantial differences.
The usual V domain dimerization is through a specialized ‘three-layer’ interaction involving side chains from the CC' and FG loop regions, primarily the C' and G strands.
This interaction depends on the extensive twist introduced in these strands by conserved β- bulges.
In sCD2 the equivalent β- bulges are positioned at the ends of the CC' and FG loops, thus limiting the extent of the twist, and these loop regions are no longer of similar lengths (Fig.4 b).
As a result, in sCD2 the association involves main-chain hydrogen bonding between the tips of the CC' and FG loops, augmented by direct interactions between the residues on the GFCC'C  sheets (residues are detailed in Fig.2).
Thus the angle between the respective β- sheets in CD2 differs radically (by some 60°) from the characteristic angle of about 50° observed for V domains.
In this respect, the CD2 interaction is more comparable to the standard orthogonal class of β- sheet packing.
Figure 5 a compares the two independent examples of this contact by a superposition based on the first domains of molecule 1 from each pair.
To superimpose the first domains of molecule 2 from each pair requires a further 18° rotation.
Subtle variations between the two examples of the molecular association are accommodated without any change in the principal structural features of the interaction.
The ability of V domain dimerization to exhibit a degree of structural fluidity has previously been noted.
Antibody epitopes and ligand binding sites
The epitopes for several monoclonal antibodies raised against human CD2 have been mapped to three discrete regions.
Region 1 and 2 antibodies block ligand interactions and the combination of certain region 1 or 2 antibodies with region 3 antibodies can activate T cells.
The equivalent regions in the rat sCD2 structure span residues 34–45, 77–90 and 130–131 respectively.
Region 1 (the CC' loop and C' strand) and region 2 (the FG loop) are centred on opposite corners of the GFCC'C  sheet in domain 1.
Region 3 maps to the CC' loop in domain 2 (Fig.3 a).
This loop forms part of the membrane proximal region of the molecule within the highly basic environment of the domain 2 GFCC' sheet.
T-cell activation or the presence of antibodies directed against the top of domain 1 is necessary to make this epitope available.
But the hypothesis that antibody binding to domain 1 could lead to conformational changes that increase the accessibility of region 3 has been argued to be very unlikely and the structure now reinforces this view.
Mutagenesis of human CD2 in these regions has highlighted residues likely to be involved in binding to its ligands LFA-3 (ref.18) and CD59 (ref.9).
The structurally equivalent residues in rat CD2 may be identified by sequence alignment and Fig.5 b indicates the sidechain positions for those that are exposed to solvent in the sCD2 structure.
The contact site for LFA-3 involves residues in both regions 1 and 2 (ref.18).
For CD59, only the subset of residues located in region 2, the F and G strands, is implicated.
The LFA-3 binding site spans the diagonally opposed CC' and FG loops and thus appears to be relatively symmetrically located on the GFCC'C  sheet.
The surface of this sheet, situated close to the top of the molecule, appears to be ideally positioned to facilitate ligand binding.
This surface is walled in on either side by the CC' and FG loops.
Between these walls the sheet is carpeted with a rich assortment of charged side chains, producing an electrostatically variegated but rather flat surface (Fig.3 e and f).
Four of the five residues implicated in LFA-3 interaction (residues 38, 41, 81 and 85) are also intimately involved in the 2-fold lattice contact described in the previous section.
This manner of association places the two C-terminal stalk regions some 140  apart (Fig.5 a),oriented so that their polypeptide chains can each continue into the membranes of separate cells.
Discussion
The relationship of the structure of sCD2 to its function may be illuminated by contrasting its structure with that of the NH 2 -terminal fragment of CD4(D1D2).
First, the element of orientational flexibility supplied by the interdomain linker region and the C-terminal stalk in sCD2 is likely to facilitate docking with molecules on opposing cell surfaces.
Crystallographic data compatible with flexibility in the full extracellular region of CD4 (comprising four IgSF domains) have been reported.
Second, sCD2 is markedly longer than CD4(D1D2), although it has fewer amino acids, so increasing the exposure of the putative ligand binding face (the domain-1 GFCC'C  sheet), an effect that is magnified by a third difference, the tilt of the outer domain to maintain this sheet roughly parallel to the cell surface.
Flexibility and the location of ligand-binding sites close to the top of adhesion molecules may be a general feature of their organization.
The adhesion function of IgSF members is believed to predate their role in antigen recognition.
An evolutionary pathway for dimerization has been proposed in which the interaction of V domains (through their GFCC'C  β- sheets) originated as a homophilic association having 2-fold rotational symmetry.
The presence of this type of homophilic interaction as the dominant form of molecular association in the sCD2 crystals lends support to the general hypothesis.
But the sCD2 association shows several key structural differences from the standard V-domain dimerization and so provides a possible paradigm for adhesion interactions.
The precise position of β- bulge conformations in the C' and G β- strands and the lengths of the CC' and FG loops, combined with the relative orientations of domains 1 and 2 as determined by the linker region, have crucial long-range effects on the geometry of dimerization, leading to a switch from a dimerization mode suitable for intermolecular adhesion to the intramolecular version seen in Fabs.
Confirmation of this adaptation of the V-domain interface in cell-adhesion interactions now awaits direct structural data for the ligand or the complex.
Crystallization and preparation of derivatives.
Crystals were grown at 4°C in microbridges by equilibration against reservoirs of 18% PEG 4000, 50mM Tris, pH8.0, starting from sitting drops composed of 4μl of protein at 17mgml in 25mM Tris, 140mM NaCl, pH7.4, and 2μl reservoir.
Tests of some 40 heavy-atom soak conditions at 4°C yielded five useful derivatives:(1) ethyl mercury phosphate (EMP): 5mM in 18% PEG 4000, 50mM Tris pH8.0 for 16h;(2) NaAuCl 4 ; 1mM in 18% PEG 4000, 25mM Tris, 140mM NaCl, pH7.4, for 5h;(3) K 2 HgI 4 : 10mM in 50mM KI, 18% PEG 4000, 25mM Tris, 140mM NaCl, pH7.4, for 18h;(4) 1,4-diacetoxymercuri-2,3-dimethoxybutane (Baker's dimercurial); 20mM (saturated) in 18% PEG 4000, 50mM Tris, pH8.0, for 68h;(5) Pb (OOCCH 3 )2 ; 10mM (saturated) in 18% PEG 4000, 50mM Tris, pH8.0, for 66h.
Diffraction data.
Crystals with typical dimensions of 0.08x0.08x0.3mm gave relatively weak diffraction.
IP(SRS) native data were collected using a Mar-research imaging plate (IP) system (J. Hendrix and A. Lentfer) on station 9.5 (wavelength 0.90A) at the SERC Synchrotron Radiation Source (SRS), Daresbury.
IP(lab) native and all derivative data were measured with CuK α X-rays generated by a Rigaku RU200 rotating anode with graphite monochromator and detected on an IP system.
IP data were processed using the MOSFLM program package (A. Leslie); native and derivative data were scaled using programs 3DSCALE and DIFFER.
Additional data collected inhouse on a Siemens/Xentronics area detector and at the SRS on an Enraf-Nonius FAST area detector (detailed in ref.25) were merged with the IP SRS data for some of the stages of the structure determination but refinement and the current model are based solely on the IP SRS data.
(MFID, mean fractional isomorphous difference).
MIR analysis.
The EMP derivative was solved by the automatic Patterson search program GROPAT; the others by difference Fourier syntheses and inspection of difference Patterson maps.
The EMP, NaAuCl 4 and Baker's dimercurial derivatives have two major sites in common which conform to the non-crystallographic symmetry (binding at His 12).
Heavy-atom parameters were refined and MIR phases calculated using the programs REFINE and PHASE (P. Shaw, unpublished).
(R c , Cullis R factor for centric reflections; phasing power, mean value of the heavy-atom structure factor amplitudes divided by the residual lack-of-closure error.)
Solvent flattening and phase extension.
MIR phases based on all 5 derivatives were refined at 4.5Å resolution in the Wang program suite by 7 cycles of solvent flattening following each of 3 envelope determinations (60% solvent).
In an iterative procedure, commencing at 4.6Å resolution, MIR (NaAuCl 4 and Pb (OOCCH 3 )2 ) and calculated phases were included to 4.0Å and 3.0Å resolution respectively.
This phase extension was achieved in continuous steps of 0.0022Å, with envelope redeterminations in every 7th cycle.
Fourteen cycles of solvent flattening with 60% solvent, followed by 21 with 55%, yielded the final 3Å map, and a further 21 cycles with 50% solvent, yielded a definitive 4Å map.
The 3Å map was noisier but showed improved definition of side-chain electron density.
The non-crystallographic symmetry was established from the electron density and heavy atom sites.
A single round of real space density-averaging using the GAP program suite (DIS and J. Grimes) improved main-chain connectivity in both 4Å and 3Å maps.
(FM, mean figure of merit; Wang R factor, the crystallographic R factor between observed structure factor amplitudes and those calculated from the solvent flattened map; phase change, differences between MIR phases and phases from the solvent flattened map; asterisk, not converged.)
Model building and refinement.
The polypeptide chain was fitted to unambiguous electron density (Fig.1 a)for one copy of the molecule using the program FRODO with reference to four maps: solvent-flattened and density-averaged at 4Å and 3Å resolution.
The NMR solution structure for domain 1 (ref.16) could be placed immediately in the electron density to give a very good fit.
This was optimized by simple rigid-body manipulations of some of the loop regions.
The crystal structure for CD4 domain 2 (refs 31, 32), automatically modified (program MUTATE, R. Esnouf) to accord with the predicted CD2/CD4 sequence alignment, provided a putative model for sCD2 domain 2; major rebuilding was required to match this to the electron density.
The atomic coordinates for the second copy of sCD2 were generated by non-crystallographic symmetry.
The two models were initially refined at 3.0Å, using simulated annealing, in the program XPLOR, and the extent of the non-crystallographic symmetry established.
Five rounds of model rebuilding and refinement, during which the resolution was extended to 2.8Å, resulted in the current models which comprise a total of 2,796 non-hydrogen atoms.
All 13,432 reflections measured to spacings of 2.8Å are included in the refinement.
The stereochemistry is typified by an r.m.s. bond deviation from ideality of 0.015Å and B factors restrained such that the r.m.s. discrepancy in values between bonded atoms is 4.8Å.
Mean B factors of 29.5Å and 37.1Å for domain 1 in copies 1 and 2 contrast with values of 23.5Å and 23.3Å for domain 2.
The thermal parameters for main-chain atoms exceed 50Å for residues 2–4 and 175–176 in both copies and for residues 19–26, 43–48 and 84 in copy 2.
For these models, the R factor for all data to 2.8Å is 21.5% (24.3% if tighter B factor restraints, typified by 1.0Å r.m.s. discrepancy between all bonded atoms, are applied).
All non-glycine ,angles lie in allowed regions of the Ramachandran plot.
FIG. 1 Portions of electron density maps for residues 63–67 of sCD2 copy 1.
a,
4Å solvent-flattened MIR map.
b,
2 F map (model phases) after refinement at 2.8Å resolution.
Density (indicated by an X in b)is clearly visible at N67 for an N- linked acetyl glucosamine which was not included in the phasing model.
Similar quality density is present at N112 in both copies and, by virtue of stabilizing lattice contacts, at N84 in copy 1.
Of the expected N- linked sites, only N84 in copy 2, in a region of high B factors, lacks any trace of sugar density.
FIG. 2 Sequence alignment of rat CD2 and human CD4.
The amino-acid sequences were aligned on the basis of structural superpositions.
Black dots indicate each tenth residue and stars every fiftieth residue of the rat CD2 sequence.
The principal differences from previous alignments occur at β- strand A of domain 2.
Residues judged to be structurally equivalent in terms of α- carbon position and side-chain direction in the superimposed structures are stippled.
Positions of the β- strands in sCD2 (based on program DSSP) are indicated and solvent inaccessible residues (less than 20Å of exposed surface) are indicated by triangles.
Residues mediating the 2-fold lattice contact are indicated by the symbol 
FIG. 3 The structure of sCD2.
The orientation of sCD2 is chosen relative to a cell surface assumed to lie at the bottom of the illustration in the plane normal to the vertical.
a,
Schematic diagram of the polypeptide fold (program RIBBON).
Several of the loops in domain 1 are flexible; r.m.s. deviations between main-chain atoms for the two copies of sCD2 exceed 1.0Å for residues 20–26, 34–37, 44–47, 70–71 and 85–86.
Bifurcation of the electron density at Gly4 indicates a degree of structural fluidity in the first 4 residues of the polypeptide chain.
The alternative conformation extends away from the molecule, stabilized by crystal contacts.
The disulphide bonds are indicated in green (1) Cys 117 and 157;(2) Cys 110 and 174.
Asparagine residues providing N- linked oligosaccharide sites are indicated in red.
N67 lies on the EF loop at the bottom of domain 1, N77 in strand F is orientated towards the bottom of the F and G strands.
N84 at the tip of the FG loop points back, above the BC loop.
N112 lies on the AB loop at the base of domain 2.
b,
α- Carbon trace superpositions for CD2 and CD4.
Two orthogonal views are shown.
The molecules are matched on CD2 domain 2.
CD2, green; CD4, red.
c,
α- Carbon trace superpositions for CD2, CD4 and Fab NEW light chain.
The molecules are matched on CD2 domain 2.
Note the Fab domain 1 is flipped over by some 90° with respect to CD2 domain 1.
CD2, green; CD4, red and NEW, blue.
d,
Linker region.
Residues involved in hydrophobic and van der Waals interactions at the domain interface are indicated in green and include W7, A9, L10, E99, M100, R162 and V163, with R70 forming a salt bridge to E99.
This type of link may be characterized by the stretch of apolar residues in the N-terminal β- strand A and a hydrogen bond network in domain 2 mediated by Ser-X-Pro at the start of β- strand A combined with Asn 161 and Ser 164 at the end of β- strand F and start of G (residues in red).
e,
Solid sphere representation (van der Waals surface).
The colour coding accords with the electrostatic potential computed with DELPHI (in collaboration with C. Edge) at neutral pH; blue represents positive potential, red negative, and white neutral.
The orientation is almost orthogonal to that in a.
The surface of the domain 1 GFCC'C  sheet is indicated by ‘A’ and the domain 2 GFCC' sheet by ‘B’.
f,
Domain GFCC'C  sheet.
Colour coding as in e.
The view is along the normal to the β- sheet surface as indicated by the line in e.
FIG. 4 Stereodiagrams of pairwise α- carbon backbone superpositions.
a,
CD2 domain 1 (thick lines; residues 2–98) and CD4 domain 1 (residues 1–98) based on 70 equivalenced C α atoms fitted with 0.83Å r.m.s. deviation.
b,
CD2 domain 1 (thick lines) and REI (residues 1–114) based on 60 equivalenced C α atoms fitted with 0.82Å r.m.s. deviation.
c,
CD2 domain 2 (thick lines; residues 99–176) and CD4 domain 2 (residues 99–176) based on 58 equivalenced C α atoms fitted with 1.69A r.m.s. deviation.
(Superpositions were done using the program SHP.)
FIG. 5 Homophilic interaction mode observed in crystal.
a,
α- Carbon trace superposition of the two versions of this interaction.
Copy 1 molecules are coloured green and blue, copy 2 molecules red.
Superposition is on domain 1 of the blue molecule.
The hinge-bending variation between the two copies may also be noted.
b,
Close-up of the molecular association at the crystallographic 2-fold axis.
Residues at positions implicated in human CD2/LFA-3 and CD2/CD59 binding are indicated and those also involved in the homophilic interaction are colour-coded red.
Possibility of an Arctic ozone hole in a doubled-CO 2 climate
John Austin, Neal Butchart & Keith P. Shine
Increased atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations are expected to cause cooling of the lower stratosphere.
This could enhance the formation of polar stratospheric clouds, which convert potential ozone-depleting species to their active forms.
In an idealized three-dimensional numerical simulation of the Northern Hemisphere winter stratosphere, doubling the CO 2 concentration leads to the formation of an Arctic ozone hole comparable to that observed over Antarctica, with nearly 100% local depletion of lower-stratospheric ozone.
THE springtime reduction of ozone over Antarctica is now well established observationally and the processes involved are quantitatively understood theoretically.
Whether similar processes could also operate over the Arctic to produce a massive reduction in the ozone abundance remains uncertain.
With the continued concern about the ozone layer, however, the chemical composition of the Arctic lower stratosphere has been observed extensively and the theoretical behaviour of polar ozone has been analysed in numerical models.
Measurements made during the 1989 Airborne Arctic Stratospheric Expedition (AASE) showed large abundances of ClO in the lower stratosphere together with low values of NO, indicating that the Arctic polar vortex was extensively perturbed by heterogeneous chemistry and was ‘primed for ozone destruction’.
Indeed, local ozone depletion rates in the lower stratosphere inferred from the AASE observations were in excess of 1% per day, approaching the values calculated for extended periods in the Antarctic.
Similarly, observations of ozone during the winter and early spring provided circumstantial evidence for local depletion of up to 30% in the lower stratosphere, which would imply total column changes of up to 15%.
This is consistent with satellite observations in high latitudes, although it is considerably smaller than observed over Antarctica.
The conclusions of a more comprehensive (albeit idealized) three-dimensional modelling study provide a different picture and suggest that massive ozone destruction as seen over Antarctica is unlikely to occur over the Arctic with current conditions.
Although rapid ozone depletion does occur locally in the model, consistent with observations, the downward transport associated with the Northern Hemisphere meteorological conditions significantly limits the ozone depletion on a seasonal timescale.
Furthermore, this downward transport is likely to limit Arctic ozone destruction despite the increases in stratospheric chlorine amounts anticipated from estimates of chlorofluorocarbon release.
Consequently, it seems that the appearance of an Arctic ozone hole would require a considerable change in the stratospheric circulation.
Increases in CO 2 anticipated over the next 50 years are expected to produce such a change by cooling the lower stratosphere.
This is likely to increase the occurrences of polar stratospheric clouds (PSCs) which are an essential component for springtime polar ozone destruction.
Moreover, the reductions in ozone itself could produce some positive feedback by further reducing the radiative heating and hence the temperature of the lower stratosphere.
Here we analyse the effects of increases in CO 2 and radiative feedbacks on the evolution of polar ozone in a three-dimensional model.
With current concentrations of CO 2 the model provided an idealized simulation of the Northern Hemisphere winter from mid-December through to April with a relatively undisturbed circulation in January and February followed by a late stratospheric warming.
This is typical of those years in which prolonged and more extensive PSC formation would be most likely, and the column ozone was reduced by  40 Dobson Units (DU) where PSCs formed.
When the concentration of CO 2 was doubled, the area of depleted ozone increased, but otherwise there was little change in the ozone behaviour, except when the effects of ozone radiative feedbacks were included in the model.
In this situation the circulation was altered so that a cold polar vortex remained until the end of the simulation, thereby maintaining the presence of PSCs for a much longer period.
This resulted in a substantial ozone change, with the column ozone reduced over a small area in mid-April to under 200DU, approaching the low values observed in recent years over Antarctica.
Numerical experiments
We use a version of the numerical model developed in the UK Meteorological Office to describe the meteorology and photochemistry of the stratosphere and lower mesosphere.
We have improved the model by including bromine chemistry and refined the treatment of PSCs to allow for the sedimentation and evaporation as described in section 5 of ref. 9.
Also, a detailed treatment of radiative heating and cooling takes account of the concentration of CO 2 and the distribution of ozone.
Both climatological and model-determined ozone fields were used.
The PSC parametrization is temperature-dependent and therefore is valid for both current and doubled CO 2 situations.
With such complexity 21 minutes of Cray-YMP time are required per model day, and this restricted the number and length of simulations that could be done.
Initial conditions for the chemical constituents were taken from two-dimensional model results and adjusted to be consistent with recent observations.
Initial ozone concentrations were taken from a mid-December climatology.
For consistency, the same ozone field was used in the radiative calculation but updated during the course of the simulations using either climatological or model-calculated values.
The amount of total inorganic bromine was taken to be a linear function of the amount of total inorganic chlorine constrained by high-latitude measurements.
All the simulations used the same zonally symmetric chemical initial conditions.
The meteorological behaviour of the Northern Hemisphere winter was simulated by prescribing at the model lower boundary (316mbar) a perturbation geopotential height field.
The perturbation, although qualitatively consistent with climatological wave amplitudes, was chosen to enable the model to simulate a Northern Hemisphere winter in which the polar stratosphere remained relatively cold throughout January and most of February with a late stratospheric warming.
The perturbation had a maximum amplitude at 60°N and decreased to zero at 82.5°N and 27.5°N.
Only the first two zonal harmonics were included.
The amplitudes were initially zero and increased asymptotically to 160m and 130m at 60°N with an e-folding timescale of 3 days.
All the simulations covered the 130-day period from 15 December.
For current levels of CO 2 (330p.p.m.v.), the initial temperature fields were obtained from a 10-year zonally-averaged December climatology derived from data retrieved from the Tiros-N series of Stratospheric Sounding Units.
For doubled CO 2 the model was first integrated for perpetual 15 December conditions in zonally symmetric form without chemistry.
After about 90 days there was a steady systematic temperature difference between two integrations with 330 p.p.m.v. and 660 p.p.m.v. of CO 2 , similar to that predicted in climate change studies.
This was then used to modify the December climatology to approximate a doubled CO 2 climatology.
Initial wind fields were derived from the temperature fields using the hydrostatic approximation and gradient wind balance.
The temperature changes for doubled CO 2 would be different if, instead, a mixture of increased greenhouse gas concentrations (CO 2 , CH 4 , N 2 O, CFCs) was considered.
Calculations with the University of Reading's Fixed Dynamical Heating Model indicate that temperature reductions in the wintertime polar lower stratosphere are reduced by about one-third if changes in these gases are included in a simulation from 1765 to 1990, instead of the ‘effective CO 2 ’ for the same period.
Changes in greenhouse gases and in the stratospheric circulation itself will also affect the tropospheric circulation.
Nevertheless, because the interannual variations in the Northern Hemisphere planetary wave amplitudes are considerably larger than the expected climatic variability, the chosen tropospheric forcing should remain realistic over the range of climate scenarios considered here.
The same tropospheric forcing was therefore applied at the model lower boundary in all the simulations.
Zonal mean temperature evolution
Figure 1 shows the evolution of the zonal mean temperature in the lower stratosphere (56mbar) for four simulations.
With current CO 2 and with radiative heating rates calculated using climatological ozone, high-latitude mean temperatures remained low until the occurrence of a stratospheric warming in late February (Fig. 1 a).
This behaviour is similar to the observed evolution of the mean temperature in the lower stratosphere during 1984 and 1989.
When the model-calculated ozone was used instead of the climatological values (Fig. 1b)there was little change.
Similarly, there was little difference in the overall behaviour when CO 2 was doubled, with climatological ozone (Fig. 1 c)but, as might be expected, the temperatures were about 3K lower.
Finally, with both doubled CO 2 and fully interactive ozone (Fig. 1 d)there was a marked change in the evolution and a stratospheric warming no longer occurred.
Instead mean temperatures in polar latitudes remained under 190K throughout March, low enough for the formation of PSCs at this level.
This is lower than the daily minimum temperature observed in the polar vortex in March for the years 1964–89 (ref. 28).
The additional diabatic cooling occurred predominantly through a decrease in solar absorption by ozone.
Present-day Arctic ozone depletion
Figure 2 a shows where chemical processes have reduced ozone by more than 10% in the simulation with current CO 2 but without radiatively interactive ozone.
By 25 March (100 days into the simulation) ozone has been reduced in two main regions.
In the western hemisphere, there is a broad region where chemical destruction exceeds 15% which can be identified with air advected from high latitudes.
In the eastern hemisphere, local ozone destruction has exceeded 30% and can be identified with air advected from low latitudes.
A repeat of the simulation but without the heterogeneous reactions confirmed that the western hemisphere depletion was almost entirely due to heterogeneous processes whereas the change in the eastern hemisphere was due to homogeneous chemistry.
Figure 2 b shows the differences in total ozone between the two simulations on 25 March.
Because there is no ozone radiative feedback in either simulation, the dynamical evolutions are identical, and therefore differences are due entirely to the changes in chemistry.
The figure shows a maximum decrease of just over 40DU at about 65°N.
Similar behaviour was also obtained with fully interactive ozone, but because of the radiative coupling of the ozone field to the dynamical evolution it was not possible to identify unambiguously the contributions of heterogeneous and homogeneous chemistry.
Nonetheless, the model results suggest that under current conditions heterogeneous processes involving PSCs reduce total ozone in the high-latitude Northern Hemisphere by about 40DU and give rise to a local loss of over 20%.
These results are broadly consistent with observed ozone changes.
PSCs and polar ozone chemistry
Figure 3 a shows the fractional coverage of PSCs polewards of 25°N at 56mbar for current CO 2 with both the noninteractive (run 1) and interactive (run 2) ozone, and for the same simulations with doubled CO 2 (runs 3 and 4).
PSCs were initially absent from all the simulations but began to form first with doubled CO 2 just before day 20 (4 January) and about 10 days later with current CO 2 For three of the simulations the area of PSCs reached a maximum at about day 50 (3 February) before reducing rapidly to zero by early March, corresponding to the rapid increase in temperatures in Fig. 1.
For the remaining simulation with doubled CO 2 and radiatively interactive ozone the PSCs existed well into April.
PSCs affect ozone by perturbing the nitrogen and chlorine species.
Figure 3 b and c shows for the two simulations with radiatively interactive ozone, the evolution of ozone, total odd nitrogen N y  and ClO at 56mbar at the position of the temperature minimum which lies within the PSC region.
With 330p.p.m.v. of CO 2 (Fig. 3 b),ozone gradually increased at 56mbar because of downward transport, but a substantial drop in N y  occurred shortly after day 40 (24 January).
The N y  recovered soon after day 60 (13 February) returning roughly to its initial value.
The low N y  or denitrification occurred during the presence of PSCs but the existence of PSCs did not automatically result in denitrification because the temperatures were not always low enough (Fig. 3 a and b).
The concentrations of ClO remained extremely low during these periods because air at the temperature minimum was in darkness at the model output time (00:00).
With doubled CO 2 (Fig. 3 c)denitrification again occurred but concentrations of N y  lower than about 1p.p.b.v. were maintained until the last 10 days of the simulation when downward transport restored the higher values.
In fact at the end of March in this simulation there was denitrification at all levels from 75 to 20mbar, similar to that observed over Antarctica.
From about day 80 (5 March) ClO increased to over 0.7p.p.b.v. in Fig. 3 c,corresponding to over 1p.p.b.v. at local noon.
By this time solar illumination was sufficient even in high latitudes to drive the same catalytic ozone destruction cycle involving the ClO dimer that is responsible for the Antarctic ozone hole.
As a result essentially all the ozone had been destroyed at 56mbar at this location.
Reduction of the ozone column
Figure 3 d shows the evolution of the average ozone column polewards of 75°N for the two simulations with interactive ozone (runs 2 and 4).
The other two simulations were barely distinguishable from run 2 where there is a gradual increase from the initial value of 370DU to about 500DU on day 80.
Thereafter, the mean ozone remained broadly constant.
In contrast, with doubled CO 2 and fully interactive ozone (run 4) the mean column amount decreased steadily after day 80 and by the end of the simulation was  150DU lower than in the other simulations.
Although PSCs were present early in all the simulations (Fig. 3a),in three of these they had disappeared before having a significant effect on the ozone amounts.
In the final simulation however, the continued presence of PSCs resulted in elevated levels of ClO (Fig. 3 c)and substantial ozone destruction.
Figure 3 e shows the evolution of the minimum ozone column polewards of 55°N.
Again, the behaviour in three of the simulations is very similar (only run 2 is shown) whereas with doubled CO 2 and fully interactive ozone (run 4) an ozone minimum of under 200DU occurred in mid-April.
Although not as low as the extreme values observed in some Antarctic ozone holes, it is typical of the minimum which appeared in the middle 1980s.
Maps of the column ozone amounts on day 120 (14 April) of each simulation are presented in Fig. 4.
Again the total ozone amounts shown in Fig. 4 a-c are very similar with maxima near 70°N varying between 526 and 541DU.
In these three figures there are no clearly defined minima in high latitudes, but the lowest values polewards of 55°N are very similar and vary between 307 and 352DU.
These low values are due mostly to horizontal transport of lower ozone amounts from mid-latitudes rather than chemical destruction.
In contrast with doubled CO 2 and fully interactive ozone (Fig. 4d),there is a clearly defined minimum in high latitudes whilst the maximum ozone amount is about 10% lower than in the other simulations.
The reduction in the mid-latitude ozone maximum has also been noted for the Antarctic and the overall figure is reminiscent of the Southern Hemisphere spring total ozone distribution, albeit with an ozone hole of smaller total area.
Prospects and uncertainties
Increased concern over the atmospheric ozone layer followed from the discovery of massive springtime reductions in ozone over Antarctica.
The effects of these depletions on the global ozone budget and the possibility of similar massive ozone reductions occurring over the Arctic are of prime interest.
Although idealized, our three-dimensional model results provide direct evidence of a possible future Arctic ozone hole, but this will require current levels of chlorine combined with a doubling in the concentration of CO 2 to 660p.p.m.v.
With 330p.p.m.v. of CO 2 , our model results confirm earlier findings that an Arctic ozone hole is unlikely at present.
From our necessarily limited number of simulations, it was not possible to establish the threshold concentration of CO 2 at which the probability of an ozone hole increases.
During the next few decades chlorine is expected to increase then decrease, while CO 2 is expected to increase continuously.
It is therefore likely that a combination of conditions will occur during the next 50 years which will give rise to an Arctic ozone hole unless both CO 2 and chlorine emissions are curbed.
In the model the Arctic ozone hole appeared as a direct result of the changes in circulation induced by both doubling the amount of CO 2 and properly representing the radiative feedbacks of the evolving ozone distribution.
Neither change was by itself sufficient to lead to the formation of an ozone hole.
Also, because of the interannual variability of the stratosphere, it is not possible to determine accurately from the results of this study the frequency of occurrence of Arctic ozone holes.
Recent calculations with doubled CO 2 using a low-resolution general circulation model failed to produce an Arctic ozone hole partly, it appears, because the modelled January zonal mean temperatures in the Arctic lower stratosphere with current CO 2 were much higher than climatology.
In contrast, our simulations were designed for cold winters and indeed the zonal mean temperatures in the lower stratosphere for two of the past 10 years (1984, 1989) were similar to the 330-p.p.m.v. results presented here.
Therefore it might be expected that up to 20% of winters will produce Arctic ozone holes for doubled CO 2 conditions.
For the remaining 80% of winters, it is unlikely that doubling of CO 2 will suppress the occurrence of a stratospheric warming sufficiently to produce an Arctic ozone hole, although even in these conditions ozone depletion could be enhanced.
Finally, there are other potentially important ways in which the polar ozone destruction mechanism may be perturbed in future but which have not been considered here.
Changes in the tropospheric circulation will affect planetary wave propagation and hence the temperature variability of the lower stratosphere.
Changes in stratospheric water vapour due to changes in methane and stratosphere-troposphere exchange could affect both the radiative budget and the temperature of PSC formation.
A long-term decrease in ozone might systematically affect stratospheric temperatures so that the beginning of winter could be colder than in our simulations.
Nevertheless, the occurrence of an Arctic ozone hole directly as a result of increased CO 2 could be one of the more serious consequences of climate change.
Results presented here together with observations of lower stratospheric temperatures suggest that the interannual variability of ozone depletion in the Northern Hemisphere spring will increase considerably in the future and is likely to be determined largely by the meteorological behaviour of the upper troposphere.
Therefore, in considering the ramifications of climate change, it will be important to predict details of the upper air circulation as well as mean surface parameters.
FIG. 1 Zonal mean temperature at 56mbar for the model simulations in which the radiative heating and cooling were calculated using
a,
present-day levels of CO 2 and climatological ozone concentrations;
b,
present-day levels of CO 2 but with model-calculated ozone concentrations;
c,
doubled CO 2 with climatological ozone concentrations; and
d,
doubled CO 2 and model-determined ozone concentrations.
Light shading indicates where temperatures are below 195K and dark shading where temperatures are below 190K.
FIG. 2
a,
Percentage change in ozone on 25 March at 56mbar resulting solely from chemical processes acting from the start of the simulation in which the radiative heating and cooling were calculated using present-day levels of CO 2 and climatological ozone concentrations.
Contours are shown only where the chemistry has depleted ozone by more than 10%.
Values greater than 20% are lightly shaded and those greater than 30% more heavily shaded.
b,
Change in the total ozone (Dobson Units) due to heterogeneous processes for the period 15 December to 25 March from the simulation in which the radiative heating and cooling were calculated using present-day levels of CO 2 and climatological ozone concentrations.
FIG. 3
a,
Percentage of the model domain north of 25°N covered by polar stratospheric clouds at 56mbar for the simulations in which the radiative heating and cooling were calculated using present-day levels of CO 2 and climatological ozone concentrations (run 1), present-day levels of CO 2 but with model-calculated ozone concentrations (run 2), doubled CO 2 with climatological ozone concentrations (run 3), and doubled CO 2 and model determined ozone concentrations (run 4).
b,
Concentrations of O 3 , N y and ClO at 00:00GMT and 56mbar at the position of the local temperature minimum, for run 2.
c,
As Fig. 3 b but for run 4.
In b and c,the local times of each point were within a few hours of local noon and so the ClO values may be taken as qualitatively representative of the day maximum, which in run 4 reached 1.1p.p.b.v. at this level.
d,
Average ozone column (Dobson Units) polewards of 75°N, and
e,
minimum ozone column (Dobson Units) polewards of 55°N for runs 2 and 4.
FIG. 4 Total ozone (Dobson Units, including an estimated tropospheric component) on 14 April for the corresponding model simulations a-d shown in Fig. 1.
Shading denotes where the ozone column is under 240DU.
Because of the idealized nature of the numerical experiments the longitudinal orientation in these maps is arbitrary and is merely determined by the specified phases of the planetary waves prescribed at the model lower boundary (similarly for Fig. 2).
The coastline shown on the colour picture (front cover) should therefore only be used as a guide to the size of the ozone hole and not its longitudinal position.
Solar cycle length, greenhouse forcing and global climate
P. M. Kelly & T. M. L. Wigley
THE recent rise in global-mean surface air temperature is widely thought to be the result of increasing atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases, but there are discrepancies between the predicted response of the atmosphere to this radiative forcing and the observed temperature changes.
Solar irradiance fluctuations have been proposed as a possible explanation for these discrepancies, and various solar properties (for example, radius, smoothed sunspot number or cycle length) have been suggested as proxies for solar irradiance variations in the absence of direct data.
Here we model the effects of a combination of greenhouse and solar-cycle-length forcing and compare the results with observed temperatures.
We find that this forcing combination can explain many features of the temperature record, although the results must be interpreted cautiously; even with optimized solar forcing, most of the recent warming trend is explained by greenhouse forcing.
We use an upwelling-diffusion energy-balance climate model to simulate the effects of greenhouse and solar forcing over the period 1765 to 1985.
In a series of analyses, we vary the climate sensitivity and a scaling factor linking changes in solar cycle length to radiative forcing, and determine the best fit between annual modelled and observed global-mean (land-plus-marine) temperature by maximizing the explained variance over the period 1861–1985 (following ref. 11).
We use two records of greenhouse forcing and allied effects.
The first, ‘history 1’, is taken from ref. 12.
The second, ‘history 2’, has been derived by Wigley and Raper (their ‘middle’ aerosol forcing case) on the basis of a recent re-evaluation of the forcing associated with,inter alia,ozone depletion and sulphur dioxide emissions.
The climate sensitivity is specified by the equilibrium global-mean warming for a change in forcing (of any origin) equivalent to a doubling of the CO 2 concentration, T 2x ,and is allowed to vary between 0.5 and 5.5°C.
This exceeds the range of uncertainty associated with cloud feedback and other processes, 1.5 to 4.5°C, based on general circulation model calculations.
We assume a simple linear relationship between irradiance and cycle length, consistent with ref. 8.
The solar forcing term is defined by  Q s = β  L,where  Q s is the solar forcing change at the top of the troposphere, L refers to the series of cycle-length departures from the 1765–1985 mean and β is a solar forcing scaling factor (Wm -2 yr -1 ).
β is varied between -1.0 and +0.5 which implies a range of -3 to +2Wm -2 for  Q s (-1.3 to +0.8% irradiance change).
We make use of two cycle length records, that presented by Friis-Christensen and Lassen, FCL, and our own estimate, KW (Fig. 1).
Considerable margins of uncertainty are associated with the best-fit climate sensitivities identified in an analysis of this type.
First and foremost, we are intentionally considering a limited subset of the potential causes of recent longer-term climate change.
Other mechanisms must have played a part and their inclusion could alter the best-fit climate sensitivities significantly and lead to improved values for the explained variance.
(Some mechanisms, such as internal climate variability, provide an alternative explanation for the discrepancies between the modelled response to greenhouse forcing and observed trends.)
Second, uncertainties exist in the data records used in the analysis and aspects of model formulation, although these are well documented.
These problems are unlikely to affect the relative levels of the greenhouse and solar contributions, but they could well influence their absolute levels.
We consider first greenhouse forcing alone (Table 1).
For history 1, the best fit occurs when , with 50.9% of the variance in the observed temperature record accounted for.
For history 2, the best fit occurs at a higher climate sensitivity, as the global forcing is not as great.
This simulation explains 55.7% of the temperature variance.
These simulations capture the magnitude of the observed long-term trend in a realistic fashion, but the observed and simulated series differ noticeably on the decade-to-decade timescale (Fig. 2a and b).
We now combine greenhouse and solar forcing to determine whether a better fit between modelled and observed temperature can be obtained by including the solar component.
For history 1 and the KW solar record, the best fit occurs at  and β=-0.58; 
With history 2 and the KW record, the best fit is for  and β=-0.29. 
The variance explained by these two simulations is 60.8% and 60.6%, respectively.
The results based on the FCL record are similar, although the variance explained is slightly less (Table 1).
The solar term clearly improves the agreement between the modelled and observed series (Fig. 2c-f);in particular, the marked warming around 1930 and the stable temperatures during the 1950s are better represented.
If the explained variance is partitioned into greenhouse and solar components, greenhouse forcing has the strongest influence in all cases although the solar contribution is not negligible (Table 1).
Finally, we consider solar forcing alone.
No best fit occurs within the specified range of  whichever cycle length record is used.
The optimal pairing of β and  is found at  for the KW record and at  for the FCL record.
The variance explained by this pair of experiments is close to 60%, and the visual correspondence between the simulated and observed temperature series is good (Fig. 2g and h).
Although these results might be considered implausible because of the extreme climate sensitivities implied, the explained variance at more reasonable climate sensitivities within the upper half of the accepted range of uncertainty, 1.5 to 4.5°C, remains above 55%.
Nevertheless, the overall credibility of the experiment with solar forcing alone must be considered low, as it is illogical to neglect greenhouse forcing given the well-established case for its existence.
We now assess the plausibility of the greenhouse-plus-solar simulations in terms of their implied climate sensitivities and solar forcing ranges.
The best-fit results using history 1 imply climate sensitivities below the accepted range, but they are not beyond the bounds of possibility.
For history 2, the implied climate sensitivities are within the accepted range.
We next compare the range of past variations in solar irradiance implied by the best-fit values of β with what is known from other sources.
The solar and greenhouse components of the radiative forcing for the four best-fit cases are shown in Fig. 3.
For the twentieth century as a whole, the variations in solar irradiance implied by the analyses are within the bounds of possibility.
For earlier times, though, there are reasons for doubting certain simulations.
For history 1 and the KW solar record, the implied variation in solar irradiance before 1850 is much greater than current estimates of the potential range of variability of this quantity.
For example, the solar forcing increases by about 2.5Wm -2 from 1795 to 1834, an increase of more than 1% in irradiance.
Such a change is unlikely.
It is well beyond both the departure necessary to account for the Little Ice Age and, more important, beyond the range of potential departures estimated from astronomical data.
In two of the other cases (history 2, KW record; history 1, FCL record), the implied irradiance variations about the year 1800 border on inconsistency with the independent evidence cited above.
Only in the case of history 2 and the FCL record are the implied irradiance changes compatible with that evidence.
In this case, the maximum change over a 40-year period is -0.5Wm -2 (-0.21%) from 1765 to 1804.
A nonlinear  Q s - L relationship may reduce the range of implied solar changes before 1900, but there is no evidence available at present to support a more complex relationship than assumed here.
In summary, our results provide circumstantial support for the hypothesized link between solar cycle length and irradiance.
Even in the optimal cases considered here, however, the solar contribution to recent global-mean temperature change is much less than that due to increasing greenhouse gas concentrations and other anthropogenic effects.
The value of cycle length data is limited because our results show considerable sensitivity to the filtering method used to construct the record.
This implies large uncertainties in the cycle-length-based record of solar irradiance changes over and above those associated with the optimization procedure used to deduce β.
The physical mechanism underlying the proposed link between solar output and cycle length must be better understood before cycle length can be used with confidence as a proxy for irradiance changes.
Note added in proof:The accompanying paper by Schlesinger and Ramankutty, which was shown to us after we had submitted this paper, also considers the relative importance of greenhouse, sulphate aerosol and solar forcing.
There are minor differences in the results which arise mainly because we use the latest IPCC temperature data and include stratospheric ozone depletion feedback in history 2 (ref. 13).
In addition, the model formulation and parameter values used differ slightly between the two analyses.
The climate sensitivity, T 2x ,solar forcing scaling factor,β,and percentage of the observed temperature variance explained for the best-fit simulations associated with the greenhouse-forcing-alone, greenhouse-plus-solar and solar-forcing-alone analyses.
History 1, greenhouse forcing; History 2, greenhouse plus aerosol forcing; KW, present cycle-length record; FCL, Friis-Christensen and Lassen cycle-length record.
FIG. 1 The two solar cycle length records.
Solid line: record derived in this paper (KW).
Dashed line: record derived by Friis-Christensen and Lassen (FCL).
KW is derived from the same basic sunspot data set as FCL but the raw maximum-to-maximum and minimum-to-minimum length series were combined into a single series before applying a 7-term binomial filter.
Differences between the records arise mainly because of the different bandwidths of the filters used.
We have used the FCL record as published, although we found that they omitted two minor troughs around 1800 and that a different length for the final solar cycle is obtained when making use of the most recently available data.
FIG. 2 Comparison of modelled (thick) and observed (thin) global-mean surface air temperature changes as departures from the 1861–1900 mean.
(See Table 1 for associated CO 2 -doubling temperatures and solar forcing scaling factors.)
We use global-mean (land-plus-marine) temperature as it is the best available indicator for the Earth as a whole.
Ref. 8 used the Northern Hemisphere, land-based temperature record as an indicator of global change, claiming these data to be superior to the full global data set, but this is incorrect.
Before calculation of the explained variance, both simulated and observed temperatures have been adjusted to have the same 1861–1900 mean.
We have not filtered the annual data to avoid both a subjective decision on filter characteristics and the inflation of explained variance at the expense of loss of degrees of freedom.
a,
Greenhouse forcing alone, history 1.
b,
Greenhouse forcing alone, history 2.
c,
Greenhouse, history 1, and solar, KW record, forcing.
d,
Greenhouse, history 2, and solar, KW record, forcing.
e,
Greenhouse, history 1, and solar, FCL record, forcing.
f,
Greenhouse, history 2, and solar, FCL record, forcing.
g,
Solar forcing alone, KW record.
h,
Solar forcing alone, FCL record.
FIG. 3 Solar forcing variations (Wm -2 ) implied by the best-fit estimates of the solar forcing scaling factor.
a,
KW (solid line) and FCL (dashed line) cycle-length records, with global history 1 greenhouse forcing (dotted, offset by -2Wm -2 ).
b,
KW (solid line) and FCL (dashed line) cycle-length records, with history 2 greenhouse plus aerosol forcing for the Northern Hemisphere, NH, and Southern Hemisphere, SH (dotted, offset by -2Wm -2 ).
The greenhouse plus aerosol forcing in this case is hemisphere-specific because of the differential effects of the sulphate aerosol contribution.
Mutations in T-cell antigen receptor genes α and β block thymocyte development at different stages
Peter Mombaerts, Alan R. Clarke, Michael A. Rudnicki, John Iacomini, Shigeyoshi Itohara, Juan J. Lafaille, Lili Wang, Yoshiaki Ichikawa, Rudolf Jaenisch, Martin L. Hooper & Susumu Tonegawa
Analysis of mice carrying mutant T-cell antigen receptor (TCR) genes indicates that TCR- β gene rearrangement or expression is critical for the differentiation of CD4 -CD8 -thymocytes to CD4 + CD8 + thymocytes, as well as for the expansion of the pool of CD4 + CD8 + cells.
TCR- α is irrelevant in these developmental processes.
The development of γ  T cells does not depend on either TCR- α or TCR- β.
IN the vertebrate immune system the recognition of a large variety of antigens is achieved by antigen-specific lymphocyte receptors, the immunoglobulin on B lymphocytes and the T-cell antigen receptor on T lymphocytes.
There are two types of TCR,αβ TCR and γ  TCR, which are expressed on the surface of distinct subsets of T lymphocytes that seem to be derived from different cell lineages.
In the main pathway of αβ T-cell development in the adult thymus, bone marrow-derived stem cells undergo a series of intermediate stages.
Among these stages are CD4 -CD8 -IL-2R + TCR -(double negative, or DN) and CD4 + CD8 + IL-2R -TCR low+ (double positive, or DP) cells, both of which are important control points at which some signal or stimulus from the thymic microenvironment is suspected or known to be required for proliferation or differentiation to proceed.
The end stage of the pathway is represented by CD4 + CD8 -TCR high+ or CD4 -CD8 + TCR high+ cells (both are said to be in single positive, or SP, stages), which are mostly immediate precursors of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II-restricted helper T cells and MHC class I-restricted cytotoxic T cells, respectively.
It is well established that αβ TCR play critical roles in the DP to SP transition by interacting with self-ligands expressed on the surface of thymic stroma cells (positive selection).
But the role of the TCR genes or their products in the earlier DN to DP transition is uncertain.
Because in the developing fetal thymus TCR- β genes rearrange before TCR- α genes, a distinct role can be envisaged for each of these genes or their products.
Indeed, analysis of severe combined immunodeficiency (scid)mice carrying rearranged TCR transgenes indicated that TCR- β gene rearrangement or expression could be instrumental in the DN to DP transition.
But it is not known whether TCR- β gene rearrangement or expression is required for such a transition, and no information is yet available on a role for TCR- α gene rearrangement or expression.
Here we use gene targeting to introduce a mutation in the TCR α or β genes into the germ line of mice.
Initial analysis of these mice revealed that TCR- β gene rearrangement or expression is necessary for the maintenance of normal thymocyte number and the DN to DP transition.
Our results show that a single rearranged TCR- β gene introduced as a transgene can quantitatively convert DN cells to DP cells from DN cells that have accumulated in mice mutant for the recombination activating gene-1 (RAG-1)and increase the total thymocyte number to the normal level.
By contrast, TCR- α gene expression seems to be irrelevant for these developmental events.
Our study also indicates that αβ T cells are unnecessary for the generation of apparently normal γ  T cells.
Creation of mutations in TCR genes
The creation of a deletion at the TCR- β locus in embryonic stem (ES) cells has been described.
Briefly, two ES clones were produced carrying a genomic deletion of 15 kilobases (kb) that encompasses the TCR- β locus from D β1.3 to downstream of C β2.
Germ-line chimaeras were obtained from both clones.
A line was established from clone 59 and clean stocks derived by caesarean section.
To produce a targeted disruption of the unique TCR Cα segment, we constructed targeting vector pPMKO-1 using 3.9kb of homologous DNA sequences of BALB/c origin and carrying the pgk- neo selectable marker in the first exon of TCR Cα (Fig. 1 a).
Two out of 160 G418-resistant D3 clones were found to have the targeted mutation and clone 515 gave rise to germ-line chimaeras.
For both the TCR- α and TCR -β mutations, intercrosses between heterozygous mice gave rise to homozygous mutant mice at the expected frequency of 25%.
An example of the results from Southern analysis is shown in Fig. 1b for both TCR -α and TCR -β littermates.
Numbers of thymocytes
The numbers of total thymocytes were determined for TCR -α and TCR- β mutant mice, and for mice doubly homozygous for the TCR -α and TCR -β mutations (called TCR αxβ mutant mice).
Whereas the thymuses of TCR -α mutant mice contained similar numbers of cells to those of normal littermates (Fig. 2 a),the thymuses of the TCR- β mutant mice contained fewer cells, ranging from 6- to 60-fold less than those of normal littermates (Fig. 2 a).
TCR αxβ mutant mice had similar numbers of thymocytes as TCR- β mutant mice (Fig. 2a).
The importance of TCR- β in regulating the total number of thymocytes was also demonstrated by crossing a functionally rearranged TCR -β transgene into the RAG-1 mutant mice.
This resulted in restoration of the numbers of total thymocytes to wild-type levels (Fig. 2 a).
These results indicate that TCR- β is necessary to generate a thymus with the wild-type number of cells, and that it alone can lift the blockade imposed by the RAG-1 mutation in this respect.
In contrast, TCR- α is irrelevant to the generation of wild-type numbers of thymocytes.
Blockade by TCR -α mutation
As shown in Fig. 3a,thymuses of TCR -α mutant mice are largely devoid of CD4 or CD8 SP cells but retain normal numbers of small DP cells without the interleukin-2 (IL-2) receptor (IL-2R -DP cells)(Fig. 2b).
The latter cells do not express αβ TCR, or only barely, as determined by staining with the pan-TCR- β monoclonal antibody H57–597 (ref. 15)(Fig. 3a).
There is also no difference in the number of DN cells in TCR- α mutant mice as compared to wild-type littermates (Fig. 3a).
The overall results indicate that expression of a rearranged TCR- α chain is unnecessary either for the progression of thymocytes from the DN to DP stage or for the expansion of the DP cells to the levels of wild-type mice.
Thus the role of TCR- α expression seems to be confined to further differentiation to the SP stage.
Finally, as in the thymuses of wild-type littermates, about 1% of the cells bear γ  TCR in the thymus of the TCR -α mutant mice, as determined by the anti-TCR-  monoclonal antibody 3A10 (ref. 3)(Fig. 3b).
These results suggest that TCR -α expression is unnecessary for the generation of γ  thymocytes.
Blockade by TCR -β mutation
The thymuses of TCR- β mutant mice are different from those of wild-type littermates, not only in the total cell number (on average  8% of wild type) but also in their cellular composition.
First, as expected, no TCR- β- positive cells were detected by antibody H57–597 (Fig. 3a).
Second, only about 50% of the thymocytes were double positive, although there was substantial individual variation (15–80%).
This amounts to, on average, only  6% of DP cells in the wild-type littermates (compare with Fig. 2b).
As in wild-type littermates, these cells are small and negative for IL-2R (data not shown).
Third, the proportion of large DN cells has increased to about 50% of the total cell number.
As in wild-type littermates this thymocyte population includes two subpopulations of similar cell numbers: immature, IL-2R-positive, TCR-negative cells, and mature, IL-2R-negative,γ  TCR-positive cells (data not shown).
The increase in the proportion of DN cells in TCR- β mutant mice is due to the reduction in the numbers of DP cells: the number per thymus of each DN subpopulation is not altered by the introduction of the TCR- β mutation (Figs 2 a, 3a and b).
Finally, the TCR- β mutant thymus contains a few CD4 + SP and CD8 + SP cells, of which between half and two-thirds are γ  T cells (data not shown).
The rest are probably cells on the way to the DP stage.
The severe reduction of DP cells (about 6% of DP cells in the wild-type littermates) by the introduction of the TCR -β mutation indicates that TCR -β rearrangement or expression is important in the DN to DP transition in the principal differentiation pathway of αβ T cells.
To evaluate whether TCR -β rearrangement or expression is necessary for this transition, we introduced the TCR -β mutation to TCR -mutant mice (to be described elsewhere), in which we found that αβ T cells develop normally and normal numbers of DN, DP and SP thymocytes are present.
But introduction of the TCR- β mutation into the TCR-  mutant mice abolishes virtually all DP cells and eliminates SP cells entirely (Fig. 3 a ), indicating that TCR -β rearrangement or expression is required for the DN to DP transition, at least in the principal differentiation pathway of αβ T cells.
We investigated whether this role of TCR -β in αβ thymocyte differentiation supersedes rearrangement or expression of TCR- α gene by crossing the TCR- α and TCR -β mutant mice.
As shown in Figs 2a, b and 3a,the thymuses of the TCR αxβ mutant mice were similar to those of the TCR- β mutant mice by our criteria.
The mutation in TCR- β is therefore epistatic to the mutation in TCR- α.
In conclusion, the mutation in TCR- β blocks αβ thymocyte differentiation at an earlier stage than the mutation in TCR -α:at the transition from the large, IL-2R-positive DN stage to the small, IL-2R-negative DP stage.
As a result the total number of thymocytes is much reduced.
In contrast, the differentiation of γ  thymocytes does not seem to be affected by the TCR- β mutation.
TCR- β can induce DN-DP transition
As we reported previously,αβ T-cell differentiation is blocked at a DN stage in RAG-1 mutant mice.
Introduction of the transgenic TCR- β gene not only restored the total number of thymocytes to the levels of wild-type mice (Fig. 2a),but allowed nearly complete transition of the large, IL-2R-positive, DN cells to the small, IL-2R-negative DP cells (Fig. 2 b).
These results demonstrate that a single productively rearranged TCR -β gene provides a sufficient signal for the transition of αβ lineage cells from a DN stage (at least the stage reached in the RAG-1 mutant mice) to a DP stage, and for the expansion of these DP cells to the normal level.
TCR- α rearrangement
TCR -β genes are rearranged and their RNA has been detected before TCR- α gene rearrangement in the fetal thymus.
A signal may therefore be provided by TCR -β gene rearrangement or its RNA or protein product which is required for TCR -α gene  rearrangement , but there is no direct evidence to support this hypothesis.
We investigated rearrangement of TCR -α genes in the thymuses of the TCR -β mutant and other mice by Southern blot analysis using two probes simultaneously, a 5'J α1 probe and a C α probe.
Typical results are shown in Fig. 4 a.
In the thymuses of the wild-type and TCR -β (as well as TCR -α)heterozygous mice, rearrangement has occurred at nearly half of the TCR- α alleles (see Fig. 4 legend for definition of the rearrangement index, RI (α)).
Although somewhat reduced, the rearrangement is substantial in the thymuses of TCR -β (as well as TCR- α)mutant mice.
The reproducibility of these data is shown in shown in Fig. 4 legend.
In support of the Southern blot data, thymuses of TCR -α mutant mice contain, albeit at a reduced level compared to the thymuses of wild-type or other mice, TCR -α transcripts of sizes expected from the fully rearranged gene (Fig. 4b).
Cloning and sequencing experiments confirmed that these transcripts are indeed derived from productively or non-productivity rearranged TCR -α genes (data not shown).
We conclude that TCR -β rearrangement is unnecessary for TCR -α rearrangement.
TCR- β rearrangement
Using a 5'D β1 probe we examined at TCR -β rearrangement in the different mice, including RAG-1 mutant mice in which no TCR rearrangement occurs (Fig. 4 c).
TCR -β rearrangement in the thymocytes of TCR -α mutant mice was as extensive as that in wild-type or TCR- α heterozygous mice, as indicated by the virtual disappearance of the germ-line band and the presence of several bands corresponding to DJ rearrangements.
The levels of TCR -β transcripts corroborate these rearrangement results (Fig. 4 d),so we confirm that TCR -α expression is not needed for TCR -β rearrangement and transcription.
In contrast to thymocyte DNA from TCR -α mutant mice, thymocyte DNA from TCR -β mutant mice gave rise to no detectable DJ bands and a mutant germ-line band as intense as brain DNA (negative control) from the same mutant mice.
This finding is interesting because the mutant allele retains the intact D β1,J β 1.1 and J β 1.2 segments despite the 15-kb deletion, and therefore can potentially undergo extensive DJ or VDJ rearrangements.
The lack of rearrangement may be caused by a loss of an as-yet unidentified cis -acting rearrangement-promoting element, as suggested by the dramatic differences in the extent of rearrangement in the wild-type and mutant alleles coexisting in the same thymocytes of TCR -β heterozygous mice (Fig. 4 c,third lane from right).
TCR- β surface expression
Extensive rearrangement and transcription of the TCR -β locus in TCR -α mutant mice provides a potential for synthesis of TCR- β polypeptide chains and even their cell-surface expression on thymocytes.
Indeed, a small fraction of thymocytes of TCR- α mutant mice seems to be stained weakly by the anti-TCR- β antibody H57–597 (Figs 3a and 5).
Surface expression of TCR -β chains was clearly seen with thymocytes derived from TCR -α mutant mice or RAG-1 mutant mice, into which a transgenic TCR -β gene was introduced; virtually all of these thymocytes were stained with H57–597 at levels higher than the TCR- β surface-positive thymocytes from TCR -α mutant mice (Figs 3a and 5).
The occurrence of these cells in TCR -β transgenic RAG-1 mutant mice suggests that at least some of the surface TCR- β chains are not associated with any of the other known complete TCR polypeptide chains.
A few CD4-positive lymphocytes became increasingly detectable with age in the peripheral lymphoid organs and in the blood of TCR- α mutant mice but not in TCR -β mutant mice, which stained weakly with antibodies against TCR -β and CD3- .
As an example, staining patterns of lymphocytes from mesenteric lymph nodes of a 9-month-old TCR -α mutant mouse and 8-month-old TCR -β mutant mouse are shown in Fig. 6 a.
The TCR -β and CD4-positive cells were not stained by two different anti-TCR C  antibodies (3A10 and GL3) and are therefore unlikely to bear mixed TCR β  heterodimers (data not shown).
We observed an equally small population of CD4-positive dull TCR- β -positive cells in the periphery of TCR- β transgenic TCR α mutant mice (data not shown).
γ  T-cell development
In both the TCR -α and TCR -β mutant mice,γ  T-cell development in the thymus appears to be unaltered; the number of γ  thymocytes is the same as in wild-type mice (Fig. 3 b).
The numbers of γ  T cells in the spleen, lymph nodes and gut epithelium are similar or slightly increased in young mutant mice as compared to wild-type littermates (an example for the spleen is shown in Fig. 6 b).
Discussion
We have shown that TCR -β rearrangement or, more likely, expression of a functionally rearranged TCR -β gene, is not only necessary but also sufficient for driving most of the immature IL-2R-positive DN thymocytes to the DP stage and for expanding the pool of thymocytes.
We have also shown that TCR- α expression is irrelevant to these processes, but together with TCR- β rearrangement and expression it allows further differentiation into mature, CD4 or CD8 SP thymocytes expressing high levels of αβ TCR and CD3.
The conclusion that TCR- β is sufficient is based on the observations that both the severe drop in total thymocyte numbers (to about 1% of the wild-type level) and the blockade at a DN stage in the RAG-1 mutant mice are fully restored upon introduction of a productively rearranged TCR- β transgene.
These observations differ from earlier findings in which scid mice were host for the same TCR -β transgene.
In these TCR -β transgenic scid mice the number of double-positive cells reaches only about 2% of wild-type level and the total number of thymocytes is about 3% of wild-type.
The most likely explanation for the difference is that the scid mutation affects the physiology of the thymocyte in a more general way rather than just preventing correct V(D)J recombination.
The origin of the small number (about 5% of the wild-type level) of DP cells remaining in the thymus of TCR -β mutant mice is unclear.
They may belong to a minor αβ T-cell pathway in which DN  DP transition occurs independently of TCR -β rearrangement or expression.
Alternatively, these cells may belong to the γ  T-cell lineage because they are virtually abolished when TCR -mutation is introduced into the TCR- β mutant mice.
No role for DP cells as intermediates in the differentiation of γ  T cells has been demonstrated.
But TCR-  -positive DP cells have been detected in the late embryonic thymus and about 1% of TCR --positive cells in the postnatal TCR- β mutant thymus are DP (data not shown).
The hypothesis that TCR -β rearrangement provides a signal for TCR -α rearrangement is challenged by our findings of TCR -α rearrangements and full-size TCR- α transcripts in the TCR -β mutant mice.
These findings are analogous to those made recently in the B-cell system: Ig-  rearrangements can occur in the absence of an Ig- μ product in Ig-C μ mutant mice.
However, rearrangements may occur sequentially at the TCR- β and TCR -α loci, but with a causal relationship.
Surface expression of TCR -β without TCR- α (α -less TCR) has been found in DN thymocytes of TCR -β transgenic mice, in DN and DP thymocytes of TCR -β transgenic scid mice, and in a DP thymocyte line.
We have now extended these observations to DP thymocytes in TCR- β transgenic TCR- α mutant, TCR- β transgenic RAG-1 mutant and probably to TCR -α mutant mice.
The α -less TCR could be an artefact of the mutant or TCR- β transgenic mutant mice.
But cells expressing such TCR may be normal intermediates of αβ thymocyte differentiation, in analogy to the pre-B cells that expresses Ig- μ without any light chains on the surface.
Surface expression rather than only cytoplasmic expression of the TCR- β chain may be essential for transduction of the signal for the induction of CD4 and CD8 and/or proliferation of DP cells.
This hypothesis can be tested by crossing variously altered TCR- β transgenes into the RAG-1 or TCR- β mutant mice.
The presence of CD4-positive dull TCR- β positive cells in the periphery of the TCR- α mutant and TCR- β transgenic TCR- α mutant mice, suggests that some thymocytes bearing TCR- β without TCR- α may develop into mature T cells and emigrate to the periphery in normal mice, although such T cells could be present only in the genetically manipulated mice.
Recently another strain of TCR- α mutant mice has been reported but no T cells with α -less TCR were observed; the reason for this discrepancy is not clear, although these cells may have been overlooked.
Finally, our studies indicate that the TCR- α or TCR -β mutation does not block γ  T-cell development.
The αβ T-cell-deficient mice should be useful for analysing the in vivo functions of γ  T cells.
FIG. 1 Targeting of TCR Cα and Southern analysis of TCR- α and TCR -β mutant mice.
a,
top,
TCR -α targeting construct pPMKO-1.
Crossed lines indicate hypothetical crossovers between the targeting construct and the TCR Cα locus,
middle,
genomic structure of the TCR Cα locus.
Exon I codes for most of the extracellular domain, exon II encodes the hinge domain, exon III encodes the transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains, and exon IV contains untranslated sequences;
bottom,
structure of the disrupted TCR Cα locus.
Upon targeted integration of pPMKO-1, the pgk- neo gene is inserted in the first exon of TCR Cα.
Probes are probe B-B, to genotype the mice, and 3' β probe, to screen the ES clones.
Sizes of DNA fragments hybridizing to these probes are indicated within double-arrowed lines.
At both left and right ends, the scale is interrupted.
Abbreviations for restriction enzyme sites: H,Hin dIII; E,Eco RI; B,Bam HI; P,Pfl MI.
b,
Southern blots.
Top,
TCR -α mice.
Thymocyte DNA from eight littermates was cut with Hin dIII and hybridized with probe B-B.
The wild-type allele is at 9.0kb and the mutant allele is at 10.8kb.
bottom,
TCR -β mice.
Tail DNA from eight littermates was cut with Pst I and hybridized with a 3' C β probe.
The wild-type allele is at 6.8kb and the mutant allele is at 5.5kb; +/+, wild-type; +/-, heterozygous; and-/-, homozygous mutant.
METHODS.
pPMKO-1 was constructed from phage λ 3.9 of BALB/c origin.
The 3.9-kb Eco RI insert of this phage was subcloned into pUC18.
The pgk- neo selectable marker was excised as a Eco RI- Hin dIII fragment from pKJ1 25 , blunt-ended with Klenow DNA polymerase and inserted into the unique Pfl MI site in the first exon of TCR Cα,which was blunted by treatment with T4 DNA polymerase.
Before electroporation that targeting construct was released from plasmid sequences by digestion with Eco RI.
The targeting experiment was done as described.
ES colonies were screened by digesting with Bam HI and hybridizing with the 3' probe, a 0.5-kb Pvu II fragment containing the TCR- α enhancer.
Chimaeric mice were generated by standard protocols.
DNA was isolated according to ref. 28.
FIG. 2 Thymocyte numbers.
a,
Numbers of total thymocytes.
As there is much variation in numbers of thymocytes between mice of different litters of the same age but much less between mice belonging to the same litter, the numbers of total thymocytes are shown in comparison to wild-type or heterozygous littermates in a logarithmic scale.
TCR -α,TCR- α mutant mice (○):n=16,average 101%.
TCR -β,TCR -β mutant mice (○):n=13,average 8.3%.
RAG-1x β Tg: RAG-1 mutant mice (),n=10,average 1.4%; TCR -β transgenic mice (i),n=17,average 92%; TCR -β transgenic RAG-1 mutant mice (fl),n=15,average 102%.
TCR βx :TCR -β mutant mice,n=16,average 6.6%; TCR βx  mutant mice (),n=10,average 3.4%.
TCR αxβ:TCR -β mutant mice,n=8,average 5.2%; TCR- α mutant mice,n=8,average 110%; TCR αxβ mutant mice (▾),n=7,average 5.3%.
b,
Numbers of CD4-CD8 double-positive thymocytes.
Data are shown for the same mice as in a.
Percentage of DP thymocytes was measured by FACScan.
TCR- α: n=16,average 112%; TCR- β: n=13,average 5.8%; RAG-1x β Tg: RAG-1 mutant mice,n=10,average 0%; TCR- β transgenic mice,n=17,average 88%, TCR -β transgenic RAG-1 mutant mice n=15,average 115%; TCR βx :TCR- β mutant mice,n=16,average 4.2%; TCR βx  mutant mice,n=10,average 0.04%.
TCR αxβ:TCR- α mutant mice,n=8,average 118%; TCR- β mutant mice,n=8,average 2%; TCR αxβ mutant mice,n=7,average 2.7%.
METHODS.
Mice were between three weeks and three months old.
The background is (129/SvxC57BL/6) for TCR- α and RAG-1 mutant mice, and (129/OlaxBalb/c) for TCR- β and TCR -mutant mice.
We have also obtained TCR- β and TCR -mutant mice in a (129/OlaxC57BL/6) background and have found no effect of genetic background on thymocyte numbers and percentage of DP cells (data not shown).
TCR -β transgenic mice were of founder 101 (ref. 14).
The non-erythroid cells isolated from the thymuses were counted using a haemacytometer.
At least one and usually two or more wild-type or heterozygous littermates were analysed in parallel with the mutant mice.
The average number of total thymocytes of these littermates was given the value of 100%, and the number of total thymocytes in individual mutant mice was converted into a percentage.
The percentage of DP thymocyte was measured by FACScan analysis by staining with 53–6.7 (Becton Dickinson) for CD8 and GK1.5 (Pharmingen) for CD4.
The number of DP thymocytes was calculated by multiplying the number of total thymocytes with the percentage of DP thymocytes.
This number was converted into a percentage using the wild-type or heterozygous littermates as 100%.
In the case of TCR βx  mutant mice, TCr-  mutant mice were included in the reference group of wild-type or heterozygous littermates, as they have normal numbers of total thymocytes and of DP thymocytes (our unpublished observations).
FIG. 3 FACScan analysis of thymocytes of mutant mice.
a,
top,
CD3-  -fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)(horizontally) and TCR- β- phycoerythrin (PE)(vertically);
bottom,
CD8-FITC (horizontally) and CD4-biotin-PE (vertically).
WT, Wild-type;α-/-,TCR -α mutant;β-/-,TCR- β mutant;αxβ-/-:TCR αxβ mutant;βx -/-,TCR βx  mutant mouse.
Percentage of cells in quadrants 1, 2 and 4 are indicated in the corners.
The DN TCR-negative thymocytes in the TCR- β mutant mice are predominantly IL-2 receptor- and Sca-1 positive, and class I MHC high (data not shown).
b,
CD3-  -FITC (horizontally) and TCR-  -biotin-PE (vertically).
Indicated below are the absolute numbers of thymocytes.
FIG. 4
a,
Southern blot analysis of TCR -α rearrangements.
Thymocyte DNAs from 3–8 weeks old mice were cut with Sac I and Hin dIII and were hybridized simultaneously with a 5'J α 1 probe and a TCR C α probe.
Lane 1, RAG-1 mutant; lane 2, wild-type; lane 3, TCR- α heterozygous; lane 4, TCR -α homozygous mutant; lane 5, TCR -β heterozygous, and lane 6; TCR -β homozygous mutant.
As all VJ rearrangements will delete the 5'J α 1 sequence but retain the C α sequence, the ratio of the intensity of the 5'J α 1 band to that of the C α band is inversely proportional to the extent of rearrangements in the TCR- α locus.
The rearrangement index for the TCR- α locus, RI (α),is defined by (1- (5'J α 1/C α ratio of sample) /(5'J α 1/C α ratio of RAG-1 sample))) x100.
A value of zero means no VαJα rearrangement.
The RI (α)for the TCR- β mutant thymocyte sample is 28, meaning that 28% of the chromosomes have undergone a VαJα rearrangement. 5'J α 1/C α ratios (shown in table below) are given for different DNA samples.
Three different RAG-1 mutant and seven different TCR- β mutant samples are analysed, prepared independently from pools of 3–10 mice each.
The TCR- β heterozygous samples were derived from individual mice.
Some samples are analysed in more than one experiment.
Ratios vary between different experiments, depending on the specific activity of the two radioactively labelled probes.
b,
Northern blot analysis of TCR C α transcripts in thymocytes.
Top,hybridization with a TCR C α probe.
Bottom,hybridization with a β -actin probe as internal control.
Lane 1, C57BL/6: lane 2, TCR -α heterozygous; lane 3, TCR -α mutant; lane 4, TCR- β heterozygous; lane 5, TCR- β mutant mice.
Transcripts hybridizing to the TCR C α probe in the TCR- α mutant mouse are longer than those in the other mice, presumably because of insertion of the 1.8-kb neo- selectable marker in the first exon of TCR C α.
WT and M designate transcripts from rearranged wild-type (1.8kb) and mutant TCR- α alleles, respectively.
Numbers at the bottom indicate the ratio of the intensity of the TCR C α band to the β -actin band, normalized to 100 for the sample of the TCR -β heterozygous thymocytes.
c,
Southern blot analysis of TCR- β rearrangements.
Thymocyte (T) DNAs from 3–8-week old mice cut with TCR- α rearrangements in thymocytes.
Hin dIII were hybridized with a 5'D β1 probe.
Lane 1, RAG-1 mutant; lane 2, C57BL/6; lane 3, TCR -α heterozygous; lane 4, TCR- α mutant; lane 6, TCR- β heterozygous; lane 8, TCR -β mutant mice.
For negative controls, brain (B) DNA was isolated from: lane 5, TCR- β heterozygous; lane 7, TCR- β mutant mice.
‘WT’ and ‘M’mark the germ-line (unrearranged) wild-type and mutant bands, respectively.
‘GI’, germ-line, and ‘DJs’, D-J rearrangements.
The 5'D β 1 probe detects DJ rearrangements involving the D β1 segment by the appearance of bands of known restriction fragment sizes, and VDJ rearrangement by a reduction in the intensity of the band representing unrearranged alleles.
Rearrangement is extensive in thymocytes of wild-type compared to RAG-1 mutant mice (negative control), as indicated by the virtual disappearance of the germ-line band and the presence of several bands corresponding to DJ rearrangements.
TCR- β rearrangement in thymocytes of TCR- α mutant mice is as extensive as that in wild-type mice.
Upon prolonged exposure, two faint bands expected from D β1- J β1.1 or D β1- J β1.2 rearrangements of the mutant allele were occasionally observed.
d,
Northern blot analysis of TCR C β2 transcripts in thymocytes.
Top,hybridization with TCR C β2 probe.
Bottom,hybridization with a β -actin probe as internal control.
Same RNA samples as in b.
TCR C β2 transcripts were present at normal levels in TCR -α mutant mice, but were absent in TCR- β mutant mice, as the TCR C β2 gene segment is included in the 15-kb deletion.
METHODS.
For Southern blot analysis, thymocyte and brain DNA was isolated according to ref. 28.
The 5'D β1 probe has been described before; the 5'J α1 probe is a 1.2-kb Kpn I- Pst I fragment isolated from a 4-kb Hin dIII genomic clone (gift from A. Winoto).
This probe is immediately upstream of the first J α segment (J α 1) and downstream of  J α.
It hybridizes to a 1.5-kb Sac I- Hin dIII fragment.
Note that m  Rec-  J α rearrangements do not affect the outcome.
The C α probe is a 0.7kb Xba I- Eco RI fragment encompassing the second exon of TCR C α and hybridizes to 1.3-kb Sac I- Hin dIII fragment.
The mutation in TCR C α does not affect the results.
The intensity of the radioactivity was measured using a Fujix BAS2000 Bio-image Analyzer within the linear range of intensities.
Total RNA was prepared for northern blot analysis.
The TCR C α probe was a 550-bp Nco I fragment isolated from cDNA 2C1B2 α 4 (gift from Y. Takagaki), which spans the insertion site of pgk- neo .
The TCR C β 2 probe was a 800-bp genomic Sac I fragment within the TCR C β2 region, isolated from cosmid 2.3W7 (ref. 16).
Patterns of fine root mortality in two sugar maple forests
Ronald L. Hendrick & Kurt S. Pregitzer
MUCH of the carbon assimilated by plants is allocated to fine root production, and the amount of carbon and nutrients subsequently returned to the soil from fine root turnover equals or surpasses that returned through leaf litter in many forests.
Unfortunately, limitations in traditional methods of studying roots have prevented us from thoroughly understanding the dynamic nature of fine root mortality in most forests, and better measurements of fine root longevity are needed to quantify and model more accurately ecosystem carbon and nutrient budgets.
We used minirhizotrons to follow the mortality of contemporaneous fine root cohorts in two sugar maple (Acer saccharum Marsh.) forests located 80km apart (north-south) during 1989 and 1990.
We report here that roots in the northern forest consistently lived the longest, principally owing to greater rates of mortality early in the life of roots at the southern site.
Differences in site factors suggest that warmer soil temperatures seem to be associated with the more rapid death of roots at the southern site.
During the 1989 and 1990 growing seasons, we used a microvideo camera to record monthly images of fine root cohorts growing along the exterior surfaces of 12 minirhizotrons (clear plastic tubes) located in each forest.
Fine root cohorts were comprised of all living roots 1.5mm in diameter (pooled across the 12 minirhizotrons) that were produced during the intervals between sampling dates.
We used a microcomputer software program (ROOTS) to identify and measure the length of individual roots within contemporaneous cohorts at each site, and subsequently to follow their fate by repeatedly measuring the same roots at each sampling date.
Because there are no appreciable differences among the sites in soil organic matter content, exchangeable Ca, Mg, Al or K, N mineralization, growing season soil moisture content, canopy leaf area, litterfall mass or N, we hypothesized that fine root length would be lost at similar rates in both forests.
Instead, we found large differences in fine root lifespans (Fig. 1).
Analyses of survival distributions of contemporaneous cohorts showed that roots at the northern site consistently lived longer on average than roots born during the same periods at the southern site (Geham-Mantel test,α =0.05).
The only exceptions were in July (no site difference) and September (greater longevity at the southern site) of 1989.
The longer lifespan of roots in the northern forest was due to significantly lower first-season mortality rates (Fig. 2).
New roots were lost 64% faster at the southern forest (0.41 versus 0.25% per day at the northern forest,), but overwinter and second-year mortality rates were not significantly different (P=0.5;0.14 versus 0.12% per day at the northern forest).
The good fits of the first growing season mortality regressions (Fig. 2) were due to very similar patterns of mortality for all cohorts at each site (Fig. 1).
These results were unexpected, because several studies have shown seasonal variation in forest ecosystem fine root biomass turnover, which is often believed to reflect variable root mortality rates.
But the dynamics of root length and root biomass production and mortality are similar within both forests (R.L.H. and K.S.P., manuscript in preparation) and our results suggest that temporal differences in biomass ‘turnover’ may be due to temporal variation in root production, not in root mortality, in ecosystems like those we studied.
Low overwinter fine root mortality, relative to growing season mortality, might be due to low maintenance respiration rates under cold soil temperatures, but it is unclear why roots produced in the 1989 growing season should continue to die at a slower rate during the 1990 growing season.
Survival of these roots may have been enhanced by greater lignification and/or suberization of cortical or epidermal cells, or perhaps they were located in resource-rich microsites.
Low branch orders of roots can also live longer than higher order roots.
Our study was not designed to address these possibilities, but they deserve further investigation.
Both forests we studied are similar in structure, composition and site quality (Table 1 and refs 14–16).
Thus, site differences in these factors cannot be invoked as obvious explanations for the site differences in mortality rates and survival distributions.
But it is possible that warmer soil temperatures contribute in part to greater fine root mortality rates in the southern forest (Table 1).
Late-spring and summer soil temperatures at 15-cm depth were 2–4°C warmer at the southern site in both 1989 and 1990 (Fig. 3), and soil temperatures were significantly warmer at the southern site from late April to mid-October during both years (paired t- test;P=0.001)by an average of about 1.5°C.
Soil temperature was not controlled in our study, and so the evidence linking temperature and root mortality is circumstantial.
But previous studies have demonstrated increased root respiration rates and faster root turnover associated with higher soil temperature, and we believe that higher soil temperatures at the southern forest act in part to accelerate maintenance costs and mortality rates throughout the entire system of fine, absorbing roots.
Soil organisms, which would be more active in the warmer soil, can also shorten root longevity.
The relationship between soil temperature and root longevity needs to be more firmly established, and rates of fine root mortality may not be as predictable in other ecosystems as they are in the forests we studied.
Nonetheless, our findings highlight the need for a better understanding of the processes controlling fine root inputs of carbon and nutrients to the soil.
For example, below-ground resource allocation is driven by nitrogen or water availability in many forest ecosystem models.
In others, carbon and nutrient budgets allow for greater C costs through increased root respiration in warmer soils associated with seasonal or climatic increases in temperature.
But none of these models or any others that we are aware of make allowance for possible differences in root turnover rates within an ecosystem type, nor are root turnover rates intrinsically linked to soil temperature.
We do not wish to imply that current models are flawed in their construction.
Instead, they reflect how little is known of the demographic processes (such as root mortality) that control below-ground carbon and nutrient cycling, and the relationship between root demography and the soil environment.
Given the importance of fine roots in terrestrial carbon and nutrient budgets, the need for more and better data on fine root dynamics is apparent.
Even if soil temperature is generally found to have a minimal influence on root mortality, the fact that rates of fine root turnover can vary substantially among virtually identical ecosystems needs to be reconciled with current knowledge and models of below-ground processes that do not account for this phenomenon.
Values are averages across plots, with s.e.m.
in parentheses where shown.
FIG. 1 Root length survival curves for root cohorts during 1989 and 1990.
Survival times were significantly greater at the northern site for all but the July (no difference) and October (southern site greater) 1989 cohorts.
Cohorts were comprised of all new roots present along a 1.8-cm-wide transect on the minirhizotron surface that were produced between successive sample dates in the upper 30cm of the soil.
The data were pooled from the 12 minirhizotrons in each forest.
Cohort sizes ranged from 26 to 245 roots, with a mean and standard deviation of 87 and 50, respectively.
Each root was identified and numbered by the ROOTS image analysis program we developed, and was remeasured and classified as live or dead at each sampling date.
Significant differences in length survival were tested using a Gehan-Mantel test for the censored data at an α of 0.05.
FIG. 2 Regressions of length mortality data against the number of days a cohort had been under observation during its first growing season, with the line forced through the origin.
The slope (mortality rate) of the  southern site was significantly greater than the northern site.
There were no site differences in over-winter and second-year mortality rates (regressions not shown).
Data were pooled across all 1989 and 1990 cohorts.
Differences among the two forests were tested by comparing regression slopes at an α of 0.05. 95% confidence intervals shown.
FIG. 3 Weekly averages of soil temperatures at 15-cm depth in both forests.
Paired t- tests of site differences in weekly averages (derived from the mean of three temperature sensors in each forest) showed that temperatures from 26/4/89 to 17/10/89 and 30/4/90 to 16/10/90 were significantly higher in the southern forest (P=0.001).
Data were collected every 30min with an Omnidata monitoring system (Omnidata International, Logan, Utah, USA).
Possible blindsight in infants lacking one cerebral hemisphere
Oliver Braddick, Janette Atkinson, Bruce Hood, William Harkness, Graeme Jackson & Faraneh Vargha-Khadem
PATIENTS with damage to the striate cortex have a subjectively blind region of the visual field, but may still be able to detect and localize targets within this region.
But the relative roles in this ‘blindsight’ of subcortical neural systems, and of pathways to extra-striate visual areas, have been uncertain.
Here we report results on two infants in whom one cerebral hemisphere, including both striate and extra-striate visual cortex, needed surgical removal in their first year.
Single conspicuous targets in the half-field contralateral to the lesion could elicit fixations, implying detection and orienting by a subcortical system.
In contrast, binocular optokinetic nystagmus (OKN), for which a subcortical pathway has often been thought adequate, showed a marked asymmetry.
In normal neonates, fixation shifts and OKN have both been taken to reflect subcortical control; our results are consistent with subcortical control for fixation but not for OKN.
Hemispherectomy surgery, to relieve intractable myoclonic seizures caused by congenital unilateral megalencephaly (Fig. 1), was performed on infant P.P. (right hemisphere) at 4 months of age and on infant L.A.H. (left hemisphere) at 8 months.
The complete removal of one hemisphere was confirmed by the neuropathologist's examination of removed tissue in each case.
The tests we report followed these operations by 3–7 months (P.P.) and 8–10 months (L.A.H.).
In the week before surgery, both infants (then heavily medicated to alleviate their seizures) showed very poor visual behaviour.
P.P. showed no consistent shifts of gaze to a target; L.A.H. showed some visually guided reaching but poor shifts of gaze, and acuity around 1cycledeg -1 (equivalent to a newborn).
But in postoperative testing, both children were visually alert with full eye movements, although each showed intermittent strabismus.
Their visual acuity was in the normal range for 11–15 month infants (8–12cycledeg -1 , tested by preferential looking).
On informal testing each child ignored a toy presented in the half-field contralateral to the removed hemisphere, but promptly reached for the same toy in the ipsilateral half-field.
In our fixation shift procedure, the infant initially sees a screen containing a central flashing face-like target, which is replaced by a contrast-reversing target 23 deg either right or left of centre.
The direction and latency of the initial fixation shift is recorded.
A number of control trials, in which the central target was followed by a blank screen, were included in the random sequence.
With binocular viewing, P.P. made initial shifts of gaze in the correct direction to 100% (7/7) of targets presented in the right half-field, and 82% (9/11) in the left half-field whose cortical projection is missing.
Corresponding results for L.A.H. were 88% (7/8) in the left half-field and 100% (16/16) in the decorticate right half-field.
Thus both infants show performance considerably above chance (binomial P= 0.05) for targets that could not produce any visual cortical representation.
P.P.'s responses had significantly longer latencies for the half-field contralateral to the lesion (mean=1.84s, s.d. =1.67) compared to the good field (mean=0.47s, s.d. =0.16; independent groups t=2.15, P=0.05),but there was no significant difference for L.A.H. (affected field: mean=0.612s, s.d. =0.41; good field: mean=0.48, s.d. =0.22).
In control trials, P.P. made 5/11 initial fixations towards the decorticate half field, whereas L.A.H. made 3/10.
Thus the results cannot be explained by a bias in looking towards the decorticate half-field in the absence of detectable stimulation.
Different aspects of these results were explored further in each infant.
For L.A.H., we repeated the test for each eye viewing separately.
With the right eye she could respond to targets in both half-fields (left, 12/12 correct; right, 7/7) as in binocular viewing.
But the left eye yielded significantly poorer performance (2/16) in the right half-field, although still good (11/11) in the left.
This pattern of results suggests that no uncrossed pathway from the left eye to the damaged left side of the brain is functional to elicit fixation shifts.
With P.P., shifts of fixation were compared between a ‘competition’ condition, in which the central target remained visible, and the ‘non-competition’condition where it disappears at the onset of the lateral target.
In the non-competition condition P.P. made fixation shifts to the target in his left half-field, but competition reduced this performance much more severely than in the right half-field (Fig. 2).
Such competition effects normally occur in both half-fields in the first month of life, but significantly reduce by 3 months, a change linked to cortically mediated attentional mechanisms.
Qualitatively, infant P.P. often appeared to blink and make nodding head movements in order to ‘unlock’ his central fixation and move his gaze to a target in his defective half-field.
With binocular stimulation of OKN, both infants showed marked asymmetry, with brisk responses to stimulus movement in the direction towards the decorticate half-field (that is, contralateral-directed with respect to the damage).
In the direction towards the good half-field, the only response, if any, was occasional long tracking movements or reversed OKN.
Figure 3 shows results for P.P. Over the whole velocity range tested, he shows the asymmetry for stimulation of each eye individually, as well as binocularly; note that this is quite different from the pattern seen in very young normal infants and subjects with defective binocularity, who show no temporal-directed response in either eye but no evident asymmetry in binocular viewing.
Normal infants over 3 months, and adults, show very similar OKN responses to nasal-directed and temporal-directed motion of these stimuli.
L.A.H. showed little response in either direction with her right eye (contralateral to the absent hemisphere), and only nasal-directed response with he left eye.
The nucleus of the optic tract (NOT) on each side of the pretectum is believed to control OKN responses to stimuli moving towards that side.
The nasal-directed response in young infants has been widely interpreted as reflecting a functional crossed pathway, direct to the NOT, with the temporal-directed response depending on later maturation of an uncrossed pathway through binocular cortical neurons.
But if a direct crossed pathway was functional in these patients, it should allow nasal-directed responses in both eyes, which were not seen.
The results imply that in these patients, OKN in either direction requires an intact pathway through the visual cortex.
P.P., but not L.A.H., was able to use an uncrossed pathway on the intact side; this may possibly reflect differences in cortical binocularity between the two infants.
A similar pattern to that of P.P. has been reported for a child with a large cyst in one hemisphere.
Overall, our results are consistent with proposals that OKN in human adults is under cortical control for both directions.
Cortically blind patients have often been reported to lack OKN, although the response has been found to recover after some months.
Developmentally, the results suggest either that a cortical pathway operates in normal newborns, or that an initially functional route direct to the NOT drops out in favour of cortical control at a very early stage.
The fixation shift results make it clear that orienting behaviour can be evoked by stimuli that cannot have been processed by any contralateral cortical structures.
The relation of this behaviour to ‘blindsight’ is debatable because the infants cannot report their subjective experience.
We presume that the behaviour depends on subcortical pathways involving the superior colliculus, although given the early abnormalities of these brains, anomalous projections to the hemisphere ipsilateral to the stimulus cannot be excluded.
The results support earlier findings with older hemispherectomy patients and are consistent with models of subcortical control of visual orienting in normal newborns.
The presence of these responses in hemispherectomized infants as young as 8 months and within 3 months of surgery, argues against any need for long-term plasticity, or acquisition of a special strategy, in order to use this subcortical route.
There may, of course, have been shorter-term adaptations first to abnormality and then to absence of the cortex on one side.
The monocular results imply that the crossed pathway is necessary for an orienting response to the decorticate half-field.
This is somewhat surprising given primate evidence that the colliculus receives substantial uncrossed input.
But in hemianopic patients, only the crossed pathway can convey target inhibition from the ‘blind’ field that delays a saccade towards the intact field, and the crossed pathway also appears dominant in fixation control early in development.
A persisting central stimulus can largely suppress the orienting response, suggesting that cortically based mechanisms, when present, are prepotent in competition with the subcortical orienting mechanism.
Generally, the study of hemispherectomized children shows that cortical and subcortical visual systems interact in different ways for different visual functions, and raises the important question of how far these interactions may be plastic during early development.
FIG. 1 Pre-operative magnetic resonance images of the two infants' brains (T2-weighted axial images).
a , Patient P.P.: section at level of the thalamus and basal ganglia shows right occipital region (shown on right) lacking grey/white matter differentiation resulting in apparent thickening of the grey matter (small arrows).
Anteriorly large gyri appear, with decreased signal throughout the hemisphere (large arrow).
Histology after hemispherectomy showed an extensive neuronal migration defect with polymicrogyria mainly in the area supplied by the middle cerebral artery.
b , Patient L.A.H.: section at level of basal ganglia.
The right hemisphere (shown on right) appears normal.
Abnormal morphological changes in the left hemisphere include absence of gyri, thickening of cortex, and marked signal abnormality in the remaining white matter.
These are most prominent in parietal and occipital lobes (arrows).
Pathological examination after hemispherectomy of the resected specimen showed pachygyria with nodular heteratopia and superficial myelination.
FIG. 2 Comparison of ‘competition’ and non-competition conditions for fixation shifts in subject P.P. When the observer is satisfied that the infant is fixating the initial high-contrast (88%) central stimulus, he initiates presentation of a lateral target at 23 deg either right or left of centre.
Target is one cycle of 0.08cycledeg -1 vertical square-wave grating in a strip 12x32 deg, contrast 50%, matched in mean luminance (8cd m -2 ) to the grey background, reversing in contrast 6 times per second.
In non-competition trials the central target disappears at this point; in competition trials it remains visible.
The observer is ‘blind’ to target location of the target and makes a forced-choice whether the initial fixation shift is to right or left.
Latency is subsequently measured from a time-coded videotape record of head and eye movements.
(Initial results on both infants reported in the text used the same procedure but with non-competition trials only and a target contrast of 88%).
Bars show the percentage of correctly directed fixations to targets appearing in the left (LVF) and right (RVF) visual fields, on three successive visits.
Visit 1, age 8 months, 3 months after right hemispherectomy; Visit 2, age 10 months (5 months post-operative); Visit 3, 12 months,(7 months post-operative).
The left visual field would normally project to the hemisphere which is absent in this patient;n above each bar refers to the total number of trials with that target.
Whether the apparent trend of decreased responses in the competition condition across the three successive visits represents a long-term behavioural change is an important question for further studies.
FIG. 3 The asymmetry of optokinetic nystagmus for subject P.P. tested at age 9 months (5 months after R hemispherectomy).
To stimulate OKN, infants were seated in front of a rear-projection screen (subtending 120° widex100° high) on which a moving film strip projected a texture of irregular high-contrast blobs, moving at speeds of 28–80 deg s -1 either leftwards or rightwards.
Beats per second derived from an observer counting fast-phase eye movements over a 10–20s period.
In binocular right-eye and left-eye viewing conditions, brisk OKN is elicited by right-to-left motion; for left-to-right motion the number of beats is very small and does not represent a normal OKN response (the traces at bottom illustrate the observer's description of the pattern of eye movements in the two directions).
RE, right eye; LE, left eye.
Molecular identification of microorganisms associated with parthenogenesis
R. Stouthamer, J. A. J. Breeuwer, R. F. Luck & J. H. Werren
CYTOPLASMICALLY inherited microorganisms are widespread in insects and have been implicated as causes of female parthenogenesis (females developing from unfertilized eggs) and cytoplasmic incompatibility.
Normal sexual reproduction can be restored by treatment with antibiotics.
Sequence analysis of the DNA encoding 16S ribosomal RNA has shown that cytoplasmic incompatibility bacteria from diverse insect taxa are closely related (they share  95% sequence similarity) and belong to the alpha subdivision of Proteobacteria.
Here we show that parthenogenesis — associated bacteria from parasitoid Hymenoptera also fall into this bacterial group, having up to 99% sequence similarity to some incompatibility microorganisms.
Both incompatibility and parthenogenesis microorganisms alter host chromosome behaviour during early mitotic divisions of the egg.
Incompatibility bacteria act by interfering with paternal chromosome incorporation in fertilized eggs, whereas parthenogenesis bacteria prevent segregation of chromosomes in unfertilized eggs.
These traits are adaptive for the microorganisms.
On the basis of their sequence similarities, we conclude that parthenogenesis bacteria and cytoplasmic incompatibility bacteria form a monophyletic group of microorganisms that ‘specialize’ in manipulating chromosome behaviour and reproduction of insects.
Identification of insect bacterial symbionts has long been hampered by the inability to culture these fastidious prokaryotes.
But the development of the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and use of DNA sequence encoding 16S RNA (16S sequences) in microbial phylogeny has made it possible to determine their phylogenetic position.
We amplified and sequenced the bacterial 16S ribosomal DNA from six parthenogenetic strains of Trichogramma wasps (three different species) and one parthenogenetic strain of Muscidifurax uniraptor.
Trichogramma wasps are minute (around 0.5mm) parasites of insect eggs, primarily those of Lepidoptera.
Muscidifurax uniraptor is a Pteromalid pupal parasitoid of houseflies.
Each of these strains harbours microorganisms associated with parthenogenesis.
To check for PCR amplification of bacteria not associated with parthenogenesis, sexual strains of Trichogramma were used as a control.
Some forms of parthenogenesis in Trichogramma are genetically based and are not associated with microorganisms.
As a second control, three strains of Trichogramma with genetic parthenogenesis were also examined for cytoplasmic microorganisms.
For M. uniraptor,a closely related sexual species (M. raptor)was used as a PCR control.
In addition, standard controls for PCR contamination were set up.
PCR products were obtained from all microbe-associated parthenogenetic T. deion (four different North American collections originating from South Dakota, Texas, and two different localities in California: Bautista Canyon and Mountain Center),T. pretiosum (from Mexico),T. cordubensis (from Spain) and M. uniraptor.
No DNA was amplified from the controls.
The results from PCR are consistent with those from cytogenetic and antibiotic studies.
Bacteria are easily visualized in the eggs of parthenogenetic Trichogramma strains, and antibiotic treatment results in reversion to sexual reproduction and elimination of the microorganisms.
Bacteria are not present in the eggs of bisexual strains or those with genetically based parthenogenesis.
All microbe-associated parthenogenetic strains examined have a cytogenetic mechanism of parthenogenesis (gamete duplication) that differs from those with genetic parthenogenesis (ref. 19; R. S. and D. J. Kazmer, unpublished data).
Phylogenetic analysis of the 16S rDNA sequences from the parthenogenesis microorganisms was undertaken using the parsimony algorithm Branch and Bound of PAUP 3.0 (ref. 20).
All parthenogenesis bacteria fall in the alpha subdivision of Proteobacteria, and form a group with over 95% sequence similarity (Figs 1 and 2).
Most interestingly, all parthenogenesis microorganisms are closely related to cytoplasmic incompatibility bacteria, which are found in diverse insect taxa including beetles (Coleoptera), butterflies (Lepidoptera), flies (Diptera) and wasps (Hymenoptera).
Wolbachia pipientis,the cytoplasmic incompatibility microbe of Culex pipiens,is type species of the genus Wolbachia (see ref. 6).
Based on their high sequence similarity, it is reasonable also to place parthenogenesis bacteria within this genus.
Figure 1 shows the phylogenetic position of the parthenogenesis/ incompatibility group relative to several representatives of the alpha subdivision of proteobacteria.
The parthenogenesis/ incompatibility (Wolbachia)bacteria form a monophyletic group relative to other alpha Proteobacteria.
The closest sequenced relatives to this group are Anaplasma marginale ,Cowdria ruminantium,and several species of Ehrlichia .
Each of these are arthropod vectored microorganisms that cause mammalian diseases.
A more detailed phylogenetic analysis of the parthenogenesis/ incompatibility group is shown in Fig. 2.
Although partial 16S sequences (the first 700 bases) are known for incompatibility bacteria from several insect species, nearly complete sequences have only been published for incompatibility bacteria of the mosquito Culex pipiens and wasps of the genus Nasonia .
This is unfortunate, because much of the phylogenetically informative sequence information is in the second half (3' end) of the 16S rDNA gene.
Therefore we did the phylogenetic analysis for those incompatibility microbe sequences that are nearly complete, including Culex and Nasonia incompatibility bacteria.
The parthenogenesis/incompatibility group is divided into two subgroups that differ consistently from each other at 15 positions over 1,464 bases of the almost complete 16S ribosomal gene.
The two subgroups represent real 16S variants based on analysis of secondary structure.
The diagnostic base positions separating the two subgroups are shown in Table 1.
Although incompatibility microorganisms from different insects occur in both subgroups, all parthenogenesis microorganisms from Trichogramma wasps fall into subgroup I. All 16S rDNA sequences of parthenogenesis bacteria from Trichogramma can be distinguished from the incompatibility bacteria by two diagnostic base positions, as shown in Table 1.
This suggests a monophyletic origin for Trichogramma parthenogenesis bacteria.
In contrast, the parthenogenesis bacterium of Muscidifurax falls into subgroup II, suggesting an independent derivation of bacterial parthenogenesis in this wasp.
Alternatively, microbial parthenogenesis may have a single origin, with subsequent sequence divergence.
Resolving such issues requires more sequence information on hosts and bacterial symbionts.
Both parthenogenesis and incompatibility increase the transmission of these cytoplasmically (maternally) inherited bacteria.
Parthenogenesis increases frequency of the bacteria by biasing sex ratio towards the transmitting (female) sex.
Incompatibility increases the frequency of associated bacteria by indirectly decreasing the frequency of cytoplasmic lineages that do not carry the same bacterial strain , 24 .
Thus these phenotypes are selectively advantageous for the microorganisms.
The parthenogenesis/incompatibility Wolbachia are cytoplasmically inherited symbionts of insects that have evolved mechanisms of altering mitosis in their insect hosts.
Cytoplasmic incompatibility bacteria have been shown to disrupt the first mitotic divisions in fertilized eggs of incompatible crosses in Nasonia, Drosophila simulans and Culex pipiens .
In Nasonia it has further been shown that condensation of chromosomes derived from the sperm is abnormal and that they are often fragmented in incompatible crosses.
Mechanisms are unknown, although the process is likely to involve chromosome imprinting.
Parthenogenesis bacteria alter the segregation patterns of chromosomes in unfertilized eggs (ref. 19; R.S. and D. J. Kazmer, unpublished data).
By preventing segregation of chromosomes in the first mitotic division, diploidy is restored, which leads to the development of a parthenogenetic female.
Apparently some special attributes of this microbial group have led to acquisition of the ability to manipulate mitosis in eukaryotic hosts.
Nucleotide positions of parthenogenesis and incompatibility bacteria are shown that distinguish the two sequence subgroups.
Although additional variable positions (47) are present, the positions shown are fixed for all members of each subgroup (so they are diagnostic); position number is based on E. coli numbering.
Diagnostic positions for the Trichogramma parthenogenesis microorganisms are boxed.
CIM, cytoplasmic incompatibility microorganisms; PM, parthenogenesis microorganisms.
FIG. 1 Most parsimonious phylogenetic tree of parthenogenesis microorganisms (PM) of Trichogramma deion (Bautista strain) and Muscidifurax uniraptor,several cytoplasmic incompatibility microorgansisms (CIM) and other representatives of the alpha subdivision of the Proteobacteria.
The 16S rDNA sequences of PM (bold) and CIM are identified by the host species from which they were isolated.
Escherichia coli (gamma subdivision) was used as an outgroup.
Sequences were manually aligned using regions of the 16S gene that are conserved in eubacteria.
The aligned sequences of parthenogenesis microorganisms were 1,512 bases in length, including gaps.
Gaps were treated as a ‘fifth’ base.
The aligned sequence dataset was analysed with PAUP 3.0 (ref. 20) using the Branch and Bound algorithm to find the shortest tree(s).
Two parsimonious trees (length 1,195 bases) were generated.
They only differed in the positioning of the Drosophila simulans and Ephestia cautella microorganisms within the PM/CIM group.
This is a result of the fact that only a partial 16S sequence is available for these two cytoplasmic incompatibility microorganisms.
Sequences of 16S ribosomal genes of the M. uniraptor and Trichogramma symbionts were determined using the following procedure.
Total DNA was extracted from white pupae (100 of Trichogramma spp. and 5 of Muscidifurax)after these were surface-sterilized with 70% ethanol, thoroughly washed with sterile water and homogenized in a Mini-Bead beater (Biospec).
After precipitation with ethanol, bacterial 16S rDNA was PCR-amplified using conserved 16S rDNA primers (fD2 and rP2; ref. 21).
PCR product was then directly cloned into T-tailed M13mp18 vector and sequenced by the Sanger method using Sequenase vr. 2.0 kit (US Biochemical; for sequence primers, see refs 5,27).
The nucleotide sequence data of parthenogenesis bacteria will appear in Genbank under the following accession numbers;M. uniraptor,L02882;T. cordubensis,L02883;T. deion TX, 102884;T. pretiosum,L02885,T. deion Mo, 102886;T. deion Ba, L02887;T. Deion SD, L02888.
FIG. 2 A most parsimonious phylogenetic tree of parthenogenesis and cytoplasmic incompatibility microorganisms based on 16S rDNA sequences.
The 16S sequences of microorganisms are identified by the host from which they are isolated (PM are in bold).
Anaplasma marginale was used as the outgroup.
Only taxa with complete 16S rDNA sequences were included in the analysis.
Gaps were treated as a ‘fifth’ base.
Constant and uninformative sites were eliminated, which gave a total of 68 informative (variable) sites.
The reduced dataset was analysed using PAUP 3.0 and the Branch and Bound algorithm.
Numbers indicate the level of support for individual nodes on the tree based on 100 bootstrapped (Branch and Bound) runs.
Twelve most parsimonious trees (length 97) were generated with minor differences at three nodes, which is consistent with the low levels of support for those particular nodes.
Sequences from each subgroup have been identified from each Nasonia species.
These represent either two 16S rDNA genes in Nasonia Wolbachia or infection by two different bacterial strains.
Adhesion of epidermal Langerhans cells to keratinocytes mediated by E-cadherin
Aimin Tang, Masayuki Amagai, Lawrence G. Granger, John R. Stanley & Mark C. Udey
LANGERHANS cells (LC) are the principal accessory cells present in epidermis.
Because LC have limited capacity for self-renewal, epidermis is continually repopulated by as-yet uncharacterized bone marrow-derived LC progenitors.
In addition, although LC persist in epidermis for extended periods, LC are induced to migrate from skin to regional lymph nodes after antigen exposure.
To begin to elucidate mechanisms involved in LC trafficking, we characterized LC-keratinocyte (KC) interactions.
Here we report that fresh murine LC express cadherins, and that LC adhere to KC in vitro through E-cadherin.
Cultured LC (which may bear a phenotypic and functional relationship to LC that have migrated to lymph nodes) express lower levels of E-cadherin and exhibit decreased affinity for KC.
These results suggest that expression of E-cadherin by LC promotes persistence of these cells in epidermis, and that cadherins may play important and unanticipated roles in interactions between leukocytes and epithelia.
Because cadherins are expressed in uninflamed epidermis and are prominently involved in interactions between KC, we reasoned that cadherins might also mediate adhesion of LC to KC.
We examined murine epidermal cells for surface expression of cadherins with anti-E- (ECCD-2; ref. 14) and anti-P-cadherin (PCD-1; ref. 8) monoclonal antibodies by flow cytometry.
Staining with ECCD-2 revealed several subpopulations of KC (Fig. 1).
About half of the KC expressed high levels of E-cadherin.
The remaining KC expressed lower levels.
LC expressed levels of E-cadherin as high as those expressed by the most intensely stained KC.
Both KC and LC stained less intensely with PCD-1, but most LC also expressed P-cadherin.
We also found that cadherin epitopes on LC (and KC) were degraded by trypsin in 1mM EDTA (TE cells) and protected from trypsin by 1mM calcium (TC cells), as previously reported for E- and P-cadherins (Fig. 1).
Partially purified splenic dendritic cells and preparations enriched in lymph node dendritic cells did not stain with ECCD-2 or PCD-1 (data not shown).
To demonstrate that the E-cadherin expressed by LC reflected endogenous synthesis, we characterized LC- and KC-derived E-cadherin messenger RNAs.
LC were enriched to –98% purity (Fig. 2 a)and total RNAs were prepared.
LC- and KC-derived mRNAs were reverse-transcribed and complementary DNAs were amplified using the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and E-cadherin, I-A α- chain, and keratin-1 (K1) primers.
Reverse-transcribed PCR (RT-PCR) was done with serial dilutions of LC and KC RNA and the amounts of E-cadherin PCR products were compared with the amounts of I-A α -chain and K1 PCR products in each sample.
E-cadherin PCR products of the predicted size were obtained from both LC and KC RNA samples (Fig. 2 b).
LC-derived samples were greatly enriched in I-A α -chain and greatly depleted of K1 mRNA when compared with amounts of KC RNA that gave similar amounts of E-cadherin PCR product.
Thus, most of the E-cadherin PCR product derived from LC RNA originated in LC, and was not derived from contaminating KC.
Cadherins mediate cell-to-cell adhesion in tissues by binding to identical cadherins on adjacent (and usually ontogenically related) cells.
To determine whether cadherins on LC could mediate intercellular adhesion through this type of homophilic interaction, we examined the ability of LC to bind to L cells (mouse fibroblasts devoid of cadherins) and L cells transfected with a vector encoding mouse E-cadherin (LEC cells)in vitro.
As shown in Fig. 3, LEC cells expressed E-cadherin and avidly bound LC, whereas few LC attached to L cells lacking cadherins.
Prior treatment of LC with typsin in EDTA resulted in a 68% reduction in LC-LEC cell interactions.
We also tested the ability of LC to adhere to murine KC expressing E- and P-cadherins (Fig. 3d).
The number of TC-LC that adhered to KC was 10-fold greater than the number of TE-LC that bound, implying a role for cadherins in LC-KC interactions.
By counting the number of LC in representative fluorescence photomicrographs of monolayers before and after removal of nonadherent LC, we determined that the majority (experiments) of TC-LC added into the binding assay adhered to KC.
The importance of E-cadherin in LC-KC binding was confirmed by quantifying LC attachment to KC in the presence of antibody known to inhibit E-cadherin-dependent interactions and antibodies reactive with unrelated adhesion molecules.
Addition of the anti-E-cadherin antibody ECCD-1 into the binding assay reduced adhesion of LC to KC by 81  4% (n =3 experiments); equal amounts of anti-CD8, anti-ICAM-1 and anti-Mac-1 antibody had no effect on LC binding (Fig. 3 e).
We also assessed the level of cadherin expression on cultured LC (that may represent the in vitro equivalent of LC that have migrated to regional lymph nodes in vivo)and measured the ability of cultured LC to bind to KC, L cells and LEC cells.
As compared with fresh TC-LC, TC-cultured LC expressed lower levels of E-cadherin (mean fluorescence intensity 34.8% that of fresh TC-LC,n=3 experiments) and adhered less readily to KC (16.8% as well as fresh TC-LC,n=3 experiments)(Fig. 4).
The increased binding of TC-cultured LC to LEC cells relative to KC is largely reflective of the ability of TC-cultured LC to attach to fibroblasts, apparently through an E-cadherin-independent process (Fig. 4).
These results further emphasize the potential importance of E-cadherin in LC-KC interactions in vivo.
Members of the cadherin family are prominently represented in epithelial and neural tissues, where they play important roles in morphogenesis and in maintenance of tissue integrity.
Although structurally related molecules have recently been described in skeletal muscle, cadherins are not ubiquitously expressed by mesenchymal cells and have not previously been identified on leukocytes.
Our results indicate that epidermal LC express functional cadherins and suggest that cadherins may be responsible for certain biological properties of these highly specialized bone marrow-derived cells, including their propensity to persist in epidermis.
It will be of interest to determine if cadherin expression is a general feature of leukocyte subpopulations that reside in epidermis, and if cadherins are involved in leukocyte-epithelial interactions in other tissues as well.
FIG. 1 Binding of anti-cadherin monoclonal antibodies to cadherins expressed by epidermal Langerhans cells and keratinocytes.
Murine epidermal cells (EC) were treated with trypsin in EDTA (TE) or trypsin in calcium (TC), stained for E- or P-cadherins and I-A antigens, and analysed by two-colour flow cytometry. a, c, e,Cadherin-specific (phycoerythrin) fluorescence on I-A -(FITC -) KC;b, d, f,phycoerythrin fluorescence on I-A + LC. a, b,EC stained after a single exposure to trypsin in calcium during epidermal separation.
c, d, e, f,TE cells and TC cells, respectively.
Profiles of cells stained with rat antibody 53–6.72 (anti-CD8, ATCC, dotted line), ECCD-2 (anti-mouse E-cadherin; continuous line) or PCD-1 (anti-mouse P-cadherin; dashed line) are shown.
The gating used to differentiate KC from LC stained with anti-CD8 or anti-E-cadherin antibody (as depicted in a and b ) is illustrated in g and h.
METHODS.
Single-cell suspensions of BALB/c EC were prepared as previously described, except that trypsin digestion was done in Hank's balanced salt solution (HBSS) containing 1mM calcium (Biofluids), 10mM HEPES (GIBCO BRL).
After dissociation, EC were incubated in 0.01% trypsin in calcium- and magnesium-free HBSS (Biofluids) containing 1mM EDTA (TE) or 1mM calcium (TC) for 30min at 37°C (ref. 15) and washed with HBSS, 1mM calcium, 0.005% DNase (Sigma), 20% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Biofluids).
Cells were stained for epitopes reactive with rat (6.72, ECCD-2 or PCD-1) and mouse (MKD6, anti-mouse I-A d ; Becton Dickinson) antibody as previously described and analysed with a FACScan analytical flow cytometer using Consort 30 software (BDIS).
LC were 90% viable based on their ability to exclude propodium iodide.
FIG. 2 Characterization of Langerhans cell-derived E-cadherin mRNA.
LC were purified to  98% I-A + cells by preparative flow cytometry (a,continuous line).
KC (1% I-A + ) were obtained simultaneously (a,interrupted line).
Total RNA was prepared and mRNAs were reverse-transcribed and amplified by PCR, resolved in agarose gels and detected after ethidium bromide staining (b).
Lanes 1–4 depict PCR products derived from serial 10-fold dilutions of RNA.
METHODS.
LC were enriched from BALB/c TE-EC (ref. 22), stained with M5/114.15.12 (anti-I-A d and anti-I-E d , ATCC) and FITC-goat (Fab')2 anti-rat IgG (TAGO) and additionally purified using a BDIS Facstar Plus flow cytometer.
Purity of sorted populations was analysed by repeat flow cytometry (a).
Total RNA was extracted from sorted cells using RNAzol B (BIOTECX) and precipitated with yeast transfer RNA.
mRNAs were reverse-transcribed and amplified in serial 10-fold dilutions of RNA using a GeneAmp RNA PCR kit (Perkin Elmer Cetus) and primers (Synthecell) at 1μM for both cDNA synthesis and amplification.
The I-A α -chain primers used have been described.
Sense (5'-AGACCAAGATCAATCCCACC-3') and antisense (5'-CTCGCAAACACCTTATGTAC-3') K1 primers correspond to a portion of the 3'-untranslated region of murine K1 mRNA sequence (S. Yuspa).
Sense (5'-GTGAATTCCCAAAGAACCTGG-3') and anti-sense (5'-CTTCATCACGGAGGTTCCTG-3') E-cadherin primers encompassed the sequence encoding the epitopes reactive with ECCD-1 and ECCD-2 (refs 24, 25) and spanned three introns.
PCR parameters included denaturation at 95°C for 1min, annealing at 55°C for 1.15min and polymerization at 72 °C for 2min.
Twenty-five cycles were used to amplify K1 mRNA and 30 cycles were used for I-A α -chain and E-cadherin mRNAs.
PCR products (430 base pairs (bp) for I-A, 323bp for K1 and 344bp for E-cadherin) were resolved in 1.8% agarose (Gibco BRL) gels and detected after ethidium bromide staining.
PCR products were not detected if RNA or reverse transcriptase was omitted from the reaction tubes.
FIG. 3 Adhesion of Langerhans cells to E-cadherin-expressing fibroblasts and keratinocytes in vitro.
L cells, E-cadherin-transfected L cells (LEC cells) and cultured murine KC were analysed for cadherin expression as described (Fig. 1).
a, b, c,Profiles of L cells, LEC cells and KC stained with anti-CD8 (53–6.72, dotted line), anti-E-cadherin (ECCD-2, continuous line) or anti-P-cadherin (PCD-1, dashed line) antibody.
The ability of TC-LC (open bars) and TE-LC (solid bars) to adhere to L cells, LEC cells and KC was tested (d).
In a separate experiment, the influence of anti-E-cadherin (ECCD-1) and unrelated anti-adhesion molecule antibodies on LC-KC interactions was studied (e).
mAb, Monoclonal antibody.
METHODS.
L cells were transfected with expression vectors carrying the mouse E-cadherin cDNA (pBATEM2) and the neomycin-resistance gene (pBATneoβ) as described.
KC were prepared from neonatal BALB/c mice and cultured to confluence in low(0.05mM)-calcium-containing medium.
Low-calcium medium was replaced with normal calcium DMEM (Gibco BRL), 10% FBS and the incubation continued for 4h (ref. 28) before initiating binding assays.
Fibroblasts and KC (cultured in low-calcium medium) were detached from culture dishes after incubation in calcium-free HBSS, 2mM EDTA and were washed in HBSS with calcium, stained for cadherins and analysed by flow cytometry.
LC were enriched from TE- and TC-EC, stained with M5/114.15.2, FITC-(Fab') 2 goat anti-rat IgG and analysed by flow cytometry.
Preparations enriched in LC comprised 30–60% I-A + cells.
M5/114.15.2 was purified from supernatants using a protein G column (Pierce Chemical) and modified with NHS-LC-biotin (Pierce).
Supernatants containing 53–6.72 (anti-CD8), YN/1.7.4 (anti-ICAM-1, ATCC) and M1/70/15/11/5/HL (anti-Mac-1 (CD11b), ATCC) were concentrated in Centriprep 30 microconcentrators (Amicon) before use in inhibition studies.
PCD-1 (ref. 8) and ECCD-1 (ref. 18) were supplied by M. Takeichi.
Antibody concentrations were assayed by indirect ELISA.
To assess binding activity, LC stained with biotin-conjugated M5/114 and streptavidin-RED613 (Gibco BRL) were suspended in calcium-containing HBSS, 1% BSA, and allowed to adhere to confluent fibroblast or KC monolayers in 24-well culture plates 6x10 4 LC in 1ml per well (d)or 5x10 4 LC in 0.2ml per well (e)).
In the experiment shown in e,wells contained anti-adhesion molecule antibodies (100μgml -1 ) as indicated.
After 1h at 37°C, wells were washed six times with BSA, HBSS and adherent (fluorescent) LC were counted using an inverted phase fluorescence microscope.
Data reported represent the mean  s.e.m.
of the number of fluorescent cells enumerated in triplicate wells (in five random fields encompassed by the 20x objective (0.55mm per field) per well).
FIG. 4 Adhesion of fresh and cultured Langerhans cells to keratinocytes and fibroblasts in vitro.
Fresh and cultured LC were stained for E-cadherin and analysed by flow cytometry (a).
Profiles of TC-fresh LC stained with anti-CD8 (closely spaced dots) or anti-E-cadherin (ECCD-2, continuous line; mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) =114) and TC-cultured LC stained with anti-CD8 (widely spaced dots) or anti-E-cadherin (dashed line, MFI=33) are shown.
The ability of TC-fresh LC and TC-cultured LC to attach to KC, L cells and LEC cells was also quantified (b).
METHODS.
TC-fresh LC (39% I-A + ) were prepared and analysed for cadherin expression as described in Fig. 1 legend.
TC-cultured LC (45% I-A + ) represent BALB/c EC that were cultured for 72h (ref. 21), TC-treated and enriched by density gradient centrifugation.
Cell-binding activity was measured as described for Fig. 3.
Equal numbers of TC-fresh LC and TC-cultured LC (5x10 4 per well) were added into wells at the initiation of the binding assay.
Modulation of the cGMP-gated channel of rod photoreceptor cells by calmodulin
Yi-Te Hsu & Robert S. Molday
PHOTOBLEACHING of rhodopsin in rod photoreceptors activates the visual cascade system leading to a decrease in cyclic GMP and the closure of cGMP-gated channels in the rod outer segment plasma membrane.
Calcium plays an important role in the recovery of the rod outer segment to its dark state by regulating the resynthesis of cGMP by guanylate cyclase.
Here we report that calmodulin, a Ca 2+ -binding protein present in the rod outer segment, increases the apparent Michaelis constant of the channel for cGMP.
This results in a decrease in the rate of cation influx into the rod outer segment by two- to sixfold at low cGMP concentrations and has the effect of increasing the sensitivity of the channel to small changes in cGMP levels during phototransduction.
Biochemical studies indicate that calcium-calmodulin binds to a protein of M r 240K which is tightly associated with the channel.
On the basis of these studies, Ca 2+ is suggested to play a central role in photorecovery and light adaptation, not only by regulating guanylate cyclase, possibly through recoverin, but also by modulating the cGMP-gated channel through calmodulin interaction with the 240K protein.
The effect of calmodulin on the cGMP-gated channel activity was investigated using a calcium ion flux assay.
The Ca 2+ -sensitive dye, Arsenazo III, was trapped inside the rod outer segment (ROS) membrane vesicles and the rate of Ca 2+ influx was measured spectrophotometrically as a function of cGMP concentration in the presence and absence of calmodulin (Fig. 1 a, b).
The apparent Michaelis constant (K m ) for cGMP increased from 19  0.4 μM in the absence of calmodulin to 33  2μM in the presence of Ca 2+ -calmodulin.
This change in K m translates into a relatively large change in the rate of Ca 2+ influx (sixfold) at 12.5μM cGMP.
The V max and the cooperativity for cGMP as determined by a Hill plot, however, was unaffected by Ca 2+ -calmodulin.
Other calcium-binding proteins, including recoverin and S-100 protein, had no effect on channel activity under similar conditions.
The Ca 2+ -calmodulin effect on channel activity was also inhibited by excess mastoparan, a calmodulin inhibitor.
A neutral red dye assay was used to determine the effect of Ca 2+ -calmodulin on the cGMP-dependent influx rate of different cations into ROS membrane vesicles.
At 20μM cGMP, Ca 2+ -calmodulin decreased the initial rate of ion influx by 2–3-fold for all cations except Mg 2+ (Fig. 2).
The smaller decrease for Mg 2+ (1.4-fold) may be due to the interference of high Mg 2+ concentration on the interaction of Ca 2+ with calmodulin.
For Ca 2+ influx rates using the neutral red assay, Ca 2+ -calmodulin was observed to increase the K m for cGMP from 34μM to 51μM without affecting the Hill coefficient (n=2.2).
The higher K m and lower Hill coefficient obtained with this assay may be due to the hydrophobic nature of this dye and its interaction with the phospholipids and/or channel.
The effect of Ca 2+ concentration on the calmodulin modulation of channel activity was also measured using the neutral red dye assay.
As shown in Fig. 3 for Na + influx into ROS membrane vesicles, the calmodulin effect on channel activity was observed over a Ca 2+ concentration of 50–300nM.
This is comparable to the range of the Ca 2+ dependence for recoverin activation of guanylate cyclase and to the physiological Ca 2+ concentration in photoreceptor outer segments.
Earlier, Caretta et al.
observed that Ca 2+ decreased the binding affinity of a cGMP analogue to ROS membranes.
It is likely that this observed Ca 2+ effect on cGMP binding is related to the effect of Ca 2+ on calmodulin modulation of the cGMP-gated channel as reported here.
A 240K protein previously shown to be tightly associated with the cGMP-gated channel of ROS membranes has been identified as a major calmodulin-binding protein of ROS membranes by affinity chromatography and western blotting.
Two polypeptides of apparent M r 63K and 240K were isolated as the major constituents by calmodulin affinity chromatography (Fig. 4 (left), lane b).
These polypeptides comigrated with the 63K and 240K polypeptides of the cGMP-gated channel complex isolated on an anti-channel immunoaffinity column (Fig. 4 (left), lane c).
Western blots labelled with antibodies to the channel and to the 240K protein confirmed that the calmodulin affinity column extracted the 63K/240K cGMP-gated channel complex from ROS membranes (Fig. 4 (middle)).
A western blot labelled with 125 I-calmodulin in the presence of Ca 2+ was used to identify the calmodulin-binding proteins.
Although calmodulin labelled several polypeptides of apparent M r 240K, 140K, 70K, 67K and 35K in both the ROS membrane and calmodulin affinity-purified fraction (Fig. 4 (right), lanes a and b), only the 240K polypeptide was labelled with calmodulin in the immunoaffinity-purified channel complex (Fig. 4 (right) lane c).
Calmodulin affinity chromatography has also been used to purify a related 63K/240K channel complex from pig and rat ROS membranes.
This suggests that the channel complex and its interaction with calmodulin is conserved, at least for mammalian ROS.
These results indicate that calmodulin affinity chromatography can be used to purify the cGMP-gated channel complex from ROS membranes and that the 240K channel-associated polypeptide binds calmodulin in a Ca 2+ -dependent manner.
On the basis of these findings, calmodulin modulation of the channel activity is likely to occur through Ca 2+ -dependent interaction of calmodulin with the 240K channel-associated protein.
The molecular identity of the 240K protein is not yet known.
Previous studies have indicated some immunocrossreactivity between the 240K ROS protein and the α -subunit of red blood cell spectrin and brain fodrin.
These proteins have been reported to bind to calmodulin.
Results reported here suggest that changes in cytoplasmic Ca 2+ concentration during the photoresponse can affect the activity of the cGMP-gated channel.
The channel is opened in response to the cooperative binding of cGMP to the 63K channel subunits.
The affinity of the channel for cGMP is further modulated by the level of cytoplasmic Ca 2+ through the binding of Ca 2+ -calmodulin to the channel complex.
This Ca 2+ -calmodulin effect on the channel is most pronounced at low cGMP concentrations as found under physiological conditions.
Regulation of the channel by cGMP and Ca 2+ -calmodulin is in some ways analogous to the regulation of haemoglobin by oxygen and pH (Bohr effect), in which small changes in pH alter the affinity of haemoglobin for oxygen.
The Ca 2+ -calmodulin effect on the cGMP-gated channel can be incorporated into the current model for photoexcitation and photorecovery.
In the dark, the free cGMP level in ROS, estimated to be about 4–10 μM, maintains a small but significant number of channels in their open state, allowing for the influx of Na + and Ca 2+ .
Under these conditions, the cytoplasmic Ca 2+ is maintained at a relatively high concentration (0.3μM) by balancing the influx of Ca 2+ through the channel with the efflux of Ca 2+ through the Na + /Ca 2+ -K + exchanger.
Under these conditions, guanylate cyclase is maintained at its basal level of activity and the cGMP-gated channel is in its low affinity (high K m ) state for cGMP through Ca 2+ -calmodulin binding to the 240K channel-associated protein.
Photoexcitation leads to the activation of phosphodiesterase and a decrease in cGMP levels.
The decrease in total cGMP has been reported to be only 10–15% (ref. 24), but the decrease in free cGMP has not yet been measured.
Because the channel is in its low-affinity state, it may be positioned on the cGMP dose-response curve to be sensitive to a small decrease in free cGMP concentration, thus facilitating its closure.
A decrease in cytoplasmic Ca 2+ levels (estimated to be below 100nM) will result because of the decreased influx of Ca 2+ through the channel.
This decrease in Ca 2+ will activate the guanylate cyclase, possibly through recoverin and limit phosphodiesterase activation.
Calmodulin will also dissociate from the channel complex and cause the channel to switch to its high-affinity state for cGMP.
The channel will now reopen at a lower cGMP level, thus aiding the recovery of the ROS to its dark level as cGMP synthesis proceeds.
The opening of the channel will in turn restore the Ca 2+ level to its dark level, leading to the inactivation of guanylate cyclase and the return of the channel to its low-affinity state.
Thus, reversible binding of calmodulin to the channel complex in response to changes in the level of Ca 2+ has the effect of increasing the sensitivity of the channel to small changes in cGMP which may occur during the photoresponse.
Light adaptation  characterized by a decrease in rod sensitivity in the presence of background illumination has been shown to be mediated by Ca 2+ (refs 26, 27).
Reduced Ca 2+ induced under conditions of light adaptation will result not only in an increase in cGMP, but also in a higher affinity of the channel for cGMP.
On this basis, Ca 2+ may regulate photorecovery and light adaptation not only by regulating guanylate cyclase activity and phosphodiesterase activation, but also by modulating the affinity of the channel for cGMP.
FIG. 1
a,
Effect of calmodulin on the activation kinetics of the cGMP-gated channel.
The relative initial velocity of channel activation by cGMP was plotted against the concentration of cGMP either in the presence (i) or absence (○) of calmodulin.
In the absence of calmodulin, the channel had an apparent K m of 19μM and a Hill coefficient of 3.8 for cGMP.
In the presence of calmodulin, its K m increased to 33μM, but its Hill coefficient remained the same at 3.8.
These assays were done in three separate experiments using different ROS membrane vesicle preparations; in all cases an increase in K m (from 19  0.4μM to 33  2 μM) in the presence of calmodulin without significant change in either the V max or the Hill coefficient  and  in the absence and presence of calmodulin, respectively) was observed.
The solid curved lines are calculated from a sigmoidal binding isotherm using the indicated K m and Hill coefficients.
b,
A typical trace for cGMP-dependent influx of Ca 2+ into ROS vesicles containing trapped Arsenazo III.
A cGMP concentration of 12.5μM was used to initiate the influx of Ca 2+ either in the presence (+) or absence (-) of calmodulin.
METHODS.
ROS membrane vesicles were loaded with Arsenazo III dye as follows: ROS membranes were washed twice in buffer A (10mM HEPES pH7.4, 1mM DTT, 1mM EDTA and 0.1mM diisopropylfluorophosphate (DFP)) and once in buffer B (2mM HEPES, pH7.4, 0.2mM DTT and 0.02mM DFP) to remove soluble proteins.
The membrane pellet was then resuspended in buffer B at a concentration of 12mg protein per ml.
The ROS membrane was then bleached by continuous white light and subjected to freezing and thawing.
The membranes suspended in 10mM HEPES, pH7.4, 100mM KCl, 1mM DTT, and 2mM Arsenazo III were sonicated for 1min in a beaker of water using a broad-tip sonicator probe (Heat Systems-Ultrasonics) at setting 7.
The sonicated ROS membranes were then extruded three times through a Lipid Extruder (Lipex Biomembranes, Vancouver) using two layers of Nuclepore polycarbonate membranes of decreasing pore sizes from 800nm to 400nm and finally to 200nm (ref. 28).
The membrane vesicles were then passed through a Sephadex-G50 column (1.5x28cm) equilibrated in buffer C (10mM HEPES, pH7.4, 1mM DTT and 100mM KCl) to remove untrapped dye.
The eluted vesicles were further dialysed against buffer C for 3h.
ROS membrane vesicles containing trapped Arsenazo III dye were then added to buffer C in a cuvette to a final volume of 2ml and a protein concentration of 0.29mgml -either in the absence or presence of 4μgml -(235nM) calmodulin (Sigma).
Stock CaCl 2 (4μl) was then added to give a final concentrations of 100μM CaCl 2 .
One minute after the addition of calcium, the calcium influx assay was initiated by the injection of 4μl of varying concentrations of cGMP.
The change in absorbance was monitored at 650–730nm using a SLM Aminco DW 2000 dual-wavelength spectrophotometer.
FIG. 2 The initial rate of cGMP-dependent influx of different monovalent (Na + , K + , Li + and Cs + ) and divalent (Mg 2+ , Ba 2+ and Mn 2+ ) cations into ROS membrane vesicles in the presence (solid) and absence (cross-hatched) of calmodulin.
A cGMP concentration of 20μM was used to initiate cation influx.
The initial velocity of Ca 2+ flux in the absence of calmodulin was set at 100%.
All ions except Mg 2+ showed a two- to threefold decrease in initial velocities in the presence of Ca 2+ -calmodulin.
METHODS.
ROS were washed once in buffer A (10mM HEPES/arginine, pH7.4, 0.5mM DTT, 1mM EDTA) and once in buffer B (10mM HEPES/arginine, pH7.4 and 0.5mMDTT) to remove soluble proteins.
The membrane pellet was then resuspended in buffer B at a concentration of 14mg protein per ml and then subjected to freezing and thawing.
The membranes were then mixed with an equal volume of the resuspension buffer (20mM HEPES/arginine, pH7.4, 10% sucrose, 2.5% Ficoll, 0.5mM DTT) and extruded four times through the lipid extruder using one layer of Nuclepore polycarbonate membrane of decreasing pore size from 800nm to 400nm.
The assay was modified from ref. 13.
The membrane vesicles were added to the assay buffer containing 20mM HEPES/arginine, pH7.4, 5% sucrose, 0.5mMDTT, 30μM neutral red, 1μM trifluoromethoxycarbonylcyanide phenylhydrazone and with or without 400nM calmodulin to make up a total volume of 2ml and a concentration of 0.5mg protein per ml.
The assay was initiated by the addition of 50μl of 0.5M of various ions (12.2mM final concentration) containing 0.4mM CaCl 2 (10μM final concentration), followed by the addition of 4μl 10mM cGMP (20μM final concentration) 1min later.
The change in absorbance was monitored at 540–650nm using a SLM Aminco DW 2000 dual-wavelength spectrophotometer.
FIG. 3 Calcium dependence of calmodulin effect on the cGMP-gated channel activity.
The initial velocity of Na + influx in the presence of 10nM Ca 2+ but in the absence of calmodulin was designated as 100% activity.
The assay was done either in the presence (i) or absence of calmodulin (○) and with 20μM of cGMP.
Results of three sets of experiments in the presence of calmodulin are shown with standard deviations marked by errors bars.
METHODS.
Assay procedures are as described for Fig. 2.
Assay buffer containing different concentrations of CaCl 2 was prepared according to the program of Fabiato.
The following ratios of Ca 2+ to 1mM EGTA were used (estimated free Ca 2+ in parentheses): 0.134 (10nM), 0.279 (25nM), 0.436 (50nM), 0.607 (100nM), 0.755 (200nM), 0.830 (316nM), 0.860 (398nM), 0.908 (631nM) and 0.940 (1,000nM).
FIG. 4 Purification of the cGMP-gated channel complex by calmodulin and immunoaffinity chromatography and identification of the 240K channel-associated protein as a major calmodulin-binding polypeptide of ROS membranes.
Lanes a, ROS membranes after the extraction of soluble proteins; lanes b, EDTA eluant from a calmodulin affinity column; and lanes c, N-terminal peptide eluant from an N-terminal-specific anti-channel monoclonal antibody (PMc 6E7) column.
Left, SDS gel stained with Coomassie blue (CB); middle, western blot labelled with an anti-63K channel monoclonal antibody (PMc 1D1) and an anti-240K monoclonal antibody (PMs 5E11).
Right, western blot labelled with 125 I-calmodulin (CaM).
Calmodulin was found to bind to the 240K polypeptide, but not to the 63K channel subunit in the immunoaffinity-purified channel complex.
No labelling was observed in the presence of EGTA.
The intense labelling of the 67K and 70K proteins in the calmodulin column eluant as compared to the 240K protein is probably due to the low transfer efficiency of the 240K protein.
METHODS.
ROS membranes were prepared from freshly dissected bovine retinae as previously described in the presence of proteolytic inhibitors: 0.1mM DFP, 5μgml -1 aprotinin, 2μgml -1 leupeptin, and 2μgml -1 pepstatin.
The ROS membranes were washed three times in 10mM HEPES, pH7.4 buffer containing 1mM EDTA and solubilized in solubilization buffer (10mM HEPES, pH7.4, 150mM KCl, 10mM CaCl 2 , 1mM DTT, 18mM 3- ((3-cholamidopropyl) -dimethylammonio) -1-propanesulphonate (CHAPS), and 0.2% asolectin) at a concentration of 1.5–2mg protein per ml.
Solubilized protein (10mg) was then loaded onto each ml of calmodulin-Sepharose column (Sigma) equilibrated in the solubilization buffer.
The column was then washed with 15 column volumes of washing buffer (10mM HEPES, pH7.4, 1mM DTT, 1mM CaCl 2 , 15mM CHAPS and 0.18% asolectin).
Calmodulin-binding proteins were then eluted off the column with the washing buffer in which 1mM CaCl 2 was substituted by 2mM EDTA.
For the antibody affinity chromatography, PMc 6E7 monoclonal antibody was purified from ascites fluid and coupled to CNBr-activated Sepharose 2B beads.
The purification of the cGMP-gated channel complex was essentially the same as the calmodulin affinity chromatography except DTT was omitted and 0.9mgml -1 of synthetic peptide corresponding to the N-terminal of the 63K ROS channel (Ser-Asn-Lys-Glu-Gln-Glu-Pro-Lys-Glu-Lys-Lys-Lys-Lys-Lys) was used to elute the channel complex.
SDS gel electrophoresis and western blotting were done as described.
Calmodulin was iodinated by Bolton-Hunter reagent (NEN) and the labelling of the blot by calmodulin was done according to the method of Flanagan et al..
For immunoblotting analysis, the blot was first labelled with PMc 6E7 and PMs 5E11 and then relabelled with 125 I-labelled goat anti-mouse immunoglobulin and visualized by autoradiography.
Evidence for photochemical control of ozone concentrations in unpolluted marine air
G. P. Ayers, S. A. Penkett, R. W. Gillett, B. Bandy, I. E. Galbally, C. P. Meyer, C. M. Elsworth, S. T. Bentley & B. W. Forgan
OZONE in the troposphere is an important greenhouse gas, and a key participant in the oxidation of other trace species, but the mechanisms for its formation and destruction are not fully understood.
In polluted regions of the Northern Hemisphere, seasonal increases in ozone concentration have been observed; such changes could arise from photochemical reactions, but they could also involve transport from the ozone-rich stratosphere.
In remote, unpolluted (low-NO x  ) regions, photochemical theory predicts net destruction of ozone.
Here we present observations of a large summer minimum in ozone concentration in the unpolluted marine boundary layer of the Southern Hemisphere.
Our results show a clear link between ozone loss and hydrogen peroxide production in the region, demonstrating that in situ photochemistry, rather than transport, is the major cause of the seasonal ozone cycle in the boundary layer.
These findings emphasize the role of photochemical processes in the lower atmosphere, and may suggest only a limited role for transport in other, more polluted regions.
Ozone is both made and destroyed by photochemical reactions in the troposphere, the balance depending on the availability of nitrogen oxides and other gases, particularly hydrocarbons and carbon monoxide.
Formation of ozone occurs through photolysis of nitrogen dioxide (formed via oxidation of nitric oxide by peroxy radicals), producing oxygen atoms which combine readily with molecular oxygen to yield ozone.
This process is well documented in continental areas, where NO x  (NO+NO 2 ) concentrations exceed 100 parts per 10 12 by volume (p.p.t.v.)(ref. 6).
In more remote areas, where the NO x concentration can be extremely low, ozone destruction has been reported owing to photolysis by near ultraviolet light.
This process is not, however, well documented experimentally.
Ozone photolysis in remote, unpolluted (low-NO x  ) regions of the troposphere involves a sequence of free-radical reactions:
The hydroxyl radicals produced in reaction (2) can react with carbon monoxide or methane to yield peroxy radicals, for example HO 2 ; these can then react with ozone, as can hydroxyl, leading to further ozone destruction:
Alternatively, two HO 2 radicals can react  with each other to produce hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ):
Organic peroxy radicals, such as CH 3 O 2 produced in the course of methane oxidation, also react with HO 2 to form organic peroxides:
We report here the concurrent observation of processes (1) -(6), which we follow by monitoring ozone and peroxide concentrations in surface air.
These measurements allow us to assess the extent of photochemically driven peroxy radical chemistry in ozone destruction without the complications of simultaneous ozone-forming NO x  chemistry.
Our measurements were made between February 1991 and March 1992 at the Australian Baseline Air Pollution Station, located at 41°S on the northwestern tip of Tasmania.
The station sits on the seaward edge of Cape Grim, at 100m altitude.
This site frequently receives very clean air masses from the Southern Ocean which have had no contact with land for many days.
Measurements of peroxides and ozone were made at one-minute intervals except during routine instrument calibration, or failure.
Peroxide concentrations were measured using a fluorometric analyser similar to that described by Lazrus et al..
A TECO Model 49  ultraviolet photometer was used for the ozone measurements.
The data discussed here were selected according to wind-direction and particle-concentration criteria that have been shown previously to define ‘baseline’ periods of very clean oceanic air.
Details on the station, its scientific programmes and data summaries appear in the Baseline Atmospheric Program annual reports.
Although the peroxide instrument uses two channels to yield data on both total concentrations of peroxides and concentrations with hydrogen peroxide removed enzymatically, we have reservations about the performance of the second channel and so report only total peroxide concentrations, which we suppose to consist primarily of hydrogen peroxide plus some methylhydroperoxide (CH 3 OOH).
It is generally thought that the latter component should be small (about one-third the concentration of H 2 O 2 ) which, given the lower sensitivity of the instrument for CH 3 OOH (by a factor of 0.6), implies that the total peroxide signal should approximate that for hydrogen peroxide alone.
Figure 1 shows the average diurnal variation of ozone and total peroxide in baseline air for January 1992.
During sunlit hours, an ozone loss of about 1.6 parts per 10 9 by volume (p.p.b.v.) occurs between mid morning and late afternoon, followed by a replenishment to a similar starting concentration by about midnight.
In contrast, the average peroxide concentration increases from about 600 p.p.t.v. to about 900p.p.t.v. between mid morning and late afternoon, followed by an overnight loss.
These diurnal cycles are evident in all months of the summer half-year, but the amplitude of the cycles declines with declining solar intensity towards austral winter (June to August), at which point no clear cycle is discernible above the noise (0.2p.p.b.v. for ozone and 40p.p.t.v. for peroxide).
These observations leave little doubt that daytime photochemistry simultaneously destroys ozone and produces odd hydrogen radicals (HO and HO 2 ) in the clean, unperturbed marine boundary layer of the Southern Ocean.
The night-time replenishment of ozone is presumably caused by transport of ozone-rich air from higher altitudes.
Although there are no higher-altitude ozone data from Cape Grim to confirm this directly, an eight-year record of ozone profiles presented by Pittock in the mid-1970s for a coastal site on the Australian continent located 300km north of Cape Grim shows mean monthly ozone concentrations for the 800-hPa level (2km altitude), which is consistent with our suggestion.
These data and the mean monthly ozone concentrations (1982–1991) from Cape Grim are plotted in Fig. 2.
The night-time loss of peroxide must be the result of dry deposition to the ocean surface, which is expected of any highly soluble gas.
It is important to note that diurnal variations in dry deposition cannot significantly affect the diurnal cycles, because daily cycles in  surface temperature, boundary-layer mixing and the mixing height necessary to drive diurnal variations in dry deposition are all very small over the ocean.
Moreover, the ozone deposition velocity is so low over water (0.1cms -1 ) that dry deposition cannot explain the rate of ozone loss apparent in Fig. 1 during morning hours.
Some preliminary quantitative insights can be obtained by writing the rate of change of hydrogen peroxide with respect to time as: Here k f  is the second-order rate coefficient for recombination of HO 2 radicals (6.7x10 -12 cm 3 per molecule s -1 at 287K) and k l  is the first-order rate coefficient for physical removal.
The latter can be determined from the overnight loss shown in Fig. 1, yielding a first-order rate coefficient of 1x10 -5 s -1 , equivalent to a deposition velocity of H 2 O 2 of about 1cms -1 .
Assuming this applies night and day and is the dominant loss process, it is straightforward to derive an average HO 2 concentration of 3x10 8 molecules cm -3 for the middle six hours of the day.
This value may be compared with that predicted by a very simple photochemical box model.
The modelled processes are photolysis of O 3 to produce O (1 D), reaction of O (1 D) with H 2 O to yield OH, reaction of OH with CO, CH 4 and O 3 , reaction of H with O 2 to produce HO 2 , reaction of HO 2 with O 3 , NO and itself, and removal of H 2 O 2 by photolysis and dry deposition.
The model is constrained by observed long-term mean seasonal concentrations of CH 4 , CO, O 3 , H 2 O and temperature to predict concentrations of OH, HO 2 and H 2 O 2 for each hour of the year.
Photolysis rates were computed for clear-sky conditions at the latitude and longitude of Cape Grim, incorporating measured (1987 values) aerosol and ozone column extinctions.
The only unconstrained variable is NO concentration, for which we have no data; however, clean air should contain 10p.p.t.v.
NO (ref. 19).
As model sensitivity studies showed only minor changes in NO in this range, we assume that the NO concentration remains constant at 3p.p.t.v.
The predicted HO 2 concentration for the middle six hours of 15 January is 3.6x10 8 molecules cm -3 , in good agreement with the ‘measured’ value (from equation (7)) of 3x10 8 molecules cm -3 , especially as the ‘measured’value makes no provision for photolytic loss of H 2 O 2 and so underestimates HO 2 by about 20%.
The daily ozone losses calculated by the model for January are 1.23, 0.2 and 0.13 p.p.b.v. for reactions (2),(3) and (4) respectively giving a total loss of 1.6p.p.b.v. identical to our measured loss.
In October the calculated ozone loss is 0.9 p.p.b.v., compared with a measured loss of 1p.p.b.v., so despite the simplicity of the model this agreement lends considerable credibility to the basic photochemical scheme.
A comparison of the measured and calculated seasonal cycles of peroxide at Cape Grim is shown in Fig. 3.
The agreement is again fairly good, given that the model output does not include organic peroxides and that hydrogen peroxide results from a radical-radical recombination reaction (5) and thus is very sensitive to the predicted HO 2 concentration.
The measured seasonal variations of peroxide and ozone in clean air at Cape Grim during the experiment are contrasted in Fig. 4.
The seasonal ozone maximum clearly occurred in winter, when levels of peroxide were minimal, and the minimum average ozone concentration occurred in summer, when maximum concentrations of peroxide were present.
These data, when considered in conjunction with the instantaneous loss of ozone and production of peroxide (Fig. 1) show clearly that photochemical processes modulated by the solar cycle control the annual ozone budget of the clean marine boundary layer.
The concentration of ozone in surface air at Cape Grim can now be explained in terms of the competition between vertical mixing in the lower few kilometres of the atmosphere, near-surface destruction by photochemical reactions, and continuous, slow, dry deposition.
Assuming that there is little seasonal variation in the ozone mixing ratio at the 800-hPa level (Fig. 2), enhanced photochemical destruction in the moist marine boundary layer in summer must be the cause of both the steep summer minimum in near-surface concentration and an increased vertical gradient.
The key factor here is probably enhanced summertime OH formation/ozone loss in the boundary layer (via reaction (2)) caused by the high summertime water-vapour content in the marine boundary layer.
This explanation has been advanced previously to explain very similar seasonal cycles at Cape Grim in the vertical gradient of methane, which is destroyed by OH and which, like ozone, shows an enhanced drawdown in boundary-layer concentration in summer.
The Cape Grim ozone record is very different from those at clean-air sites in the Northern Hemisphere—for example, elevated sites such as Mauna Loa, and Izania in the Canary Islands, and surface sites such as Mace Head on the west coast of Ireland—where a spring maximum is a dominant feature.
The lack of such a maximum at Cape Grim leaves open the possibility that they may be caused by phenomena other than, or in addition to , increased transport from the stratosphere in springtime, such as enhanced photochemical production of ozone at that time.
Finally, we should comment on the relative abundance of ozone and hydrogen peroxide at Cape Grim.
In summer the ozone concentration is 15p.p.b.v. whereas the peroxide concentration is 1 p.p.b.v..
Taking into account their respective lifetimes (1–2 weeks and 1 day), however, the two oxidants are seen to be approximately equal in importance as repositories of highly reactive oxygen.
FIG. 1 Average diurnal cycles for peroxide (open squares) and ozone (filled squares) in baseline air at Cape Grim for January 1992.
FIG. 2 Monthly mean ozone concentrations at Cape Grim, 1982–91 (filled squares), and at 800hPa (2km altitude) over Aspendale, 1965–73 (open squares).
FIG. 3 Comparison of observed (open squares) and model-predicted (filled squares) seasonal cycles of hydrogen peroxide in baseline air at Cape Grim.
FIG. 4 Comparison of peroxide (open histogram) and ozone (filled squares) seasonal cycles in baseline air at Cape Grim.
Primary structure of dystrophin-related protein
J. M. Tinsley, D. J. Blake, A. Roche, U. Fairbrother, J. Riss, B. C. Byth, A. E. Knight, J. Kendrick-Jones, G. K. Suthers, D. R. Love, Y. H. Edwards & K. E. Davies
DYSTROPHIN-RELATED protein (DRP or ‘utrophin’) is localized in normal adult muscle primarily at the neuromuscular junction.
In the absence of dystrophin in Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) patients, DRP is also present in the sarcolemma.
DRP is expressed in fetal and regenerating muscle and may play a similar role to dystrophin in early development, although it remains to be determined whether DRP can functionally replace dystrophin in adult tissue.
Previously we described a 3.5-kilobase complementary DNA clone that exhibits 80 per cent homology to the C-terminal domain of dystrophin.
This sequence identifies a 13-kilobase transcript that maps to human chromosome 6 (refs 2, 11).
Antibodies raised against the gene product identify a polypeptide with a relative molecular mass of about 400K in all tissues examined.
To investigate the relationship between DRP and dystrophin in more detail, we have cloned and sequenced the whole DRP cDNA.
Homology between DRP and dystrophin extends over their entire length, suggesting that they derive from a common ancestral gene.
Comparative analysis of primary sequences highlights regions of functional importance, including those that may mediate the localization of DRP and dystrophin in the muscle cell.
Because DRP is under-represented in amplified cDNA libraries, we constructed an unamplified library using messenger RNA extracted from the human glioma cell line IN157, in which DRP is abundantly expressed in the absence of dystrophin.
Initially the library was screened with a 1.9-kb fragment derived from the B3 cDNA referred to previously, thereafter a stepwise screening procedure led to the isolation of nine overlapping clones covering the complete DRP cDNA.
A single large open reading frame of 10,299 base pairs (bp) is preceded by an ATG initiation codon and 550bp of 5’ untranslated sequence.
The stop codon is followed by about 2kb of 3' untranslated region containing an AATAAA poly(A) consensus sequence.
The open reading frame encodes a protein of 3,433 amino acids with a predicted relative molecular mass of 395K a size similar to dystrophin M r 427K).
DNA and amino-acid sequence comparisons of DRP and dystrophin show the overall structure to be similar with a putative actin-binding domain in the first 250 amino acids, a long region containing multiple repeats followed by a cysteine-rich domain.
In the first 250 amino acids, 80 per cent of the residues are conserved between DRP and dystrophin.
This region of dystrophin is known to bind actin in vitro and computer analysis identified two actinin-type actin-binding motifs at amino-acid positions 33–42 and 107–131 in DRP.
Figure 1 shows an amino-acid comparison between DRP, dystrophin and the consensus sequence for α -actinin.
The proposed 15-amino-acid actin-binding domain of α -actinin is also conserved in dystrophin and DRP with nine exact matches and three conserved matches.
These data suggest that DRP, like dystrophin, binds actin and consequently may have a similar cellular function to that of dystrophin.
DRP and dystrophin are similar throughout most of their lengths, although DRP lacks two large regions in the second half of the rod domain.
Excessive emphasis has been placed on the ‘spectrin repeats’ of dystrophin as the repeats are much more variable than those of spectrin, which suggests that their structure may differ.
The predictions of coiled-coil regions are very closely related between human, mouse and chicken dystrophin sequences (data not shown).
Although a broadly similar pattern is seen in DRP, there are significant differences in the rod domain.
Whether these predictions are consistent with existing models for the structure of dystrophin is not clear, but they suggest that the structure is more irregular than previously described.
This may reflect lower evolutionary constraints on the structure of this region in the two proteins.
Indeed, large deletions of this domain in dystrophin result in only a very mild phenotype.
An interesting feature at the very end of the carboxy terminus is the pair of predicted coiled-coil regions which are virtually identical in all four published sequences.
The function of this region is unknown.
In dystrophin, part of the C-terminal domain and the adjacent cysteine-rich region are involved in the binding of the dystrophin glycoprotein complex.
Absence of the carboxy terminus of dystrophin is associated with severe phenotypes in most muscular dystrophy patients.
Comparison of the C-terminal regions of DRP and the dystrophins (Fig. 2) shows that this region is highly conserved with an 80 per cent exact match and about half of the remaining residues conserved.
Strong conservation of the glycoprotein-binding region suggests that DRP may bind to the sarcolemma in dystrophic muscle through the glycoprotein complex in a similar manner to dystrophin.
It remains to be seen whether interaction occurs between DRP and glycoproteins in tissues other than muscle and whether such interaction is important to the function of DRP in these tissues.
FIG. 1 Sequence comparison between the N terminus of human dystrophin (residues 11–231), DRP (utrophin; residues 27–246) and the α -actinin consensus sequence.
The sequences were aligned with the aid of the computer program PILEUP (UWGCG); boxes enclose conserved residues and the consensus line indicates regions of exact homology.
Bold broken lines indicate regions important in actin binding (MOTIFS, UWGCG) and the region underlined is the 15-amino-acid actin-binding domain of α -actinin.
FIG. 2 Amino-acid sequence comparison of the C termini of human dystrophin (3,075–3,685), mouse dystrophin (3,075–3,678; J. S. Chamberlain, J. Pearlman, D. Muzny and N. Farwell, unpublished data), chicken dystrophin (3,079–3,660) and DRP (utrophin; 2,833–3,427).
Sequences were aligned using the program PILEUP (UWGCG).
Blocked regions indicate exact conservation of residues.
Solid arrowheads mark the boundary between the cysteine-rich and C-terminal domains.
Two open arrowheads delimit the putative binding region with the dystrophin-associated glycoproteins.
Molecular analysis of the association of HLA-B53 and resistance to severe malaria
Adrian V. S. Hill, John Elvin, Anthony C. Willis, Michael Aidoo, Catherine E. M. Allsopp, Frances M. Gotch, X. Ming Gao, Masafumi Takiguchi, Brian M. Greenwood, Alain R. M. Townsend, Andrew J. McMichael & Hilton C. Whittle
The protective association between the human leukocyte antigen HLA-B53 and severe malaria was investigated by sequencing of peptides eluted from this molecule followed by screening of candidate epitopes from pre-erythrocytic-stage antigens of Plasmodium falciparum in biochemical and cellular assays.
Among malaria-immune Africans, HLA-B53-restricted cytotoxic T lymphocytes recognized a conserved nonamer peptide from liver-stage-specific antigen-1 (LSA-1), but no HLA-B53-restricted epitopes were identified in other antigens.
These findings indicate a possible molecular basis for this HLA-disease association and support the candidacy of liver-stage-specific antigen-1 as a malaria vaccine component.
FOR 25 years, HLA associations with diseases have provided clues to pathogenesis but the molecular basis of these associations has not been defined.
The determinant selection hypothesis, that associations result from the ability of a particular HLA type to present a critical antigenic peptide, has been difficult to investigate because, for most disease associations, the relevant antigen is unknown.
Recently, the identification of characteristic sequence features in peptides eluted from HLA class I molecules suggested that the relevant antigen might be identifiable by assessing cellular immune responses to peptides containing such motifs among antigens which are candidates for mediating HLA-disease associations.
The finding of HLA associations with severe P. falciparum malaria provided an opportunity to test such a ‘reverse immunogenetic’ approach to identifying an immune response to the malarial parasite of protective importance.
Numerous antigens from P. falciparum have been cloned and sequenced in efforts to develop a malaria vaccine, but progress has been impeded by uncertainty as to which, if any, of these antigens elicits a protective immune response.
We analyse here the association between the HLA class I antigen, HLA-B53, and protection from severe malaria.
We have hypothesized that this might be mediated by HLA class I-restricted cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) acting during the liver-stage of the parasite's life cycle.
Immunization studies using irradiated sporozoites have indicated that responses to pre-erythrocytic-stage antigens, those expressed by sporozoites or liver-stage parasites, can provide complete immunity both in rodents and in humans, and that similar protective mechanisms, of which CTL appear to be an important component, may operate in each species.
The impracticality of large-scale immunization with irradiated sporozoites has led to efforts to identify protective pre-erythrocytic antigens.
But identification of cytotoxic T cells in humans naturally exposed to malaria has been problematic, partly because of the lack of a suitable in vitro restimulation system to generate CTL.
By eluting self-peptides from HLA-B53 we identified a sequence motif for bound peptides and have synthesized 60 octamer, nonamer or decamer peptides bearing this motif from the four pre-erythrocytic-stage P. falciparum antigens that have been cloned and sequenced: each of these antigens has been used in or is currently awaiting human vaccine trials.
One or more peptides from each antigen bound to HLA-B53 in an HLA assembly (binding) assay and these were tested further using lymphocytes from Africans naturally exposed to malaria.
None of the peptides from the three sporozoite antigens, which have been the focus of most previous work, elicited CTL responses.
But a nonamer peptide from liver-stage-specific antigen-1 (LSA-1) elicited secondary CTL responses in HLA-B53-positive individuals and sequence analysis showed this to be a conserved epitope in the local parasite population.
In contrast, a similar approach for the HLA-B35 molecule identified responses mainly to polymorphic epitopes, variants of which escape CTL recognition.
This suggests a possible molecular basis for the association of HLA-B53 with resistance to severe malaria, and identify LSA-1 as an important antigen for attempts to induce CTL-mediated immunity to this infectious disease.
Peptide elutions
Self peptides were acid-eluted from HLA-B53 (HLA-B5301), separated by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and sequenced.
The pool sequence (Table 1) showed a predominant signal for proline at position 2 indicating that most peptides bound to HLA-B53 have this ‘anchor’ residue at position 2.
A similar approach was taken for HLA-B35 (HLA-B3501), which was not significantly associated with altered resistance to severe malaria in the Gambian case-control study of malaria susceptibility.
HLA-B35 also showed a strong preference for proline at position 2 of bound peptides (Table 1), probably because of its sequence identity to HLA-B53 in the region of the B pocket of the molecule.
But HLA-B35 showed a predominant tyrosine residue at position 9 of bound peptides: no anchor residue was identified at this position for HLA-B53.
These peptide motifs allowed us to search the sequences of known P. falciparum antigens for potential epitopes for HLA-B53 and -B35.
We reasoned that a malaria antigen (or antigens) which could interact with HLA-B53 and account for the disease association should be expressed early in the liver-stage of the parasite's life cycle: human erythrocytes do not express class I molecules, and enhanced CTL lysis of macrophages that have engulfed blood-stage parasites is unlikely to benefit the host.
Furthermore, comparison of radiation doses required to induce protection in the irradiated sporozoite model of pre-erythrocytic immunity has indicated that antigens expressed early in development in the liver are of most importance for protection.
So, peptides conforming to these motifs were identified in the three sequenced sporozoite antigens (circumsporozoite protein (CSP), TRAP and Pfs16) and the only sequenced liver-stage-specific antigen (LSA-1) from P. falciparum.
HLA assembly assay
A total of 60 peptides with proline at position 2 were synthesized (Table 2), to determine whether these were HLA-B53-restricted CTL epitopes in malaria-immune Africans.
But this large number of peptides would have prevented comparison of responses to all peptides in the same individual, unless very large blood volumes were donated.
So, we first used an HLA assembly assay to identify a subgroup of these peptides which bound with high affinity to HLA-B53.
Only eight peptides from the four malaria antigens bound in this assay, all of which had hydrophobic or aromatic residues at position 9 (Table 2, Fig. 1).
For HLA-B35 peptides, the additional requirement for a terminal tyrosine limited the number of potential epitopes to be tested to 10 (Table 2).
HLA-B53-restricted CTL
Most adults in areas of hyperendemic malaria have immunity to malaria which, although not completely effective in preventing parasitaemia and occasional symptomatic episodes, is strongly protective against life-threatening malaria.
We studied healthy adult Gambian villagers who had the HLA-B53 antigen.
CTL were detected to none of the peptides from the three sporozoite antigens, but three out of six individuals tested responded to the ls6 peptide from LSA-1 (Fig. 2).
This CTL lysis was HLA-B53-restricted, peptide-specific and inhibitable by anti-CD8 antibodies.
We then sequenced parasite DNA from nine Gambian isolates (Fig. 2, legend): in each, the ls6 epitope was identical to the published sequence, indicating that it is largely or completely conserved in this population.
HLA-B35 epitope variants
Eight Gambians with the HLA-B35 antigen were tested using the peptides synthesized to match the HLA-B35 motif (Table 2), and in two individuals CTL were identified.
One recognized an epitope from CSP, cp26 (Fig. 3), that represents the 8 amino-terminal residues of the 23 amino-acid peptide previously shown to elicit CTL in three volunteers immunized with irradiated sporozoites.
In the two volunteers reported to have HLA-B35 this octamer is likely to have been the minimal epitope.
Importantly, however, CTL from the Gambian that recognized cp26, did not recognize two other naturally occurring variants of this epitope, cp28 and cp29, and showed only limited recognition of another variant cp27.
Conversely, the second Gambian responder recognized the uncommon variant, cp29, but did not recognize cp26, cp27 nor cp28 (Fig. 3).
This individual also had CTL specific for an octamer peptide, ls8, from LSA-1.
Discussion
The identification of CTL to several epitopes in P. falciparum antigens indicates that natural exposure to malaria leads to processing of pre-erythrocytic antigens for HLA class I presentation.
CD8 + CTL, initially identified in unnatural host-parasite combinations in rodents, were found in volunteers immunized with irradiated sporozoites: however, in the latter situation the abnormal termination of liver-stage parasite development may facilitate access of parasite antigens to the hepatocyte cytoplasm.
CTL recognizing the conserved ls6 epitope of LSA-1 are restricted through HLA-B53 and, although further work is required to demonstrate CTL in young children and to show that, as in rodent models, human CTL can kill intra-hepatic parasites, the findings support our proposal that the association of this HLA class I antigen with resistance to severe malaria may be mediated by CTL.
Furthermore, although many parasite proteins are expressed in the liver, and we have only examined four for HLA-B53 epitopes, several observations suggest that CTL to ls6 may account for a substantial part of the HLA-B53 protective association.
This epitope is predominantly conserved in the parasite population in The Gambia, unlike the CSP epitopes identified (ref. 45 and Fig. 3, legend).
Moreover, within the hepatocyte the liver-stage parasite develops in a parasitophorous vacuole bounded by an extensive membrane, which probably limits access of parasite antigens to the host cytoplasm and class I presentation pathway.
Indeed, access of only a few P. falciparum antigens to class I molecules, and the tendency of CTL responses to be focused on one or few foreign antigens, as observed in some other infections, may tend to magnify HLA class I differences in malaria susceptibility: LSA-1 is abundant within the parasitophorous vacuole.
Finally, ls6 responses were readily detected using a peptide restimulation method that appears less efficient at growing CTL than conventional viral restimulation methods (ref. 39 and our unpublished data).
We could not grow CTL to 1s6 from all B53-positive donors during the low transmission season for malaria but, as previous work suggested, detectable CTL to P. falciparum may be relatively short-lived in the absence of boosting, and low precursor frequencies may be common because of the very small numbers of hepatocytes infected by each sporozoite inoculum.
Even in immune adults CTL do not completely prevent bloodstage infection.
But this natural partially effective response might be enhanced by immunization, and recently a bacterial CTL epitope identified in mice using a class I motif has been shown to induce a protective response after immunization.
More generally, our identification of a likely mechanism for an HLA-disease association by characterization of peptides bound to the relevant HLA type and screening of candidate antigens for epitopes congruent with a derived motif, should encourage similar approaches to other disease associations.
Polymorphism clustering in the T-cell epitopes of the CSP generated debate about the origin and maintenance of this variation and raised concerns about its possible influence on vaccine efficacy.
The previously identified 23 amino-acid CTL epitope included polymorphic residues, and three of these are contained in the minimal HLA-B35 restricted octamer epitope, with variant epitopes escaping CTL recognition.
Hence, CTL to this epitope generated by one parasite strain will not protect against many other strains.
Although CSP epitope variation may be limited in some regions, the extensive polymorphism seen in Africa will be difficult to encompass in multivalent vaccines.
Conversely, the observation that the CSP CTL epitope contains only non-synonymous nucleotide changes supports the proposal that much of the observed CSP sequence variation has been generated and maintained by CTL selection pressure, the intensity of which may be frequency-dependent.
This indication of parasite adaptation to avoid host CTL responses provides evidence of a different type for a protective role for CTL in P. falciparum malaria.
The contrasting conservation of the ls6 epitope might indicate an important functional role for this sequence that prevents escape mutants becoming prevalent.
CTL against LSA-1, identified here in Africans naturally exposed to malaria, may also be important in response to immunization with irradiated sporozoites.
To produce immunity, live sporozoites must be injected intravenously after an irradiation dosage that allows limited intra-hepatic development, suggesting that expression of early liver-stage antigens is required for protection.
But all reports of CTL in rodents and humans as well as most pre-erythrocytic vaccine research have focused on sporozoite antigens, particularly CSP, even though CTL to CSP alone appear insufficient for protection against P. falciparum .
The association of HLA-B53 with malaria resistance and the observation that HLA-B53-restricted CTL recognize only LSA-1 of several major pre-erythrocytic antigens from P. falciparum,constitute a genetic approach to implicating this antigen in providing protective immunity to malaria, and encourage further assessment of LSA-1 as a component of future subunit vaccines.
The sequences of these HLA molecules differ from each other at only five amino acids, all in the α 1 domain at the end of the cleft which binds the carboxy terminus of the peptide.
Anchor, strong and weak signals are classified as described by Falk et al.
(single-letter amino-acid code).
Peptides from both molecules have proline as an anchor residue at position 2, but only HLA-B35 has a clear anchor, tyrosine, at position 9.
Partial sequences of several individual peptide peaks eluted from HLA-B53 (not shown) and a single complete sequence from the largest individual peak, YPAEITLYW, all showed proline at position 2.
The latter sequence was identified as part of the α 3 domain sequence of HLA-B53, as well as some other class I molecules.
In contrast, peptides eluted by the same method from an HLA-B8 transfectant showed anchor residues at positions 3 and 5 (ref. 54).
Methods.
To determine whether particular sequence features were found in peptides presented by HLA-B53 (HLA-B5301), as has been described for other class I molecules, we used the cell line Hmy-B53 (ref. 55): this was derived by transfection of the cell line CIR, which lacks HLA-A and -B molecules, with a genomic clone of HLA-B53. 1.5x10 10 Hmy-B53 or Hmy-B35 cells were pelleted and lysed and HLA class I molecules purified with the monoclonal antibody W6/32 (ref. 56) on an immunoaffinity column as described.
After acid elutions in 0.1% TFA, the supernatants were dried by vacuum centrifugation and separated by reversed-phase HPLC using a Brownlee Aquapore RP300 column (C8, 100x2mm) and Severn Analytical equipment.
Peptide peaks were pooled and sequenced using an Applied Biosystems 473A protein sequencer and Applied Biosystems model 610 data analysis software.
Antigens studied:
Peptides were identified in the four sequenced pre-erythrocytic antigens of P. falciparum:(1)circumsporozoite protein (CSP), a 412 amino-acid sporozoite protein;(2) thrombospondin-related anonymous protein (TRAP), 559 amino acids and expressed by sporozoites and blood-stage parasites;(3) liver-stage-specific antigen-1 (ref. 24, 25), 1,909 amino acids and expressed only by the liver-stage parasite; and (4) sporozoite hepatocyte-binding antigen (SHEBA or Pfs16), 157 amino acids and found in both sporozoites and gametocytes.
Antigens expressed by sporozoites will also be present during the early phase of hepatocyte development.
CSP and LSA-1 have large central repeats spanning 164 and 1,475 amino acids, respectively.
Top:
Peptides synthesized and tested in the HLA assembly assay for binding to HLA-B53.
Peptides shown to bind to HLA-B53 are highlighted in bold type.
The amino-acid sequence, using the single-letter amino-acid code, and the number of amino-terminal residue in the published sequence is shown.
The CSP, LSA-1, TRAP and SHEBA antigens are indicated by the prefixes cp, ls, tr and sh, respectively.
All possible nonamer peptides with proline at position 2 were synthesized for CSP, LSA-1 and SHEBA; where a sequence had been shown to be polymorphic variant peptides, for example cp10, cp16–18, were also synthesized.
The peptides from CSP which bound to HLA-B53, that is, cp6, cp6.1 and cp6.2 are allelic variants.
Additionally, some octamer and decamer peptides were analysed but none of these bound.
The decamer, cp4, was made with an added terminal glycine to aid synthesis.
Inspection of the sequences of peptides binding to HLA-B53 indicated that several branched aliphatic or aromatic residues, but no polar or hydrophilic residues, can be accommodated at the C terminus.
So, for TRAP which has a total of 48 prolines, a subset of 21 of these, including all possible peptides with proline at position 2 and C termini of residues, V, A, L, I, F or W were synthesized.
The cell line T2-B53 has endogenous HLA-A2 and HLA-B51 genes as well as the transfected HLA-B53 gene.
HLA-B51, as well as HLA-B53, is immunoprecipitated by the antibodies used, so data on peptide binding to this HLA type was obtained in the same experiments: only peptides sh1, sh6 and cp6, but not cp6.1 nor cp6.2, bound to HLA-B51.
All the highlighted peptides as well as the eluted self-peptide YPAEITLTW, and an HIV-2 HLA-B53 epitope, TPYDINQML (our unpublished data) were found to show 50% maximum binding to HLA-B53 in the micromolar range (2–6μM)(Fig. 1).
Bottom:
Peptides synthesized to match the HLA-B35 motif.
Only a single nonamer peptide in the four pre-erythrocytic antigens, ls2, has proline at position 2 and tyrosine at position 9.
So, all possible peptides with proline at 2 and tyrosine at 8 or 10, as well as their allelic variants, were also tested.
In addition to the 10 peptides shown two longer peptides, cp24 and cp25, ENDIEKKICKMEKCS and ELDYANDIEKKICKM, were also included in CTL assays: these, with cp26, overlap the 23-mer sequence previously shown to contain a CTL epitope.
Peptides shown to be epitopes (Fig. 3) are highlighted in bold type.
FIG. 1 HLA assembly assay.
Stable assembly of HLA class I molecules in the mutant cell line T2 is dependent on binding by peptides and this phenomenon can be used as a peptide binding assay.
We have found, using this assay, that all optimized CTL epitopes for other class I molecules (HLA-A2, D b and K b ) have bound with high affinity, and the assay has recently been used to identify a HIV-gag CTL epitope in mice by screening of potential epitopes fitting the D b motif.
a,
Autoradiograph of a one-dimensional isoelectric focusing gel analysis showing binding or stabilization of HLA-B53 and -B51 by peptides cp6, sh1 and sh6, and of HLA-B53 by the ls6 peptide.
Peptide binding is associated with stabilization of assembled class I molecules which appear as strong bands in the autoradiograph.
In the absence of peptide (lane 2) class I molecules lose conformation, dissociate and are not precipitated by specific monoclonal antibodies.
The peptides tested were, from left: cp6, saline negative control, sh6, ls7, ls6, sh5, cp22, sh1.
Cp6 bound more strongly to HLA-B51 than to HLA-B53 but the allelic variants of this peptide with single amino-acid substitutions at position 4, cp6.1 and cp6.2, bound more strongly to HLA-B53 and very poorly to HLA-B51 (data not shown).
b,
Titration curve of the assembly of HLA-B53 with varying concentrations of the peptides ls6, cp6, sh6 and α 3, YPAEITLYW, which was the major self-peptide eluted from HLA-B53.
The y -axis represents the quantity of assembled class I heavy chain precipitated after addition of peptide, the x -axis the concentration of peptide added.
The ls6 and sh6 peptides and the cp6 and α 3 peptides were titrated in separate experiments.
All four show 50% of maximum assembly of HLA-B53 in the micromolar concentration range (10 -5 –10 -6 M), as does an HIV-2 nonamer epitope for HLA-B53 identified recently (F.M.G. et al.
unpublished data).
This is a higher concentration range than for HLA-A2-binding epitopes and some HLA-B51-binding peptides, but comparable to an epitope for the mouse K b molecule (ref. 61 and unpublished data).
METHODS.
The assembly assay was done as described elsewhere.
Briefly, the mutant cell line T2-B53 was derived from T2 cells of HLA type, HLA-A2, -B51, by transfection with a genomic clone of HLA-B53 using hygromycin selection.
Peptides were synthesized by Cambridge Research Biochemicals, Cheshire, UK using their multiple peptide synthesis service or, subsequently, in Oxford using the same procedure and apparatus.
Peptide concentrations were determined with a Micro BCA colorimetric assay (Pierce).
Peptides were added to lysates of 35 S-methionine-labelled cells and incubated overnight at 4°C.
Stable assembled class I molecules were then precipitated with monoclonal antibodies W6/32 (ref. 56; reactive with all assembled class I molecules) or MHM5 (ref. 62; reactive with assembled HLA-B but not HLA-A molecules).
The precipitated class I molecules were separated by one-dimensional isoelectric focusing, visualized by autoradiography and quantified as described.
All peptides were initially tested at 4μM concentration, and those found to bind titrated to estimate binding affinities.
FIG. 2 HLA-B53-restricted CTL.
CTL assays using cells from two adult Gambian volunteers with the HLA-B53 antigen, Z 16 (a)and Z 1 (b).
Both showed cytolytic activity towards B lymphoblastoid cell lines (BCL) with HLA-B53 when incubated with the ls6 peptide, but not when incubated with the peptides that bound to HLA-B53 from the other three pre-erythrocytic antigens.
The cytolytic activity was HLA-B53-restricted and peptide specific.
Ls9, the octamer peptide derived from ls6 by removing the C-terminal residue was not recognized: ls9 did not bind to HLA-B53 in the assembly assay (Table 2).
The B53 matched cell lines were matched to the donors only for HLA-B53; the B53 mismatched line was matched to Z 16 (HLA type A3, A19, B35, B53, Cw3, Cw6) only for HLA-Cw3.
The Hmy-B53 line expresses, in significant amounts, only HLA-B53 and -Cw4.
CTL activity was inhibitable by an anti-CD8 monoclonal antibody, M236, a gift from R. W. Knowles (Sloane-Kettering, New York) and CTL lines could be maintained by weekly restimulation with peptide-pulsed irradiated autologous B cell lines.
One further volunteer from Brefet, out of six HLA-B53 positive individuals tested, showed HLA-B53-restricted CTL responses to the ls6 peptide but none recognized any peptide from the other three antigens.
Further samples of blood were obtained after 2–3 weeks from donors Z 16 and Z 1.
On this occasion, CTL to ls6 were again grown from Z 1 but not from Z 16.
Two caucasian Oxford residents with HLA-B53 but not exposed to malaria were tested as controls and neither responded to any peptide.
HLA-B53-positive individuals from the conurbation around the capital Banjul, where malaria transmission is 10–100 times less intense, were also tested.
In only one of nine such volunteers could CTL be grown, again only to the ls6 peptide, suggesting that CTL may be more readily detectable in areas of higher malaria transmission.
To determine whether the ls6 epitope is conserved or significantly variable among P. falciparum isolates in The Gambia, DNA extracted from samples collected from nine children with acute malaria was examined.
A segment of the LSA-1 gene containing the DNA encoding this epitope was amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and sequenced directly.
In all nine samples the previously reported 27 base pair (bp) sequence was found.
METHODS.
Volunteers from the Gambian village, Brefet, which has hyperendemic malaria, were studied at the time of year with lowest malaria transmission: none had had a recent febrile illness.
Peripheral blood lymphocytes were separated from whole blood and incubated at 3x10 6 cells per well of a 24-well Costar plate.
The cells were stimulated with peptides that had bound to HLA-B53 in the HLA assembly assay, each at 25μM, pooled as follows: cp6, cp6.1, cp6.2, sh1, sh6; and ls6, tr15, tr16 and tr20.
The tr16 peptide was included as a non-binding control.
At 72h 10Uml -1 IL-2 (Cetus) was added and CTL assays were done on day 8. 51 Cr-labelled BCL were preincubated for 1h with 25μM of one or more peptides, and without peptide, and a 4h assay done as described.
Assays (shown here and in Fig. 3) were done at effector to target cell ratios of 50:1 and 8:1 but only the results of the former are shown: lysis at the lower ratio was invariably much lower.
CTL lysis of target cells was also detectable without peptide preincubation, by adding the ls6 peptide into the CTL assay at 10 -7 M (not shown).
Background chromium release was from 15–20%.
Nonspecific lysis, possibly due to NK-like cells, was higher in Gambians than in Europeans, typically 15–25%.
Specific lysis was calculated by the standard formula and values in the absence of peptide subtracted to yield the values shown.
CTL could also be generated by restimulation with the ls6 peptide without tr15, tr16 and tr20 in the medium (not shown).
CTL lines were maintained by weekly restimulation with equal numbers of irradiated autologous peptide-pulsed BCL.
HLA typing was done by both serological and PCR-based methods as described.
The LSA-1 gene was amplified for 35 cycles from nt, 5,372 to nt 5,701 (ref. 25) using the primers GTGCTGAATATGACGATTCA and CCTTTTCCTTATTAACCTGC, in a buffer with 1mM MgCl and 10% DMSO, with annealing at 55°C.
The purified amplification products were directly sequenced using a  Taq cycle-sequencing kit (USB) and the manufacturers' protocol.
Briefly, the reverse strand primer TTCCTTCATCTAAATCATCT (0.5pmol) was labelled with 35 S ATP and the supplied TTP cycle mix and reaction buffer for 80PCR cycles with annealing at 55°C for 45s, and subsequent termination reactions done for 50 cycles with annealing at 60°C for 45s.
FIG. 3 HLA-B35-restricted CTL.
CTL assay results from donor Z 22 (a)and donor Z 87 (b ), both residents of the same village in The Gambia as donors Z 16 and Z 1 (Fig. 2).
Cells from donor Z 22 were initially tested (assay 1) on five different sets of (1–4) peptides as shown, using as targets a BCL HLA-matched to the donor only for HLA-B35.
Cells preincubated with the peptides cp26, cp27 and cp28 were lysed.
In assay 2, these peptides and cp29, which are four allelic variants (Table 2), were tested individually, again at an effector to target cell ratio of 50:1.
Cp26 was recognized, 24.4% specific lysis, and cp28 and 29 were not: cp27 showed 13.7% specific lysis, just below the level we regard as positive, 15%.
Cells from donor Z 87 were tested initially on HLA-B35-matched BCL pre-incubated with seven different peptides, as shown.
Significant lysis was found for the cp28, cp29 mixture (54%) and for ls8 (15%); the weak response to cp30 and cp31 was not repeatable.
A further assay, using a different BCL again matched only for HLA-B35, confirmed the ls8 result and showed that cp29 but not cp28 was the CSP peptide recognized.
CTL from Z 87 also lysed autologous BCL targets preincubated with cp29 and ls8 (not shown).
CTL lysis of cp29-pulsed BCL was blocked by the anti-CD8 monoclonal antibody, M236.
Using a further sample from donor Z 87, fresh (unrestimulated) PBL were used in a CTL assay on cp29-pulsed targets but no lysis was observed.
In all, eight donors with HLA-B35 were tested, all from the village of Brefet, and only these two responded to any of the peptides tested.
PBL from two Oxford residents with HLA-B35 were restimulated with all 12 peptides and grew no CTL.
All three HLA-B35 epitopes identified here are octamers, with several shared residues, even though most eluted self peptides were nonamers (Table 1).
The available data suggest that responses to ls8 in HLA-B35 individuals may be less frequent than ls6 responses in HLA-B53 individuals but larger numbers are required to substantiate this.
To estimate the relative frequencies of the four allelic variants cp26-cp29 in P. falciparum in The Gambia, DNA was analysed from samples collected from 156 children with acute malaria.
A segment of the CSP gene containing the DNA encoding this epitope was amplified by PCR and the allelic variants detected by specific oligonucleotide probes.
More than one parasite variant (mean 2.0) can frequently be detected in these children with acute malaria.
The frequencies of the four variants were: cp26, 45%; cp27, 78%; cp28, 26%; cp29, 11%.
The single amino-acid changes between some of these peptides is sufficient to abolish CTL recognition, as shown in other  systems .
The poor or absent recognition of cp27 and cp28 may result from the charge change at position 5 of the peptide preventing binding to HLA-B35.
The alternative, that neither individual had been infected with a parasite carrying these commoner variants, seems less likely.
METHODS.
Peptide stimulations and CTL assays were done essentially as described in the legend to Fig. 2.
PBL were incubated with peptides each at 25μM, pooled as follows: pool 1, the eight CSP peptides cp24-cp31; pool 2, ls2, ls8, tr24 and tr25.
All HLA-B35 individuals were typed by the previously described PCR method to confirm that they had the B3501 rather than the B3502 or B3503 subtypes: these latter  subtypes are not amplified by the primers used.
To identify alleles of the CSP gene by PCR, primers AATGCTAATGCCAACAATGCTG and CGACATTAAACACACTGGAAC (compare with ref. 45) were used (in 1.5mM MgCl 2 ) with annealing at 58°C.
Amplification products were fixed to nitrocellulose filters and alleles detected using the following probes with washing in 6xSSC at the stated temperature: cp26, ACGAATTAGATTATGCAA and ACGAATTAGATTATGAAA, 46°C and 44°C; cp27, ACCAATTAGATTATGCAA, 46°C; cp28, ACCAATTAAATTATGAAA, 42°C; cp29, TAAATCTAAAGACGA, 38°C.
T-cell adhesion induced by proteoglycan-immobilized cytokine MIP-1 β 
Yoshiya Tanaka, David H. Adams, Stefan Hubscher, Hiroyuki Hirano, Ulrich Siebenlist & Stephen Shaw
LYMPHOCYTE migration from blood into tissue depends on integrin-mediated adhesion to endothelium.
Adhesion requires not only integrin ligands on the endothelium, but also activation signals because T-cell integrins cannot bind well until they are activated.
The physiological ‘triggers’ for T-cell adhesion are unknown, but cytokines may be good candidates as they are released during inflammation and trigger adhesion in neutrophils and monocytes.
We have identified a cytokine, macrophage inflammatory protein-1 β (MIP-1 β ), that induces both chemotaxis and adhesion of T cells; MIP-1 β is most effective at augmenting adhesion of CD8 + T cells to the vascular cell adhesion molecule VCAM-1.
We reasoned that, as cytokines in vivo will be rapidly washed away, MIP-1 β might be bound to endothelial surfaces and so induce adhesion in its immobilized form.
Here we show that:(1) MIP-1 β is present on lymph node endothelium;(2) immobilized MIP-1 β induces binding of T cells to VCAM-1 in vitro.
MIP-1 β was immobilized by binding to proteoglycan: a conjugate of heparin with bovine serum albumin and cellular proteoglycan CD44 were both effective.
We propose that MIP-1 β and other cytokines with glycosaminoglycan-binding sites will bind to and be presented by endothelial proteoglycans to trigger adhesion selectively not only of lymphocyte subsets, but also of other cell types.
From a survey of cytokines, we found that one, MIP-1 β,was unique in mediating both chemotaxis and adhesion-induction for T cells (Fig. 1).
MIP-1 β is a member of the ‘intercrine'/’ chemokine' family, which includes chemotactic cytokines such as the interleukin IL-8, MCP and RANTES.
We observed a chemotactic response to MIP-1 β over a narrow range of cytokine concentrations (Fig. 1 a;and data not shown); MIP-1 β has been reported to induce myeloid cell chemotaxis at higher concentrations and apparently T-cell chemotaxis.
MIP-1 β also induces augmented adhesion of CD8 T cells to VCAM-1 over a similar concentration range (Fig. 1 b); this augmentation is superimposed on the basal binding to VCAM-1 with resting T cells.
MIP- β also increases binding of CD8 cells to the extracellular matrix ligand fibronectin (Fig. 1 c),although, unlike adhesion to VCAM-1, this response is not observed in all donors (data not shown).
MIP-1 β augmentation of adhesion occurs predominantly with CD8 + rather than CD4 + cells (Fig. 1 b, c).
The induction of adhesion of particular T-cell subsets by specific cytokines would make the process of lymphocyte recruitment more flexible and selective.
We and others have proposed that cytokines should be most effective when immobilized on the luminal surface of the endothelium, otherwise blood flow would prevent accumulation of effective local concentrations.
Chemokines like MIP-1 β have glycosaminoglycan (GAG) -binding sites and bind heparin.
There are many biological systems in which the interaction of cytokines with proteoglycans in the extracellular matrix and on cell surfaces is functionally important.
We propose a novel variation, namely that proteoglycans on an endothelial cell can bind and present cytokines to passing leukocytes.
We have therefore created a biochemically defined model system to explore this hypothesis.
(1) Heparin-bovine serum albumin(BSA) conjugate (a model proteoglycan) and VCAM-1 (an endothelial ligand for VLA-4) were co-immobilized on plastic;(2) MIP-1 β was added and then washed out to assess only the effect of immobilized cytokine; and (3) we assayed binding of resting CD8 + T cells to all eight combinations of the three components: integrin ligand, proteoglycan and cytokine (Fig. 2 a).
A marked MIP-1 β- specific augmentation of binding was observed only when both the proteoglycan and the integrin ligand were co-immobilized.
Other cytokines bearing GAG-binding sites such as RANTES and GRO showed minimal activity (Fig. 2 b;and data not shown).
Thus MIP-1 β can be retained by immobilized proteoglycan and induce T-cell adhesion to integrin ligands on that same surface.
To explore whether cell surface proteoglycan could also present MIP-1 β to T cells, we substituted CD44 for heparin-BSA conjugate in our model.
CD44, a proteoglycan expressed on many cells, including endothelium, has been implicated in T-cell adhesion to endothelial cells.
VCAM-1 and purified CD44 glycoprotein were co-immobilized, MIP-1 β added, incubated, free cytokine washed out, and the binding of T cells assayed (Fig. 3 a).
The results parallel those with synthetic proteoglycan.
MIP-1 β- specific augmentation of binding was consistently observed only when CD44 and the integrin ligand VCAM-1 were co-immobilized.
MIP-1 β- specific augmentation of adhesion to VCAM-1 was not observed with a control glycoprotein (CD45; data not shown).
Blocking studies with monoclonal antibodies confirmed that adhesion was mediated by T-cell VLA-4 binding to VCAM-1 (Fig. 3 b).
The presence of heparin and heparan sulphate during the phase of MIP-1 β immobilization substantially inhibited subsequent adhesion induction (Fig. 3 c),suggesting an involvement for GAG-binding.
MIP-1 β is produced in large amounts by monocytes, fibroblasts and lymphocytes early after activation in vitro ;in vivo,it might bind to proteoglycan on the endothelial surface at inflammatory sites and be presented as an adhesion-inducing stimulus to passing leukocytes.
Our hypothesis is supported by the detection of MIP-1 β on endothelium in lymphoid tissue (Fig. 4) as well as on endothelium at sites of inflammation such as tonsil (data not shown).
Interleukin-8 induces granulocyte adhesion and can be localized at the surface of endothelium, findings that taken together with our MIP-1 β results indicate that endothelial presentation of pro-adhesive cytokines may be a general mechanism.
Endothelial cells express many proteoglycans, whose structure and density depend on the type of endothelium and its activation status.
Our data indicate that cytokines are among the many proteins that bind to endothelial surfaces in a GAG-dependent fashion.
CD44, which we have used as a model proteoglycan, is a plausible candidate for in vivo presentation of pro-adhesive cytokines; such a role for endothelial CD44 would be additional to the apparent role of T cell CD44 in T-cell binding to endothelium.
CD44 and other endothelial proteoglycans show structural diversity in both their protein core and their carbohydrate side chains; this could introduce additional specificity to cytokine presentation during adhesion cascades.
A model adhesion cascade has been proposed to explain adhesion of many leukocyte subtypes to endothelium (reviewed in refs 2, 3, 31, 32).
Circulating cells are first loosely ‘tethered’ to endothelium by selectin-mediated adhesion.
This would allow presentation of proteoglycan-bound MIP-1 β by endothelial cells to its receptor on T cells.
Cytokines, when immobilized, become analogous to previously described triggers that are integral membrane molecules on activated endothelium: the lipid mediator PAF and E-selectin.
Such triggers cause functional activation of leukocyte integrins, which then mediate strong adhesion to endothelial ligands: cells can then migrate into tissue under the influence of local chemotactic factors.
Extrapolation to include different cytokines and endothelial surface proteoglycans would bring enormous flexibility and selectivity to the process of lymphocyte recruitment.
Pharmacological agents could then be selected to modify these cascades.
FIG. 1 MIP-1 β induces T-cell chemotaxis and adhesion of T cells to VCAM-1 and fibronectin.
a,
Chemotactic response of resting T cells to increasing concentrations of MIP-1 β (solid line) or MIP-1 α (broken line).
b and c,
Adhesion of CD4 T cells (long-dash line) and CD8 T cells (solid line) to VCAM-1 (b ) and FN (c ) in the continuous presence of increasing concentrations of recombinant human MIP-1 β .
METHODS.
T cells, CD4 + T cells and CD8 + T cells were prepared by exhaustive negative selection from peripheral blood mononuclear cells of normal donors using immunomagnetic beads and multi-antibody cocktail as described.
Analysis of expression of markers (CD4, CD8) on the relevant subsets always showed 96% purity.
We use the term MIP-1 β , originally applied to the mouse gene product, for its human counterpart used here.
a , Cell chemotaxis was assessed in 48-well microchemotaxis chambers as described using 5-μm polycarbonate chemotaxis membranes (Nuclepore) coated by floating overnight on type IV collagen (5μgml -1 )(Sigma).
Cells migrating to the underside of the membrane were counted with an Optomax System IV image analyser.
MIP-1 β was diluted from cell supernatants from conditioned media collected from SF9 insect cell lines that had been infected with baculovirus in which pAT744 MIP-1 β cDNA was expressed; MIP-1 α was prepared similarly, except that pAT 464 was substituted.
All samples were assayed in triplicate and the mean value used; lines represent standard errors.
b and c , Adhesion was assayed as described.
Purified VCAM-1 (35ng per well; from W. Newman) or fibronectin (1μg per well; New York Blood Center) was applied to 96-well microtitre plates (Costar).
51 Cr-labelled T cells and recombinant human MIP-1 β (from M. Tsang) were added to the plates, settled at 4°C for 60min and rapidly warmed to 37°C for 15min, after which non-adherent cells were washed off.
γ- Emissions of the lysates of adherent cells were counted.
Background binding of T cells to BSA or collagen was less than 3%.
Data are expressed as a mean percentage of the binding of T cells from a representative experiment; lines represent standard errors.
FIG. 2 Immobilized MIP-1 β retained by heparin-BSA induces CD8 + T-cell adhesion to co-immobilized VCAM-1 but other cytokines do not.
a,
MIP-1 β (filled bars) or control medium (open bars) was added to wells which had been coated with one of four possible combinations of VCAM-1 or BSA and heparin-BSA or BSA.
The cytokine was washed out before CD8 + T cells were added and binding was evaluated as for Fig. 1.
Increased binding in the presence of MIP-1 β was seen in each of 21 donors in 13 experiments, with an overall statistical significance of P=0.001 (Student's t- test).
b,
MIP-1 β induces adhesion in the presence of heparin-BSA but GRO and RANTES do not.
Open bar and dotted line define the level of binding of T cells to heparin-BSA/VCAM-1 in the absence of cytokines.
METHODS.
Purified VCAM-1 (35ng per well), BSA-heparin conjugates (20ng per well; from D. Roberts) and/or control BSA in PBS were applied to plastic plates at 4°C overnight and the plastic binding sites subsequently blocked with BSA.
MIP-1 β (1:100), control supernatant from SF9 cells infected with wild-type baculovirus (1:100), GRO/MGSA (10ngml -1 ; from J.J. Oppenheim), or RANTES (10ngml -1 ; from J. J. Oppenheim) were added to the wells and allowed to bind to plastic-immobilized heparin-BSA at 37°C for 60min.
Free cytokine was then removed by washing the plates 5 times in PBS;51 Cr-labelled CD8 + T cells were added to the plates and the number of cells binding was assayed as described in Fig. 1 legend.
Data are expressed as mean percentage of T cells binding from three replicate wells; lines represent standard errors.
FIG. 3 MIP-1 β retained by purified CD44 protein induces CD8 + T-cell adhesion to co-immobilized VCAM-1 in a fashion that is dependent on VLA-4/VCAM-1 and GAG.
a,
Experimental design is identical to that for Fig. 2 a but uses purified CD44 in place of heparin-BSA.
MIP-1 β (filled bars) or control (open bars) was added to the wells and washed away before assaying adhesion.
Increased binding in the presence of MIP-1 β has been seen in each of 11 donors in 7 experiments, with an overall statistical significance of P=0.001 (Student's t -test).
b,
Inhibition of CD44-immobilized MIP-1 β- induced T-cell adhesion to VCAM-1 by monoclonal antibodies against β1 integrins and VCAM-1. c , Effect of free GAGs on T-cell adhesion to VCAM-1 induced by CD44-immobilized recombinant MIP-1 β.
GAGs were applied to plates before addition of MIP-1 β and washed away when MIP-1 β was removed.
Dotted line indicates the level of binding of T cells to CD44/VCAM-1 in the absence of MIP-1 β .
METHODS.
CD44 glycoprotein was purified from a monocyte-rich preparation of peripheral blood mononuclear leukocytes by immunoaffinity chromatography using monoclonal antibody raised against CD44, NIH44–1 (ref. 39), and applied at 1ng per well (estimated by silver staining).
The preparation consists of NIH44–1-immunoreactive components with M r s estimated as dominant 80–90K and minor  200–220K by western blotting after transfer from a reducing SDS-polyacrylamide gel; VCAM-1 and/or control BSA were co-immobilized as for Fig. 2.
MIP-1 β (1:100) or control conditioned medium was added to plastic co-immobilized protein for 30min, free cytokine was then washed out and adhesion was assayed as for Fig. 2.
In b , the following monoclonal antibodies were added at saturating concentrations of 10μgml -1 : anti-VCAM-1 mAb 2G7 (from W. Newman); VLA-4(CD49d) mAb L25 (Becton-Dickinson);β 1 (CD29) mAb MAB13 (from K. Yamada) and CD18 mAb MHM23 (from J. E. Hildreth).
In c , MIP-1 β was used at 10ngml -1 final concentration.
The following free GAGs were added to wells before addition of MIP-1 β:heparan sulphate proteoglycan (HSPG)(30μgml -1 ; Collaborative Research), heparin sodium (15Uml -1 ; LyphoMed) and hyaluronic acid (HA)(100μgml -1 ; Sigma).
GAGs and MIP-1 β were removed at the same time by extensive washing.
FIG. 4 Presence of MIP-1 β on lymph node endothelium detected by immunohistochemistry.
Many vessels show positive endothelial staining, including some with the morphology of high endothelial venules (arrowed).
METHODS.
Frozen sections were stained from the paracortical region of a human inguinal lymph node with features of nonspecific reactive hyperplasia.
A three-step immunoalkaline-phosphatase method was used with a rabbit anti-MIP-1 β polyclonal antibody diluted 1/5,000 in Tris-buffered saline.
The antiserum was raised against a synthetic peptide from the C-terminal region of MIP-1 β ; of the many molecules assayed for reactivity, only MIP-1 β was reactive.
The glial cell glutamate uptake carrier countertransports pH-changing anions
Muriel Bouvier, Marek Szatkowski, Alessandra Amato & David Attwell
UPTAKE into glial cells helps to terminate glutamate's neurotransmitter action and to keep its extracellular concentration,[Glu]o , below neurotoxic levels.
The accumulative power of the uptake carrier stems from its transport of inorganic ions such as sodium (into the cell) and potassium (out of the cell).
There is controversy over whether the carrier also transports a proton (or pH-changing anion).
Here we show that the carrier generates an alkalinization outside and an acidification inside glial cells, and transports anions out of the cells, suggesting that there is a carrier cycle in which two Na + accompany each glutamate anion into the cell, while one K + and one OH -(or HCO) are transported out.
This stoichiometry predicts a minimum [Glu]o of 0.6μM normally (tonically activating presynaptic autoreceptors and postsynaptic NMDA receptors), and 370μM during brain anoxia (high enough to kill neurons).
Transport of OH -/HCO on the uptake carrier generates significant pH changes, and may provide a mechanism for neuron-glial interaction.
Glutamate uptake was monitored electrically in salamander retinal glia, which have uptake like that in mammalian glia and neurons but have no glutamate-gated ion channels.
Changes of extracellular pH (pH o ) were monitored just outside the cell while controlling the membrane potential by whole-cell clamping.
Activating uptake, by hyperpolarizing in the presence of external glutamate, led to the pH o going alkaline (Fig. 1 a ).
Omitting external glutamate (Fig. 1 a ) or sodium (Fig. 1 b ) abolished this pH o change, as would be expected if it were produced by glutamate uptake.
Hyperpolarizing to more negative potentials, to activate more uptake, generated larger [H + ]o changes (Fig. 1 c ) which were proportional to the uptake current activated (Fig. 1 d ).
D-Aspartate, a non-metabolized analogue of L-glutamate and D-aspartate (Fig. 1 f ), showing that glutamate metabolism does not cause the pH o change.
Intracellular pH (pH i ) changes produced by uptake were monitored using the dye BCECF.
Glutamate evoked an intracellular acidification in voltage-clamped cells loaded with BCECF using the patch pipette (Fig. 2 a ), and in unclamped undialysed cells loaded with the acetoxymethyl ester of BCECF (Fig. 2 b ).
This response had the pharmacology and Na + -dependence of uptake (Fig. 2 b, c ).
D-Aspartate produced less uptake current and acidification than L-glutamate, but the ratio of pH i change to uptake current was similar for these agents (Fig. 2 d ).
Amiloride (1mM), which blocks Na + /H + exchange by 90% (ref. 10), and 0.5mM DIDS, which blocks Na + /HCO co-transport by 95% (ref. 11), did not affect the pH i change per uptake current (Fig. 2 legend), so the pH i change was not due to uptake affecting these carriers by raising [Na + ]i .
To test whether the uptake carrier transports a pH-changing anion (such as OH -or HCO) out of the cell, rather than transporting a proton in, we replaced the normal Cl -ions in the pipette (and thus inside the cell) with other anions.
The aim was to find an anion which would replace a putative transported pH-changing anion and thus alter the size of the uptake current.
Replacement of pipette Cl -with the large anion gluconate or with Br -or I -(Fig. 3 a ) did not affect the uptake current.
But replacing Cl -by NO, SCN -or ClO increased the uptake current 2- to 4-fold (Fig. 3 legend).
To test whether NO, SCN -or ClO are indeed transported out of the cell on the uptake carrier, or merely speed uptake (for example, allosterically), we measured the uptake-evoked pH o change with NO or ClO in the cell.
If these anions merely speed uptake (and the pH change is due to H + transport into the cell), they should increase the uptake current and [H + ]o change proportionally.
But if they are transported in place of a pH-changing anion, then, as the salts of strong acids, they should generate no pH change and the pH o change per uptake current should be less than with Cl -in the cell.
Experimentally (Fig. 3 b ), this latter prediction was found to hold for NO (5-fold less) and ClO (3-fold less; SCN -was not tested).
Partial replacement of Cl -with HCO also increased the uptake current (Fig. 3 c ), suggesting that HCO can be transported out of the cell by the uptake carrier.
However, with no added HCO, inhibiting carbonic anhydrase did not affect the pH changes associated with uptake (Fig. 3 d, e ), implying that these pH changes do not reflect HCO transport (see later).
Transport of anions out of the cell on the uptake carrier was demonstrated directly using an anion-sensitive electrode just outside the cell.
Micromolar levels of ClO or SCN -could be detected in the presence of the normal extracellular chloride concentration (Fig. 4 a ).
With ClO or SCN -, but not Cl -, as the main anion in the cell, applying glutamate led to ClO or SCN -accumulating outside the cell (Fig. 4 b, c ).
This response had the pharmacology and sodium-dependence of glutamate uptake (Fig. 4 d, e ).
The amount of ClO accumulating was proportional to the uptake current at different membrane potentials (Fig. 4 f ) and was similar to the rise in [ClO]o predicted from the uptake current flowing (Fig. 4 g legend).
These data show that the glutamate uptake carrier generates an extracellular alkalinization and an intracellular acidification by transporting a pH-changing anion, presumably OH -or HCO, out of the cell.
In vivo some HCO transport may occur (Fig. 3 c ), but HCO cannot be the main anion transported in our experiments because in other cells inhibiting carbonic anhydrase greatly reduces pH changes generated by HCO movement (compare Fig. 3 d, e ).
Furthermore, with carbonic anhydrase blocked there is not enough HCO production in the cell to provide one HCO per unitary charge of the observed uptake current, whereas dissociation of water could provide enough OH -to account for the current (Fig. 3 legend).
We therefore propose the stoichiometry shown in Fig. 4 g , in which uptake of one glutamate is accompanied by two Na + and by the countertransport of a K + and an OH -(or occasionally an HCO in vivo).
This is consistent with the first-order dependence of uptake on external glutamate and internal potassium concentrations, and with the thermodynamic determination that two sodium ions are transported.
Uptake-induced changes of pH constitute a novel second messenger action of glutamate.
Prolonged activation of uptake, as may occur during epileptic seizures or in the retina where glutamate is released tonically, can lower the intracellular pH significantly, and a larger alkalinization is expected in the extracellular space, which is of smaller volume.
Thus, the glutamate-evoked alkali flux may contribute to the changes of extra- and intracellular pH induced by neuronal activity.
It may also provide a signal to alter glial cell metabolism when neurons release glutamate at a high rate.
The extracellular glutamate concentration,[Glu]o , is determined by the balance between the release of glutamate and its removal by uptake.
However, even with no release, a lower limit to [Glu]o is set by the stoichiometry of the uptake carrier.
For Fig.4 g , the minimum [Glu]is given by , where V m is membrane potential and V X  is the Nernst potential of X. (This holds even if some HCO is transported, because .)
Normally at 37°C, with ,, and [Glu]i =10mM (refs 14–16), this predicts a minimum [Glu]o of 0.6μM.
This will activate presynaptic L-AP4 receptors and reduce glutamate release.
It will also activate some postsynaptic NMDA receptors, allowing some postsynaptic Ca 2+ influx at synapses that are not releasing glutamate (when other active synapses depolarize the cell and remove Mg 2+ -block of the NMDA channels).
In anoxia, when rundown of ion gradients leads to V Na =24mV,V OH =0mV and V K = V m =-20mV,[Glu]o is predicted to rise to 370μM, which can cause neuronal death.
FIG. 1 Glutamate uptake generates an extracellular alkalinization. a and b , Changes in pH recorded with a pH-sensitive microelectrode just outside a Mûller cell (pH o , alkaline upwards) during membrane polarization from +17mV (where uptake is small) to -83mV (where uptake is large) in solutions containing 107mM (a ) or 0mM (b ) sodium and 0μM or 100μM L-glutamate. c , pH o (as in a , with 100μM glutamate) during activation of different amounts of uptake by polarization from +7mV to various test potentials (bars).
d , pH o (○), as in c (12s after starting the voltage step), and the increase in uptake current (○) from its value at +7mV in the same cell, as a function of test potential.
For small changes  pH o is roughly proportional to  [H + ]o .
e , pH o , as in a , but polarizing from +7 to -70mV, in the presence of 100μM L-glutamate or D-aspartate. f , Data in e normalized by the extra uptake currents produced by the +7 to -70mV voltage steps (162 and 54pA for L-Glu and D-Asp).
In 16 cells, the ratio of the [H + ]changes (normalized by uptake current) evoked by DL-Glu was 0.91  0.08 (s.e.).
METHODS.Glial (Mûller) cells isolated from the tiger salamander retina were whole-cell clamped using pipettes containing (mM): KCl (95); HEPES (5); NaCl (5); Na 2 ATP (5); MgCl 2 (7); CaCl 2 (1); K 2 EGTA (5); pH set to 7.0 with KOH.
External solution contained (mM): NaCl or choline-Cl (105); KCl (2.5); CaCl 2 (3); MgCl 2 (0.5); glucose (15); BaCl 2 (6),(to block the potassium conductance of the cells); HEPES (0.05); pH set to 7.3 with N -methyl-D-glucamine.
Glass (Hinke type) or resin-filled (Fluka ionophore 95291) pH-sensitive microelectrodes gave similar results.
FIG. 2 Glutamate uptake generates an intracellular acidification. a , Changes of pH in a cell, pH i , at -43mV, monitored with BCECF (96μM, in the internal solution used for Fig. 1, but with 0.5mM HEPES).
External trimethylamine base (TMA) and acetic acid (Ac)(time of application indicated by open bars) increased or decreased BCECF fluorescence (at 530nm wavelength) excited at 490nm, owing to alkalinization and acidification of the cell, but did not alter fluorescence excited at 440nm (near the isosbestic wavelength: record obtained just after the 490nm record from the same cell).
Such data were used to calibrate 490nm signals: nigericin calibration gave similar results.
Mean  pH i in 45 cells after 20s of 100μM glutamate at -43mV was 0.23  0.04 (s.e.), which is consistent with an efflux of about one OH -ion per unitary charge of a 200pA uptake current in a cell of volume 10 -14 m 3 and typical buffering power of 20mM per pH unit.
Other data in this figure were obtained with 490nm light.
External solution as for Fig. 1, but 5mM HEPES and pH set with NaOH.
b , pH i evoked by glutamate analogues (30μM) in an intact unclamped cell, measured as fluorescence ( F ; not calibrated for this cell) of BCECF, loaded by 30-min incubation in 10μM of its acetoxymethyl ester and 0.2μM pluronic acid.
The  pH i produced by L-Glu, D-Asp,trans -ACPD, kainate, NMDA, quisqualate and AMPA had relative values (s.e.; number of cells in parentheses): 1, 0.47  0.05 (11), 0.023  0.023 (5), -0.01  0.06 (7), 0 (10), 0(5) and 0(5).
External Ba 2+ was left out so that uptake would not depolarize the cell more than a few mV from its -90mV resting potential.
Mean  pH i in 10 cells after 20s of 100μM Glu was 0.11  0.02 (44  9% less with 5% CO 2 /HCO outside).
c , Replacing external NaCl by choline-Cl reversibly abolishes the pH i change (measured as in a ).
d , Changes in pH i (as in a ) and uptake current produced by 100μM L-Glu and D-Asp (applied at a more negative potential to increase its uptake current).
The ratio of  pH i /uptake current evoked by D-Asp to that evoked by L-Glu was 0.98  0.10 (20 cells).
pH i /uptake current evoked by 100μM Glu in 1mM amiloride or 0.5mM DIDS (4,4'-diisothiocyanatostilbene-2,2'-disulphonic acid) was 0.95  0.04 (5 cells) and 1.11  0.10 (7 cells) of its value without blockers.
DIDS reduced the uptake current by 49  7%, probably by binding to the carrier's anion-binding site.
FIG. 3 The size of the glutamate uptake current depends on the intracellular anion present.
Typical currents evoked at -43mV by 30μM Glu in cells filled with different anions.
Pipettes contained (in mM): K + -anion (112); K 2 EGTA (5); HEPES (5); pH set to 7.0 with KOH.
Different cells were studied, alternating between Cl -and a test anion in the pipette.
a , Uptake currents (normalized by cell capacitance) with Cl -, Br -, I -, NO, ClO, SCN -had the ratio 1, 1.4  0.3 (s.e.)(8 cell pairs), 0.9  0.2 (3), 2.4  0.3 (18), 2.8  0.4 (10), 4.1  0.5 (5).
b , Top: pH o (as in Fig. 1 a , with 30μM Glu) outside 2 cells containing Cl -or NO.
Bottom: the same  pH o normalized by uptake current/capacitance (pA/pF).
In 5 cell pairs, the normalized  pH o was 0.035  0.005 with Cl -, and 0.0067  0.0020 with NO.
For 5 cell pairs with Cl -or ClO, values were 0.032  0.006 and 0.011  0.001. c , Currents/capacitance evoked by 100μM Glu at -43mV in 2 cells, using a Cl -internal solution as for Fig. 1 but with 1mM acetazolamide (ACZ) and (in mM) MgCl 2 (2), Mg-ATP (5), NaCl (10) instead of MgCl 2 (7), Na 2 ATP (5), NaCl (5), or the same with 10mM NaHCO 3 /5% CO 2 replacing 10mM NaCl.
In 10 cell pairs 10mM HCO increased the current by 39  18%. d , pH o (as in Fig. 1 a ) outside a cell (Cl -inside) with and without 1μM external ACZ.
In 4 cells, pH o in ACZ was 1.05  0.15 of its control value.
e , pH i (as for Fig. 2 a ; Cl -inside) with and without 100μM external ACZ.
In 6 cells, pH i in ACZ was 0.88  0.07 of its control value (or 0.92  0.07 in 5 unclamped cells, as for Fig. 2 b ).
Normal size uptake currents were seen (as in c ) with 1mM internal ACZ, which blocks carbonic anhydrase (IC 50 10 -8 M).
We measured the [HCO]and [CO 2 ]in our ‘HCO-free’ pipette solutions as 400 and 50μM.
If 1HCO were transported per unitary charge of a 200pA uptake current, an efflux of 2x10 -15 mols -1 , then the 4x10 -15 mol HCO in a 10 -14 m 3 cell would be lost in 2s.
With carbonic anhydrase blocked, generation of HCO from 50μM CO 2 (rate constant 0.037s -1 ) would be only 1.9x10 -17 mols -1 , and diffusion (with coefficient 2x10 -9 m 2 s -1 ) from a 3M  series resistance pipette (filled with solution of resistivity 0.8  m) could replenish only 2.1x10 -16 mols -1 HCO, so HCO transport cannot be obligatory.
By contrast, dissociation of water (56M, rate constant 2.5x10 -5 s -1 ) can generate 1.4x10 -14 mols -1 of OH -.
FIG. 4 The glutamate uptake carrier transports anions out of the cell.
a , Response of an anion-sensitive microelectrode (filled with Fluka ionophore 24902) to Ringer's (as for Fig. 2) containing different [ClO](bars) to calibrate the electrode. b and c , Uptake currents at -43mV (top) and response of an extracellular anion-sensitive electrode (bottom) evoked by 30μM Glu in 2 cells clamped with electrodes (as for Fig. 3) containing ClO (b ) and Cl -(c ).
A 5mV change of anion-sensitive electrode voltage implies a 6.8μM rise of [ClO]when ClO is present.
The [ClO]change per uptake current was not affected by raising [Na + ]from 0 to 30mM to reduce the fractional change of [Na + ]i produced by uptake, suggesting that the ClO efflux was not produced secondarily by a Na + -dependent anion carrier like the Na + /HCO co-transporter. d-f , Data from cells filled with ClO. d , Uptake currents at -43mV (top) and extracellular ClO accumulation (bottom) evoked by 30μM L-Glu, D-Asp, NMDA, kainate (KA) and quisqualate (QUIS)(data typical of 5 cells).
Note that internal ClO increases the maximum velocity (V max ) of uptake for Asp relative to that for Glu (compare with Fig. 2 d ).
e , Uptake current at -43mV (top) and [ClO]o rise (bottom) evoked by 30μM L-Glu in Ringer's with no sodium (replaced by choline), or with normal sodium.
f , Voltage dependence of the uptake current (○) and [ClO]o rise (○) evoked by 30μM Glu (curve drawn by eye).
g , Proposed stoichiometry of the glutamate uptake carrier.
If, with ClO inside, 64% (1.8/2.8 from Fig. 3 a ) of carrier cycles transport one ClO out of the cell, and the diffusion coefficient of ClO is 2x10 -9 m 2 s -1 , then the [ClO]expected at the surface of a 20-μm diameter cell for a 300pA uptake current is 8μM, similar to a typical rise of 6μM seen experimentally.
Electrical conductivity of carbon-bearing granulite at raised temperatures and pressures
Paul W. J. Glover & F. J. Vine
IT has long been recognized that the electrical conductivity of the lower continental crust is anomalously high.
Both pore-saturating brines and conducting films of carbon at grain boundaries have been proposed to explain this, but the evidence remains inconclusive.
Here we report measurements of electrical conductivity at high temperatures and pressures on samples of carbon-bearing and carbon-free granulites with a range of electrolyte saturations.
The application of pressure to nominally dry carbon-free samples reduces the electrical conductivity as a result of a progressive reduction in pore connectivity, whereas the carbon-bearing samples show an increase in conductivity under the same conditions—an effect that we ascribe to reconnection of carbon conduction pathways during compaction.
Moreover, we find a greater increase in conductivity with temperature for the carbon-bearing samples.
In the light of work indicating that the abundance of carbon in high-grade rocks has been underestimated in the past, our results provide strong evidence for the role of carbon in lower-crustal conductivity.
Very few laboratory experiments have been done under fully simulated lower-crustal conditions to estimate the contribution of electrolytes to the in situ rock conductivity, and only one study, to our knowledge, examined carbon-bearing rock.
Here we examine carbon-bearing and carbon-free granulites under a range of electrolyte saturations, confining pressures, pore pressures and temperatures to assess their contributions to the bulk conductivity of the rock and to help understand the nature of the rocks causing the high-conductivity zones in the lower crust.
When pressure is applied to an electrolyte-saturated rock, it reduces the rock's electrical conductivity.
This is due to the progressive loss of porosity and pore connectivity through which the conduction occurs; the effect is smaller if there is significant conduction through the rock matrix.
We found that the electrical conductivity of our electrolyte-saturated carbon-bearing granulite samples (A1, A2) decreased with the application of confining pressures as expected.
The decrease was, however, less than that for the carbon-free granulites, B1 and B2 (Fig. 1 a).
This is in itself unremarkable and can be explained if, of the two types, the carbon-free granulites have a higher porosity, a weaker matrix or a greater proportion of long thin cracks that tend to close on application of small confining pressures.
In our work, however, the carbon-bearing granulite samples have a higher porosity (Table 1) and friable nature, and would be expected to lose much of their porosity, with associated loss of conductivity, when even small pressures are applied.
Furthermore, the highly foliated nature of the carbon-bearing granulites suggests that much of their porosity is in the form of long thin cracks rather than less compressible, more rounded pores.
If the pressure variation were solely due to electrolytic conduction through the pore fluid, one would expect that the flat thin cracks in the carbon-bearing granulites, confirmed by optical and electron microscopy, and deduced from mercury injection porisimetry, would make the electrical conductivity more sensitive to pressure than was observed.
It seems, therefore, that sample pore-space or matrix properties cannot account for the different trends in electrical conductivity.
We expected the conductivity of nominally dry samples to mirror the behaviour of the fully saturated samples but to be lower overall.
The reason for this was that the nominally dry samples were not oven-dried and would contain small amounts of remaining pore fluids.
The carbon-free samples (B3, B4) showed lower conductivities than the saturated case, as expected.
The conductivity of the unsaturated carbon-bearing samples (A3, A4) at near surface conditions was lower than that when saturated with electrolyte, as expected, but increased with the application of confining pressure (Fig. 1 b ).
This behaviour is consistent with that of the saturated samples and indicates that the lower rate of reduction of conductivity with pressure is not associated with electrolytic conduction but with some mechanism that becomes more efficient during compaction.
We found that the electrical conductivity of the electrolyte-saturated carbon-bearing samples increased more steeply with temperature than that for the electrolyte-saturated carbon-free samples (Fig. 2).
This increased temperature dependence cannot be explained merely by additional carbon conduction, as graphite conduction is nearly independent of temperature.
Further work on the carbon-electrolyte system is needed to ascertain whether the effect is connected with a carbon-water interaction or possibly the formation of carbon-sodium intercalation compounds at high temperature and pressure.
These compounds have higher conductivity than graphite, but also have a negative coefficient of conductivity with temperature.
The observed effect may be due to increased formation of such compounds as temperature increases.
Most measurements made in this work were at a fixed frequency of 1,592Hz.
The electrical conductivity of most rocks varies slightly with frequency, and considerable variations may occur in carbon-bearing rocks.
We measured the impedance spectra of rock samples A1, A2, B1 and B2 to check that the conductivities at the fixed frequency were representative.
The mode of conduction in all samples is dominated by the in-phase conduction throughout the complete frequency range (Fig. 3).
The electrical phase angles at 1,585Hz, the nearest measured point to the frequency used in the main measurements, were -2.83°, -1.76° and -0.15° for A1, A2 and B1 respectively.
This indicates that more out-of-phase conduction occurs in the carbon-bearing samples, although the effect is still small in comparison with the in-phase component.
One possible explanation lies in the way in which charge carriers move between crystal lattice planes: the build up of charge carriers on alternate planes of a graphite lattice gives rise to local electrical fields that oppose the main field and generate the out-of-phase conduction.
The presence of the out-of-phase conduction is therefore additional evidence that significant non-electrolyte-mediated conduction is occurring.
We propose that the increase in electrical conductivity in the unsaturated carbon-bearing samples is due to increased connectivity of carbon as the pore volume is lost and pore throats close down, leaving only compacted carbon conduction pathways.
If so, the conductivity of the rock at high pressures would be expected to mirror that of carbon.
Specifically, the rock's conductivity would depend only upon the amount and conductivity of the carbon fraction present, and have a negligible variation with pressure, as for pure carbon.
We were able to create confining pressures of 0.4 GPa; to judge whether our hypothesis is correct, greater pressures are needed to compact the rock completely.
Even at the highest pressures used here, the progressive loss of conduction by the small amounts of fluid still remaining in the pores unfortunately prevents quantitative comparisons with a dry rock containing only compact carbon and matrix minerals.
It is clear, however, that some conducting mineral is responsible for the anomalous electrical behaviour.
Quantitative mineralogical analysis of all the samples shows similar fractional amounts of all minerals but one.
The exception is the presence of 2.7% carbon in those labelled carbon-bearing.
Auger spectroscopy of igneous and metamorphic rocks has shown fine films of carbon covering grain boundaries.
It has been postulated that decompression could irreversibly change the electrical conductivity of rocks by rupturing these films, and that laboratory measurements would not be able to duplicate the high conductivity in rocks even if the rocks were subjected to high pressures.
Our experiment suggests that, at least to some extent, carbon grain-boundary films will reconnect under high pressures.
From the marked rise in the electrical conductivity of these saturated carbon-bearing samples as temperature and pressure increase, one would expect a high sample conductivity under lower-crustal conditions.
The presence of carbon-bearing rocks similar to those studied here would raise the rock conductivity to moderate values if dry and to high values if also saturated with brines, producing values similar to those observed for the crustal high-conductivity zones by magnetotelluric methods.
It seems increasingly likely that plutonic and granulitic rocks with grain-boundary carbon could have electrical conductivities as high as those deduced in many areas of the lower continental crust.
Mineral assemblage: clinopyroxene, orthopyroxene, plagioclase, spinels, hornblende
Overview of the samples used in this work.
Total carbon measurements were made using a Leco induction furnace and infra-red detector which was calibrated against samples of steel with accurately known carbon content.
Thin-section studies of the granulites showed the absence of carbonate minerals.
The total carbon content has, therefore, been taken as the carbon content and quoted as a percentage weight.
The carbon content figures have an associated error of 0.1 in the range 1–10%.
The carbon-free samples B1 and B2 had less than 20p.p.m. carbon (the limit of instrumental resolution).
Orientation of direction of electrical conductivity measurements with respect to the plane of foliation
FIG. 1
a
, Variation of the electrical conductivity of water- and brine-saturated carbon-free and carbon-bearing granulites as confining pressure is increased.
Measurements were made with a Wayne Kerr B642 a.c. transformer bridge operating at 1,592Hz.
The samples were measured with a PTFE sleeve and two-electrode arrangement or with a metal sleeve and three-electrode guard-ring arrangement.
All electrical conductivity measurements were taken after any transient changes in the pore structure had occurred.
Error bars indicate the range of results from three experimental runs.
A1 and A2: carbon-bearing, electrolyte-saturated, measurement direction parallel and perpendicular to planes of foliation respectively.
B1 and B2: carbon-free, no foliation, saturated with electrolyte and distilled water respectively.
The data are normalized to that at 5MPa; absolute values for each of the samples at this pressure were as follows: A1, 5.01x10 -4 Sm -1 ; A2, 2.51x10 -4 Sm -1 ; B1, 1.995x10 -4 Sm -1 ; B2, 2.24x10 -4 Sm -1 .
b,
Variation of the electrical conductivity of unsaturated samples of carbon-free and carbon-bearing granulites as confining pressure is increased.
Measurements and error bars as in a .
A3 and A4: carbon-bearing, unsaturated, measurement direction parallel and perpendicular to planes of carbon foliation respectively.
B3 and B4: carbon-free, unsaturated, no foliation.
The data are normalized to that at 18MPa; absolute values for each of the samples at this pressure were as follows: A3, 2.24x10 -5 Sm -1 ; A4, 3.55x10 -6 Sm -1 ; B3, 2.51x10 -6 Sm -1 ; B4, 2.3x10 -6 Sm -1 .
FIG. 2 Variation of the electrical conductivity of 0.5M NaCl brine-saturated carbon-free and carbon-bearing granulites at constant confining pressure (0.2 GPa) and pore fluid pressure (0.18GPa) at different temperatures (up to 800°C).
Measurements were made with a Wayne Kerr B642 a.c. transformer bridge operating at 1,592Hz.
The samples were measured with a metal sleeve and three-electrode guard-ring arrangement.
The size of symbols indicates the approximate error associated with individual readings.
A1 and A2: carbon-bearing, measurement direction parallel and perpendicular respectively to planes of carbon foliation.
B1: carbon-free, no foliation.
Conductivities during cooling coincided with those during heating.
Heating/cooling hysteresis was observed on the first heating cycle.
This was removed by holding the temperature high under pressure until all temperature-induced changes had occurred.
The values given here are from subsequent heating and cooling cycles applied slowly.
The results are normalized to that at 25°C; absolute values for each of the samples at this temperature were as follows: A1, 1.26x10 -4 Sm -1 ; A2, 0.631x10 -4 Sm -1 ; B1, 1.26x10 -5 Sm -1 .
FIG. 3 The complex electrical conductivity of selected samples as a function of frequency of applied electric field.
The measurements were made on a HP4192 LCR meter.
Measurements of electrical conductivity and susceptibility were made at 20 frequencies per decade from 5Hz to 20MHz on samples saturated with 0.5M aqueous NaCl solution with a two-electrode system.
The electrodes were made from platinum-blacked platinum gauze to minimize electrode polarization at low frequencies.
A1 and A2: carbon-bearing, electrolyte-saturated, measurement direction parallel and perpendicular to planes of foliation respectively.
B1: carbon-free, no foliation, saturated with electrolyte.
Evolution and environment in the Hominoidea
Peter Andrews
Between 10 and 20 million years ago, a variety of hominoid primates lived in Africa, Europe and Asia.
The question of which of these, if any, lie closest to the ancestries of humans and modern apes remains a lively source of debate.
Recent fossil discoveries, though, shed light on the environments in which the various groups of hominoid emerged and, it is hoped, on their evolution.
But the lack of a hominid fossil record before about 5 million years ago—and any fossil record for the African apes—is still a frustrating barrier.
THE hominoid primates are the group that encompasses the apes and humans.
The origin of the group and the evolution of the various hominoid species are of relevance to the human condition, but of more immediate concern are the issues of when and where the human species originated and the context in which it evolved: the effects of climate, environment and behaviour, for example, and the ecological relationships between communities.
I shall review the evidence relating to these issues, particularly the systematic relationships of fossil hominoids and their palaeoecology, insofar as it is currently available from the fossil record.
The hominoid apes include the lesser apes, the gibbons and siamangs of eastern Asia, and the great apes, chimpanzees and gorillas of Africa and the orang-utan of South East Asia.
Molecular evidence has shown that the old concept of great apes (family Pongidae), as distinct from humans (family Hominidae), is no longer valid because the African apes and humans are more closely related to each other than any of them are to the orang-utan.
This is recognized taxonomically by the division between the Ponginae, which contains only the orang-utan and its putative fossil relatives, and the Homininae, for the African apes and humans.
This distinction is supported both by molecular evidence and by morphology.
Neither source of evidence, however, offers a definitive solution on the relationships within the African ape and human group, the Homininae.
The majority of molecular studies support a closer relationship between chimpanzees and humans, with gorillas more distantly related (see Box 1), but some molecular studies support the alternative of closer relationship between chimpanzees and gorillas, with humans the sister group to the combined African apes.
Morphological evidence is also ambiguous, so in my opinion the trichotomy shown in Box 1 is not yet resolved.
Hominoid origins
The earliest fossil record for the Hominoidea is in early Miocene deposits in East Africa.
The genus Proconsul is widely distributed in Uganda and Kenya in sediments ranging in age from 22 to 17Myr (million years ago).
Proconsul is recognized as having mainly ancestral catarrhine characters of the skull and dentition, but to be linked with the Hominoidea on the basis of a few postcranial characters.
Some of these have been appropriately criticized, but I consider that the characters listed in Box 2 are well established as hominoid synapomorphies shared by Proconsul.
It has also been claimed recently that Proconsul lacked a tail, as do extant hominoids, and that it had a relatively larger brain than comparably sized monkeys (Box 2), and there is now little doubt that Proconsul is phylogenetically linked with the Hominoidea.
Species diversity in the early Miocene East African hominoids is high, with two to three species of Proconsul- related forms and two to three species of small-bodied apes present at many sites.
Differences are partly based on size: the two species of Proconsul from Rusinga Island are estimated at 9kg and 26–38kg based on good postcranial evidence.
The small species, formerly P. africanus,is now being referred to a new species, with P. africanus being restricted to Koru and Songhor, together with the similarly sized but morphologically distinct Rangwapithecus gordoni.
Also present at these sites is a much smaller form related to the latter and a larger species of Proconsul, P. major.
Associated with Proconsul are a number of less well known fossil primate taxa, many of which are inferred as being hominoid but which lack the necessary body parts to be sure.
The ‘small-bodied ape’Limnopithecus legetet has been grouped with Proconsul in the Hominoidea on the basis of dental evidence.
An older discovery that has become significant is the taxon ‘Proconsul (Xenopithecus) hamiltoni’described for a maxilla fragment from Lothidok Hill in northern Kenya, because the Eragaleit beds from which this fossil came (together with some additional undescribed specimens) have recently been dated at between 24.3 and 27.5Myr.
This is several million years older than the previously oldest known fossil ape from Meswa Bridge in the Koru area, and if this specimen is indeed a fossil hominoid it puts the date for hominoid origins at least to 25Myr.
Proconsul has been shown to have been mainly associated with forested palaeoenvironments in East Africa.
The faunas and floras from Songhor, Koru and Mfwangano in Kenya, and Napak in Uganda all have clear affinities with present day rainforest biotas.
Some of the Rusinga Island floras are closer to more seasonal tropical woodlands, although there are wet forest elements as well, and the faunas have both forest elements and non-forest at different stratigraphic horizons, indicating a mixture of habitats during the Miocene.
The community structure of the mammalian faunas is similar to modern forest communities, again with the exception of some of the Rusinga faunas.
It may be that the species difference between the Rusinga hominoids and those from all the other East African sites reflects these apparent ecological differences, for there are similar differences in several other groups of mammals.
All of the Proconsul species appear to share a form of arboreal quadrupedalism that was little changed from their catarrhine ancestors.
Evidence from the wear patterns of teeth shows that they also shared similar diets of soft fruit and young leaves, and it seems likely that the various species operated within similar ecological constraints, although there is evidence of some ecological diversification in contemporaneous hominoids both in diet, for example the more folivorous Rangwapithecus , and in locomotion, for example the long-limbed Dendropithecus .
The recent conclusion that the Proconsul hand had a fully opposable thumb, with rotation at the trapezium-first metacarpal joint at least as extensive as in other hominoids, is of particular significance in combination with thumb length, for Proconsul lacks the relatively short thumb of the living great apes and so had hand proportions very similar to those of modern humans.
This is particularly interesting in view of the recent emphasis on tool use in chimpanzees, and it would be interesting in this respect to ascertain if there is any evidence of tool use by natural living populations of gorillas and orang-utans.
The Dryopithecinae
In the period from 17 to 12Myr there appears a second radiation of hominoid species.
Their relationships with each other and with later hominoids is still uncertain, but as they represent different evolutionary trends I am going to distinguish them taxonomically at the level of tribe, where they have been distinguished at generic level before.
Three groups of fossil hominoid may be recognized, manifesting two rather distinct evolutionary trends.
The three groups, and their constituent fossils, are listed in Box 2.
The fossil record of the first group, the Afropithecini, is confined to the African continent.
Three important fossil sites are known, the Turkana sites of Buluk and Kalodirr yielding Afropithecus,dated to older than 17Myr, the Arabian site of Ad Dabtiyah, yielding Heliopithecus,with a faunal age of about 17Myr, and the East African sites of Maboko Island and Nachola, yielding ‘Kenyapithecus’africanus,and both dated about 15Myr.
These three genera seem to form a natural grouping (Box 2) and in the past they have been confused with one another: in commenting on the original description of the Buluk specimens, Deslon suggested that they should be attributed to Kenyapithecus (rather than to Sivapithecus,as they then were), and in an addendum to their original description of Heliopithecus,Andrews and Martin recognized the affinities of that genus to Afropithecus,which was published just before Heliopithecus.
The recently described taxon Otavipithecus namibiensis from 13Myr deposits in Namibia has been compared with this group on the basis of shared dental characters, but cranial and postcranial material is needed to clarify this point.
This combination of specimens could be recognized either by grouping them into a single genus or into a tribe, and on present evidence I favour the latter alternative and suggest the Afropithecini as a suitable name.
This follows from the probable distinction between the Fort Ternan and Maboko/Nachola material: because the type species of Kenyapithecus is K. wickeri from Fort Ternan, the generic name Kenyapithecus has to remain with the Fort Ternan material and forms the root for the second tribe Kenyapithecini.
Later in the Miocene, the hominoid fossil record becomes sparse in Africa.
Kenyapithecus is known from middle Miocene sites such as Fort Ternan (see above), about 14Myr, but the rest of the fossil record is restricted to a small number of indeterminate isolated teeth and fragmentary hominine jaws (see below).
Similar aged sites in Eurasia are also rare, but hominoids very similar to Kenyapithecus wickeri are known from 14 to 15Myr sites in Turkey, Pasalar and Candir, and Czechoslovakia and Austria (Neudorf Sandberg and Klein Hadersdorf).
These fossils constitute the second group recognized here, the Kenyapithecini.
The Pasalar hominoids have been assigned in the past to Sivapithecus,but new material shows that at least one of the species lacks the derived subnasal morphology of that genus.
For this reason, we have provisionally allocated the Pasalar species to Griphopithecus .
The third group comprises the European fossils that are mostly attributed to the genus Dryopithecus.
The Dryopithecini are known from 12 to 8Myr deposits in France, Austria, Germany, Spain and Hungary, and similar fossils from Georgia through to China have also been attributed to this genus.
The Afropithecini is characterized by thickening of the enamel on the molars (only actually measured on Heliopithecus ), by broadening of the molars, reduction in molar cusps and ridges so that the occlusal surfaces become more flattened, hyper-robusticity of the canine, the breadth of which is almost as great as length, and enlargement of the premolars, particularly the uppers, which are 92–97% the size of the first molar.
The premolar enlargement is greater than is seen in any other hominoid, living or fossil, except for the Moroto palate, which on this basis is also included in the Afropithecini.
At least two premolar morphologies are included in this combination,Afropithecus and the Moroto palate having strong cusp heteromorphy on the third premolar and the Maboko ‘Kenyapithecus’having the cusps more nearly equal in size.
Enamel thickening of the molars and enlargement of the premolars seem likely to be linked to a dietary change in the afropithecin fossils.
This may be an increased component of hard fruit in the diet, although the evidence for this is ambiguous.
The postcrania are only known for ‘Kenyapithecus’from Maboko Island, and they indicate little change from the generalized arboreal quadrupedalism present in the early Miocene hominoids like Proconsul .
Little is known of the ecological context of the afropithecin fossils, but while the best record is again from Maboko Island, there is some doubt about the ecological interpretation of this site.
On the basis of the mammalian fauna, the hominoids appear to be associated with tropical forest, albeit a dry seasonal and probably deciduous forest.
The land gastropods appear to indicate more arid conditions, although still with tree cover, indicating a high degree of climatic seasonality.
It is hard to reconcile this interpretation with the apparent frugivorous adaptations of Kenyapithecus and the presence in the fauna of at least four other primates (one other hominoid, one monkey and two small-bodied apes), but the interpretation of seasonal forest is consistent with the little that is known about the other afropithecin sites as well.
The Kenyapithecini appear to have thicker enamel than the afropithecins, although enamel thickness has yet to be measured on any of the East African specimens.
They occur in deposits slightly later than most afropithecins.
Their postcranial remains are little different from those of the afropithecins (as determined by the Maboko postcrania for the latter).
The kenyapithecins are represented by the humerus from Fort Ternan, undescribed remains from Pasalar and perhaps the Klein Hadersdorf specimens.
The palaeoenvironments also appear to have been little different from those of the afropithecins, with closed woodland-forest indicated for Fort Ternan, although some authors infer open country or even grassland for this site.
At Pasalar, the evidence is strongly in favour of subtropical forest, probably evergreen but with a pronounced dry season, and current work on the microwear of the Pasalar specimens, which are the oldest ones known to have thick enamel, indicates a diet of small hard objects, probably fruits.
The Dryopithecini retain the primitively thin enamel of early hominoids, and in some aspects of the skull and dentition it is little advanced over proconsulids.
The subnasal morphology is slightly different from that of Proconsul,with some reduction in size of the incisive foramen, but there is no premaxillary lengthening similar to that of extant great apes.
On the other hand, the morphology of the glabella region and the greater development of the brow ridges may indicate affinities with the African apes and humans, but the polarity of these characters is uncertain (see Box 4).
Postcranially, the limb bone shafts are rounded, the humerus shaft is straight with a convex deltoid region, and the elbow joint has increased ranges of extension and supination-pronation combined with stability, as seen in the distal humerus, which has a deep olecranon fossa, rounded capitulum and well developed medial and lateral ridges of the trochlea.
These adaptations indicate upper arm and elbow function similar to that of the living great apes, with below-branch arboreal adaptations and elbow joints modified for stability; this might be evidence of a relationship, although the absence of some of these characters in Sivapithecus may invalidate this conclusion.
The environment of the dryopithecins appears to have been forested.
The vegetation suggested by floral evidence is of mesophytic forests, subtropical to warm temperate in nature, but probably partly deciduous and strongly seasonal.
It is probable that the dryopithecin apes were mainly arboreal, but it is not clear at this stage what their diet was in such an environment.
Their abundance in such sites as Rudabanya, Hungary, and Can Llobateres, Spain, and their wide distribution across the whole of southern Europe, demonstrates a successful adaptation spanning 3–4Myr, but it is not possible with our present knowledge to say what was the basis of this success.
Ponginae
Over the past decade it has become accepted that some of the fossils formerly thought to be human ancestors are in fact on the line leading to the orang-utan.
It has been shown earlier that this line branched off before the separation of humans and the African apes, so that these fossils are now considered remote from human ancestry.
‘Ramapithecus’was once considered to be a human ancestor, but it is now viewed as a synonym of Sivapithecus .
This has led some authors to make Sivapithecus a human ancestor, and others to recognize the affinities of these fossil genera with the orang-utan but provide evidence linking the orang clade with humans.
The third option, and the one that I prefer, is that Sivapithecus,including ‘Ramapithecus' , is related to the orang-utan and that they branch at node 2 in Box 1.
The evidence for these options is summarized in Box 3.
The evidence supporting Sivapithecus- orang-utan relationship has been questioned recently on the basis of new postcranial remains of Sivapithecus.
Two new humeri from Pakistan are said to retain ancestral characters similar to those seen in Proconsul and Kenyapithecus,with the proximal shaft curving laterally and anteriorly (that is, convex laterally as in Old World monkeys), and a flat deltoid plane, whereas the distal articular surface has several derived great ape features.
This combination of characters in Sivapithecus indicates that if it is indeed related to the orang-utan, characters like the straight shaft and convex deltoid plane that are present in the extant great apes must have arisen independently in the orang-utan and the African apes.
Alternatively, it may be that Sivapithecus precedes the splitting of the great apes, so that the combination of cranial characters shared by it and the orang-utan must have arisen independently.
In my view, the evidence of the face (Boxes 3 and 4) is of greater significance, for it involves several functional complexes of the nose, orbits and palate, and this supports the relationship of Sivapithecus with the orang-utan.
The presently accepted age range for Sivapithecus is 12.5 to 7Myr, and it is this date that provides the earliest evidence for the splitting of the orang-utan from the other hominoids.
Geographic distribution covers from IndoPakistan to Turkey.
Palaeoenvironments were probably subtropical forests, strongly seasonal but most likely evergreen.
On the evidence of postcrania,Sivapithecus was similar to other Miocene apes in being an arboreal quadruped with perhaps a terrestrial component as well.
Its diet appears to have been soft fruit, which appeared to contradict the suggestion that thick enamel was adaptive for hard fruit diets; but the more recent conclusion that the microwear of the much earlier thick-enamelled hominoid from Pasalar is indicative of a hard-fruit diet suggests that there was a dietary shift after the development of thick enamel, with dietary change independent of morphology.
Homininae
There are two groups of fossils that can be attributed to the Homininae, that is the African ape and human clade.
These are the sample from Greece that has been called Ouranopithecus macedoniensis by some, or synonymized with Graecopithecus freybergi by others, and the single maxilla from Samburu Hills which has not yet been named.
Both lack pongine characters, retaining the primitive condition for the characters that distinguish the pongine clade.
The claim that on this basis the Greek fossils fit better with Australopithecus afarensis is certainly correct, but based as it is on primitive characters this conclusion has no phylogenetic significance.
On the other hand, there are several characters linking Graecopithecus to the African ape and human clade.
The supra-orbital torus is moderately well developed, with broad lateral orbital rims, but the torus is discontinuous, unlike the continuous bar-like structure in the African apes.
The region of glabella is also well developed, although the condition in Graecopithecus is similar to that seen in dryopithecins and afropithecins, so that the significance of this character is uncertain.
The premaxillary lengthening in Graecopithecus is a highly derived character shared with the African apes, and it is combined with the development of an incisive canal and an extended nasoalveolar clivus.
These characters and some others are summarized in Box 4.
Hominidae indet
There are two groups of middle Miocene hominoid that have unknown relationships with the three subfamilies recognized here.
These are Lufengpithecus lufengensis from the late Miocene of China and Oreopithecus from the late Miocene of Italy.
The Chinese hominoid has been claimed to belong to the pongine clade, but the characters are of doubtful significance, for example the enlarged maxillary sinus, which may be an ancestral hominid character, or the size discrepancy between central and lateral incisors, which, although correct, is linked with an extremely low crowned and heavily buttressed morphology.
Other supposed pongine characters of the zygomatic and orbital regions appear more likely to be primitive for the Hominidae.
Oreopithecus is one of the best known Miocene primates, and yet agreement has yet to be reached as to its taxonomic status.
It is considered a separate family of the Cercopithecoidea by some on the basis of its teeth, while others attribute it to a separate family of the Hominoidea on the basis of its postcrania.
All agree on the highly derived nature of the teeth, and it is the postcranial adaptations that are of particular interest, for Oreopithecus shares with living hominoids a number of apparent postcranial synapomorphies.
Some of these characters are also present in Dryopithecus,and they have been used to support a relationship of this genus with the living great apes, but their presence in Oreopithecus,which is so highly specialized cranially, must cast some doubt on this interpretation.
Hominoid evolutionary trends and the Homininae
The hominoid primates appear to have emerged during the Oligocene at least 25Myr ago as a tropical African group inhabiting tropical forests in an equable climatic regime.
The majority were arboreal frugivores occupying much the same niche as equivalent-sized monkeys today.
Two trends are apparent during the Miocene Period.
The first led to increased enamel thickness on the molar teeth combined with little change in postcranial anatomy, and this is seen in the progression from Proconsul to Afropithecus to Kenyapithecus.
This progression could be interpreted as an ancestor-descendent lineage, but the relationships of the later thick-enamelled hominoids to this putative lineage,Graecopithecus on the one hand and the pongine Sivapithecus on the other, are uncertain.
These morphological changes may be interpreted functionally in dietary terms as a change to a diet with hard fruit as the main constituent, and this may be related in turn to the drier and more seasonal environments they lived in, but as there was little change in their postcranial skeletons it is likely that they retained their ancestral arboreal locomotor pattern.
The second trend produced change in the postcranial anatomy, leading to functional complexes similar to those of living great apes, but there was less change in the skull and particularly the teeth.
There may have been some dietary change, despite the absence of change in enamel thickness, but this has yet to be tested.
Postcranial change is seen in the progression from Proconsul and/or Afropithecus to Dryopithecus on the one hand, and to Sivapithecus on the other.
Dryopithecus appears to share many of the great ape synapomorphies of the humerus, but these are present also in Oreopithecus,which makes their interpretation difficult.
Sivapithecus combines some of these same characters of the distal humerus with primitive characters of the humeral shaft, and this confuses the issue still further if it is grouped in the orang-utan clade, for this indicates that some of the postcranial characters shared by the orang-utan and the African apes must have evolved independently.
It is likely that locomotor and positional behaviours were related to environmental change, in this case the move from tropical forest habitats in Africa to the subtropical and warm temperate forest habitats of Europe, which would have been both more seasonal and more open, with less complex canopies.
The orang-utan lineage appears to have originated from within the first trend, with further modifications of skull and postcrania, but with little change in environments.
There is no good evidence available at present to identify the origin of the African ape and human clade, the Homininae, but two alternatives can be mentioned.
First, there may have been a continuation of the thick-enamelled trend independently of the pongine radiation, such as is seen in Graecopithecus for instance.
The morphology of the alveolar clivus supports this alternative, in which case Graecopithecus can be interpreted as a fossil hominine, but there is a possibility that this morphology represents an ancestral great ape character which was primitively retained in Graecopithecus and the hominines (and was independently further modified to produce the more derived orang-utan condition).
The second alternative is that there may have been a continuation of the dryopithecin radiation.
This is supported by the morphology of the postcrania, which is more similar in Dryopithecus fontani to the living great apes and humans than that seen in any other fossil hominoid.
Two problems arise here, however, for Oreopithecus shares some of the same characters, and the pongine Sivapithecus is less advanced in this respect.
Oreopithecus is clearly not a dryopithecin, which indicates these postcranial characters may be primitive for the great ape and human clade, but if Sivapithecus belongs in the orang-utan clade, as I have argued, the shared morphology of the orang-utan and the African apes must have arisen independently.
This weakens the phylogenetic potential for these postcranial characters in Dryopithecus,and although it could be suggested that Dryopithecus could belong in either of the two derivative clades (Ponginae or Homininae), additional supporting evidence would be needed before such a claim could be substantiated.
The earliest fossil evidence for the Homininae is based on fragments of jaw from latest Miocene to Pliocene deposits in Africa.
An upper jaw from Samburu Hills appears to have gorilla-like morphology of its teeth combined with thick enamel, which is very much what would be expected if thick enamel is identified as an ancestral hominine character.
Its date is uncertain but is thought to have been about 9Myr, and it is placed at this date on the phylogeny in Box 3 (identified as SH).
Two lower jaws, one from Lothagam in northern Kenya is now dated at older than 5.6Myr, and a slightly younger lower jaw from Tabarin from deposits just over 5Myr share very similar morphology with each other and with Australopithecus afarensis .
It may be asked, however, to what extent this morphology would differ from that of thick-enamelled hominoid ancestors from the Miocene, and on what basis, therefore, should these fossils from Lothagam and Tabarin be identified as human ancestors.
Early australopithecines are linked with living humans on the basis of shared characters related to bipedalism, but it has yet to be shown that their jaws and teeth differ from putative hominine ancestors.
As the Tabarin and Lothagam jaws share only primitive characters with the earliest australopithecines, this is not enough to establish them definitely as human ancestors.
The presence of some arboreal retentions in early australo- pithecines, and their association with palaeoenvironments that may have been more wooded than has formerly been thought, should also give rise to caution in identifying human origins.
The relationships of the extant hominoid primate
THE characters distinguishing the three branching points are listed below.
Node 1
Characters of the extant Hominoidea.
Large numbers of characters defining the ancestral hominoid morphotype have been listed, but the most useful way of summarizing them is to extend Harrison's list of discrete functional complexes for the postcrania:
1.
differential usage of the forelimb, including increased potential for raising arms above the head, for extending the forelimb at the elbow joint, and for rotation of the forelimb;
2.
greater flexibility of the wrist and opposable thumb;
3.
more erect posture during locomotion and feeding with broadening of thorax and loss of tail;
4.
greater mobility at the hip and ankle joints.
5.
To this may be added the characters of the dentition related to diet, such as broad spatulate central incisors, low crowned premolars with loss of honing on P3, and relatively broad molars with low rounded cusps.
Node 2
Characters of the Hominidae linking Ponginae and Homininae.
1.
Skull with enlarged maxillary sinuses, orbits higher than broad, increased alveolar prognathism with elongated premaxilla, facial lengthening with elongation of nasal bones and narrow incisive foramen;
2.
great increase in size of incisors relative to molar size;
3.
robust and enlarged premolars relative to molars, upper premolar heteromorphy reduced;
4.
reduced molar cingula;
5.
mandible robust with large inferior transverse torus;
6.
distal humerus with deep sulci either side of lateral trochlear keel.
Node 3
Characters of the Homininae linking the African apes and humans.
The characters distinguishing this node are both morphological (described in more detail in Box 3) and molecular, for example:
1.
myoglobin chain, positions 23 and 110;
2.
two shared substitutions in the fibrinopeptide A and B chains;
3.
twenty-seven shared substitutions in the DNA and mitochondrial DNA chains and three deletions;
4.
fusion of os centrale in the wrist;
5.
enlarged supra-orbital torus.
Evidence resolving the trichotomy at node 3 is provided for a human-chimpanzee grouping and for a chimpanzee-gorilla grouping.
some of these workers recognize that the trichotomy is not yet resolved, but others insist that it is resolved in favour of the chimpanzee-human grouping.
BOX 2 Relationships of the fossil hominoids, with characters distinguishing the branching points
TWO fossil clades are recognized here.
The first consists of the Proconsulidae at node 0 and includes Proconsul,for which the best evidence is available.
This clade also includes Rangwapithecus, Nyanzapithecus,and the Lothidok hominoid (see text).
Some of the characters distinguishing node 0 are the same as for node 1, thereby providing evidence for the hominoid status of Proconsul, as follows:
1.
low crowned P3 with length greater than height, cusp heteromorphy on upper premolars reduced, reduction in breadth of upper molars (breadth/length 115–121%), and I nearly as broad as high (breadth/length index 80–90%);
2.
relative increase in brain size: encephalization quotient 48.8% compared with a range of values of 22 to 41% for eleven species of monkey;
3.
medial torsion of the humeral head and elongated vertebral border of the scapula, leading to increased potential for raising arms above the head;
4.
strong medial and lateral keels of the trochlea;
5.
increased mobility at the ulnocarpal joint;
7.
phalanges of hallux broad and robust, and complete opposability of the thumb;
8.
absence of tail.
The second node, at position 1A on the cladogram, is probably a heterogeneous association of taxa, grouped here because we do not at present understand their phylogenetic relationships.
It is referred here to the Dryopithecinae and it includes three groups:(1)Dryopithecus itself in tribe Dryopithecini;(2) a newly proposed tribe, Afropithecini with Afropithecus, Heliopithecus and Otavipithecus , together with material from Maboko Island and Nachola that has been referred in the past to Kenyapithecus;and (3) the Kenyapithecini, which includes Kenyapithecus wickeri from Fort Ternan,Griphopithecus alpani from Pasalar, Turkey, and the postcrania from Klein Hadersdorf.
The characters distinguishing node 1A are as follows:
1.
premolar enlargement combined with retention of varying degrees of cusp heteromorphy;
2.
molars with low cusps, flattened occlusal surfaces, reduction in cingulum and squarish shape;
3.
reduction in size of superior transverse torus of the mandibular symphysis;
4.
robust but low crowned canines.
At node 1A, the three groups have the following distinctive characters:
Afropithecini.
Increase in enamel thickness of the molars to intermediate thick, with relative enamel thickness of 17.35 (ref. 47); and further enlargement of the premolars.
The postcrania (from Maboko) retain primitive hominoid characters similar to the morphology seen in Proconsul.
Kenyapithecini.
Increase in enamel thickness, but the enamel is even thicker than in afropithecins, as measured for the Pasalar sample, with relative enamel thickness of 19.71 (ref. 47), although it has yet to be measured for any of the African Kenyapithecus;this character may be diagnostic of node 1A if it can be shown to be ancestral for both pongines and hominines;
Dryopithecini.
Limb bones with rounded shafts; distal humerus with rounded capitulum, deep olecranon fossa and prominent trochlear keels.
These characters may be homologous with those of the orang-utan, or with those of the African apes and humans, but not with both as there is now evidence of independent derivation of orang postcranial characters from the other great apes.
BOX 4 The characters of the homininae and the relationship of Graecopithecus
THE following characters have been claimed to distinguish the hominine branching point, node 3, Box 1, and their condition in fossil apes is described.
1.
Prominent supra-orbital torus, continuous and bar-like in African apes and discontinuous in australopithecines: moderately prominent and discontinuous in Dryopithecus and Graecopithecus .
2.
Prominent glabella: prominent in Afropithecus ,Dryopithecus and Graecopithecus , and probably an ancestral hominid character.
3.
Frontal sinus present: present in Proconsul, Afropithecus and Dryopithecus,and so it is almost certainly an ancestral hominoid character.
Not known if present in Graecopithecus,but may be so if it is associated with increased brow ridge development.
4.
Elongated nasoalveolar clivus of the premaxilla with narrowing of the incisive foramen.
Least developed in the gorilla but greater in chimpanzees and australopithecines, with formation of incisive canal.
The hominine character state could either be gorilla-like lengthening of the premaxilla, which is not present in Dryopithecus but is in Graecopithecus,or it could be unlengthened as in Dryopithecus,but in both cases the elongated premaxilla and narrow incisive canal in Graecopithecus could constitute a hominine synapomorphy.
The extreme reduction in diameter of the incisive canal and lengthening and rotation of the alveolar clivus of the premaxilla in the orang-utan are probably derived independently of the hominine condition.
5.
Increased klinorhynchy, which has been linked with most of the above characters in a single functional complex relating to the angle of hafting of the face to the cranium.
It is difficult to identify this character in unsectioned skulls, but it is likely that some degree of airorhynchy is primitive for hominoids, greatly exaggerated in the pongine lineage and modified towards klinorhynchy in hominines, but as my observations lead me to believe that the bonobo is airorhynchous to some degree, it is difficult to be sure of the ancestral hominine character state.
It is also highly doubtful that this character state can be identified in the broken and distorted partial skulls of Dryopithecus and Graecopithecus,although it is claimed that the former is klinorhynchous because of the brow ridge development.
It is also claimed that the molar cusp arrangement is related to cranial flexion, with the protocone being posteriorly placed relative to paracone in klinorhynchous skulls and transversely placed in airorhynchous forms, but this is the reverse of the usually accepted polarity for cusp orientation, with the primitive trigon having the protocone posteriorly placed.
6.
Straight humeral shaft and convex deltoid plane: not known for Graecopithecus but present in Dryopithecus.
Lateral and anterior curvature (that is, laterally and anteriorly convex) and flat deltoid plane represent the ancestral hominoid condition, as present in Proconsul,and these characters are present also in Sivapithecus .
The degree of curvature, however, far exceeds that of other fossil hominoids, including Proconsul,and it may be a uniquely derived and functionally related characteristic of the sivapithecines.
7.
Characters such as broader incisors and enlarged maxillary sinuses are the only characters apart from the premaxillary/incisive complex (see character 4) that Begun designates for the hominine clade, but I would interpret these as basal hominid characters (node 2 on the cladogram in box 1), not diagnostic of the hominine clade.
Three further characters all appear to be ancestral, non-pongine characters not diagnostic of the hominine clade.
The are: canine facets in line with molars (ancestral hominoid character), lingual cusps of the molars posteriorly placed (ancestral catarrhine character; see 5), and vertical orientation of incisors (non-pongine character).
TWO options have been put forward in the literature:(1)Sivapithecus is related to humans, which has little support; and (2)Sivapithecus is related to the orang-utan. both of these may be combined with the third possibility that the orang-utan is the nearest living relative to humans, although there is much evidence against this proposition (Box 1).
The characters proposed in support of these propositions are listed below.
Evidence for Sivapithecus- human relationship
1.
Low cusped molars with thick enamel (although this is more likely to be an ancestral character for the pongine and hominine clades (Box2))
2.
robust mandibles with shallow, broad mandibular bodies;
3.
reduced canines, upper canine being reduced mesiodistally, and with reduced canine sexual dimorphism;
4.
tendency toward enlarged P3 metaconid.
Evidence for Sivapithecus -orang-utan relationship
1.
Narrow interorbital distance;
2.
broad high zygomatic region;
3.
zygomaxillary foramen above lower rim of orbit;
4.
smooth unstepped nasal floor, with elongated premaxilla, rotated antero-superiorly, with extremely narrow incisive canal;
5.
facial profile concave with extreme airorhynchy (Box 4);
6.
great size discrepancy between the upper incisors.
A number of other characters shared by the orang-utan and Sivapithecus may also support this relationship, such as the lack of glabellar thickening and the shapes of the orbits and nose, but their significance is uncertain.
Solution structure of the cyclosporin A/cyclophilin complex by NMR
Yves Thériault, Timothy M. Logan, Robert Meadows, Liping Yu, Edward T. Olejniczak, Thomas F. Holzman, Robert L. Simmer & Stephen W. Fesik
CYCLOSPORIN A, a cyclic undecapeptide, is a potent immunosuppressant that binds to a peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase of 165 amino acids, cyclophilin.
The cyclosporin A/cyclophilin complex inhibits the calcium- and calmodulin-dependent phosphatase, calcineurin, resulting in a failure to activate genes encoding interleukin-2 and other lymphokines.
The three-dimensional structures of uncomplexed cyclophilin, a tetrapeptide/cyclophilin complex, and cyclosporin A when bound to cyclophilin have been reported.
However, the structure of the cyclosporin A/cyclophilin complex has not been determined.
Here we present the solution structure of the cyclosporin A/cyclophilin complex obtained by heteronuclear three-dimensional NMR spectroscopy.
The structure, one of the largest determined by NMR, differs from proposed models of the complex and is analysed in terms of the binding interactions and structure/activity relationships for CsA analogues.
Figure 1 depicts a stereoview of 31 superimposed structures of the cyclosporin A (CsA) /cyclophilin (CyP) complex generated from a total of 2,115 NMR-derived restraints using a distance geometry/simulated annealing protocol.
As shown in Table 1, the structures satisfy the distance restraints with no violation greater than 0.4 A and show good covalent geometry and non-bonded contacts.
For most of the complex, the structure is well defined by the NMR data.
The atomic root-mean-square (r.m.s.) distribution about the mean coordinate positions for residues 5–165 of the CsA/CyP complex is 0.93  0.10Å for the backbone atoms and 1.51  0.10 A for all atoms.
The least defined regions are residues 1–4 at the N terminus of CyP and the loop composed of CyP residues 41–45.
As shown in Fig. 2, the structure of CyP with bound CsA consists of an eight-stranded antiparallel β- sheet, two α- helices, and a series of loops and turns, as previously observed for uncomplexed CyP and a tetrapeptide/CyP complex.
In general, the backbone of free CyP lies within the ensemble of NMR-derived solution structures for the complex (Fig. 1).
Thus, unlike other proteins that undergo large structural changes upon ligand binding (such as penicillopepsin), the structure of cyclophilin changes very little after complexing with CsA.
In contrast, the conformation of CsA when bound to cyclophilin is very different from either the crystal or chloroform-solution structures of uncomplexed CsA.
Although the bound conformation of CsA may pre-exist in aqueous solution to a small extent, NMR studies of a water-soluble CsA derivative ([D-diaminobutyric acid]CsA; ref. 8) indicate the presence of several different slowly interconverting conformations in aqueous solution (unpublished observations).
Some of these forms may need to change conformation to allow binding to CyP, consistent with recent kinetic evidence that support a time-dependent inhibition of the peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase activity of cyclophilin by CsA.
The structure of the CsA/CyP complex is stabilized by several hydrophobic interactions.
The side chains of CyP residues Trp121, Phe60, Ile57, Leu122, Phe113, His126, Ala101, Ala103 and Thr73 form a hydrophobic pocket that interacts with the hydrophobic surface of CsA residues 9–11 and 1–3 (Fig. 2).
Several hydrogen bonds also stabilize the structure of the complex (Fig. 3 a).
The NMR data indicate intermolecular hydrogen bonds between MeLeu 10(CO) and Arg55 ( NH), MeLeu9(CO) and Trp121 ( NH), as well as Abu2(NH) (where Abu represents L- α -aminobutyric acid) and Asn102(CO), consistent with the slow exchange of the Abu2 amide.
Cyclosporin A binds to the same region of CyP as a tetrapeptide substrate (N- acetyl-Ala-Ala-Pro-Ala-amidomethylcoumarin), but in an opposite N- to C-terminal orientation (Fig. 2).
As previously proposed, the MeVal11 side chain fits into the same hydrophobic pocket as the Pro ring of the substrate, and the MeVal11 C α- C’ bond of CsA is superimposable on the N-C' bond of the substrate that isomerizes.
Unlike the peptide bond of the tetrapeptide substrate, the MeVal11 C α- C' bond of CsA can more easily rotate to form favourable interactions with CyP, suggesting that this portion of CsA mimics a twisted amide bond as postulated in one mechanism.
These results contradict our earlier proposal based on a model CsA/CyP structure and an unrefined X-ray structure, in which the MeBmt1OH mimics the carbonyl of the peptide bond (MeBmt is N -methyl-(4R)-4- ((E) -2-butenyl) -4-methyl-L-threonine).
Four models of the CsA/CyP complex were reported based on X-ray and NMR data.
The NMR structure of CsA/CyP was found to be very different from one of the proposed models of the complex, differing in the CsA orientation relative to CyP by about 90°.
Three other models based on additional CsA/CyP NOE data are more similar to the NMR structure, but still differ in several important aspects.
In contrast to two of the models, the proposed hydrogen bond between the MeBmt1OH and Asn102 carbonyl is not present in the NMR structure and cannot be used to explain the importance of the MeBmt1OH group for cyclophilin binding and immunosuppressive activity.
Instead, the MeBmt1OH hydrogen-bonds to the MeBmt1 or MeLeu 4 carbonyl group and may be important for stabilizing the conformation of CsA.
In addition, the Abu2NH of CsA is hydrogen-bonded to Asn102(CO) in our NMR structure and not to MeBmt1OH as previously reported, and appears to mimic the Ala2(NH)/Asn102(CO) hydrogen bond in the tetrapeptide/cyclophilin complex (Fig. 3).
Furthermore, the proposed hydrogen bond between His126  NH and MeVal11(CO) is not possible in our NMR structure.
Titrations show that at pH 6.5, His126 is uncharged and only the  (not )NH (12.51 p.p.m.), which is hydrogen-bonded to Met100(CO), is observed.
Owing to the lack of NOEs involving Gln63, a hydrogen bond between Gln  NH and MeBmt1(CO) could not be unambiguously identified.
The NMR structure is consistent with previously observed structure/activity relationships.
For example, the marked decrease in CyP affinity for CsA analogues substituted with larger side chains at the 11 position can be rationalized by the tight fit of the MeVal11 in the middle of the binding pocket.
In contrast, the side chains of MeLeu9 and Abu2 are located to the sides of the binding pocket (Fig. 2) and can accommodate a variety of side chains consistent with the structure/activity relationships.
Cyclosporin A residues 5–8 do not interact with cyclophilin and, as expected from the NMR structure, are able to tolerate modifications.
Some of the analogues with modifications at these sites bind tightly to cyclophilin but are relatively inactive as immunosuppressants (for example,[MeAla6]CsA and [D-aminobutyric acid]CsA) which may be explained by their decreased affinity for calcineurin.
Key CyP mutants together with the NMR structure of the CsA/CyP complex presented here should allow the identification of those portions of the complex that interact with calcineurin.
FIG. 1 Superposition of 31 CsA/CyP NMR-derived structures (blue) and the X-ray structure of uncomplexed CyP (yellow) onto the mean coordinates for CsA/CyP.
CsA is colour-coded in red.
These structures were generated with a distance geometry/simulated annealing (DG/SA) protocol using the XPLOR/DG program.
Structure calculations used 1,699 CyP/CyP, 227 CsA/CsA and 81 CsA/CyP proton-proton distance restraints obtained from heteronuclear three-dimensional nuclear Overhauser effect (NOE) spectra of , or .
The NOEs were interpreted using previously reported CyP backbone and CsA assignments and recently obtained CyP side-chain assignments, which included the stereospecific assignments of the Val and Leu methyl groups of CyP by biosynthetic fractional 13 C-labelling.
NOE-derived distance restraints were classified as ,, and  on the basis of the integrated NOE cross peak volumes.
In addition to the NOE-derived distance restraints, 108 hydrogen bonds were included in the final structure calculations based on the identification of the slowly exchanging amide protons from a series of 1 H/ 15 N correlation spectra of the CsA/ [U- 15 N]CyP complex in 2 H 2 O and by visual inspection of preliminary structures of the complex derived solely from the NOE data.
Calculations began by generating starting cartesian coordinates for the β and γ atoms from the covalent geometry and experimental restraints.
The remaining coordinates were obtained by least-squares fitting the side chains to the backbone positions before the next step of the refinement procedure, which consisted of high-temperature (2,000K) molecular dynamics followed by dynamical simulated annealing.
During this stage quadratic harmonic potentials were included for the covalent geometry, a square-well quadratic term was used for the distances and dihedral restraints, and a quartic potential was used for the van der Waals term (F- repel).
Force constants for the NOE-derived distance restraints were maintained at 50kcal mol -1 A -2 throughout the refinement process.
Dihedral angle restraints were initialized to 5kcal mol -1 rad -2 and increased to 200 kcal mol -1 rad -2 at the beginning of annealing, which proceeded stepwise from 2,000 to 100K in 50K increments, with each step consisting of 0.25ps of restrained molecular dynamics.
The repulsive term was increased during this phase to 4.0kcal mol -1 A -4 and was maintained at that value during the penultimate energy minimization.
Final structures were obtained after 1,000 cycles of Powell minimization with the full CHARMM Lennard-Jones potential.
FIG. 2 Ribbon plot depicting the structure of the CsA/CyP complex.
Side-chain atoms are shown for those residues of cyclophilin (yellow) with NOEs to CsA colour-coded by atom type.
FIG. 3Portions of
a,
the NMR structure of the CsA/CyP complex compared with
b,
a model of the X-ray structure of the tetrapeptide/CyP complex, indicating similar hydrogen-bonding patterns (yellow dashed line).
A direct or water-mediated hydrogen bond between Asn 102 NH and MeVal11(CO) of CsA (blue dashed line) is also possible, as evidenced by the close proximity of these atoms in many of the NMR structures and the slow amide-exchange rate of Asn102.
This hydrogen bond would mimic the Asn102 NH/Ala2(CO) hydrogen bond in the tetrapeptide/CyP complex shown in b.
Arrows indicate the C α- C' of CsA in a that corresponds to the N-C' bond of the tetrapeptide substrate in b.
Active-centre torsion-angle strain revealed in 1.6 Å-resolution structure of histidine-containing phosphocarrier protein
Zongchao Jia, Margaret Vandonselaar, J. Wilson Quail & Louis T. J. Delbaere
THE histidine-containing phosphocarrier protein (HPr) is a central component of the phosphoenolpyruvate: sugar phosphotransferase system that transports carbohydrates across the cell membrane of bacteria.
A typical phosphotransfer sequence is phosphoenolpyruvate  enzyme I  HPr  enzyme II/III sugar sugar.
This is thermodynamically favourable owing to the participation of the high-energy phosphoenolpyruvate.
We report here the structure of HPr from Streptococcus faecalis determined at 1.6Å resolution.
Remarkable disallowed Ramachandran torsion angles at the active centre, revealed by the X-ray structure, demonstrate a unique example of torsion-angle strain that is probably directly involved in protein function.
During phosphorylation, the active-centre torsion-angle strain should facilitate the phosphotransfer reaction by lowering the activation-energy barrier.
A recently reported Bacillus subtilis HPr structure, which represents the phosphorylated state of HPr with no torsion-angle strain, provides direct evidence supporting our hypothesis that torsion-angle strain plays a direct part in the function of HPr.
An HPr phosphotransfer cycling mechanism is proposed, based primarily on the structures of HPr and other phosphotransferase system proteins.
The structure of HPr from S. faecalis has been solved using multiple isomorphous replacement (MIR) followed by solvent flattening and has been least-squares refined at 1.6  resolution.
Details of crystallization, data collection, MIR phase determination, structure refinement and overall structure description are given in Table 1 and the legend to Fig. 1.
The active centre of HPr consists of a histidine residue, at position 15 (His15), the target of phosphorylation, and Arg17.
In S. faecalis HPr, the side chains of His15 and Arg17 point away from each other to adopt an open conformation (Fig. 2 a)in the phospho-free state.
This conformation is rigidly maintained by three hydrogen bonds (see legend to Fig. 2 a).
His15 in S. faecalis HPr has a relatively low p K a (6.1) and it was generally accepted that this resulted from the direct interaction between the side chains of His15 and Arg17.
Based on the current structure, however, this low p K a can be attributed instead to the positive dipole moment at the N terminus of the α -A helix as His15 N-caps the α -A helix and the side chains of His15 and Arg17 are far apart.
Evidence that this open conformation of the active centre is involved in protein function is provided by the site-directed mutagenesis study of HPr from Escherichia coli,in which it was found that a Gln51  Glu mutation decreased phosphotransferase activity by 90% (ref. 7).
Modelling indicates that in the open conformation of S. faecalis HPr, if Met51 were to be replaced by Gln51, then the resulting longer side chain would be close enough to form a direct hydrogen bond to N  2 of His15.
The Gln51  Glu mutation in E. coli HPr introduces an extra negative charge and would affect the electrostatic and/or conformational microenvironment of the active centre, resulting in a significant change in the biological  activity of HPr.
We propose that in the phospho-free state of HPr, the open conformation of the active centre (having residue 51 in the vicinity) is the one most likely to be involved in the phosphotransfer process with enzyme I. But the actual interaction awaits the structure determination of enzyme I and, more relevantly, structure determination of the enzyme I/HPr complex.
Only one residue in the S. faecalis HPr structure, Ala16 (located in the middle of the active centre), adopts energetically unfavourable or disallowed Ramachandran angles (Fig. 2 c).
The strained conformation is illustrated in Fig. 1 b,together with a section of the electron density map for which the tripeptide His15-Ala16-Arg17 was omitted from all calculations.
In addition, the  angle of Arg17 is 168°, 12° from planarity.
We realized that these strained angles could be important in the phosphotransfer function of HPr.
Modelling studies show that by rotation of main-chain torsion angles to achieve only allowed Ramachandran values (Fig. 2 c)and adjustments of the side-chain torsion angles, the side chains of His15 and Arg17 can be easily brought together to make a closed conformation (Fig. 2 b)suitable for accommodating a phosphoryl group; adjustments of main-chain and side-chain torsion angles were made using the program TURBO-FRODO (ref. 9; Biographics, Marseilles).
Phospho-HPr (P-HPr) in the closed conformation is stabilized both by the positive dipole moment of helix A and by the positive charge of Arg17.
The energy released by going to allowed Ramachandran angles was estimated to be 4kcalmol -1 using the program BIOGRAF (BioDesign, Pasadena).
This torsion-angle strain would lower the activation-energy barrier for the phosphorylation of His15.
Therefore, we suggest that this strain facilitates the phosphotransfer process from enzyme I to HPr.
It should be noted that the local ‘high energy’ torsion-angle strain is compensated by favourable interactions such as the three hydrogen bonds, bringing the protein to its overall energy minimum.
The energy of this hydrogen bonding is comparable to that of the torsion-angle strain.
The breaking of hydrogen bonds in the active centre has been detected during phosphorylation of His15 (ref. 11).
Disallowed Ramachandran angles associated with active sites have been found in some proteins and are generally believed to have structural and also possible functional roles.
To our knowledge, there are no other examples in which the activity/angle-strain relationship has been fully rationalized.
Hence we present here the first rationalization of active-centre disallowed Ramachandran angles that are likely to play a direct role in protein function.
The recently reported 2.0  X-ray structure of HPr from B. subtilis illustrates the HPr structure with a sulphate ion bound in the active centre, which resembles the closed conformation, namely the phosphorylated state of HPr.
The closed conformation in this latter structure does not apparently have torsion-angle train, as judged from the stereo diagram of the active centre.
This recently reported structure thus provides direct evidence supporting our hypothesis that the release of torsion-angle strain takes place during phosphorylation, in proceeding from the open to the closed conformation.
It has been recently shown that enzyme III from both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria has a well defined binding pocket which is very hydrophobic and is doughnut-shaped, with the phosphoryl-accepting residue, His90, located in a central depression of the hydrophobic ring.
The hydrophobic doughnut and His90 of enzyme III would precisely direct the approach of P-HPr (Fig. 3).
As the phosphoryl group leaves HPr, the charge on Arg17 is no longer neutralized and HPr is repelled by the extreme hydrophobic environment.
Simultaneously, the His15 and Arg17 side chains of HPr would separate and the active centre would take on the strained open conformation (Fig. 2 a),ready for the next cycle; formation of hydrogen bonds to His15 and Arg17 would help to stabilize the open conformation and the protein would be in an overall energy minimum.
By cycling in this manner (Fig. 3), HPr could accept and donate a phosphoryl group by adopting an open conformation suitable for interacting with enzyme I and a closed conformation suitable for interacting with enzyme III.
The S. faecalis HPr (M r =9,438) native crystals were grown by vapour diffusion from a solution containing 2.7mgml -1 protein in citrate-phosphate buffer (pH5.0) equilibrated against 45% saturated ammonium sulphate.
Space group is P 2 1 2 1 2, with cell dimensions a=53.56, b=45.46, c=29.88 A. The X-ray source was an Enraf-Nonius FR571 rotating-anode generator operated at 45kV, 95mA, with copper radiation and a graphite monochromator; data were collected on an Enraf-Nonius FAST area detector diffractometer.
The temperature of measurement was 14°C.
Data were processed using the MADNES software package and the CCP4 suite (Daresbury Laboratory, UK) was used for all subsequent crystallographic calculations.
Final heavy-atom parameters used for the phasing were obtained by a Dickerson-type refinement, as implemented in the CCP4 program PHARE (G. Bricogne).
Anomalous scattering data were included in the phasing calculation and were also used to determine the correct enantiomorph.
A 2.8-A MIR map was considerably improved using solvent flattening, even though there is a relatively low solvent content (36%).
FIG. 1
a,
Schematic ribbon representation of the overall folding of S. faecalis HPr; the ribbon illustration was generated using the program SETOR, The overall folding topology of HPr is a classical open-faced β -sandwich.
The β -sheet with right-handed twist consists of four antiparallel β -strands and the helical face has two major antiparallel α -helices and a minor α helix.
The three α -helices are α -A(16–27),α -B(46–52) and α -C(69–84); the four β -strands are β -A(2–8),β -B(32–36),β -C(40–44) and β -D(58–66).
A comparison of the NMR structures of HPr from B. subtilis and HPr from E. coli with this structure shows that they are very similar in overall tertiary folding, although the minor α -helix was not observed in the NMR structures.
The X-ray structure of S. faecalis HPr is in general agreement with all HPr structures published so far, except for the E. coli HPr X-ray structure.
Therefore the general HPr structural motif in different bacteria is apparently the open-faced β -sandwich.
There are two C -terminal residues (Glu88 and Gln89) missing from the present mode.
b,
An omit (2 F -F c ) stereo map of the active centre with the final model (His15, Ala16 and Arg17) superimposed; for the omit map calculation, residues 15–17 were left out of both the least-squares refinement and the map calculation; the map is contoured at a 1.0  level.
METHODS.
Residues 1–78 of HPr were fitted in a 2.8Å solvent-flattened MIR map using TURBO-FRODO (ref. 9; Biographics, Marseilles).
The partial model was refined using X-PLOR; residues 79–87 were then constructed on (3F –2F c ) and (F -F c ) maps.
The refinement was gradually extended to higher resolution.
Manual adjustment of the model was carried out at intervals of the refinement.
The R factor is 0.168 for all data between 8.0 and 1.6Å resolution, maintaining good geometry with r.m.s. deviations in bond lengths of 0.012Å and in bond angles of 2.22°.
Coordinates will be deposited in the Brookhaven Protein Data Bank.
FIG. 2
a,
Open, or phospho-free, form of the active centre in HPr.
For clarity, the three hydrogen bonds mentioned in the text are not illustrated.
CB represents C β of an amino acid.
The main chain O of Thr12 forms a hydrogen bond with N  1 of His15 while N  2 of His15 hydrogen-bonds to a well-ordered water molecule that in turn hydrogen-bonds to the main chain O of Met51.
There is one water molecule hydrogen-bonded to N  of Arg17.
b,
Proposed model of closed, or phosphorylated, form of the active centre in HPr.
CA represents C α of an amino acid.
c,
Ramachandran plot for the structure of S. faecalis HPr; crosses and squares represent non-glycine and glycine residues, respectively.
The open-form torsion angles are observed values for the phospho-free state of HPr; the closed-form torsion angles of Ala16 are for the modelled phosphorylated state of HPr.
FIG. 3 Proposed HPr phosphotransfer cycle.
P-HPr: phospho-HPr; E-I: enzyme I; P-E-I: phospho-enzyme I; E-III: enzyme III; P-E-III: phospho-enzyme III.
The closed conformation of the active centre (10Å in the longest dimension) would be easily accommodated by the hydrophobic doughnut (18Å diameter) of enzyme III whereas the open conformation (18Å in the longest dimension) could not be accommodated.
Agnathans and the origin of jawed vertebrates
Peter Forey & Philippe Janvier
The origins of jawed vertebrates (gnathostomes) lie somewhere within the ranks of long-extinct jawless fishes, represented today as the lampreys and hagfishes.
Recent discoveries of hitherto unknown kinds of jawless fishes (agnathans), together with re-examination of known agnathans and advances in systematic methods, have revitalized debates about the relationships of ancient fishes and given fresh insights into early vertebrate history.
FOR many years fossil agnathans were known primarily by cephalaspids (Osteostraci)(Fig. 1d)and  pteraspids (Heterostraci)(Fig. 1 c),accompanied by a small group of anaspids (Anaspida)(Fig. 1 f)and the very poorly known thelodonts (Fig. 1 l).
All of these fishes occur in Silurian and Devonian deposits and were most numerous in the late Silurian/early Devonian (about 420–390 million years before present (Myr BP)).
These extinct fishes were unlike their modern counterparts in possessing a dermal skeleton of minute scales and/or bony plates.
They are therefore sometimes known collectively as ostracoderms (bony-skinned) and it is thought that one or other ostracoderm groups gave rise to the gnathostomes.
During the past 15 years, important discoveries of new kinds of extinct agnathans have been made worldwide which considerably increase our knowledge of the variety of agnathans and, at the same time, question some of the traditional ideas about the interrelationships of these early fishes and the history of vertebrate specializations.
Some of the important finds are listed.
New fossil finds
(1) In 1977 Arandaspis was described from the Lower Ordovician of Australia and in 1986 a very similar form,Sacambambaspis,was described from the Upper Ordovician of Bolivia (Fig. 1 h).
Both of these are early representatives of articulated heterostracan fishes with well developed dermal skeletons and they may offer insights into the anatomy of the earliest vertebrate armour.
(2) From the Silurian and Devonian of China and northern Vietnam we now have evidence of a highly distinctive and varied group of agnathans known as galeaspids (Galeaspida)(Fig. 1e).
The internal structures of some of these galeaspids are beautifully preserved such that it is possible to make detailed anatomical comparisons with cephalaspids and gnathostomes.
(3) Very recent discoveries of articulated thelodonts from the Silurian and Devonian of northwestern Canada have revealed a surprising new body shape among agnathans and traces of a stomach, as well as providing evidence of the affinities of this enigmatic group.
(4) Another new agnathan body form was revealed with the recent discovery of pituriaspids from the Middle Devonian of Australia (Fig. 1 g).
Superficially, they resemble the galeaspids but as yet very little is known about these animals and any statement about their affinities must be speculative.
(5) Last, among the recent fossil finds there has been the discovery of a superficially hagfish-like animal which carries a feeding apparatus consisting of conodonts.
Conodonts are tiny phosphatic tooth-like structures, commonly occurring in marine rocks ranging from the Cambrian to the Triassic, and of great biostratigraphic importance for correlating rock sequences.
Their biological affinities, however, have never been satisfactorily explained.
The discovery of this conodont-bearing animal suggests that at least some conodonts may be among the most primitive of vertebrates.
Alongside the discoveries of these new animals there has also been a considerable increase in our knowledge of the anatomy of heterostracans and osteostracans.
Many new detailed comparisons may be made between the fossils and Recent representatives, leading to new theories about the relationships between agnathan groups and new theories about how jawed vertebrates acquired their characters.
Lampreys, hagfishes and relatives
Lampreys (Petromyzontiformes) and hagfishes (Myxiniformes) are eel-like, naked animals with no trace of dermal armour or paired fins.
Both have a single median nostril and circular mouth (accompanied by a sucker in lampreys), a complex toothed tongue operated by circular and longitudinal muscles, and pouch-like gills opening through circular openings.
The feeding habits of both are rather specialized.
Most lampreys are filter-feeders as young and ectoparasitic blood-suckers as adults, whereas hagfishes are predators or they rasp away the flesh of dead or moribund fishes.
Because of these common anatomical and behavioural features lampreys and hagfishes were thought to be most closely related to one another among the modern fauna and were recognized as cyclostomes (Fig. 2A, a).
This theory carries with it the implication that the cyclostome characters mentioned above were not part of the history of gnathostomes but were instead specializations restricted to lampreys and hagfishes.
Lampreys and hagfishes have long, separate histories.
Fossil representatives of lampreys and hagfishes may be found in the Upper Carboniferous (230Myr BP) where, in most preserved details, they are similar to their modern counterparts.
Fossil agnathan groups, such as the heterostracans, anaspids and osteostracans were considered related to one or other of the modern types (Fig. 2A, b).
Osteostracans (cephalaspids) have long been considered close relatives of lampreys despite a total difference in overall body shape.
Like lampreys, cephalaspids show a single nostril joined with a single hypophysial opening which opens together on top of the head as a keyhole-shaped opening.
This is a highly unusual feature, and for many years palaeontologists have interpreted cephalapsids using the lamprey as the model.
Anaspids also show a dorsally placed nasohypophysial opening and are therefore considered to be closely related to lampreys and cephalaspids.
The heterostracans were associated with the hagfishes, chiefly because they lacked the specializations of the nasohypophysial opening and because they have a single branchial opening (see below).
This theory, relating armoured forms to each of the living groups, implies that any feature such as armour, scales or modified fins were independently lost during the history of hagfishes and lampreys.
Another theory concerning the relationships of the Recent taxa suggests that lampreys are more closely related to gnathostomes than either is to hagfishes, implying that hagfishes are the most primitive of craniate animals (Fig. 2B, a).
Lampreys and gnathostomes share a great many features which are, at the same time, absent from hagfishes, such as well developed neural and haemal arches (the beginnings of a true backbone) and radial muscles in the fins (which allow voluntary flexing of the fins), true neuromast organs distributed along a lateral line, extrinsic eye muscles, nervous regulation of the heart and hyperosmoregulation.
This theory raises the possibility that cyclostome characters such as the median nostril, complex tongue and pouch-like gills are either primitive craniate characters and are truly part of the history of gnathostomes, or are convergencies, that is, accidental similarities, developed independently in lampreys and in hagfishes.
There have been several suggestions as to how fossil agnathans may fit into a scheme such as this.
Usually, one or other fossil group is considered more closely related to gnathostomes than to any other agnathan, living or fossil.
One theory is shown in Fig. 2B, b,another in Fig. 4.
With these different theories come different conclusions about the history of the skeleton, fins, nasal sacs and so on.
Choice between these competing theories of relationship among the Recent forms has not received consensus (compare refs 23, 24 to refs 21, 22, 25).
Unfortunately, molecular evidence, which has proved itself useful in other areas of disagreement, has yet to prove itself here.
Amino-acid data for a variety of proteins has accumulated throughout the 1980s.
Sequences for globin molecules are available for lampreys, hagfishes and a variety of gnathostomes, and comparisons of these sequences imply that lampreys and hagfishes are sister groups.
But this may be misleading because agnathan globin is homologous with both gnathostome myoglobin and haemoglobin.
It is probable that the agnathan globin sequences simply represent the primitive craniate sequences from which other gnathostome sequences were derived, perhaps by gene duplication.
Another line of molecular evidence comes from nucleotide sequences of 18s ribosomal RNA.
This analysis used a bootstrapping technique and examined 1,631 base pairs.
When cephalochordates or cephalochordates plus tunicates were used as the outgroup, the analysis suggested that lampreys and hagfishes are sister groups.
But when tunicates alone were used to root the analysis, the grouping of lampreys and gnathostomes was supported.
A somewhat similar result was obtained using 28S rRNA.
The results of analyses are equivocal, and these appear to depend on which outgroup (cephalochordate or tunicate) is chosen to root the analysis.
Lecointre (unpublished memoir, DEA, University of Paris VII (1989)) has examined sequences of 361 nucleotides of the 5' extremity of 28S rRNA and found that there are only two base-pair positions, out of 361, common to lampreys and hagfishes: and there is only one position uniquely shared by lampreys and gnathostomes.
This is hardly conclusive evidence for one theory or another.
Therefore, the molecular data, while adding a new dimension, also requires additional explanation and does not clearly arbitrate between the competing theories of relationship.
It is clear that one of the challenges of molecular systematics is to deal with sequence data of ancient and possibly highly specialized lineages.
Significance of the new fossil finds
Heterostracans.
One of the chief reasons for believing that heterostracans were fossil relatives of hagfishes (Fig. 2 A, b)centred on the fact that in the modern hagfish,Myxine,and heterostracans there is a single external branchial opening emptying from several internal gill pouches.
This is undoubtedly a specialization which developed from the condition where there are many separate branchial openings as seen, for instance, in lampreys, anaspids, cephalaspids, galeaspids and thelodonts as well as in cephalochordates (one likely sister group of craniates).
Although Myxine shows a single paired branchial opening, another Recent hagfish (Eptatretus)has a series of separate openings and this has cast doubt on reasons for associating hagfishes and heterostracans.
With the discovery of Arandaspis and Sacambambaspis this doubt is reinforced.
These earliest armoured vertebrates are clearly related to heterostracans: they have large dorsal and ventral shields encasing the head and a similar pattern of lateral lines penetrating the shields.
At the same time they show a series of separate gill openings wedged between these shields and each associated with a tiny branchial plate.
A similar series of separate openings has recently been found in Astraspis which is another early heterostracan but without the large shield-like armour.
Thus, these early heterostracans show a primitive vertebrate condition and suggest that the single branchial opening was developed independently within the heterostracan lineage and within the hagfish lineage.
The discovery of articulated Ordovician heterostracans has other more general implications for our ideas of the evolution of the vertebrate skeleton and tail structure.
For nearly a century it was assumed that the primitive vertebrate armour consisted of scales and small polygonal bony plates.
These had been found in the fragmentary vertebrates such as Astraspis and Eriptychius,long known from Middle Ordovician rocks of North America, and they were often regarded as showing primitive vertebrate conditions from which the large shields of more typical pteraspids developed.
Arandaspis and Sacambambaspis both show large continuous head shields and a trunk covered with elongated scales (Fig. 1 h).
This suggests that considerable diversification of the vertebrate skeleton had already taken place by Lower Ordovician times and, furthermore, that it is not possible on the basis of antiquity alone to predict whether a micromeric or macromeric skeleton is the more primitive vertebrate condition.
The detailed histology of the bone of Arandaspis and Sacambambaspis is, as yet, unknown.
But the Ordovician agnathans Astraspis and Eriptychius were originally associated with heterostracans because the skeleton was made of aspidin (acellular bone), a condition regarded by some as primitive and by others as derived.
The early occurrence of aspidin has always strengthened the opinion that it is the more primitive condition.
Recently, however, investigation has confirmed earlier suspicions that the presence of cellular bone is of equal antiquity.
Furthermore the particular type of cellular bone found in the same deposits as Eriptychius suggests that cephalaspids (osteostracans) may be equally as old as heterostracans.
Traditional ideas about the primitive vertebrate tail were derived from studies on pteraspid heterostracans.
These ideas proposed that the tail was asymmetrical, with a larger lower lobe and, when in use, tended to drive the head up to compensate for a heavy head shield and a lack of paired fins.
Sacambambaspis and several other recently discovered well preserved heterostracans from the Silurian of the North West Territories and the Canadian Arctic all show perfectly symmetrical tails.
The tail was deep with enlarged ridge scales along the upper and lower edges for stiffening, and the fan was strengthened by special radiating rows of enlarged scales (Fig. 1 e ).
This type of tail drove the fish directly forwards.
Cephalaspids.
During the last decade or so cephalaspids have been re-examined in great detail.
Leaving aside the undoubted similarities in the nasohypophysial opening between cephalaspids and lampreys (see above), these recent studies show that there is a striking resemblance between the cephalaspid skull and the skull of an early jawed vertebrate such as the placoderm (Fig. 3).
Externally the cephalaspid body, like that of primitive gnathostomes, shows a heterocercal tail and paired fins (only pectoral fins are developed in cephalaspids).
These similarities, together with several other less obvious features, suggest that cephalapsids are more closely related to gnathostomes than either is to lampreys.
This would mean that the single nasohypophysial opening is either a convergent feature or a feature primitive for craniates.
Galeaspids.
The galeaspids are a group of about 40 species which superficially resemble cephalaspids in having a large, flattened and solid head skeleton which encloses a complex brain and inner ear (Fig. 3).
They have been considered as directly related to cephalaspids.
But unlike cephalaspids they lack paired fins and, instead of a dorsal nasohypophysial opening, they have a large median dorsal opening which communicates with paired nasal cavities and, further below, with the  pharynx .
In some respects this arrangement is similar to that seen in recent hagfishes where a single nostril opens into a duct which passes the single nasal sac before opening into the roof of the mouth.
Thelodonts.
Thelodonts are usually represented in the fossil record as isolated scales which, because of their abundance, are useful for stratigraphic correlation.
But we know very little about the animals which bore these scales and although a few articulated remains have been known for several years, they show very little anatomical detail and it is not easy to identify immediate relatives.
Hitherto, known thelodonts appear to be flattened dorso-ventrally and to have paired flaps on either side of the head.
Very recently, discoveries of some new and very well preserved thelodonts from the Silurian of British Columbia were announced.
These new thelodonts show an unexpected body shape in which the body is deep and compressed from side to side and the tail is perfectly symmetrical, rather like that of early heterostracans.
They also show that several very different types of scale could be borne by the same animal, including some complex scales immediately surrounding the gill openings.
Interestingly, the gill openings are arranged in an oblique line, a situation very reminiscent of the gill opening of anaspids and lampreys.
This may suggest that at least some thelodonts are related to these two groups.
Another interesting feature about these new thelodonts is that there is evidence that a well developed stomach was present.
Lampreys and hagfishes lack a differentiated stomach, and it is generally assumed that all agnathans were similarly microphagous with no need for a stomach.
Jaws, macrophagy and stomachs were thought to go together.
However, in these thelodonts we have evidence that stomachs preceded jaws in vertebrate history.
Conodonts.
Conodonts have traditionally been used as form taxa, useful for stratigraphic correlation within Palaeozoic rocks.
During the last few years there have been a number of discoveries suggesting that conodonts may be vertebrates.
Briggs and colleagues discovered fossils of 4cm-long eel-like animals from the Early Carboniferous of Scotland, each of which carried a set of conodont elements at the anterior end.
Each of these animals, one of which has been named Clydagnathus,shows a laterally flattened body, caudal fin and ‘V-shaped’ muscle blocks, together with the faint outline of a notochord and large paired eyes.
These are features typically found in chordates, although it is difficult to make more precise comparisons.
More recently the histological detail of the minute conodont elements themselves has been re-examined.
Most conodonts, or euconodonts, are tooth-like phosphatic structures with a shiny outer layer and an inner core.
Recent research advocates that the minute spaces within the substance of the core, which have long been known to exist, are true bone cell or osteocyte cell spaces.
The basal tissue of the conodont has also been compared to globular calcified cartilage as seen associated with the earliest authenticated bone of Eriptychius.
But the surface layer is far more problematic.
It appears to be composed of centrifugally deposited lamellar tissue, superficially like vertebrate enamel.
But in the conodonts examined so far the crystalline structure within this layer is very variable.
In two species examined the crystals lie parallel to the surface and in another two they lie at a steep angle.
Neither type corresponds precisely to that seen in vertebrate enamel, and the extreme variation in crystal orientation is puzzling.
Furthermore, there appears to be a total absence of dentine, which is unexpected if conodonts are vertebrates.
Dentine is universal in vertebrates and is thought to be the most primitive of vertebrate hard tissues.
Clearly, much more research needs to be done on a wide variety of conodonts before the histological structure may be used as evidence of vertebrate affinities.
If that supportive evidence is forthcoming then the implication is that vertebrates existed in the Late Cambrian, 510 million years ago, and some 40 million years before the appearance of vertebrate armour.
Conodonts are not considered further here.
Relationships and ideas of vertebrate history
The new features that have been discovered by re-examining Recent taxa alongside the many new fossil finds during the past 15 years lead to classifications that suggest that lampreys are more closely related to gnathostomes than either is to hagfishes.
In other words, lampreys and hagfishes do not form a monophyletic group.
One of the classifications that inserts the fossil groups is illustrated in Fig. 4.
This classification is based on a cladistic analysis of morphological characters using the PAUP parsimony program.
Details of this classification will be published elsewhere.
Interpreting this as a phylogeny, we can use this classification to trace the history of the transformation of some characters leading to the condition in gnathostomes.
One of the most debated areas of anatomy is the early history of the vertebrate nasal and hypophysial regions already mentioned above.
It is not clear whether paired or single nasal sacs and nostrils are primitive for craniates.
The phylogeny given here predicts that the condition in hagfishes is primitive.
That is, the earliest craniate had a single median  inhalant duct conveying water over the unpaired nasal sac on its way to the pharynx and gills.
The gnathostome condition, with paired nasal sacs not associated with a through duct, would therefore be a derived condition.
The nature of the nasal sacs in heterostracans has been the subject of some debate.
Stensiô 38 reconstructed the snout after the hagfish model.
Others have suggested that there were paired nasal sacs opening separately and gave rise to the theory that heterostracans might be ancestral to jawed vertebrates (Fig. 2 B, b).
As long as the endoskeleton of the heterostracans remains unknown there must always be doubt about the pattern.
Some faint impressions on the inside of the dermal skeleton suggest that at least paired nasal sacs may have been present (unlike in modern hagfishes).
But the  inhalant duct leading to the outside may well have been single.
We now know that this was the condition in galeaspids where paired nasal sacs opened into median duct and the duct itself communicated with the pharynx.
This may represent an example of a second stage of transformation.
Subsequent modification of this pattern would be the confluence of both nasal sacs and the failure of the  inhalant duct to communicate with the mouth in lampreys and cephalaspids.
A different modification would have taken place in gnathostomes where the separate nasal sacs remained large but the common  inhalant duct was lost.
The phylogeny suggested here implies that hagfishes are primitively naked, whereas lampreys are secondarily so.
For the history of the dermal skeleton the recent finds have tended to complicate the issue because it is no longer clear from the stratigraphic record whether cellularity or acellularity is primitive, or whether a solid shield or polygonal plates are primitive.
The evolution of fins may also be traced across this phylogeny.
Hagfishes have a weakly developed symmetrical tail and the web is supported by poorly developed cartilage rods without associated muscles.
This was probably very similar in the heterostracans except that here the tail lobe was scale covered, perhaps with some special scale rows aligned along the length of fin (see above).
From here anaspids, lampreys and perhaps some thelodonts developed a downturned asymmetrical tail (hypocercal), and in the first two there were definite endoskeletal fin rays with, in at least lampreys, associated musculature.
In cephalaspids the tail is turned upwards (epicercal) as in gnathostomes and here too there were probably muscularized endoskeletal fin rays developed.
The tail of galeaspids remains poorly known.
Paired pectoral fins of gnathostome-type were only developed in cephalaspids (and perhaps pituriaspids) where there is evidence of an endoskeleton and associated muscles.
Some anaspids have specialized elongate paired fins which may have been developed and restricted to this group (Fig. 1 f).
The outline above suggests that agnathans are a paraphyletic group (that is, some are more closely related to jawed vertebrates than to other agnathans) and therefore the presence of circular mouths and pouch-like gills was part of gnathostome history.
The acquisition of many gnathostome characters occurred through several transformation series which can be traced across the phylogeny of agnathans.
But some characters appear suddenly, and this applies to the feature which characterizes the gnathostomes: the development of jaws.
The way in which jaws developed remains unknown.
There is a long-held belief that jaws developed from a true mandibular gill-bearing arch.
Yet no animal showing this has ever been found.
The idea stems from the belief that in gnathostomes the mandibular arch is a serial homologue of the hyoid arch and the more posterior gill arches.
Agnathans have gill arches but no jaws.
Hence jaws might be a transformation of the anteriormost gill skeleton.
But we know that the gill lamellae in a lamprey develop medially to the supporting skeleton, whereas the gills of a gnathostome develop laterally to the skeleton.
For this reason some workers have denied any homology.
One possible alternative may be to suggest that jaws correspond to the velum in a larval lamprey, a special pumping device located at the entrance to the pharynx.
The velum develops from the same embryonic segment as the mandibular arch, and part of its skeleton is located more medially than that of subsequent arches.
Summary
The discovery of many new facts and new types of agnathans with hitherto unknown anatomical features has questioned some of our traditional ideas.
At the same time, it has permitted the formation of a more precise theory of relationships from which we may deduce evolutionary pathways.
We may ask if we would have different views on the interrelationships of modern craniates if we had no fossils.
In this case we doubt it.
But if we asked about the history of the appearance of characters then the answer is ‘yes’.
Fossils do throw light on the history of the lateral line and tail.
In these cases the fossils show that these features have developed through an ordered series of transformations leading to conditions in the jawed vertebrates.
The fossils show that paired fins constructed like those in gnathostomes are a relatively late development but that there may have been an experiment with elongated paired fins as seen in anaspids.
Fossils also show that the structure of the nasohypophysial region is considerably variable and more complicated than the Recent animals might suggest.
At the same time, the great variety of skeletal anatomy has complicated our theories of the early evolution of the vertebrate dermal skeleton.
Interesting future directions of study might be attempts to understand the varied locomotory adaptations of agnathans which show different development of paired and median fins.
Detailed anatomical studies need to be done alongside modern hydrodynamic experiments.
There is also considerable scope for informed speculation about the feeding mechanisms among the extinct agnathans.
The wealth of new information is a reminder that there is still plenty of scope for new studies in old fishes.
FIG. 1 Diversity of jawless fishes.
Agnathans are represented today by
a,
hagfishes (Myxiniformes) and
b,
lampreys (Petromyzontiformes).
Both are naked eel-shaped and without paired fins.
They are collectively known as cyclostomes (round-mouths).
In the Palaeozoic there were several different groups of agnathans showing a wide variety of morphology of bony dermal armour.
These are collectively known as ostracoderms.
c,
Pteraspids (Heterostraci) and
d,
cephalaspids (Osteostraci) were very common and their solid head shields are often preserved in Upper Silurian and Lower Devonian rocks of North America, Europe and Siberia.
The pteraspids (Pteraspis illustrated) were the dominant group of heterostracans.
Their armour consisted of large dorsal and ventral oval shields surrounded by a series of smaller plates.
The eyes were placed laterally and the mouth surrounded by tiny rod-shaped plates.
In cephalaspids (Cephalaspis illustrated) the eyes were placed dorsally with a single nasohypophysial opening and the flattened head shield was fenestrated by enlarged sensory fields connected to the inner ear.
They were enhanced parts of the lateral line system and probably used to detect water vibrations.
Cephalaspids had pectoral fins.
e,
Galeaspids (Galeaspida) were very unusual agnathans, also with solid head shields, and restricted to eastern Asia.
Like cephalaspids, the galeaspid head shield was flattened and in some species may have an unusual shape (Sanchaspis illustrated here).
The eyes were placed more laterally and there was a large median opening leading to the nasal sacs and the mouth,
f,
Anaspids (Anaspida) were a small, poorly known group of fusiform fishes known from North America, Europe and China.
They had a dorsal  nasohypophysial opening like cephalaspids and lampreys.
The gill openings were arranged in an oblique line as in lampreys.
Some species, such as Pharyngolepis,illustrated here, had long paired fin folds running along the ventral sides of the body.
g,
Pituriaspids from the Devonian of Australia, have only recently been discovered.
The shield of Pituriaspis was long, sutureless and pierced by triangular openings, of unknown function, on either side of the eyes.
It is probable that paired pectoral fins were present as in cephalaspids.
h,
The earliest known vertebrates (Arandaspida) show that by early Ordovician times vertebrate life had already developed complex body armour.
Sacambambaspis,illustrated here, shows large dorsal and ventral head shields separated by tiny branchial plates and a body covered with elongated scales.
i,
The thelodonts (Thelodontida) are poorly known, usually found as minute isolated scales.
Thelodus appears to have been flattened bearing several gill openings beneath pectoral flaps.
Some newly discovered thelodonts suggest that, at least some, were markedly compressed laterally.
FIG. 2 Theories of craniate relationships.
On the left are shown two theories of the relationships amongst modern animals.
On the right there are two schemes including fossil agnathan groups congruent with the classifications to the left.
A, a,A traditional classification which suggests that lampreys and hagfishes are most closely related to one another.
A, b,This classification assumes that the fossil groups are related to one or other of the Recent agnathans (galeaspids were not known at this time).
B, a,This theory suggests that lampreys are more closely related to gnathostomes than to hagfishes (agnathans are considered paraphyletic).
B, b,This classification is one of several suggesting that one or other of the fossil groups are more closely related to jawed vertebrates than they are to other agnathans.
In this case heterostracans are considered the closest relatives of gnathostome; this is based on the speculation that heterostracans had paired nasal sacs and paired nostrils as seen in jawed vertebrates.
Thelodonts are not included in these classifications, they are too poorly known.
FIG. 3 Internal anatomy.
In recent years we have learned much about the internal anatomy of cephalapsids and galeaspids which had a bony skeleton surrounding the brain and gills.
There is a remarkable similarity between these fishes and primitive gnathostomes in the structure of the orbit, the labyrinth of the ear and in the position of the head vein.
a, Brindabellaspis,a placoderm gnathostome (from ref. 45);b, Norselapsis,an osteostracan (from ref. 13);c, Duyunolepis,a galeaspid (ref. 46).
The outline of the head (left) shows the position of the internal cavities (right).
The head vein is dotted, the labyrinth of the inner ear is black.
Some of the cranial nerves are indicated by roman numerals.
FIG. 4 Our favoured phylogenetic tree of principal agnathan groups with stratigraphic ranges superimposed (bold black lines).
This tree is simplified from a PAUP analysis, the details of which will be published elsewhere.
The position of pituriaspids and thelodonts is not clear.
Some of the skeletal characters supporting the nodes of this classification are as follows:(1) lateral line sensory canal, two semicircular canals in the ear, bone (lost in lampreys).
(2) Two large plates (dorsal and ventral) covering the head, separate branchial plates.
(3) True dorsal and anal fins with fin rays, asymmetrical tail shape.
(4) Branchial openings arranged in a slanting line (suggesting a separation of pharynx from oesophagus as in modern lampreys).
(5) Perichondrial bone, large head vein placed dorsally, large orbits.
(6) Dermal bone with cells, epicercal tail with modified scale cover (hinge line), paired pectoral fins, open endolymphatic duct, sclerotic ossification.
FGF-4 and BMP-2 have opposite effects on limb growth
Lee Niswander & Gail R. Martin
LIMB development is dependent on epithelial-mesenchymal interactions.
The apical ectodermal ridge (AER), a specialized epithelium at the limb tip, stimulates proliferation of underlying mesenchyme, causing directed limb outgrowth (for review see ref. 2).
Several genes are expressed in the mouse AER, including Fgf-4 (fibroblast growth factor-4) and Bmp-2 (bone morphogenetic protein-2), both of which encode secreted signalling molecules.
Using a culture system developed to explore the function of molecules produced by the AER, we have shown that FGF-4 protein stimulates proliferation of mesenchyme in the early mouse limb-bud.
This suggests that FGF-4 serves that major function of the AER.
In contrast, BMP-2 inhibits limb growth, suggesting that as a result the AER may serve a hitherto unrecognized inhibitory function.
Furthermore, the extent of limb outgrowth can be modulated by mixing the two signalling molecules, suggesting that limb growth is regulated by a combination of stimulatory and inhibitory signals from the AER.
In the culture system used (see legend to Fig. 1), trunk fragments are isolated containing either forelimb or hindlimb buds, and the AER is removed from one limb (-AER limb) to expose the underlying mesenchyme, but kept intact on the other (+AER limb).
These are cultured in serum-free defined medium with or without growth factor supplementation for up to 48h.
This system allows direct comparison of contralateral limbs from a given embryo, controlling for variability among embryos and culture conditions.
Under these conditions AER regeneration does not occur, and in contrast to what has been observed in the chick, there is no obvious effect of AER removal on limb outgrowth (Figs 1 a, b and 2 a).
AER removal does, however, cause a decrease (45%) in the mitotic index in distal mesenchyme (Fig. 3).
Cell morphology is not significantly affected, and pyknotic cells and cell debris are observed only in the outermost layer of exposed mesenchyme.
Cells beneath this layer appear healthy, showing little evidence of cell death (Fig. 2 d, e).
Fgf-4 (previously known as hst-1 or kFGF), which encodes a secreted protein FGF-4 (ref. 15), is expressed in the AER during the period when that tissue mediates the proliferative response of the underlying mesenchyme.
Addition of recombinant FGF-4 protein to the limb cultures results in a large increase in proximo-distal (P-D) length of the -AER limb as compared to the contralateral +AER limb (Fig. 1c, d),or to limbs cultured without FGF-4 (Fig. 1 a, b).
Effects are detected within 12h (data not shown).
After 48h and over a range of FGF-4 concentrations (10, 50, 100 or 500ngml -1 , about 0.8–40nM), the average length of -AER forelimbs is 50% greater than that of contralateral+AER forelimbs or forelimbs cultured without FGF-4.
Hindlimbs exhibit 100% increase in P-D length compared with +AER hindlimbs or hindlimbs cultured without FGF-4 (Table 1).
The greater responsiveness of hindlimbs may reflect greater sensitivity of developmentally younger hindlimb mesenchyme to stimulation by FGF-4, or alternatively, might be due to differences in mesenchyme specific to hind versus forelimbs.
FGF-4 treatment causes elongation along the P-D axis of -AER limb tissue contained within surrounding epithelium, and extrusion of exposed limb mesenchyme, but has no effect on +AER limbs (Figs 1 c, d and 2 b, f;Table 1).
This is presumably because the intact epithelium acts as a barrier, preventing FGF-4 from reaching the underlying mesenchyme.
The observed increase in -AER limb length results from increased cell division in distal limb mesenchyme, as demonstrated by the finding that the frequency of bromodeoxyuridine(BrdU)-labelled mesenchyme cells is 33% (4.5%) in FGF-4 stimulated -AER limbs, but only 4% (0.7%) in contralateral +AER limbs (method described in the legend to Fig. 3).
Thus exposure to FGF-4 causes a significant increase in the number of cells initiating DNA synthesis.
Furthermore, in FGF-4-treated cultures the mitotic index in mesenchyme at the exposed surface and in deeper distal mesenchyme of -AER limbs is 44% higher than in corresponding mesenchyme underlying the AER in contralateral limbs, and 145% higher than in -AER limbs cultured in the absence of FGF-4 (Fig. 3).
In contrast, in proximal limb mesenchyme there is no difference in mitotic index between FGF-4-treated -AER and +AER limbs (data not shown).
Neither recruitment of cells from adjacent trunk mesenchyme nor oedema are responsible for the observed increase in -AER limb length, because similar results are obtained with cultures of detached limbs, and there is no obvious change in mesenchyme cell density following FGF-4 treatment (Fig. 2 e, f , and data not shown).
Thus, FGF-4 causes limb outgrowth by stimulating proliferation of cells in distal limb mesenchyme.
No obvious regional differences in response to ligand were detected in these cultures.
This is in contrast to previous findings, in which cultures of dissociated anterior mesenchyme were shown to be more responsive to FGF than were cultures of posterior mesenchyme.
No effects on limb growth are observed when unrelated growth factors (platelet-derived growth factor, epidermal growth factor, insulin) or retinoic acid are added to the culture medium, or in control cultures (Table 1).
But other FGF proteins can stimulate limb outgrowth: FGF-1 (acidic FGF), FGF-2 (basic FGF) and FGF-5 have essentially the same effect as FGF-4 (data not shown).
Growth stimulation by all FGFs tested is not unexpected because different FGF ligands can interact with and activate the same receptor, and FGF receptors are expressed in limb mesenchyme 1 8 , 19 .
In these experiments, all mesenchyme underlying the AER is exposed to exogenous FGF-4.
In vivo,however, it is likely that only posterior mesenchyme is exposed.
Fgf-4 RNA is localized to the posterior half of the AER, and the affinity of FGF-4 protein for extracellular matrix components presumably prevents it from diffusing very far from the cells that secrete it.
Such spatial restriction could account, at least in part, for the greater growth on the posterior than the anterior side of the limb (reviewed in ref. 32).
In addition to its apparent role in controlling limb mesenchyme proliferation, it is conceivable that FGF-4 also functions in the specification of pattern along the anterior-posterior (A-P) axis by regulating the expression of genes that play a role in this process.
To explore this possibility we examined the effect of FGF-4 treatment on the expression of two genes,Hoxd-11 (Hox-4.6 ) and Hoxd-13 (Hox- 4.8), involved in the specification of posterior fate in the limb.
In the +AER limb,Hoxd-11 and Hoxd-13 RNAs were detected only in the posterior distal mesenchyme, in patterns similar to those observed during normal development in vivo (data not shown).
In the -AER limb, posterior restriction of these RNAs was also observed.
Even in extruded mesenchyme, they were detected only on the posterior side of the extrusion (Fig. 2 g,and data not shown).
These results demonstrate that exposure to FGF-4 alone is not sufficient to alter the expression in limb mesenchyme of Hox genes involved in A-P patterning, such as Hoxd-11 and Hoxd-13.
Utilization of the culture system described here has, however, enabled us to demonstrate that FGF-4 alone is sufficient to regulate the expression of Evx-1 , a member of a different class of homeobox-containing genes (L.N. and G.R.M., manuscript submitted).
Evx-1 function in limb development is under investigation.
BMP-2, a member of the transforming growth factor- β (TGF- β)superfamily, is encoded by a gene expressed in the AER during the same developmental period as Fgf-4 13 .
In contrast to the effects of FGF-4, addition of BMP-2 to the culture medium causes inhibition of -AER limb growth (Figs 1 e, f and 2 c;Table 1).
Effects of this protein are observed within 12h of culture (data not shown).
After 24–48h of culture in BMP-2 at 10, 50 or 100ngml -1 , -AER forelimbs are significantly shorter (P-D length) and, strikingly, the A-P width is considerably narrower at the distal tip, when compared with contralateral +AER forelimbs (Table 1).
Growth inhibition is particularly evident for -AER hindlimbs (Figs 1 f and 2 c),which are often almost undetectable.
At 1ngml -1 BMP-2, growth is slightly inhibited and hindlimbs are affected to a greater extent than forelimbs (data not shown).
Histological examination of BMP-2-treated -AER limbs revealed pyknotic cells in mesenchyme exposed at the limb surface and to a depth of 4 cell layers.
Below this, cells appeared healthy (Fig. 2 h,and data not shown).
The mitotic index in deeper distal mesenchyme (6–16 cell layers beneath the surface) in -AER limbs is threefold lower than in a comparable region of contralateral +AER limbs, and twofold lower than in -AER limbs cultured in the absence of BMP-2 (Fig. 3), indicating BMP-2 inhibits cell proliferation in distal limb mesenchyme.
In addition, we tested the effect of a closely related molecule, BMP-4, which is also expressed in the AER.
Surprisingly, no effect on limb growth was detected with two different preparations of BMP-4 in a total of four experiments at concentrations ranging from 0.1–800ngml -1 (Table 1, and data not shown).
It is unlikely that these negative results were due to inactivity of BMP-4 protein, because both preparations continued to be active in a different assay.
In contrast, another member of the TGF- β superfamily, TGF- β1 , did inhibit limb growth, but to a lesser extent than BMP-2 (Table 1).
These variations in responsiveness to different family members presumably reflect differences in the availability of appropriate receptors, binding proteins, and/or other factors required for ligand activity in the mesenchyme.
We next did a ‘mixed signals’ experiment, in which limbs were cultured in media containing different mixtures of FGF-4 and BMP-2.
Supplementation with 100ngml -1 FGF-4 and 10ngml -1 BMP-2 results in P-D elongation and mesenchyme extrusion indistinguishable from that produced by FGF-4 alone (compare Fig. 2 i with b;Table 1).
Thus, in the presence of 100ngml -1 FGF-4, 10ngml -1 BMP-2 has no effect on outgrowth, even though this concentration of BMP-2 alone is sufficient to cause inhibition.
The inhibitory effects of BMP-2 are therefore not due to toxicity of the protein preparation.
Conversely, a reciprocal combination of the growth factors (10ngml -1 FGF-4 and 100ngml -1 BMP-2) causes dramatic growth inhibition of -AER limbs, similar to that observed with BMP-2 alone (compare Fig. 2 k with c;Table 1).
Thus, with 100ngml -1 BMP-2, 10ngml -1 FGF-4 has no effect on outgrowth, although this concentration of FGF-4 alone is sufficient to stimulate outgrowth.
When equal concentrations of FGF-4 and BMP-2 (50ngml -each) are used, P-D growth is neither stimulated nor inhibited (Fig. 2 j ; Table 1).
In essence, the effect of each growth factor is cancelled by the other, and -AER limbs are similar to those cultured in medium without supplementation (compare Fig. 2j with a;Table 1).
This indicates that BMP-2 inhibits the proliferative response to FGF-4 and, conversely, FGF-4 also inhibits the effect of BMP-2, thus providing direct evidence that the opposing effects of FGF-4 and BMP-2 can each be modulated by the presence of the other.
Studies aimed at localizing FGF-4 and BMP-2 proteins, as well as other components of their respective signalling pathways, will help to determine whether such modulation plays a role in limb development in vivo .
The importance of the AER in stimulating limb outgrowth has been recognized since the 1940s.
Our experiments provide, to our knowledge, the first functional analysis of molecules produced in the AER.
We show that FGF family members can stimulate limb mesenchyme proliferation, whereas other growth factors (EGF, PDGF, TGF- β superfamily members, insulin) and retinoic acid do not.
Because FGF-4 is localized in the AER when that tissue stimulates mesenchyme proliferation, whereas at least four other FGF genes are not (J.-K.
Han and G.R.M., unpublished data), it is likely that FGF-4 serves as an endogenous signal for mesenchyme proliferation and thus performs one of the major functions of the AER in vivo.
We also demonstrate that some TGF- β superfamily members have the opposite effect, and that BMP-2 functions to inhibit mesenchyme proliferation.
Our ‘mixed signals’ experiments further demonstrate that the effects of FGF-4 and BMP-2 can each be modulated by the other.
Because these genes are coexpressed in the AER, this raises the possibility that the extent of P-D growth is regulated, at least in part, through an interplay between stimulatory activity of FGF-4 and inhibitory activity of BMP-2.
Changes in the local concentrations of these signalling molecules may alter the balance of positive and negative signals for proliferation, leading to refinements in limb shape and limiting its overall P-D outgrowth.
Trunk fragments with attached limbs (+AER and -AER) were cultured as described in the legend to Fig. 1 for 48h in serum-free medium supplemented as stated (resupplemented after 24h).
Measurements of the P-D length, from the distal tip to the point of attachment with the body, were made for each pair of limbs.
Lengths are expressed as the mean of the distances measured in  millimetres , +/- the standard deviation (s.d.).
Growth factors: mature murine FGF-4 protein lacking the secretory signal sequence was produced using the pGEX2T bacterial expression system.
The expression plasmid was constructed by cloning a fragment of Fgf-4 complementary DNA obtained by Eco RI and partial Rsr II digestion into the Eco RI site of pGEX2T.
Bacterial culture, isopropyl- β- D-thiogalactoside (IPTG) induction (4h), affinity purification of the fusion protein by absorption to glutathione-agarose beads and thrombin cleavage to release FGF-4 were as described in ref. 25.
Most of the free FGF-4 remained bound to beads, allowing removal of residual thrombin by washing.
FGF-4 protein was eluted with 1.5M KCl and dialysed.
FGF proteins (FGF-1 provided by L. T. Williams, FGF-2 purchased from Boehringer-Mannheim, FGF-4 produced as described, and FGF-5 provided by J. Hébert) were diluted in 25mM HEPES and 0.1% BSA (acetylated form; New England Biolabs).
Unless otherwise stated, whenever FGFs were added to culture medium, heparan sulphate (10–100ngml -1 ; Sigma) was also added for protein stabilization.
Control experiments showed that addition of heparan sulphate, alone or in conjunction with other growth factors, BSA alone, or supernatant prepared appropriately from bacterial cells containing only pGEX2T expression vector, had no apparent effect on limb growth.
Recombinant human BMP-2 and BMP-4, generously provided by Genetics Institute (Cambridge, MA), and TGF- β 1 by R. Derynck, were diluted in 20mM sodium acetate, pH5.0 and 0.4% BSA.
Recombinant human PDGF (Collaborative Biomedical Products) was diluted in 10mM acetic acid.
Murine EGF (Collaborative Biomedical Products) and bovine insulin (Boehringer-Mannheim) were resuspended as specified by the manufacturers.
All protein dilutions were prepared in siliconized tubes and used immediately.
All- trans -retinoic acid (Sigma) was dissolved in dimethyl sulphoxide (DMSO)(final concentration 0.01%).
n,Number of AER forelimb or hindlimb pairs analysed.
Mesenchymal extrusion (0.25  0.05mm).
Distance in mm along the A-P axis at the distal tip of bud (+AER: 0.45  0.05; -AER: 0.20  0.05).
Similar results obtained with the following concentrations: 10, 50, 100ngml -1 ; 100, 200ngml -1 ; 50, 100ngml -1 ; 50, 200ngml -1 ; 10, 200, 5,000ngml -1 ; 1, 10, 100ngml -1 .
FIG. 1 Effects of FGF-4 and BMP-2 on cultured limbs.
Trunk fragments with attached limbs (+AER and -AER) were cultured for 48h (a, b)without growth factor supplementation;c, d , with 50ngml -1 FGF-4;e, f , with 50ngml -1 BMP-2. +AER limb is on left and -AER limb on right.
Arrowheads (c, d)indicate the distal limit of epithelium covering the -AER limb; extrusion of mesenchyme is visible distally.
METHODS.
Limb staging was as described in ref. 27.
Mouse embryos with forelimbs at stage 3–4 (fully formed AER) and hindlimbs at stage 2–3 (apical epithelium thickening) were dissected into cold phosphate-buffered saline containing 10% fetal calf serum, and the heart removed.
Limb regions were isolated by four transverse cuts through the trunk, one above and one below each pair of limbs.
With fine forceps, the entire AER was teased away from the left limb and discarded, causing no obvious damage to underlying mesenchyme.
Trunk fragments, with attached -AER and +AER limbs, were transferred to tubes (Falcon no. 2057; 4–6 trunk fragments per tube) containing 1-ml aliquots of equilibrated serum-free defined culture medium (modified Biggers medium), growth factors added (see legend to Table 1), and the tubes rotated (30r.p.m. at –75° angle) in a 5% CO 2 incubator at 37°C.
Trunk tissue appeared similar in medium with or without growth factor supplementation.
Over 48h of culture, development is normal although slightly retarded.
Forelimbs develop to stage 6–7 versus stage 8 in vivo.
Hindlimbs reach stage 5 versus stage 5–6 in vivo.
Limb tissue appears healthy with little cell death, whereas the trunk region shows signs of deterioration.
Limbs cultured for longer periods show a considerable decrease in growth rate and marked tissue degeneration.
FIG. 2 Mixed signals: effects of combinations of FGF-4 and BMP-2 on hindlimb outgrowth.
Sections (6μm) of trunk fragments with attached hindlimbs cultured for 48h in:a, d, e,medium without growth factor supplementation: or medium containing (b, f, g)50ngml -1 FGF-4;c, h,50ngml -1 BMP-2;i , 100ngml -1 FGF-4 and 10ngml -1 BMP-2;j , FGF-4 and BMP-2, 50ngml -1 each;k , 10ngml -1 FGF-4 and 100ngml -BMP-2.
In panels where both limbs are shown, the +AER limb is on left side, -AER limb on right.
d and e-h,+AER and -AER limbs, respectively, at –x5 higher magnification. g,Photographed under dark-field illumination, shows hybridization of a Hoxd-13 antisense probe.
Hoxd-13 RNA is detected in the posterior (bottom) but not the anterior (top) mesenchyme.
Similar effects on limb outgrowth and Hoxd gene expression were observed in forelimb cultures.
Arrowheads indicate the distal limit of the epithelium covering the -AER limb; extrusion of mesenchyme is visible distally.
METHODS.
After culture, embryo fragments, as illustrated in g,were processed for RNA in situ hybridization.
Probes for Hoxd-11 and Hoxd-13 have been described and were provided by D. Duboule.
FIG. 3 Effects of FGF-4 and BMP-2 on limb mesenchyme proliferation.
The mitotic index (per cent of cells in mitosis) in the distal mesenchyme was determined for +AER and -AER limbs cultured for 28h in medium alone, or in medium containing FGF-4 or BMP-2 (100ngml -1 ).
Nocodazole (5μgml -1 ), which arrests cells in mitosis, was present during the last 6h of culture.
METHODS.
Trunk fragments with attached limbs were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde, embedded in paraffin, sectioned (6μm), and stained with haematoxylin and eosin.
Using an ocular grid (50μmx50μm), the mitotic index was determined by counting the number of mitoses per total number of nuclei within 50μm of the AER or exposed surface.
For each treatment at least seven pairs of limbs were examined and over 1,500 nuclei counted.
Sections analysed were separated by at least 18μm.
The frequency of BrdU-labelled cells was determined according to the following procedure (C. Tickle, personal communication).
After 23h culture in FGF-4 (100ngml -1 ), BrdU (20μM) was added to the medium and the limbs were cultured for an additional hour.
The distal tip (200μm) of each limb was dissected and placed in 2% trypsin at 4°C for 30min to aid removal of the epithelium.
Mesenchyme cells were dissociated and smeared on microscope slides, air-dried, fixed in 4% formaldehyde, incubated with anti-BrdU antibody (Boehringer-Mannheim) and secondary fluorescein-tagged antibody.
Cells that incorporated BrdU were detected by fluorescence microscopy.
The total number of cells and of labelled cells within a randomly selected field of view were counted.
Four pairs of limbs were analysed and over 1,500 cells counted for both +AER and -AER limbs.
A gene for the mouse pink-eyed dilution locus and for human type II oculocutaneous albinism
Eugene M. Rinchik, Scott J. Bultman, Bernhard Horsthemke, Seung-Taek Lee, Kathleen M. Strunk, Richard A. Spritz, Karen M. Avidano, Michelle T. C. Jong & Robert D. Nicholls
THE mouse pink-eyed dilution (p)locus on chromosome 7 is associated with defects of skin, eye and coat pigmentation.
Mutations at p cause a reduction of eumelanin (black-brown) pigment and altered morphology of black pigment granules (eumelanosomes), but have little effect on pheomelanin (yellow-red) pigment.
We show here that the human complementary DNA DN10 , linked to the p locus in mice, identifies the human homologue (P)of the mouse p gene, and appears to encode an integral membrane transporter protein.
The expression pattern of this gene in various p mutant mice correlates with the pigmentation phenotype; moreover, an abnormally sized messenger RNA is detected in one mutant,p un , which reverts to the normal size in p un revertants.
The human P gene corresponds to the D15S12 locus within the chromosome segment 15q11-q13, which is typically deleted in patients with Prader-Willi and Angelman syndrome (see ref. 5 for review).
These disorders are phenotypically distinct, depending on the parent of origin of the deleted chromosome, but both syndromes are often associated with hypopigmentation of the skin, hair and eyes (see ref. 8 for review), and deletion of the P gene may be responsible for this hypopigmentation.
In addition, we report a mutation in both copies of the human P gene in one case of tyrosinase-positive (type II) oculocutaneous albinism, recently linked to 15q11-q13 (ref. 9).
To extend previous recombinant-inbred strain analyses demonstrating linkage of D15S12h (formerly designated D7Nic1 ) to the mouse p locus, we performed an interspecific backcross analysis.
No recombinants were detected between p and D15S12h in 182 segregants from the cross (129/R l- pc ch /pc ch x M. spretus)F 1 x129/Rl- pc ch /pc ch (Fig. 1 a),implying a map distance of less than 1 centimorgan (two-sided 95% confidence limits, 0–2cM).
The complete linkage of D15S12h and p thus suggested that D15S12h might be deleted in radiation-induced p -locus mutations, and Southern blot hybridization analysis demonstrated that all DNA fragments hybridizing to DN10 are deleted in the mouse mutations p r7FR6OLb ,p 6H ,p r46DFiOD ,p 116G and p r25DVT (Fig. 1 b).
The DN10 cDNA detects an RNA expression pattern in mouse tissues consistent with the phenotypic effects of p mutations.
DN10 recognizes two transcripts of 3.4 kilobases (kb) and 1.9kb (Fig. 2 a).
The 3.4-kb mRNA, but not the 1.9-kb mRNA, derives from the D15S12h locus, because it is not present in skin of p 6H /p 6H mice (Fig. 2 a,lane 14), in which D15S12h is deleted (Fig. 1 b).
(Thus the 1.9-kb mRNA is derived from a DN10-related locus outside the p 6H deletion (see also Fig. 2 legend) and will not be considered further.)
The 3.4-kb mRNA is expressed highly in B16 melanoma, in albino (c/c)skin (which contains melanocytes but no pigment) and in skin from agouti (A/A;combination of yellow and black) and non-agouti (a/a ; black) mice (Fig. 2 a,lanes 3, 4, 9, and 10).
The 3.4-kb mRNA is not expressed in W/W v skin (lane 17), which lacks melanocytes, or in any skin that exclusively produces yellow pigment due to mutations at the agouti locus (lanes 6, 7, and 8).
Of particular interest is the expression in a t /a t mice, in which the 3.4-kb mRNA is expressed in the black dorsal skin but not in the yellow ventral skin (lanes 5 and 6), in contrast to expression in black ventral skin of a/a mice (lane 10).
Thus in cases in which pigment is produced, the presence of the 3.4-kb transcript correlates completely with the presence of black pigment, consistent with the effects of p mutations on eumelanosomes, while having little or no effect on pheomelanosomes.
The 3.4-kb mRNA is expressed in skin of mice homozygous or hemizygous for the original p mutation, but at a very reduced level (Fig. 2 a,lanes 11 and 12), consistent with genetic data indicating that p is a low activity rather than a null mutation.
Of particular importance is the result obtained in p un /p un skin.
The p un (pink-eyed unstable) mutation results in a phenotype indistinguishable from that of p/p homozygotes, except that p un reverts to wild type at a high frequency and is associated with genomic duplication.
The DN10 probe recognizes an aberrant 4.3-kb mRNA in p un /p un skin (Fig. 2 a,lane 1), but detects a correctly sized 3.4-kb mRNA in the normally pigmented skin of a homozygous p un + 1Rn /p un+1Rn revertant (Fig. 2 a,lane 2).
This is consistent with our observation that 5' and 3' DN10 probes (912 and 1412, respectively) detect both duplicated and non-duplicated restriction fragments in Southern blot analyses of p un /p un DNA (Fig. 1 c shows results with the complete DN10 cDNA), but not in the revertant (data not shown), implying that the duplication is intragenic.
These expression and structural data for p un provide strong evidence that the DN10 cDNA corresponds to the p gene itself, because reversion to wild-type pigmentation is accompanied by a restoration of the normal DN10 /D15S12h transcript.
We designate the human homologue of the murine p locus by the gene symbol P .
A probe derived from DN10 hybridized to an abundant 3.4-kb transcript in poly(A) + RNA from normal primary human melanocytes (Fig. 2 b), which is not present in human pancreas, kidney, skeletal muscle, liver, lung, placenta, heart, HEL erythroleukaemia cells or adult brain (Fig. 2 b ).
The DNA sequence and deduced amino-acid sequence of the human P polypeptide was determined from four cDNA clones (Fig. 3 a).
The DN10 cDNA clone contains an alternatively spliced exon present in only a small fraction of P mRNA from human melanocytes and fetal brain (Fig. 3 b).
The sequence of the putative human P polypeptide predicts an integral membrane protein with 12 transmembrane domains (Fig. 3 a and c).
Searches of nucleic acid (GenBank/EMBL rel. 71) and protein (NBRF-PIR rel. 32) databases showed the best match (21% identity) to a tyrosine-specific transport protein from Escherichia coli (accession number, GRECY), which appears to contain 12 transmembrane domains.
A structural arrangement of 6–12 transmembrane domains is common among mammalian proteins that transport small organic molecules.
We speculate that the P polypeptide may be a component of the melanosomal membrane, possibly involved in the transport of tyrosine, the primary precursor to melanin biosynthesis.
In this regard, it is intriguing that pigmentation of melanocytes from p/p mice, and also from human patients with type II oculocutaneous albinism (OCA), is greatly increased by incubation in excess exogenous tyrosine.
Deletion of P might be responsible for the mild hypopigmentation usually found in Prader-Willi (PWS) and Angleman (AS) patients with 15q11-q13 deletions (see ref. 8 for review).
In fact, normal pigmentation is observed in a PWS patient with an unbalanced translocation in which all loci except D15S12 are deleted.
A surprisingly large number of PWS and AS patients also exhibit clinical features characteristic of tyrosinase-positive (type II) OCA, including severe hypopigmentations, decreased visual acuity, nystagmus and strabismus (J. Clayton-Smith, S. Saitoh, personal communications, and our unpublished data); these atypical PWS and AS patients may be hemizygous for mutant alleles of a gene responsible for type II OCA.
Accordingly, we carried out Southern blot hybridization analysis of the P gene in a PWS patient who also has type II OCA.
Karyotype analysis demonstrated a de novo deletion of 15q11-q13, and molecular analysis demonstrated that the deletion included D15S12 and other proximal markers typically deleted in PWS.
In contrast to 15 other PWS/AS patients who do not have OCA (unpublished data), probes from both the 3' (Fig. 4, right) and central (Fig. 4, left) part of the DN10 cDNA identify homozygous deletion of a 6.6-kb genomic Hin dIII fragment in the PWS/OCA patient.
Furthermore, this fragment was of reduced intensity in the mother (Fig. 4).
All other bands detected by the cDNA (with one exception: see Fig. 4 legend) are normal, except for the expected reduced intensity in the patient.
These data demonstrate that the patient has a partial deletion of the P locus in the chromosome 15 inherited from his mother, and that the entire locus is absent from the paternally derived chromosome.
The prevalence of type II OCA among PWS and AS patients, perhaps 1% (refs 19–21; J. Clayton-Smith, S. Saitoh, personal communications, and our unpublished data), is consistent with the expected frequency of carriers of type II OCA, given a frequency of the disease of 1 per 36,000 in caucasians.
Recently, genetic linkage has been demonstrated between type II OCA and markers in 15q11-q13.
Together these findings indicate that mutations of the human P gene may account for a significant fraction of cases of type II OCA, the most frequent form of oculocutaneous albinism worldwide.
The pigmentation defects observed in PWS and AS constitute one component of these contiguous gene syndromes, independent of the primary, imprinted genetic element(s) that result in the major clinical features of these syndromes.
We have shown here that specific defects in this single gene (P)are also likely to result in the phenotype of type II oculocutaneous albinism in man and pink-eyed dilution (p)in mouse.
This study exemplifies the combined use of human and mouse genetics to dissect human genetic diseases involving multiple genes and complex phenotypes.
Note added in proof:While this letter was under review, J. M. Gardner et al.
also reported identification of the mouse p gene.
FIG. 1 Molecular analysis of the D15S12h locus in mice.
a,
Segregation of D15S12h haplotypes in 182 members of an interspecies backcross (129/Rl- pc ch /pc ch x M. spretus)x129/Rl- pc ch /pc ch .
Filled boxes represent 129/Rl Bam HI restriction fragment length variants (RFLVs)(6kb and 3.3kb); open boxes represent M. spretus RFLVs (7.7kb and 3.6kb).
Numbers of animals in each class are indicated.
b,
Southern blot analysis of lethal p- locus mutations with the human DN10 cDNA probe.
DNA from mice of the indicated genotypes was digested with Bam HI and hybridized to DN10 (upper panel) or control probe 23.3 from the more distal chromosome-7 Emv-23 locus (lower panel).
Designations are abbreviated forms of the complete genotype (for example, 6H represents p 6 H ).
c,
Southern blot analysis of p un /p un and control DNA.
Hin dIII-digested DNA (lanes 1–4) from p un /p un ,p 6H /p 6H , and inbred strains C57BL/6J and AKR/J were hybridized to DN10 .
Arrows indicate fragments duplicated in p un DNA (lane 1); all other bands are of equal intensity, with the exception of the 1.6-kb fragment, which is too faint to determine.
Bands detected by subfragments of DN10 (Eco RI- Taq I 912,Taq I- Taq I 1412; see Fig. 4 for designation) are shown to the right.
Our data indicate the duplication is 18.6kb; re-evaluation of the data in ref. 12 shows that the minimum size of the duplication is 51.8kb.
METHODS.
Mice carrying p 6H , and DNA from p 6 H /p 6H ,p un /p un , and inbred strains were purchased from the Jackson Laboratory.
Breeding stocks carrying p un were provided by H. G. Wolfe, University of Kansas.
All other mice were bred at Oak Ridge National Laboratory.
Lethal mutations at the chromosome-7 pink-eyed dilution (p)locus were recovered opposite the original p mutation, and are maintained by outcross to +/+ mice, with progeny testing for p .
Neonates or juvenile mice homozygous for p r7FR60Lb or p 6H , respectively, or compound heterozygotes involving p 6H or p r7FR60Lb and any of the prenatally lethal mutations p r46DFiOD ,p 116G , or p 25DVT , were identified in the progeny of a cross of appropriate heterozygotes by their pink eye and/or dilute fur colour.
The p un +1Rn reversion of p un was recognized in a mottled pink-eyed-dilute///wild-type mosaic.
Wild-type heterozygotes (p un /p run +1Rn ) were obtained from a cross of the mosaic by p un /p un .
Wild-type homozygotes (p un+1Rn /p run+1Rn ), obtained from a cross of heterozygotes, were identified by progeny tests to p/p mice.
DN10 is a 3.2-kb cDNA from a human fetal brain library that detects 12 fragments totalling 110kb in Hin dIII-digested human DNA; all fragments but one (see Fig. 3 legend) map to 15q11-q13 on the basis of hybridization to DNA from somatic cell hybrids (unpublished data).
A human MYOD1 cDNA and the pIGF-I-R.8 cDNA were used as probes for the Myod-1 and Igf1r loci, respectively.
DNA preparation and Southern blot hybridization were as described, except that mouse filters hybridized to DN10 received a final wash of either 1xSSCP at 65°C or 0.1xSSC at 39°C.
FIG. 2 Northern blot analysis of mouse and human tissue RNA with the DN10 cDNA.
a,
Mouse blot using (upper panel)DN10 probe or (lower panel) chicken tubulin control probe.
Sizes of the transcripts (in kb) are given.
Poly(A) + RNA is from mouse skin (lanes 1–17) or from B16 melanoma (lane 18).
Lane 1,a/a; p un /p un , postnatal d8, whole-trunk, non-agouti pink-eyed dilute; lane 2,a/a; p run+1Rn /p run+1Rn , d8, whole-trunk, non-agouti black; lane 3, +/+, d11, dorsal, agouti; lane 4, +/+, d11, ventral, agouti; lane 5,a t /a t , d9, dorsal, black; lane 6,a t /a t , d9, ventral, yellow; lane 7,A y /+, d6, dorsal, yellow; lane 8,A y /+, d6, ventral, yellow; lane 9,a/a,d6, dorsal, non-agouti black; lane 10,a/a,d6, ventral, non-agouti black; lane 11,a/a; p/p,d7, whole-trunk, non-agouti pink-eyed dilute; lane 12,p/p r46DFiOD , d4, whole-trunk, agouti-pink-eyed dilute; lane 13,p/ +, d4, whole-trunk, agouti; lane 14,a/a; p 6H /p 6H , d7, 10, whole-trunk, non-agouti pink-eyed dilute; lane 15,a/a; p 6H /p 7R75M , d10, whole-trunk, non-agouti dark pink-eyed dilute; lane 16,c/c,d6, whole-trunk, albino, no pigment; lane 17,W/W v , d6, whole-trunk, albino, no melanocytes; lane 18,a/a , B16 melanoma, non-agouti black.
p 7R75M is a viable, radiation-induced mutation of p that has minor effects on pigmentation.
See ref. 1 for a review of genotypes and phenotypes.
b,
Poly(A) + RNA was used from the following human tissues or cells: pancreas (lane 1), kidney (lane 2), skeletal muscle (lane 3), liver (lane 4), lung (lane 5), placenta (lane 6), brain (lane 7), heart (lane 8), melanocytes (lane 9), and HEL erythroleukaemia cells (lane 10).
METHODS.
Poly(A) + RNA was prepared by standard procedures and analysed by electrophoresis through 1% agarose/0.22M formaldehyde (mouse) or 1% agarose/0.92M formaldehyde (human melanocytes and HEL cells) and hybridization to radiolabelled probes.
A northern blot containing 2μg each of polyadenylated mRNAs from various human tissues was purchased from Clontech.
The hybridization probe was prepared by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using oligonucleotides RN19 (5'-CCATATCCATGCTGTTCTGCAATCCC-3') and RN48 (5'-CCCAGCCTGACCCATGTGGTGG-3') as primers and plasmid containing DN10 as template, followed by gel purification of the 1.4-kb PCR product.
After hybridization, the final wash was at 60°C in 0.1xSSPE and 0.5% SDS.
The 1.9-kb mRNA in the mouse (see text), detected by both DN10 and a 2.1-kb probe derived from the DN10 cDNA by PCR using primers RN14 (5' — GGATCAAGGAAAGCTCTGGCAGCTG-3') and RN19, is present in all tissues examined (data not shown).
Probes from the co-ligated sequence 3' to the poly(A) recognition site (Fig. 3) in DN10 did not hybridize to mouse RNA.
FIG. 3 Molecular characterization of human P cDNA and the putative P polypeptide.
a,
Nucleotide and deduced amino-acid sequences of human P cDNA.
Composite DNA sequences of DN10 plus three additional 5' P cDNAs are shown.
Twelve putative transmembrane domains are boxed; potential N -glycosylation sites are indicated by bars, potential protein kinase C phosphorylation sites by triangles, and translational termination codons by asterisks; the poladenylation signal is double-underlined and a melanocyte-specific downstream element is singly underlined.
The cDNA sequence presented ends where the genomic sequence (unpublished data) diverges; the DN10 cDNA clone contains another 547 nucleotides that represent a co-ligated cDNA derived from an unrelated non-chromosome-15 locus (data not shown).
The human P cDNA sequence has been deposited in GenBank (accession number M99564).
b,
DNA sequence of a 77-bp minor alternatively spliced exon of the human P gene.
A partial nucleotide sequence of genomic clone IR10–1 is illustrated, aligned with the DN10 cDNA and predicted amino-acid sequences.
Inclusion of the IR10–1 exon introduces a frameshift and translational termination at codon 669 of the minor P -derived mRNA.
c,
Model for arrangement of the P polypeptide in the membrane.
Charged amino acids are shown as circles (negative charge D, E; +, H; ++, K, R), with neutral amino acids in the connecting line.
Putative transmembrane segments are depicted as cylinders 1–12; numbers indicate the inner and outer boundary.
Six potential N -glycosylation sites are denoted by forks.
METHODS.
DN10 cDNA extends from nucleotides 358–3,070.
Three additional human P cDNAs were obtained by screening two human melanocyte cDNA libraries using 370-bp (nt 358–735) and 260-bp (nt 118–358) fragments from the 5' end of P cDNAs.
Poly(A) + mRNA was prepared from 5x10 6 log phase normal primary human melanocytes (NHEM337; Clonetics) and 1μg used to prepare oligo(dT)-primed cDNA as described.
One-twentieth of the reaction was used as template for 30 cycles of PCR with different pairs of DN10 -derived primers.
Parallel PCRs were carried out using 0.1μg normal human genomic DNA as template.
One-fifth of each PCR was analysed by electrophoresis in a 5% polyacrylamide gel.
Most DN10 primer pairs did not amplify any products when normal human genomic DNA was used as template (data not shown), suggesting that the human P gene contains many large intervening sequences.
In contrast, all but one primer pair amplified the expected size fragments from melanocyte cDNA.
Primer pair RN46 (5'-CCCTGGCATTCATCTTGATC-3') /RN50 (5'-CTATTAAGTGGAGATGTGCC-3') amplified a major 174-bp product from melanocyte cDNA, 77bp shorter than the expected 251-bp product.
This pair of primers spans a segment corresponding to an exon present in genomic clone IR10–1 , which was the probe originally used to isolate the DN10 cDNA.
To determine whether the 174-bp RN46/RN50 PCR amplification product corresponds to cDNA lacking the IR10–1 exon, we cloned this PCR fragment in M13mp18 and determined the DNA sequence of six clones; the IR10–1 exon was precisely deleted from each, but otherwise agreed with the nucleotide sequence of DN10 (data not shown).
Similar results were obtained from a human melanocyte cDNA library and human fetal brain cDNA (data not shown).
Thus most of the P mRNA in human melanocytes and in fetal brain lacks the IR10–1 exon; the sequence of this predominant transcript is shown in a.
DNA sequences were analysed using the DNASTAR and PC/GENE software packages and IALIGN.
FIG. 4 An inherited P (D15S12 ) -locus deletion in a patient with PWS and tyrosinase-positive oculocutaneous albinism.
Hin dIII-digested DNA from the patient (P), his father (F), mother (M), and a control (C) were hybridized to the 1,412-bp (left panel) or 680-bp (right panel) probes derived from the DN10 cDNA.
Similar results were obtained with Eco RI,Bam HI and Kpn I (data not shown).
Hatched box illustrates the position of the inherited deletion demonstrated in the patient and mother; open boxes, cDNA clones; E,Eco RI; T,Taq I; poly A, polyadenylation site.
The deletion detected by the 1,412-bp probe includes only the last exon of the P gene (Fig. 3 a , and unpublished data).
The second fragment (23kb) detected by the 680-bp probe is from an unrelated locus (see Fig. 3 legend) and serves as a control for the amount of DNA loaded in this experiment as it is not deleted.
A clinical and cytogenetic description of the proband with PWS and type II OCA is given in ref. 21.
Palaeomagnetic evidence for large-magnitude, low-angle normal faulting in a metamorphic core complex
Richard F. Livaccari, John W. Geissman & Stephen J. Reynolds
CONTROVERSY exists over whether large-magnitude extensional deformation can occur along low-angle, master detachment (normal) faults.
Large amounts of Cenozoic extension occurred in the Basin and Range province of the western United States, and master detachment faults related to this extension are currently exposed as subhorizontal structures along crustal arches known as metamorphic core complexes (MCCs).
One set of models suggests that MCCs represent crustal-scale blocks bounded by originally high-angle normal faults which have tilted to subhorizontal attitudes.
More dynamic models propose isostatically induced flexural tilting of an initial subhorizontal fault, to an active high-angle fault, to final abandonment as a subhorizontal structure; these models require MCC detachment faults and their footwalls to have been tilted by 30–60°.
Alternatively, MCC detachment faults may have originated as subhorizontal or low-angle structures.
Here we test these models with palaeomagnetic data from undeformed portions of the South Mountains, a typical Cenozoic MCC in the southern Basin and Range province.
Comparison with time-averaged expected directions of the geomagnetic field yields no evidence for tilting of the footwall.
We conclude that the South Mountains master detachment fault was active as a low-angle extensional structure, with a dip of 10°.
The principal structure of the South Mountains MCC (Fig. 1) is a subhorizontal, ductile to brittle, high-strain zone which accommodated large-magnitude extensional deformation.
Initial mylonitic ductile deformation and later brittle detachment faulting were partitioned along a relatively thin zone (100m thick).
Both phases of deformation are kinematically coordinated and indicate shear such that the top moves east-northeast.
Ductile and brittle deformation occurred at relatively shallow crustal levels (within 5 to 10km of the surface), and was promoted by magmatic heat and expulsion of magmatic fluids from a suite of Miocene synkinematic intrusive rocks.
This synkinematic, footwall intrusive suite constitutes the northeastern part of South Mountains and includes (from oldest to youngest) South Mountains granodiorite (Tsm), Telegraph Pass granite (Ttp), felsic dykes (Tfd) and microdiorite dykes (Tmd).
Palaeomagnetic data from undeformed portions of South Mountains footwall rocks provide a passive linear marker to assess footwall tilting.
Here we report palaeomagnetic data from a total of 38 sites, representing all phases of the South Mountains intrusive suite and Precambrian wallrocks (Figs 2, 3 and 4).
The magnitude of footwall tilting is determined by comparing observed data (either primary thermoremanent magnetizations, TRMs, or high-temperature thermochemical magnetizations, TCRMs, acquired early in the cooling history of the intrusions) with expected, time-averaged directions of similar age.
Several palaeomagnetic studies in the Basin and Range province have focused on vertical axis rotation and on tilting of near-surface hanging wall rocks above master  detachment faults.
Here, in contrast, we focus on horizontal axis tilting of mid-crustal footwall rocks beneath a master detachment fault.
Demagnetization behaviour indicates that those well-grouped magnetizations (with high unblocking temperatures and high to moderate coercivities) that are found in South Mountains granodiorite and microdiorite dykes reside mainly in magnetite (Fig. 2).
Those characteristic of the Telegraph Pass granite and felsic dykes reside in both magnetite and hematite (Fig. 2).
South Mountains granodiorite is of normal polarity, whereas the Telegraph Pass granite, microdiorite and felsic dykes are of both normal and reverse polarity (Fig. 3).
The presence of normal or reverse polarity magnetizations is not a function of the magnetic phase dominating the remanence.
Contact tests, involving dykes and host rocks, as well as between Telegraph Pass granite and Precambrian host rocks, have been attempted.
In some of the tests involving dykes, the host rock has a polarity opposite to that of the dykes (Fig. 3).
In these cases, rocks immediately adjacent to the dykes are partly remagnetized in the direction of the dyke.
Some tests are inconclusive in that host rock and dyke give the same polarity and statistically indistinguishable direction of magnetization.
Precambrian rocks adjacent to the Telegraph Pass granite give well-grouped magnetizations identical in direction to that of the granite (reverse polarity).
Precambrian rocks at least 100m away from the Telegraph Pass granite contact are of normal polarity (Fig. 3, PC host no. 4).
Contact relationships 1 and 2 of Fig. 3 suggest that magnetizations carried by magnetite in South Mountains granodiorite and microdiorite dykes are primary TRMs.
Contact relationships 3 and 4 of Fig. 3 suggest that hematite in the Telegraph Pass granite and felsic dykes is of high-temperature TCRM origin, with remanence acquisition occurring early in the cooling history of these intrusions.
This hematite is most likely to have been formed during synkinematic circulation of moderate temperature (600°C) magmatic fluids.
Laboratory data on the unblocking temperature of the Telegraph Pass granite and felsic dykes do not allow us to define the temperature range over which magnetizations carried by hematite were blocked.
For primary magnetizations in Telegraph Pass granite and felsic dykes carried dominantly by magnetite, most of the remanence was blocked between 400°C and 580°C.
The thermal history of the South Mountains Granodiorite, provided by isotopic (U-Pb zircon,40 Ar/ 39 Ar hornblende, K-Ar biotite) and fission-track (apatite) age determinations, indicates rapid cooling of 260°CMyr -1 (from 800 to 300°C) between 22 and 20Myr ago, followed by slower cooling of 73°CMyr -1 (from 300 to 100°C) between 20 and 17Myr (ref. 24).
Mylonitization of footwall granitic intrusions (Tsm and Ttp) began shortly after crystallization (22Myr), 19,24 .
Rapid cooling between 22 and 20Myr reflects both uplift during ductile phases of extensional deformation and ambient cooling of the granitic intrusions.
We therefore interpret magnetizations of high unblocking temperature and high to moderate coercivity found in undeformed parts of the granitic intrusions (Tsm and Ttp) as having been acquired just before or during mylonitization of structurally higher rocks.
Felsic dykes that cut strongly mylonitized portions of the granitic intrusions (Tsm and Ttp) are only weakly mylonitized.
Therefore, magnetizations of high unblocking temperature and high to moderate coercivity found in undeformed parts of the felsic dykes are interpreted to have been acquired during the final phases of ductile deformation of structurally higher rocks.
Slower cooling below 300°C, between 20 and 17Myr, is correlated with brittle phases of extension.
Microdiorite dykes cross-cut the granitic intrusions (Tsm and Ttp), felsic dykes and mylonites.
Microdiorite dykes that intersect the South Mountains detachment fault are highly brecciated and must therefore postdate ductile deformation (22 to 20Myr) and be synkinematic with respect to brittle deformation (20 to 17Myr), 19 .
Magnetizations of high unblocking temperature and high to moderate coercivity acquired by microdiorite dykes are interpreted to have been acquired synchronously with brittle phases of detachment faulting.
Fission-track age determinations on apatites from undeformed granodiorite indicate that the South Mountains MCC has resided at temperatures of less than 100°C since 17Myr (termination of major deformation).
In summary, the demagnetization behaviour, contact relationships and thermal history of South Mountains footwall rocks indicate acquisition (early in the cooling history of the intrusions) and preservation of primary TRMs and high-temperature TCRMs.
We interpret the moderate dispersion and dual polarity (except for Tsm) of palaeomagnetic data to indicate that cooling and remanence acquisition occurred over a period long enough to average palaeosecular variation.
The data do not support the idea that remanent magnetization was acquired during a post-extension thermal or low-temperature chemical event at shallow crustal levels.
Group and grand mean palaeomagnetic directions for the South Mountains intrusive suite are statistically (95% confidence) indistinguishable from Miocene reference directions (Fig. 4).
Assuming that magnetizations in the South Mountains granodiorite, Telegraph Pass granite and felsic dykes were acquired before and during ductile extensional deformation, we interpret these data as demonstrating that the South Mountains footwall has not been significantly tilted after mylonitic deformation.
Similarly, assuming that magnetizations in the microdiorite dykes were acquired during initial stages of brittle deformation, we interpret these data as demonstrating that the South Mountains footwall has not been significantly tilted after the brittle stages of deformation.
The dip of this master detachment fault at the time of active deformation is then assumed to coincide with its current dip of 10° northeastwards.
Large-magnitude extensional deformation must therefore have been accommodated along a low-angle detachment (normal) fault during both ductile and brittle phases of deformation.
Development of low-angle detachment structures is favoured in a rheologically layered continental crust.
Detachment structures initiate at moderate dips in brittle upper crust and flatten at mid-crustal levels (10–15km depth), because stress axes rotate as a result of ductile (perhaps fluid-like) flow of a weak middle crust (beneath the brittle to ductile transition zone).
In the case of South Mountains, synkinematic intrusions and associated high magmatic fluid pressures may have raised the brittle to ductile transition zone to between 5 and 10km depth.
This would allow flattening of the dip angle of a detachment structure at higher crustal levels.
Elsewhere, the dip of this detachment structure may have flattened at deeper crustal levels, resulting in an along-strike warped geometry, with only the structurally highest level (the South Mountains) currently exposed at the surface.
Variations in dip of master detachment fault structures, ranging from low angle (10° for South Mountains and Sevier Desert detachments) to high angle, may then be controlled by lateral variations in thermal and mechanical properties of a layered crust.
FIG.3 Equal-area projections of site means with α 95 confidence cones for Telegraph Pass granite (Ttp, 15 sites; this includes two sites of reverse-polarity Precambrian host rocks found within 10m of the contact, and one site of reverse-polarity mafic xenoliths found within the Telegraph Pass granite), South Mountains granodiorite (Tsm, eight sites), felsic dykes (Tfd, six sites) and microdiorite dykes (Tmd, eight sites).
Solid symbols represent lower-hemisphere projections and open symbols represent upper-hemisphere projections.
The following contact relationships are also illustrated: South Mountains granodiorite sites, Tsm host 1 and Tsm host 2, intruded by microdiorite dykes, Tmd dyke 1 and Tmd dyke 2, respectively; Telegraph Pass granite site, Ttp host 3, intruded by microdiorite dyke, Tmd dyke 3; and remagnetized Precambrian host rocks, PC host 4 (this site is not shown on other equal-area projections of this figure), intruded by felsic dyke, Tfd dyke 4.
FIG. 4
a,
Equal-area projection of Miocene reference directions for South Mountains, Arizona (solid dots, lower-hemisphere projections), calculated from palaeomagnetic pole data of Diehl et al.
(22 to 38Myr), Irving and Irving (20Myr), and Mankinen et al.
(14 to 17Myr).
b,
Equal-area projection of group-mean data (stars, lower-hemisphere projections; reverse-polarity data have been inverted to normal polarity) with α 95 confidence cones for South Mountains granodiorite (Tsm), Telegraph Pass granite (Ttp), felsic dykes (Tfd), and microdiorite dykes (Tmd).
c,
Equal-area projection of grand mean (star, lower-hemisphere projection) with α 95 confidence cone and the three Miocene reference directions (grey dots).
Grand mean is derived from the four group-mean data points of b.
The grand mean direction is statistically indistinguishable from the three Miocene reference directions, suggesting that there has been no footwall tilting.
Therefore, the current dip of the high strain zone, 10° northeastwards, is assumed to represent the dip of this structure during deformation.
A synaptic model of memory: long-term potentiation in the hippocampus
T. V. P. Bliss & G. L. Collingridge
Long-term potentiation of synaptic transmission in the hippocampus is the primary experimental model for investigating the synaptic basis of learning and memory in vertebrates.
The best understood form of long-term potentiation is induced by the activation of the  receptor complex.
This subtype of glutamate receptor endows long-term potentiation with Hebbian characteristics, and allows electrical events at the postsynaptic membrane to be transduced into chemical signals which, in turn, are thought to activate both pre- and postsynaptic mechanisms to generate a persistent increase in synaptic strength.
THE assumption that information is stored in the brain as changes in synaptic efficiency emerged about a century ago following the demonstration by Cajal that networks of neurons are not in cytoplasmic continuity but communicate with each other at the specialized junctions which Sherrington called synapses.
External events are represented in the brain as spatio-temporal patterns of neural activity, and it is these patterns of activity which must themselves be the agents of synaptic change.
The location of storage, the engram of learning and memory, must therefore be found among those synapses which support activity-dependent changes in synaptic efficiency.
These ideas were refined in the late 1940s by Hebb and Konorski, who proposed a coincidence-detection rule in which the synapse linking two cells is strengthened if the cells are active at the same time.
The first such synapses to be identified in the mammalian brain were the excitatory connections made by perforant path fibres onto granule cells of the hippocampus, a cortical structure required for the formation of conscious memories in man.
Brief trains of high-frequency stimulation to monosynaptic excitatory pathways in the hippocampus cause an abrupt and sustained increase in the efficiency of synaptic transmission.
This effect, first described in detail in 1973 3,4 , is called long-term potentiation (LTP).
LTP has since been found in all excitatory pathways in the hippocampus, as well as in several other regions in the brain, and there is growing evidence that it underlies at least certain forms of memory.
In the past 10 years, LTP in the hippocampus has become the dominant model of activity-dependent synaptic plasticity in the mammalian brain, and much progress has been made in elucidating the mechanisms underlying its induction and expression.
Properties of hippocampal LTP
Activity-dependent synaptic potentiation occurs within milliseconds and can persist for many hours in the anaesthetised animal or in the in vitro hippocampal slice preparation, and for days when induced in the freely moving animal.
This time span incorporates a number of mechanistically distinct temporal components, which include post-tetanic potentiation (PTP), short-term potentiation (STP) and LTP.
Activity-dependent potentiation can also be classified on the basis of whether or not its induction is blocked by antagonists of the N- methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) subtype of glutamate receptor (Box 1).
In this article, by LTP we mean synaptic potentiation, which is both NMDA receptor-dependent and lasts for more than an hour.
LTP is expressed as a persistent increase in the size of the synaptic component of the evoked response, recorded from individual cells or from populations of neurons.
It can be induced in a number of ways, most conveniently by delivering a tetanus (typically a train of 50–100 stimuli at 100Hz or more) to the pathway of interest (Fig. 1).
LTP can also be induced by more modest stimulus parameters, providing the patterns of stimulation fall within certain critical ranges.
(Two particularly efficient recipes are termed ‘theta-burst stimulation’(for example, several bursts of 4 shocks at 100Hz delivered at an interburst interval of 200ms) and ‘primed-burst stimulation’(for example , a single priming stimulus followed at 200ms by a single burst of 4 shocks at 100Hz).
The significance of these protocols is that synchronized firing patterns at similar frequencies occur in the hippocampus during learning.)
LTP is characterized by three basic properties: cooperativity, associativity and input-specificity.
Cooperativity describes the existence of an intensity threshold for induction; ‘weak’ tetani, activating relatively few afferent fibres, do not trigger LTP.
The threshold for inducing LTP is a complex function of the intensity and pattern of tetanic stimulation; between ‘weak’ trains which produce only PTP and ‘strong’trains which induce LTP, lies an intermediate range of activation which engages STP.
LTP is associative in the sense that a ‘weak’ input can be potentiated if it is active at the same time as a strong tetanus to a separate but convergent input.
Finally, LTP is input-specific, because other inputs that are not active at the time of the tetanus do not share in the potentiation induced in the tetanized pathway.
Associativity provides a cellular analogue of classical conditioning, and is an implicit property of the Hebb synapse, the computing element that lies at the heart of the current interest in neural computation.
The three properties can be explained on the assumption that a synapse will be potentiated if, and only if, it is active at a time when the region of dendrite on which it terminates is sufficiently depolarized.
Validation of this induction rule was provided in 1986 by experiments showing that low-frequency (1Hz), low-intensity stimuli could produce robust LTP if repeatedly paired with depolarizing pulses delivered through an intracellular recording electrode r16–18 .
In the limit, LTP can be produced in this way between pairs of synaptically coupled neurons.
Conversely, the induction of LTP can be blocked by limiting the depolarization of the cell during a tetanus.
What is now needed to complete a mechanistic description of the induction requirements for associative LTP is a molecular coincidence detector, able to respond to the conjunction of activity in afferent fibres and adequate depolarization in target dendrites.
Compelling evidence that the NMDA receptor performs this function is reviewed in the next section.
The induction of LTP
The role of amino-acid receptors in the induction of LTP.
The involvement of several amino-acid receptor subtypes in the induction of LTP has been determined largely by the use of antagonists and is described in Box 2.
The key role of the NMDA receptor channel complex relies on several of its special properties, in particular the voltage-dependent block of its channel by Mg r2+ (ref. 21).
It is this that allows the NMDA receptor to behave as a molecular coincidence detector.
For the NMDA channel to open, and thus to trigger the induction of LTP, it is necessary for two events to occur simultaneously: the membrane must be sufficiently depolarized to expel Mg 2+ from NMDA channels at the same time that L-glutamate has, by binding to NMDA receptors, promoted their opening.
The slow time course and voltage-dependence of the NMDA receptor-mediated conductance makes it particularly susceptible to the hyperpolarizing influence of synaptic inhibition; this susceptibility, together with the frequency-dependent depression of inhibition itself, largely accounts for the frequency-dependence of the induction of LTP.
The properties of cooperativity, associativity and input-specificity can now easily be explained.
The cooperativity threshold follows from the need for depolarization to reduce the level of the Mg 2+ block of the NMDA channel.
‘Weak’ stimuli, activating only a few fibres, fail to induce LTP not because insufficient L-glutamate is released to activate NMDA receptors, but because the level of depolarization provided by the weak input does not produce an adequate reduction of the Mg 2+ block.
When many fibres are activated in synchrony by a ‘strong’ stimulus, depolarization spreads between neighbouring synapses to enhance the unblocking of NMDA channels.
Associativity has a similar explanation except that the required depolarization is provided by a different set of afferent fibres; in theory, these ‘helper’ inputs could use any neurotransmitter that promotes depolarization, and, experimentally, depolarization is often provided by injecting current into the cell.
Input-specificity is explained by the need for the presynaptic terminal to provide a sufficient concentration of L-glutamate to activate adequate numbers of NMDA receptors.
(It follows that there can be little activation of NMDA receptors by ambient or spontaneously released L-glutamate, otherwise LTP would be induced by depolarization alone.)
Because the induction of LTP by tetanic stimulation is prevented by a variety of NMDA antagonists, including those which act at the receptor (such as 2-amino-5-phosphonopentanoate (AP5)), in the channel (for example, MK-801 (ref. 25)) and at the allosteric glycine site (for example , 7-chlorokynurenic acid), it is clear that activation of these receptors is an essential trigger for the process.
But, the application of NMDA itself is not usually sufficient to induce LTP, though it readily induces STP.
A possible reason for this relates to the paradoxical finding that a level of activation of the NMDA receptor system, which is itself inadequate for producing LTP, can result in a subsequent impairment in the ability to generate LTP r28–30 .
Thus, with the application of NMDA there may be two opposing processes at work, one promoting and the other suppressing the induction of LTP.
Alternatively, factors in addition to NMDA receptor activation, which could be either pre- or post-synaptic, may be required to facilitate or allow the induction of LTP.
In this respect, there has been interest in the possible role of metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluRs), prompted by the observation that the mGluR antagonists 2-amino-4-phosphonobutanoate (AP4) and 2-amino-3-phosphonopropionate (AP3) reduce the duration of LTP.
These compounds are, however, very weak mGluR antagonists of poorly defined specificity, and the observation will need to be confirmed as soon as more potent and selective mGluR antagonists are developed.
A second indication that these receptors might be involved in the induction of LTP has come from the finding that aminocylopentane dicarboxylate (ACPD), the 1S,3R-enantiomer of which is a specific agonist for mGluRs, can augment tetanus-induced potentiation.
In addition, ACPD enables subthreshold, or low-frequency stimuli (in conjunction with the application of NMDA), to induce LTP.
It does this in at least two ways.
First, ACPD augments responses of hippocampal neurons to NMDA.
Second, it can elicit an NMDA receptor- independent potentiation of slow onset which adds to STP to produce a potentiation that closely resembles tetanus-induced LTP.
The role of Ca 2+ in the induction of LTP.
In an important early study, it was found that the induction of LTP could be blocked by the intracellular injection of the Ca 2+ chelator EGTA.
This result implicated the postsynaptic cell, and in particular Ca 2+ signalling in the induction process.
Because NMDA channels are permeable to Ca 2+ (refs 21, 38, 39) it is widely assumed, but not proven, that permeation through these channels during tetanic stimulation provides the Ca 2+ signal necessary for the induction of LTP.
Because NMDA receptors are assumed to be located on dendritic spines, it is believed that spines may act to localize the Ca 2+ signal.
Spines can restrict the diffusion of Ca 2+ (ref. 40); however, whether they do so in LTP is not known.
Using Ca 2+ -imaging techniques it has been shown that tetanic stimulation elevates Ca 2+ within dendrites and spines.
Part of this signal depends on the synaptic activation of NMDA receptors and reflects, at least in part, Ca 2+ entry through NMDA channels and voltage-gated Ca 2+ channels.
In one study the tetanically induced rise in Ca 2+ persisted for several minutes, and it was proposed that sustained Ca 2+ gradients might be important for memory processing.
But it is unlikely that rises in Ca 2+ of this duration are necessary for the induction of LTP in view of the demonstration that LTP can still be induced even if the duration of the post-tetanic rise in Ca 2+ is restricted to less than 3s, using a photo-activatable caged Ca 2+ chelator.
Complementary data have come from combining Ca 2+ imaging with whole-cell recording.
Although, for technical reasons, LTP could not be induced, this preparation allowed Ca 2+ signals to be correlated directly with the synaptic response.
Strong tetanic stimulation, which evoked large NMDA receptor-mediated synaptic currents, produced Ca 2+ transients lasting only a few seconds.
This combination of techniques has also enabled the Ca 2+ signal that permeates NMDA channels on dendritic spines to be detected (Fig. 2).
There are indications from Ca 2+ imaging experiments that the Ca 2+ which permeates NMDA channels is augmented by Ca 2+ release from intracellular stores (see Box 3).
The Ca 2+ transient associated with the synaptic activation of NMDA receptors is substantially reduced in the presence of ryanodine or thapsigargin, drugs which inhibit Ca 2+ -induced Ca 2+ release and deplete intracellular Ca 2+ stores, respectively.
That this Ca 2+ might be important for the induction of LTP is suggested by the observations that dantrolene, which acts at the ryanodine receptor, and thapsigargin can both inhibit the induction of LTP.
It is likely that inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (InsP 3 ) generated as the result of the activation of mGluRs, as well as the Ca 2+ which permeates through NMDA channels, is involved in releasing Ca 2+ from intracellular stores.
Moreover, activation of mGluRs can induce LTP by a thapsigargin-sensitive mechanism, even if NMDA receptors are blocked.
This suggests that release of Ca 2+ from intracellular stores can substitute for the NMDA receptor-mediated Ca 2+ signal.
Other routes by which Ca 2+ could enter the cell to contribute to the induction of LTP include voltage-dependent Ca 2+ channels and Ca 2+ -permeable AMPA channels (that is, those lacking the GluR-2 subunit).
At present, though, there is little evidence that either of these pathways plays a significant role in LTP.
Although clearly a necessary factor, it is unclear whether a rise in postsynaptic Ca 2+ provides a sufficient trigger for the induction of LTP.
Elevation of intracellular Ca 2+ by the photolysis of caged Ca 2+ induces a form of synaptic potentiation, but the relationship between this effect and LTP has not been determined (for example, occlusion experiments have not been done).
Elevation of intracellular Ca 2+ , either by evoking Ca 2+ currents or by slowly depleting intracellular Ca 2+ stores, does not induce LTP.
This could be due either to the failure of these methods to elevate Ca 2+ in the appropriate manner (presumably what is needed is a large transient within spines) or to the need for additional pre- and/or postsynaptic signals.
In summary, the available evidence suggests that under normal conditions Ca 2+ permeates NMDA channels to provide a transient signal which is necessary for the induction of LTP.
It is probable that this signal is restricted to the vicinity of activated spines and is amplified by release from intracellular stores.
Expression of LTP
A major challenge is to identify the loci and nature of the alterations responsible for the expression of the potentiated state.
The locus of expression.
Broadly speaking, the increase in the postsynaptic response generated at potentiated synapses could be due to(1) presynaptic modifications which result in an increase in the amount of L-glutamate released per impulse,(2) postsynaptic modifications, such as an increase in the number of receptors or a change in their functional characteristics,(3) an extrasynaptic change, such as a reduction in uptake of L-glutamate by glial cells leading to increased neurotransmitter availability at the receptors, or (4) morphological modifications.
In reality, a combination of these changes, with different time courses, probably occurs.
Evidence for an increase in neurotransmitter release is derived from experiments that have measured the overflow of radiolabelled or endogenous L-glutamate from the hippocampus before and after the induction of LTP r50–52 .
Although not without difficulties of interpretation, these experiments establish a case for presynaptic changes lasting for at least several hours.
Supporting evidence was obtained from experiments in which the ability of a depolarizing stimulus to release radiolabelled glutamate was shown to be elevated in potentiated hippocampal tissue.
Other studies have suggested purely postsynaptic modifications.
The observation that paired-pulse facilitation is not altered after the induction of LTP has been interpreted as evidence for a postsynaptic modification in LTP on the assumption that facilitation in the hippocampus is presynaptic, and that an interaction between facilitation and LTP would be expected if the expression of the latter were also presynaptically mediated.
It is possible, however, to construct a model in which facilitation and LTP are both presynaptic and yet involve additive, non-interacting mechanisms; this could be the case, for example, if the initial probability of release were very low.
Claims that LTP is associated with a specific increase in the AMPA receptor-mediated component of the synaptic response, have formed the basis of an argument for a purely postsynaptic change, on the assumption that a presynaptic change would result in a similar increase in both AMPA and NMDA receptor-mediated components.
In support of this argument, an increase in both components was seen during PTP, whereas the isolated NMDA receptor-mediated component failed to exhibit LTP.
But the argument has been undermined by subsequent reports that NMDA receptor-mediated synaptic transmission exhibits pronounced LTP r59–62 .
Another test for postsynaptic changes is to monitor the sensitivity of neurons to the application of agonists before and after the induction of LTP.
Initial studies found no increase in the sensitivity to L-glutamate for up to 30min post-tetanus.
But in a more recent study, in which AMPA or quisqualate were used as agonists to avoid problems associated with the uptake and possible nonspecific actions of L-glutamate, a slow-onset increase in sensitivity was detected.
The effect began within a few minutes but took an hour or more to reach a maximum.
This time course parallels the slow-onset potentiation that can be induced by the application of certain agents, such as arachidonic acid, and ACPD.
It seems reasonable to assume that changes in the steady-state responses, as measured in the above experiments, reflect alterations that would also affect the response to synaptically released L-glutamate (for example, changes in the number, or conductance properties, of AMPA receptors).
If this assumption is valid, then the results imply that the expression of STP is presynaptic whereas that of LTP is, at least in part, postsynaptic.
Despite the formidable interpretational problems of applying quantal analysis to central synapses, there has a been a resurgence of interest in the use of this technique to analyse the locus of expression of LTP.
Early studies in area CA1 indicated a presynaptic locus.
Results of the more recent studies of fluctuations in the amplitude of synaptic responses have produced conclusions ranging from purely presynaptic, to predominantly presynaptic, to purely postsynaptic and, finally, to a mixture of purely presynaptic, purely postsynaptic and both pre- and postsynaptic.
This variability may reflect differences in the initial release probability which, in turn, will be influenced by experimental parameters such as the extracellular Ca 2+ concentration.
Analysis of spontaneous miniature synaptic currents, associated with NMDA- or L-glutamate-induced STP, has provided evidence for an increase in quantal size in the hippocampal slice, implying a postsynaptic locus, and an increase in miniature frequency in cultured hippocampal neurons, implying a presynaptic locus.
Evidently, the hoped-for resolution of the locus of expression of LTP by the application of quantal analysis has not yet been achieved.
Note that if STP and the several temporal phases of LTP (see Box 1) are expressed at different loci, then changes in quantal parameters may alter progressively with time.
Signal transduction mechanisms.
Several different Ca 2+ -sensitive enzymes have been proposed to play a part in converting the probable induction signal, the entry of Ca 2+ through the NMDA channel, into persistent modifications of synaptic strength.
These include the protease calpain, phosphatases such as calcineurin, phospholipases and protein kinases.
Most interest has focused on phosphorylation cascades and, in particular, the role of protein kinases.
The first kinase to be implicated in LTP was the Ca 2+ /phospholipid-dependent protein kinase (PKC)r78–80 .
Inhibitors of the enzyme invariably block the induction of LTP; in most studies, STP is unaffected by PKC inhibitors r81–85 , though with the use of high doses or the combined application of inhibitors STP may also be blocked.
There is general agreement that PKC inhibitors will block LTP if they are applied after the tetanus, indicating that kinase activity outlasts the initial induction signal.
But the duration of the time-window during which kinase inhibitors are effective and the manner in which the activation of kinases is maintained are both matters of debate.
For example, it has been suggested that constitutively activated PKC is involved because H-7, which inhibits the activity of the catalytic subunit, but not sphingosine, which prevents the initial activation of PKC, can depotentiate synapses in a reversible manner even when applied up to 3h after induction.
But the selectivity of H-7 for potentiated pathways has been challenged, and other PKC inhibitors that act on the catalytic subunit, including K-252b (ref. 85), are not able to depotentiate fully established LTP.
There is also disagreement as to whether the sustained kinase activity that might be necessary for LTP is located within the postsynaptic cell or not.
A recent view is that a postsynaptic kinase is activated transiently (for less than a few minutes following the tetanus) and a presynaptic kinase is activated for longer periods (but for less than 1 hour).
These kinases might be the γ and β isoforms of PKC, respectively.
Intracellular injection of the catalytic subunit of PKC induces synaptic potentiation as does the extracellular application of activators of PKC, such as certain phorbol esters.
But the enhanced response does not survive washout of phorbol ester, and occlusion experiments indicate that LTP and phorbol ester-induced potentiation use different mechanisms.
Overall, it seems that activation of PKC is not sufficient to induce LTP but is a necessary factor and may be specifically involved in the conversion of STP to LTP1 (that is in the consolidation or stabilization of LTP).
The development of more selective PKC inhibitors and, in particular, subtype-specific inhibitors are needed to confirm and extend these ideas.
Several inhibitor studies have also indicated a role for calmodulin and the Ca 2+ /calmodulin-dependent protein kinase CaMKII in LTP r84,88,94–96 .
Knockout of the gene encoding α CaMKII, an isoform which is heavily enriched in postsynaptic densities, severely impairs, though it does not always completely block, the ability of slices to exhibit LTP.
The autophosphorylated form of this enzyme does not require Ca 2+ and as a result becomes constitutively active.
This has led to the proposal that CaMKII can act as a form of molecular memory, recording the occurrence of a previous Ca 2+ transient.
But contrary to the predictions of this model, NMDA does not alter the proportion of Ca 2+ -independent CaMKII in organotypic hippocampal cultures.
Less is known about the role of other kinases in LTP.
The level of cAMP is elevated in an NMDA receptor-dependent manner in LTP and this may indicate an involvement of cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA).
It has been suggested, on the basis of inhibitor studies, that protein tyrosine kinases (PTKs) are involved in LTP, and it may be relevant that NMDA receptor activation leads to tyrosine phosphorylation of MAP-2 kinase.
In addition to post-translational modification of existing proteins there is evidence that protein synthesis is also necessary for LTP.
The extent to which protein synthesis inhibitors prevent LTP is variable, depending on the inhibitor used.
Probably the clearest picture has emerged from the use of anisomycin, which inhibits translation of proteins from mRNAs.
If present at the time of the tetanus anisomycin reduces the duration of LTP to 3–6 hours r103–105 .
A similar rate of decay is seen if LTP is induced in synapses that have been surgically isolated from the major site of protein synthesis in the cell body layer.
In contrast, actinomycin, which prevents the transcription of mRNAs from DNA, has no effect on this anisomycin-sensitive phase.
Taken together, these results suggest that proteins synthesized from pre-existing mRNA are required for the maintenance of LTP during the first few hours (corresponding to LTP2 in the classification shown in Box 1).
The identity of proteins which are up- or downregulated during this period are not known, but several have been separated on two-dimensional gels.
It is also intriguing that an increase in protease activity has been detected in perfusates from the dentate gyrus following potentiation, raising the possibility that cleavage of proteins with extracellular domains, such as neural cell adhesion molecules (NCAMs), may contribute to synaptic remodelling in LTP.
The experiment with actinomycin suggests that for the first 3 hours or so LTP does not depend on gene transcription.
This does not preclude the possibility that genes are normally transcribed at or shortly after the time of induction but exert their effects at later times.
An example of gene transcription induced by tetanic stimulation is the NMDA receptor-dependent increase in mRNA for the immediate early gene zif/268 (refs 108–110).
There is also a transient expression of c -fos,but only if the animal is unanaesthetised at the time of induction, suggesting that the c- fos protein is necessary for the generation of the most persistent form of LTP (LTP3; see Box 1).
Changes in the abundance of mRNAs for a number of proteins have recently been identified in single CA1 cells 30min to 3hours after tetanization.
The reported changes in message for protein kinases (CaMKII is upregulated and the β- isoform of PKC is downregulated) suggests that protein kinases may play a role in the late stages of LTP, in addition to their presumptive action during the early phases.
Postsynaptic modifications.
It is likely that the postsynaptic component of the expression of LTP involves alterations in the number and/or properties of the ion channels that mediate synaptic transmission.
In view of the evidence that protein kinases are involved in LTP, the simplest scheme is that the kinases directly phosphorylate these ion channels.
Consistent with this possibility, the gradual increase in AMPA sensitivity following the induction of LTP is prevented by K-252b, a potent kinase  inhibitor .
In addition, cloned AMPA receptors have several consensus sequences for phosphorylation by various kinases.
Finally, the catalytic subunit of PKA can directly increase AMPA receptor function.
The finding that each of the AMPA receptor subunits can exist in two alternatively spliced variants, termed flip and flop, with different conductance properties, raises the possibility that LTP reflects a change in the relative expression of the flip and flop variants.
Alternatively, it could involve a change in the relative expression of the different subtypes of AMPA receptor, GluR 1–4 (ref. 47).
A third possibility is regulation of RNA editing.
The drug aniracetam, which potentiates responses to AMPA by preventing desensitization, has been used to explore how AMPA receptors may be modulated in LTP.
The underlying idea is that if LTP and aniracetam share common mechanisms then their effects should interact.
The weight of evidence suggests little interaction indicating that aniracetam and LTP do not regulate AMPA receptor function in the same manner.
So far, studies have concentrated on how the AMPA receptor-mediated component of synaptic transmission may be modified in LTP.
But the NMDA receptor-mediated component also exhibits robust LTP.
Alterations in this component could provide a means by which synapses increase their plasticity, as well as their efficiency.
As with the AMPA receptor-mediated component, LTP of the NMDA receptor-mediate d component of synaptic transmission could involve increases in L-glutamate release and/or postsynaptic modifications.
A mechanism for the latter possibility is suggested by the observation that NMDA receptor function can be increased by the activation of PKC.
This may involve phosphorylation of NMDA channels to alter the extent of the Mg 2+ block of these channels.
Another possibility is an upregulation of endogenous promoters of NMDA receptor function, such as arachidonic acid and InsP 3 (ref. 126).
The nature of the retrograde messenger.
The probable trigger for the induction of LTP is the entry of Ca 2+ through NMDA channels located on the postsynaptic cell.
But as we have seen, it is very likely that the potentiated response is maintained in part by presynaptic mechanisms.
To reconcile these two observations, it was proposed that an intercellular signal is released from the postsynaptic site of induction to initiate increased transmitter release from the presynaptic terminal.
The first candidates to be considered were proteins.
In addition to a tetanus-induced efflux of newly synthesised proteins from hippocampal slices LTP is associated with an NMDA receptor-dependent increase in the protein content of hippocampal perfusates.
The increases were slow to develop, apparently ruling out proteins as immediate retrograde messengers.
The next candidate to be examined was arachidonic acid.
This unsaturated fatty acid satisfies several of the requirements for a retrograde messenger:(1) it is released from cultured neurons into the extracellular medium by the activation of NMDA receptors,(2) there is an increase in its efflux and postsynaptic availability following the induction of LTP,(3) inhibitors of phospholipase A 2 , an enzyme that liberates arachidonic acid from phospholipids, block the induction of LTP r134–135 , and (4) the transient application of arachidonic acid to hippocampal synapses causes a slow-onset potentiation.
Potential targets for arachidonic acid include not only the presynaptic terminal, where it may act to increase L-glutamate release, but also glial cells where it depresses L-glutamate uptake and the postsynaptic cell, where, for example, it can potentiate NMDA receptor-mediated currents.
Another phospholipase A 2 -derived lipid, platelet-activating factor, also has some of the properties expected of a retrograde messenger.
The possibility that nitric oxide (NO) may be a retrograde messenger in LTP has excited considerable interest.
Like arachidonic acid, NO is released from cultured neurons exposed to NMDA.
NO is derived from arginine in a reaction catalysed by NO synthase, and inhibitors of the enzyme have been reported to block the induction of LTP r140–143 .
Haemoglobin, a scavenger of NO which is presumably confined to the extracellular space, also blocks the induction of LTP r141–143 , implying that NO (or another haem-binding molecule, such as CO) is released into the extracellular compartment.
In addition, NO increases the frequency of miniature excitatory postsynaptic potentials (e.p.s.ps) in hippocampal cultures.
But although there is immunocytochemical evidence for NO synthase in hippocampal interneurons, there has been difficulty in obtaining evidence for its expression in pyramidal or granule cells.
Furthermore, other laboratories, including our own, have not found a consistent block of LTP with NO synthase inhibitors.
The story has been further complicated by the observation that under conditions where previous activation of the NMDA receptor system has disabled the induction mechanism, NO synthase inhibitors may promote the induction of LTP.
Thus, the effect of NO synthase inhibitors may depend on the recent history of activity in the hippocampus.
In summary, although NO remains an intriguing candidate, the evidence that it is a retrograde messenger is far from conclusive.
A general problem with the candidates discussed above is the time course of their action.
The evidence for increased transmitter release is strongest for STP, that is from a few seconds to an hour or so after the inductive event.
But inhibitors of arachidonic acid and NO synthesis both spare STP.
Moreover, the potentiation produced by arachidonic acid is comparably slow to develop.
Thus none of the proposed candidates has the properties expected of a rapid retrograde messenger.
An alternative means of relaying postsynaptic activity is through alterations in activities of extracellular ions.
One possibility is K + , which will be released from the postsynaptic cell during a tetanus to a degree that will, in part, reflect the level of activation of NMDA receptors.
As discussed elsewhere, this could provide a signal to the presynaptic terminal through an interaction with presynaptic mGluRs, because the coupling of these receptors to PLC is strongly potentiated by extracellular K + (ref. 148).
Presynaptic modifications.
Regulation of transmitter release could occur at any of the sequence of events leading from Ca 2+ entry to exocytosis, through the mobilization, docking and fusion of vesicles at release sites in the presynaptic terminal.
LTP-related changes in Ca 2+ homeostasis could in principle account for persistent changes in transmitter release.
Ca 2+ levels were found to be elevated in synaptosomes prepared from potentiated dentate gyrus 45min after the induction of LTP, and this may explain the enhanced ability of potentiated synaptosomes to release preloaded transmitter.
Another possibility is an increase in the size of the Ca 2+ transient associated with each action potential, following the induction of LTP.
The measurement of Ca 2+ transients associated with single action potentials in hippocampal afferent terminals has not yet been reported; however, the Ca 2+ signal produced in mossy fibre terminals by trains of stimuli is not changed following the induction of LTP in this NMDA receptor-independent pathway.
Alternatively, LTP may be associated with an increase in the sensitivity to Ca 2+ to one or more components of the release mechanism.
Because LTP is expressed as an enhanced response to single stimuli, it is processes controlling the rapid fusion of synaptic vesicles with release sites, and/or the formation of fusion pores, which are the most likely targets for regulation.
Processes which govern the ability of the terminal to respond during sustained activity, such as the synthesis of transmitter, the transport and filling of vesicles and their release from the cytoskeletal cage, will contribute to LTP only to the extent that they influence either the probability of fusion, or the amount of transmitter packed into vesicles.
The nature of the retrograde messenger may give clues to the processes responsible for the sustained increase in transmitter release.
Arachidonic acid stimulates basal phosphoinositide turnover in synaptosomes prepared from the dentate gyrus, and, consistent with this finding, there is an increase in presynaptic phosphoinositide turnover in LTP.
Arachidonic acid therefore could lead to an activation of presynaptic PKC both directly and as a consequence of the increased production of diacylglycerol.
Among presynaptic substrates for PKC is the calmodulin-binding protein gap43, phosphorylation of which is increased in LTP.
Because phosphorylated gap43 cannot bind calmodulin, it is possible that through the resulting increased availability of calmodulin, the phosphorylation of synaptic vesicle proteins such as CaMKII substrates synaptophysin and synapsin could be affected, leading to modulation of vesicle fusion and hence of transmitter release.
The identity of presynaptic targets for NO, which could include guanylate cyclase and ADP ribosyltransferase, have not been determined.
Finally, a presynaptic mGluR could be coupled to transmitter release in a number of ways, as suggested by the coupling of mGluR1 to PI hydrolysis, arachidonic acid production, and cAMP levels.
Conclusion
The associative characteristics that define the induction criteria for NMDA receptor-dependent LTP have found an elegant and satisfying explanation in the voltage-dependent properties of the NMDA receptor/channel complex.
In contrast, little is known about the biochemical cascades that are triggered by the permeation of Ca 2+ through open NMDA channels and which lead to the persistent enhancement of synaptic efficiency.
The evidence considered here suggests that tetanus-induced potentiation proceeds in stages, beginning with a protein kinase-independent phase (STP), lasting less than 1 hour, followed by three stages of LTP (LTP1–3), requiring protein phosphorylation, protein synthesis from existing mRNAs, and gene transcription, respectively.
The expression of synaptic potentiation probably involves both pre- and postsynaptic mechanisms, not necessarily in the same proportion at each stage, the one leading to an increase in transmitter release and the other to an increase in the number or change in the properties of the ion channels which mediate synaptic transmission.
Activity-induced changes in the morphology or number of spines may also contribute to changes in synaptic efficiency, as suggested by a number of electron-microscopic studies.
Advances in microscopy may soon allow the real-time visualization of any such changes.
In this review we have charted the substantial progress which has been made in understanding the cellular and molecular basis of NMDA receptor-dependent LTP in the hippocampus.
It is part of the fascination of LTP that it can be studied experimentally at many levels, from the molecular to the behavioural; at the same time, knowledge about properties of LTP feeds directly into theoretical investigations of information storage in distributed neural networks.
This catholicity of interest is reflected in the scope of the many questions that remain (Box 4).
In the end, the overriding motivation for studying synaptic plasticity in the brain is the hope of gaining an understanding of the physical basis of memory in health and disease, and it is the nature of the link between LTP and memory that is likely to provide a major focus for research in the future.
FIG. 1 Basic properties of LTP: cooperativity, input-specificity and associativity.
a,
Simplified diagram of a transverse section through the hippocampus of the rat, showing the principal neuronal fields (granule cells of the dentate gyrus (DG) and the pyramidal cells of areas CA3 and CA1), and the main excitatory afferent projections (the perforant path (pp) from entorhinal cortex to granule cells, the mossy fibre projection (mf) from granule cells to CA3 cells, and the Schaffer collateral (Sch) -commissural (comm) system which connects ipsilateral and contralateral CA3 cells to CA1 cells).
Interneurons, which are found in all hippocampal subfields and which form powerful inhibitory connections with principal cells though feed-forward and feed-back loops, have been omitted.
b,
An example of LTP in the perforant pathway recorded in vivo.
The graph plots the slope of the rising phase of the evoked response (population e.p.s.p.), recorded from the cell body region in response to constant test stimuli, for 1h before and 3h following a tetanus (250Hz, 200ms), delivered at the time indicated by the arrow.
Representative traces before and after the induction of LTP are illustrated above the graph.
Note the increase in slope of the population e.p.s.p. and the increase in size of the superimposed population spike (downward deflection).
c,
Demonstration of the properties of cooperativity, input specificity and associativity.
The diagram at the top shows the experimental arrangement in area CA1 of the hippocampal slice preparation.
Two independent sets of afferent fibres converging on a common population of cells are activated by stimulating electrodes (S1 and S2) placed either side of the extracellular recording electrode.
The stimulus intensities are adjusted so that S1 activates fewer fibres than S2.
The slope of the population e.p.s.p.s, in response to stimuli delivered alternately to S1 and S2 at 15-s intervals, are plotted as a function of time.
Arrows denote episodes of tetanic stimulation to S1 (the ‘weak’ pathway, open arrows) or S2 (the ‘strong’pathway, solid arrows).
The tetanus to S1 produced a rapidly decaying phase of PTP, lasting 2–3 min, with a small tail of STP, but no stable increase in synaptic transmission; the intensity of the tetanus was below the cooperativity threshold for LTP.
The stronger tetanus to S2 (first filled arrow) produced PTP and robust LTP, but there was no transfer of the effect to the first input (test shocks to S1 were out of phase with the high-frequency bursts to S2), demonstrating the input-specificity of LTP.
Finally, tetani to S1 and S2 were delivered together.
The coincident activation of a weak, subthreshold input with a strong input induced associative LTP in the weak input.
The traces above the graph illustrate field e.p.s.ps, evoked by test shocks in S1 and recorded in the synaptic layer, before and after the induction of associative LTP.
FIG. 2 Ca 2+ permeates NMDA channels to produce a transient signal in spines in response to tetanic stimulation.
Confocal images of a CA1 pyramidal neuron in a hippocampal slice.
The upper image shows part of the soma and dendrites as they emerge into the plane of the optical section.
The boxed region is enlarged to show a dendritic branch and spine-like structure.
This is further enlarged to show the spine in more detail and the boxed region from which the fluorescence measurements were obtained.
(The box is 1μm.)
The graph plots the relative fluorescence, emitted by the indicator fluo-3, as a function of time.
The tetanus (100Hz, 1s), delivered for the duration of the bar, resulted in a transient increase in fluorescence.
The upper trace shows the synaptic current induced by the tetanus, recorded through a patch-pipette.
The cell was internally dialysed and clamped at -35mV to eliminate all voltage-gated Ca 2+ channel activity and the slice was treated with thapsigargin to deplete intracellular Ca 2+ stores.
Under these conditions the fluorescence changes are caused by Ca 2+ permeating through NMDA channels.
BOX 1 Classification of activity-dependent increases in synaptic efficiency in the hippocampus
SYNAPTIC potentiation can be divided into two principal categories on the basis of whether or not its induction is blocked by antagonists of the NMDA subtype of glutamate receptor.
Several categories of NMDA receptor-dependent plasticity have been identified.
A distinction can be made between short-term potentiation (STP), which decays within 1h, and long-term potentiation (LTP), which is sustained for much longer periods.
STP can be distinguished from LTP by the use of protein kinase inhibitors, in the presence of which potentiation usually persists for only 30–60min r81–85 .
Potentiation of a similar duration can be produced by decreasing the number of stimuli in the tetanus or by other manoeuvres which reduce the level of NMDA receptor activation.
Although it is convenient to make the distinction, the relationship between STP and LTP has not been clearly defined.
LTP can be tentatively subdivided into several mechanistically distinct components: LTP1, with a duration of less than 3–6h which is blocked by kinase inhibitors but not by protein synthesis inhibitors; LTP2, a component which is blocked by translational inhibitors but which appears to be independent of gene expression; and LTP3, with a time constant of several days, which is only obtained if the animal is unanaesthetised at the time of induction and which may require gene expression (see text).
Another form of NMDA receptor-dependent plasticity is E-S potentiation.
This takes its name from the shift to the left of the curve relating the slope of the population e.p.s.p.
(E) to the amplitude of the population spike (S) which is commonly observed following a tetanus.
It appears not to be input-specific but may provide a generalized boost to impulse traffic.
A further type of presumed NMDA receptor-dependent LTP has been described in which potentiation occurs not only at those synapses where there is coincident pre- and postsynaptic activity, but extends to synapses made by concurrently active terminals onto neighbouring cells, whether or not these are active.
This is interesting both because it suggests that non-Hebbian forms of potentiation occur in the hippocampus, and because it provides implicit evidence for the existence of a diffusible extracellular messenger (see text).
NMDA receptor-independent processes include paired-pulse facilitation and post-tetanic potentiation (PTP), which are general features of excitatory synaptic transmission.
With the stimulus parameters usually employed to produce LTP, the duration of PTP is at most a few minutes.
Both paired-pulse facilitation and PTP are additive with LTP, and can be produced repeatedly even when LTP has reached asymptotic levels.
It follows that LTP cannot achieve the maximum strength of which a synapse is capable: the potential for a further short-term increase is always held in reserve.
Mossy fibres terminate in the stratum lucidum of area CA3, a subfield devoid of NMDA receptors.
Consistent with this observation, LTP in mossy fibres is not blocked by the NMDA antagonist AP5 (ref. 163); moreover, it appears to be nonassociative.
The projection is technically difficult to study, and the locus and cellular mechanisms of mossy fibre LTP remain controversial.
Finally, an input-specific AP5-resistant component of LTP has been described in area CA1 165 .
The effect is small, develops gradually, is blocked by Ca 2+ channel antagonists, and requires stronger tetanic stimulation for its induction than is needed for NMDA receptor-dependent LTP.
Long-lasting potentiation can also be induced by transient exposure of hippocampal synapses to a variety of chemical agents, including Ca 2+166 , arachidonic acid, the metabotropic glutamate receptor (mGluR) agonist aminocyclopentane-1S,3R-dicarboxylate (1S,3R-ACPD), the K + channel blocker, tetraethylammonium (TEA) and the G-protein activator NaF/AlCl 3 .
Chemically-induced potentiation usually occludes with tetanically-induced LTP (that is, saturation of one prevents induction of the other), suggesting a convergence of mechanisms; in general , chemically induced LTP is not blocked by NMDA antagonists, presumably because the components of the LTP cascade activated by the various agents lie downstream from the NMDA receptor.
BOX 2 The role of amino-acid receptors in the induction of LTP
This e.p.s.p. can be blocked by the quinoxalinedione antagonists, such as 6-cyano-7-nitroquinoxaline-2,3-dione (CNQX), and is usually referred to as AMPA receptor-mediated after the selective ligand for these receptors α- amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionate (AMPA).
This receptor corresponds to the cloned family GluR1–4 47 .
When the Schaffer collateral-commissural pathway is stimulated it also activates GABAergic interneurons (through glutamatergic synapses similar to those on pyramidal neurons) and this leads to the biphasic i.p.s.p. which curtails the e.p.s.p.
The initial part of the i.p.s.p. is caused solely by the activation of GABA A receptors (which contain integral Cl -channels) and this is supplemented and followed by the activation of GABA B receptors (which are indirectly coupled to K + channels).
NMDA receptors contribute little to the synaptic response because of their relatively slow activation kinetics.
By the time that significant numbers of NMDA channels are in an open state the neuron has been hyperpolarized by the i.p.s.p. and this greatly enhances the block of NMDA channels by Mg 2+ (ref. 22).
Even so, there will still be a finite contribution of the NMDA receptor system to low frequency synaptic transmission; however, this is not sufficient (under normal circumstances) to initiate changes in the efficiency of synaptic transmission.
b,High-frequency transmission.
The contribution of NMDA receptors to synaptic transmission alters radically in response to a high-frequency input.
This is because the tetanus maintains the neuron in a more depolarized state, which in turn reduces the extent of the Mg 2+ -induced block of NMDA channels, while at the same time providing the L-glutamate which promotes their opening.
Several factors may contribute to the sustained depolarization during a tetanus; these include summation of AMPA receptor-mediated e.p.s.ps, depolarizing shifts in the Cl -and K + reversal potentials due to build up of intracellular Cl -and extracellular K + .
The primary mechanism (during primed or theta-burst LTP) is depression of GABA-mediated synaptic inhibition.
This is an active process mediated by GABA B autoreceptors.
The effect takes more than 10ms to develop and can last for up to a few seconds.
As a result low frequency transmission is unaffected by this process; however, during high-frequency transmission there is considerably less GABA released per impulse which leads to a shift in the balance of excitation and inhibition.
The reduction in inhibition allows greater expression of the NMDA receptor system which in turn contributes to the depolarization and thus  further reduces the level of the Mg 2+ block.
The long duration of the synaptic conductance means that NMDA receptor-mediated e.p.s.ps summate very effectively during high-frequency transmission.
BOX 3 Ways in which glutamate through its action on postsynaptic receptors may affect signal transduction processes involved in LTP
THE initial induction signal is a Ca 2+ transient which permeates NMDA channels.
This signal is then amplified by the release of Ca 2+ from Ca 2+ /InsP 3 -sensitive intracellular stores.
A parallel pathway which may be important for the induction of LTP is provided by mGluRs.
These receptors can couple, through G-proteins, to the phosphoinositide-specific phospholipase C (PLC), phospholipase A 2 (PLA 2 ) and adenylate cyclase (AC), to produce diacylglycerol (DAG), arachidonic acid (AA), and to regulate the levels of cAMP, respectively.
Note that the initial NMDA receptor-mediated Ca 2+ transient may be necessary for the activation of these mGluR cascades by L-glutamate.
The amplified Ca 2+ signal, in association with the other activators of protein kinases (zig-zag arrows), then leads to the phosphorylation of substrate proteins including, probably, AMPA and NMDA receptors.
Other enzymes, such as nitric oxide synthase (NOS), if present, may also be activated by the Ca 2+ transient.
Biochemical changes in the presynaptic terminal may be initiated by the action of retrograde messengers, such as arachidonic acid (AA), nitric oxide (NO) and K + , perhaps in conjunction with the action of L-glutamate on presynaptic mGluRs.
BOX 4 LTP: Some unresolved issues
(1)
WHAT is the physiological significance of LTP?
Specifically, is it a central component in the synaptic machinery of memory?
(2)
What percentage of excitatory synapses can be potentiated?
Is LTP at an individual synapse a graded or an all-or-none event?
(3)
What are (1) the presynaptic, and (2) the postsynaptic mechanisms underlying expression of LTP?
What is the relative contribution of these two components and how does this change with time?
(4)
How do changes in the number or structure of synapses contribute to LTP?
(5)
Do retrograde messengers exist?
If so, what are they and how do they regulate neurotransmitter release?
(6)
How prevalent is NMDA receptor-independent LTP, and to what extent do the two forms of LTP share common mechanisms?
(7)
How do other neurotransmitter and neuromodulators, such as acetylcholine, monoamines and peptides, regulate the induction and expression of LTP?
(8)
Does LTP always decay or is there a non-decremental form in the brain?
Can LTP be reversed (depotentiated)?
(9)
What is the extent and significance of long-term depression (LTD) in the hippocampus?
(10)
Can knowledge about the mechanisms of LTP be exploited to devise rational therapies for neurological disorders such as Alzheimer's disease?
Increase in C3 plant water-use efficiency and biomass over Glacial to present CO 2 concentrations
H. Wayne Polley, Hyrum B. Johnson, Bruno D. Marino & Herman S. Mayeux
ATMOSPHERIC CO 2 concentration was 160 to 200μmolmol -1 during the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM; about 18,000 years ago), rose to about 275μmolmol -1 10,000 years ago, and has increased to about 350 μmolmol -1 since 1800 (ref. 4).
Here we present data indicating that this increase in CO 2 has enhanced biospheric carbon fixation and altered species abundances by increasing the water-use efficiency of biomass production of C 3 plants, the bulk of the Earth's vegetation.
We grew oats (Avena sativa ), wild mustard (Brassica kaber ) and wheat (Triticum aestivum cv.
Seri M82 and Yaqui 54), all C3 annuals, and selected C4 grasses along daytime gradients of Glacial to present atmospheric CO 2 concentrations in a 38-m-long chamber.
We calculated parameters related to leaf photosynthesis and water-use efficiency from stable carbon isotope ratios (13 C/ 12 C) of whole leaves.
Leaf water-use efficiency and above-ground biomass/plant of C3 species increased linearly and nearly proportionally with increasing CO 2 concentrations.
Direct effects of increasing CO 2 on plants must be considered when modelling the global carbon cycle and effects of climate change on vegetation.
The shoots of plants grown in the 38-m chamber were enclosed by a transparent cover through which air was moved in one direction.
Photosynthesis by enclosed plants progressively depleted the CO 2 concentration ([CO 2 ]) and increased the 13 C/ 12 C of air (B.D.M. et al.,manuscript in preparation) as it moved the 38m from the air intake to outlet of the chamber.
The  13 C values (see Fig. 1 legend) of leaves of C3 species and of concurrently grown C4 grasses, grassbur (Cenchrus incertus ), crabgrass (Digitaria ciliaris ) and Gaspé yellow flint maize (Zea mays ), were linearly correlated with [CO 2 ](Fig. 1).
The difference between the  13 C of atmospheric CO 2 and leaf carbon of maize (and certain other C4 species) is conservative across environments and did not vary significantly with [CO 2 ](B.D.M. et al.,manuscript in preparation), enabling us to use the  13 C of C4 leaves as a proxy for the  13 C of chamber air.
Leaf intercellular [CO 2 ](c i ),calculated from leaf  13 C values, increased linearly and nearly proportionally (by the same ratio) with higher ambient [CO 2 ](c a  ) in each C3 species.
As a result, intercellular [CO 2 ]was a constant but different fraction of c a  in oats (c i  /c a  =0.70) and mustard (c i  /c a  =0.65) grown at mean [CO 2 ]from 330 to 160μmolmol -1 (Fig. 2).
The c i  /c a  of wheat cultivars increased only slightly from 0.63 and 0.66 at 225μmol mol -1 to 0.66 and 0.69 at 350μmolmol -1 for Yaqui 54 and Seri M82, respectively.
A similar result has been reported in young wheat plants exposed to CO 2 partial pressures between 120 and 500μbar.
Others have demonstrated that coordination of stomatal and mesophyll functions minimizes variation in c i  /c a  to similar values in C3 species, but this is the first demonstration of such for C3 plants grown over a [CO 2 ]range characteristic of Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) -to-present atmospheric concentrations.
Intrinsic water-use efficiency, defined as the ratio of leaf photosynthesis or net assimilation (A)to stomatal conductance to water vapour (g ), increased by the same (oats and mustard) or nearly the same (wheat) relative amount as did [CO 2 ], a consequence of conservative c i  /c a  in these C3 species (Fig. 3).
Leaf assimilation should have increased substantially at the higher c i  that accompanied increasing [CO 2 ], unless photosynthetic capacity (the relationship of A to c i )declined.
The positive linear relationship of A to c i  at subambient [CO 2 ]that is typical of C3 species did not differ between oat plants grown at extremes of the [CO 2 ]gradient.
We estimate from that relationship that with a constant c i  /c a  of 0.70, net assimilation of oat leaves would have increased 40% with the 75μmolmol -1 rise in [CO 2 ]since 1800.
That the increase in leaf c i  was correlated with greater plant carbon gain is evidenced by the positive linear relationships between c i  and aboveground biomass per plant of all C3s studied (Fig. 4).
Climate, and particularly site water balance, largely control the structure and productivity of vegetation.
This control is determined in part by plant water-use efficiency (WUE), biomass produced per unit transpiration.
Our results imply that WUE of C3 plants may have increased by 27% over the past 200 years and 100% since the LGM.
Water-use efficiency calculated from  13 C is often highly correlated with the ratio of biomass to transpiration of C3 plants, but the correlation is influenced by leaf-to-air vapour pressure differences.
Little of the CO 2 -induced increase in potential WUE might be realized if higher A/g resulted entirely from stomatal closure.
Then, transpirational cooling of leaves would decline and leaf temperature and transpiration rate per unit g would rise.
Any decline in water loss might also be partly offset by the resulting increase in atmospheric water vapour pressure deficit.
But the c i  and biomass/plant of C3 annuals increased by the same ratio as [CO 2 ], indicating that much of the CO 2 -induced increase in A/g (and WUE) was realized as higher A and ultimately as greater plant biomass (Fig. 4).
This increase in plant A/g from the LGM to present must have extended the geographic ranges of some species into areas where precipitation was formerly too low to support growth.
We calculate from regression that A/g of oats and mustard would have increased 14.1 to 16.4mmol CO 2 per mol H 2 O, respectively, with the increase from 275 to 350μmolmol -1 CO 2 that has occurred since 1800.
The increase is comparable to the mean 27.6% rise in A/g of 21.9mmolmol -1 of C3 species from moist wash to drier slope habitats in the Sonoran desert, where the change in A/g was associated with a shift in species composition.
Our results and those of others, if representative for C3 species, imply that the rise in [CO 2 ]since the LGM greatly increased potential productivity of most of Earth's vegetation.
Many believe, however, that higher [CO 2 ]has a negligible effect on global carbon fixation because factors other than CO 2 limit productivity of most unmanaged vegetation.
Some recent research suggests that a step increase in [CO 2 ]above the current 350μmolmol -1 produces little or no short-term (3 years) increase in plant or ecosystem carbon storage where low temperatures or nutrient (particularly nitrogen) availability currently restrict plant growth.
Extrapolation from these studies to the past is difficult, for only superambient [CO 2 ]and a limited range of processes and temporal scales were considered.
Plant water- and light-use efficiencies were lower at subambient [CO 2 ], implying that sustainable biomass and plant nutrient requirements were also lower in the past.
Species and genetic change, fixation of atmospheric N 2 , and nitrogen deposition may have facilitated plant response to CO 2 in the past when concentrations rose more slowly or with a greater relaxation time between change than today, but data are lacking.
Increased widths of annular rings of some trees, global CO 2 models, calculations of carbon accumulation in temperate forests, and the increased amplitude of the annual cycle of atmospheric [CO 2 ]in recent decades, all suggest that rising [CO 2 ]has stimulated biospheric carbon fixation.
Effects of [CO 2 ], however, cannot readily be distinguished from those of human impact and concurrent climate change.
Resolution of what fraction has been realized, if any, of the potentially great increase in plant productivity since the LGM demands that effects of [CO 2 ]on the processes that influence plant growth be understood within an ecosystem context and over relevant periods.
Our results nonetheless demonstrate the risks inherent in using present vegetation-climate relationships to reconstruct past climates from pollen or fossil records without incorporating potential direct effects of [CO 2 ].
FIG. 1 The stable carbon isotope composition of upper leaves from C3 and C4 plants that were grown at daytime [CO 2 ]from near 350μmolmol -1 to
a,
150 (19 January to 3 May, 1989) or
b,
200μmolmol -1 (12 February to 23 May, 1991).
The C-isotope composition of whole leaves was determined by mass spectrometry (ISOMASS; VG Isogas) and expressed as  (parts per thousand)13 C relative to a PeeDee belemnite reference standard:.
Lines are linear regressions of  13 C of C4 species on mean daytime [CO 2 ]during growth: for grassbur and crabgrass, and  for maize.
Plants were grown from seed in a 38-m long chamber in a ventilated glasshouse.
Soil water was restored weekly to field capacity.
The chamber consisted of a 0.6-m-high polyethylene cover attached to the top of a 0.76-m-deep and 0.45-m-wide soil container.
A desired [CO 2 ]gradient was maintained in the chamber during daylight (9–10h daily) by automatically varying the rate of unidirectional air flow through the cover in response to changes in photosynthetic CO 2 depletion by enclosed plants and sunlight intensity.
Standard deviation of the minimum daytime [CO 2 ]was less than 35μmolmol -1 on more than 80% of days.
Drybulb and dewpoint temperatures of air were regulated at each 7.6m along the chamber to track temporal variation in the glasshouse.
The daytime drybulb temperature and vapour pressure deficit of air after regulation at each 7.6m along the chamber were a mean 26°C ) during the time sampled leaves of oats and mustard expanded and 20.6°C (N= 24) and 1.13kPa (N= 19) during wheat growth.
FIG. 2 The ratio of leaf intercellular [CO 2 ](c i )to ambient [CO 2 ](c a ),calculated from the  13 C of leaves, as a function of the daytime [CO 2 ]at which C3 plants were grown.
The slopes of regressions of c i  /c a  on c a  did not differ significantly from zero for .
The stable C isotope composition of plants ( p 13 C) reflects that of atmospheric CO 2 ( a 13 C) and fractionation during photosynthesis.
For C3 plants,, where a is a fractionation resulting from the greater diffusivity of 12 CO 2 than 13 CO 2 across leaf stomata (4.4  (ref. 29); positive values indicate discrimination against 13 C or 12 C-enrichment) and b is discrimination by ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase against 13 C in CO 2 fixation (29 ; ref. 30).
Leaf c i  /c a  can be deduced from the above equation when  p 13 C and  a 13 C are known.
We calculated  a  13 C as a function of c a  in the 38-m chamber from the  13 C of leaves from C4 plants that were grown with oats, mustard and wheat using a fractionation by C4 plants relative to air of 3.136 .
Isotope fractionation by maize grown across a 350–200μmolmol -1 CO 2 gradient in an additional experiment did not vary significantly with [CO 2 ](B.D.M. et al.,manuscript in preparation).
Regressions of  13 C on daytime [CO 2 ]did not differ significantly for grassbur and crabgrass grown with oats and mustard (Fig. 1 ) or for maize and crabgrass grown with wheat (data not shown;).
The small changes in drybulb and dewpoint temperatures between points of regulation at each 7.6m along the chamber had no significant influence on the relationship of c i  /c a  of individual species or cultivars to c a .
FIG. 3 Relationships between intrinsic water-use efficiencies of C3 plants (net assimilation (A)/stomatal conductance to water (g))derived from the  13 C of leaves and the daytime [CO 2 ](c a  ) at which plants were grown.
Linear regressions differed significantly (P= 0.005) between
a,
oats () and mustard (), and
b,
two cultivars of wheat, Seri M82 ) and Yaqui 54 ().
for each regression.
Intrinsic water-use efficiency of C 3 leaves is directly proportional to c a  and negatively correlated with the ratio of leaf intercellular [CO 2 ](c i )to c a : A/g=c a  (1- c i  /c a ) /1.6  in air.
The c i  /c a  was determined from the stable C isotope compositions of leaves.
A direct inversion method for surface structure determination from LEED intensities
Peijun Hu & D. A. King
LOW-ENERGY electron diffraction (LEED) has become the most successful technique in surface crystallography, but because of the complexity of the surface-electron scattering interactions, analyses of LEED data are still conducted on a trial-and-error basis: a direct-inversion method for treating LEED intensity data remains an attractive goal.
Building on recent theoretical and experimental developments in electron holography from surface structures, we show here that three-dimensional images with atomic resolution can be obtained by a direct transform of conventional LEED intensity spectra.
In LEED structural analyses, a collimated electron beam incident on a well-ordered single crystal surface under ultra-high-vacuum conditions is backscattered into a series of Bragg beams.
The intensity I of each diffracted beam is measured as a function of the incident electron beam energy,V,yielding a set of I-V spectra which form the basic input to the structural analysis.
Direct Fourier transforms have proved ineffective because of strong multiple scattering.
Analyses are therefore done by trial and error, involving guesses at the structure, calculation of intensity spectra including multiple scattering, and comparison with the experimental data.
Here, we first use a cluster approach to show theoretically that LEED and electron holography have important similarities.
The scattering geometry is schematically shown in the inset to Fig. 1 a in which the vectors α and β represent the atom positions in a surface, and R is the vector from the origin to a detector.
An incident electron wave singly scattered to the detector by atom α, and another electron wave doubly scattered by atoms α and β before reaching the detector, can be written (refs 21, 22; P.H. and D.A.K., unpublished results) respectively, where the exponents represent the phases of the scattered waves relative to the origin, and  are the scattering factors for singly and doubly scattered waves respectively, containing curved-wave effects.
Higher-order scattered waves can be obtained in a similar form.
According to the ‘tree’ scheme of ref. 20, all scattered waves in a multiple scattering ‘tree’starting at atom α shown in Fig. 1 a can be summed as  β being an atom positioned near atom α and multiple (2) scattered waves being included in the term ‘+…’.
If a perfectly ordered surface structure is assumed, the position of the s th atom in the j th unit cell can be written  where W j is the vector of j th unit cell displaced from the origin by W j , u and v are the vectors of a unit cell, and w s is the position of an atom relative to the unit cell origin.
We denote all the terms in the square bracket as A s  , which are the same for every unit cell, and sum all the scattered waves illuminated by the incident plane wave within the probe coherence area, containing N 2 unit cells, to give  The first two summations are the structure factor, which amount to constant coefficients in the LEED I-V spectra, leading to  Thus the main effect of long-range order, as distinct from short-range order, is to produce intensity at Bragg beam positions; it does not influence the I-V dependence at a given Bragg beam position.
This result indicates that the LEED I-V spectra are dominated by scattering events occurring within a small region of crystal surface (ref. 22; P.H. and D.A.K., unpublished results), as in photoelectron or Auger electron diffraction.
We now consider a particular case, a simple ordered overlayer surface.
Diffracted beams from such a surface are conventionally divided into two categories: integral-order beams produced by the substrate alone, and fractional-order beams arising from the combined substrate and adsorbed layer symmetry.
The fractional-order beams result from interference between scattered waves involving an adatom at least once.
Equation (5) is then further simplified.
Suppose that there is one adatom in a unit cell (Fig. 1).
The scattered waves starting at the unit cell that end up in fractional-order beam positions can be ordered into two groups.
The first group contains a wave singly scattered by the adatom, denoted as , and all the waves doubly scattered first by the adatom and then by a substrate atom, denoted as  as,i , where i is a substrate atom near the adatom, and the summation is over all the doubly scattered waves with sufficient large amplitudes.
The second group consists of all the waves doubly scattered first by a substrate atom and then by the adatom, denoted as , and all the multiply scattered waves involving the adatom at least once, denoted as , as shown in Fig. 1 b .
Waves singly scattered by substrate atoms and all the multiply scattered waves not involving the adatom are not included here, as they go to integral-order beam positions.
Using the terminology derived from holography, we can reinterpret these waves as follows.
The wave singly scattered by the adatom is a reference wave, with its origin at the adatom, and the doubly scattered waves in the first group are the object waves.
All the scattered waves in the second group can be filtered out, as shown later.
The fractional-order beam intensities can be written, by analogy with holography, as  It can be shown that the first and second terms are actually the squares of amplitudes of scattered waves, and their major components have lower frequencies than do the third and the last terms, and can therefore be suppressed (refs 8, 14; P.H. and D.A.K., unpublished results).
The third term is the real image term from which the object can be reconstructed and the last term is the twin image term, in holographic terminology.
It should therefore be possible to use a direct holographic transform to generate a real-space image of a surface structure from LEED I-V spectra, provided that fractional-order Bragg beams from a simple ordered overlayer structure are used.
In principle, the twin image term could also be used to reconstruct the surface structure.
Barton proposed a formalism to reconstruct surface structures from photoelectron diffraction patterns, and scattering-factor corrections were later suggested for object waves.
Multiple energy transformations can markedly improve the reconstructed images the filter concept in holographic transforms has also been addressed.
Based on this, we propose the following transform to obtain the structural information from LEED  are Legendre polynomials.
I denotes the fractional-order beam intensities from an ordered overlayer system.
The summation over  in equation (7) refers to all available fractional-order Bragg beams at a given incidence energy, while the summation over k refers to the available energy or k range for which these intensities have been measured; the summations are used in place of the integrals used in treating intensity maps as holograms.
The scattering-factor corrections for both the reference and the object waves  and , are also included.
The origin is defined at the adatom position, the source of the reference wave.
Three-dimensional images can be obtained by plotting intensities γ U (r) γ with respect to a position r in real space.
How the transform works can be understood as follows.
We consider the real image term first.
For the term  obtained from equations (1) and (2), in the real image term of equation (6), if r is not equal to a substrate atom position β i in a transform, the summations give rise to a small value because the scattering factors and the exponents are oscillating complex functions in the transform; when r is equal to  tend to cancel out the scattering path length contributions and the scattering factors to unity, and summations should produce a large value.
In the term , and also in the real image term, the cancellation mentioned above where r is equal to an atom position cannot happen, and thus the transform should give rise to small values if a reasonably wide energy range (k range) is used: it can be filtered out.
For the same reason, the multiple scattering term  is also filtered out.
Multiple energy transformations can also suppress the first, the second and the twin terms in equation (6), which can be explained in the same way.
For a systematic test of this direct inversion method, we calculated three sets of LEED I-V spectra, including multiple scattering, for the system  at normal incidence.
The oxygen adatoms were placed in 4-fold hollow sites on the square array of surface Ni atoms, with no relaxation of surface Ni atoms from bulk positions.
The height of the O adatoms above the Ni surface plane was varied between 0.8 and 1.6 .
Input parameters, such as phase shifts, were the same as those in a previous LEED calculation, which gives a good description of experimental data.
In the transforms, the energy step  is used, and the energy range is 30eV to 273eV.
Figure 2 a-c shows images directly transformed from the LEED spectra of O atoms 0.8, 1.2  and 1.6, respectively, above the first Ni layer, viewed in a vertical cut through the O atom and Ni atoms.
The plus signs are the O atom positions, the origin of the transformed structure in real space, and the centres of the small circles are the known Ni atom positions in the second layer.
It is clear that the brightest spots (other than the origin) are always found at the correct Ni atom positions in the second Ni layer, whereas the Ni atom positions in the first layer are not clear.
Electron scattering is anisotropic and the scattering amplitudes peak strongly in the forward direction.
Therefore, it is not surprising that the atoms directly below the adatoms are well imaged.
This can be clearly seen in Fig. 2 d obtained by a direct transform of LEED I-V spectra in which a non-normal incident beam was directed along the axis between the O atom and one of Ni atoms in the first layer.
In this case the first layer Ni atom is well imaged, but not the second layer Ni atom.
As agreement between calculated and experimental I-V spectra is good, this method is clearly viable for the analysis of experimental data.
The primary limitation of the technique at present is that it applies only to simple overlayer adsorbate structures producing fractional-order LEED beams.
But it has many advantages over other holographic transform methods.
Experimentally, good-quality LEED I-V spectra can be obtained at energies up to several hundred electronvolts without the difficulties associated with photoelectron, Auger electron and diffuse LEED patterns.
The incident angle can also be altered to increase the data base.
In particular, this will increase the number of substrate atoms that can be imaged.
Noise near the origin may be reduced by filtering out the low-frequency components of equations (6)(P.H. and D.A.K., unpublished results).
We expect that increasing the energy range will also improve the image quality.
A mantle metasomatic injection event linked to late Cretaceous kimberlite magmatism
P. D. Kinny & J. B. Dawson
METASOMATISM of the lithospheric upper mantle by magmas and/or other fluids may induce significant changes in its chemical and mineralogical composition.
It is not yet clear whether metasomatism takes place earlier than, concurrent with or subsequent to alkaline igneous activity and melt migration.
Clues about the timing of metasomatism beneath the Kaapvaal craton in southern Africa are provided by metasomatized peridotites brought to the surface as xenoliths in young (80–95-Myr-old) group I kimberlites: the question that arises is whether the metasomatic alterations of the xenoliths are related to the host kimberlites themselves or to earlier igneous events such as the group II kimberlite eruptions (120–150Myr).
Here we report a precise U-Pb age of 852Myr for zircons in a veined and metasomatized harzburgite xenolith from Kimberley, which indicates that this particular style of metasomatism (MARID-related) is concurrent with the migration of the kimberlite magma that hosts the xenolith.
This temporal link supports previous isotopic evidence for a genetic link between the group I kimberlite magmatism and the accompanying metasomatism.
Periodic volcanism has occurred on the Kaapvaal craton in southern Africa since the Archaean era, and each episode will have modified the composition of the subcontinental lithospheric mantle in which the magmas were generated or through which they passed, or in other words caused mantle metasomatism.
The most recent volcanic rocks are the Cretaceous kimberlites which erupted in two pulses: group II (120–150Myr) and group I (80–95Myr).
Group I, centred on the type-locality at Kimberley, has proved an important source for a wide variety of upper-mantle-derived, kimberlite-transported xenoliths ranging from peridotites and dunites, through pyroxenites and eclogites, to amphibole and phlogopite-bearing metasomites and discrete nodules (megacrysts).
Among these, Dawson and Smith recognized an igneous-textured paragenesis of the minerals mica-amphibole-rutile-ilmenite-diopside, having distinctive chemistry, and termed the MARID suite.
Similar xenoliths were recognized elsewhere in southern African and Siberia.
Dawson and Smith also recognized that some of the veined and pervasively metasomatized peridotite xenoliths from the Bultfontein Floors mine dumps at Kimberley have replacement mineral compositions that are broadly similar to those of the MARID suite (although the relationship between the two is not simple and some important chemical distinctions remain, possibly reflecting different degrees of interaction between veins and peridotite wall rocks).
Composite nodules consisting of MARID nodules in direct contact with metasomatized peridotite are rare but do exist.
Zircon is rare in mantle rocks (all known occurrences in kimberlite are of xenocrystic or xenolithic origin) but does occur in MARID xenoliths.
Here we report the dating of zircons from a metasomatic vein of MARID affiliation.
Our interpretation of the data rests on the premise that the U-Pb isotope systems in these zircons record the actual time of their formation.
Previously, the ages given by kimberlite-derived zircons (mostly megacrysts) have been assumed to be reset to the time of eruption and cooling.
There is no accepted blocking temperature for Pb retention in zircon, however, nor any evidence that it lies below the equilibration temperatures of upper-mantle rocks.
Indeed, there is evidence that old U-Pb ages are preserved in zircon megacrysts and in zircon inclusions in diamond, both erupted in young kimberlites.
On this basis, we reinterpret the young ages derived from most zircon megacrysts in kimberlites and related rocks as implying a close genetic relationship between the megacryst suites and their host eruptives.
The xenolith studied (BD 3024) is a veined and metasomatized ‘fertile’ spinel harzburgite, previously described and illustrated by Dawson.
It consists of a granular-textured palaeosome of partially serpentinized olivine, orthopyroxene and fingerprint Cr-spinel, cut by a series of subparallel veins up to 2mm wide.
These veins contain diopside and phlogopite, with minor disseminated ilmenite, zircon, calcite, apatite and serpentine.
The wall-rock olivine at the vein margins is unaltered, but orthopyroxene is partially replaced by a fine symplectite of diopside plus phlogopite, and in some places by K-rich amphibole.
Cr-spinel survives within the alteration zones.
The vein assemblage shows chemical similarities with the MARID suite; specifically the alumina content of the ilmenite is low (0.2wt%) and, compared with typical primary-textured phlogopites from peridotite nodules in kimberlites, the vein micas are rich in Fe and Ti, and poor in Al and Cr.
The diopside, too, is poorer in Al and Cr than most lherzolite diopsides, and the amphibole replacing orthopyroxene is potassic, sodic richterite.
The presence of zircon crystals up to 0.25mm in size in the veins (Fig. 1) is reflected in the unusually high Zr content of the bulk rock (340p.p.m.).
The zircons are angular and have discontinuous rims of baddeleyite (ZrO 2 ), accompanied occasionally by zirconolite (CaZrTi 2 O 7 ).
The euhedral morphology of the zircons indicates that they crystallized with the primary vein assemblage and are neither inherited nor a secondary replacement phase.
Three zircons were dated in situ using the SHRIMP ion microprobe at the Australian National University in Canberra, after chips of the ANU zircon standard SL13 had been implanted into the analysed thin section.
The results of five 25-μm spot analyses are given in Table 1.
Whereas most large mantle-derived zircons occurring in MARID, polymict and discrete nodules are characteristically low in U, Th and other trace elements, these small vein zircons are U-rich (average 340p.p.m.) and particularly Th-rich (average 1,190p.p.m.).
Similarly high U contents (although with less Th) have been found in a small zircon inclusion in a Zaire diamond.
The high U and consequent high concentrations of radiogenic Pb in the vein zircons aided isotopic analysis with the ion probe, limiting the proportion of measured nonradiogenic 206 Pb to less than 2% (Table 1).
As the common Pb correction was based on the measured 207 Pb (method described in ref. 21), only the 206 Pb/ 238 U age is quoted.
All five analyses agree to within experimental error, yielding a mean age of 852Myr.
This result is indistinguishable from the 841Myr eruption age of the Bultfontein kimberlite at Kimberley, as given by Rb-Sr analyses of the phlogopites from MARID and related metasomatized nodules.
It is also indistinguishable from an age of 82.71.0Myr (ref. 14) obtained from low-U anhedral zircons contained within the matrix of a Bultfontein polymict peridotite nodule (BD 2666), but is slightly younger than the 91.21.4Myr average age of loose zircon megacrysts.
Davis was not able to explain the discrepancy between the two zircon ages.
P. J. Lawless (unpublished work) suggested that it might imply an extended period of volcanic activity, but if the low-temperature mica age is correct, the older age for the zircon megacrysts can be reinterpreted as the true mean age of their formation, close to but significantly before eruption.
The overall age range for zircon megacrysts in the Kimberley pipes is 85–95Myr.
The broader inference is that the MARID rocks, related metasomites, megacrysts and polymict xenoliths found at Kimberley all formed in the upper mantle beneath the Kaapvaal craton over a short interval coincident with kimberlite generation and eruption.
This is also in accord with the relatively unradiogenic Pb isotopic compositions of MARID K-richterites from Bultfontein, but is inconsistent with the Rb-Sr whole-rock ages of 150Myr reported for Bultfontein xenoliths.
We consider the latter to be suspect in any case, as the data are too scattered to form true isochrons.
Taken a step further, these results lend strong support to the original interpretation of MARID xenoliths and associated metasomites as having been formed during injection and consolidation of kimberlitic melts.
The model of Dawson and Smith involved cumulus crystallization at shallow depths in the mantle (within the known stability range of K-richterite), from a magma of kimberlitic composition, accompanied by metasomatic alteration of the peridotitic wall-rocks caused by fluids migrating from the consolidating liquid.
A second batch of ascending magma would then disrupt the MARID ‘pegmatites’ and the associated metasomatized wall-rocks, and carry them, together with other peridotite and eclogite fragments derived from greater depths, to higher crustal levels.
Such a model contrasts with the suggestion that the bulk compositions of MARID xenoliths imply close genetic relations with lamproitic rocks.
It must be remembered, however, that these xenoliths and veins do not represent frozen melt compositions, but rather the respective cumulate and infiltrate products of fractionally crystallized melts and/or associated fluids in an open system, so chemical resemblance may be fortuitous.
Rather, the close similarity in age between the MARID-related metasomatism and the eruption of the Kimberley kimberlites supports the original idea that the MARID-forming fluid was a proto-kimberlitic melt.
This is not to say that MARID-type metasomatism is a necessary precursor to all kimberlite genesis—the MARID suite is of restricted occurrence overall—but some form of metasomatism is an inevitable accompaniment.
The minor age differences between zircons and other kimberlite minerals may result from the second magmatic pulse required to account for the disruption and deformation of MARID nodules before they are incorporated in the final erupted kimberlite.
Additional support for this model comes from the observations that the ranges in radiogenic isotopic compositions of the Bultfontein Floors metasomites overlap with those of the contemporaneous host group I kimberlites at Kimberley, but contrast strongly with the older, micaceous group II kimberlites of southern Africa (which are not known to contain zircons), implying geochemical differences between the mantle source rocks of the two groups.
This point is illustrated by Fig. 2, adapted from Dawson, which also illustrates the distinct isotopic compositions of certain lamproites (compare with ref. 9).
Although we have argued that the patent vein metasomatism observed in the Bultfontein peridotites represents a discrete, short-lived episode corresponding to the eruption of the Cretaceous group I kimberlites, we emphasize that alkaline volcanism on the Kaapvaal craton has occurred periodically since the Archaean era.
Radiogenic studies indicate that there have been metasomatic enrichment events of comparable antiquity in the mantle.
As the products of such events could be stored for long periods in the thick sub-cratonic lithospheric keel, there is ample scope for ancient relict-enriched mantle to be involved in younger igneous events.
Pb refers to radiogenic Pb.
U, Th and Pb concentrations are p.p.m. %c 206 Pb is the percentage of non-radiogenic 206 Pb in the total.
Spot notation is: grain number-site number.
FIG. 1 Photomicrograph of veined harzburgite BD 3024 in plane polarized light, showing euhedral zircon crystals (zirc) with dark baddeleyite rims (badd), occupying a phlogopite-rich vein (phlog) cutting olivine (oliv).
Additional phases: ilmenite (ilm); diopside (diop).
Field of view 750μmx525μm, scale bar 70μm.
FIG. 2 Plot of initial Nd against initial Sr isotopic compositions for various mantle-derived rocks, showing fields for southern African Cretaceous kimberlites, mineral phases in Bultfontein metasomites, Western Australian Miocene lamproites, mid-ocean-ridge and ocean-island basalts.
Also plotted are mixing lines between hypothetical enriched and depleted mantle endmembers, after McCulloch et al..
Contribution of Late Permian palaeogeography in maintaining a temperate climate in Gondwana
Keddy Yemane
NUMERICAL simulations based on general circulation and energy-balance models consistently indicate that the high latitudes of Gondwana experienced seasonal extremes in climate during the Late Permian period.
But palaeogeographic maps based on the distribution of climate-sensitive rocks, palynological and palaeobotanical data and dicynodont fossil records all imply a temperate climate.
The reason for this discrepancy has not been clear.
Recently, it has emerged from studies of Upper Permian fluviolacustrine deposits throughout southern Africa that the geography was dominated by a series of giant lakes, perhaps interconnected within major fluvial frameworks.
Here I review these data and their implications for a temperate climate.
I suggest that the discrepancy between the climate modelling results which indicate seasonal temperature extremes, and the increasing body of geological information documenting a temperate climate, may be explained by the fact that the palaeogeography used in the models does not take into account the existence of these lakes and rivers, which would have had a major influence on the regional climate.
The results demonstrate the importance of incorporating accurate palaeogeographies into numerical modelling studies when attempting to reconstruct past climates.
At the palaeolatitudes of southern Africa during the Late Permian, general circulation model (GCM) -based simulations show summer temperatures above 40°C, winter temperatures below -30°C, and surface temperature ranges of 50°C (ref. 1).
Community circulation (CCM) -based simulations indicate 60°C summers and — 42°C winters.
Energy balance model (EMB) -based simulations produce 45°C summers and -20°C winters.
But palaeoclimate reconstructions for southern Gondwana based on evidence from sedimentary deposits indicate otherwise.
The distribution of climate-sensitive rocks indicates that there was a humid belt at the palaeolatitudes of southern Africa, and the palynofloral distribution indicates that it lay between palaeolatitudes 45° and 60°S (ref. 5).
A map of plant distribution based on palaeobotanical data suggests that the Late Permian ’ Glossopteris biome' was comparable to the modern ‘cool temperate’Biome, which consists of deciduous angiosperm forests in temperate high latitudes where average daily temperatures are 10 °C for at least one-third of the year.
Therapsid fossil distribution also suggests a temperate, moist climate at higher palaeolatitudes in Pangea.
The macro- and microflora from Upper Permian deposits in southern Africa are dominated by Glossopteris, which formed monospecific forests or woodlands along river banks and on elevated grounds.
The genus Glossopteris consisted of arborescent and herbaceous plants with roots adapted for growth in semiaquatic environments.
Conspicuous growth rings in roots, trunks and branches, as well as periodic leaf falls, record the seasonal, frost-free growth patterns of deciduous plants.
The climate extremes suggested by the physical models would  have rendered southern Africa inhospitable for both animal and plant life, yet fossils of the most diverse and prolific terrestrial vertebrates, the mammal-like reptiles dicynodonts, are found in South Africa, Zambia, Zimbabwe, Malawi and Tanzania.
These mouse- to bear-sized herbivores subsisted on Glossopteris foliage, ferns, low-lying conifers and roots in flood plain and lake shore environments.
It has been suggested that seasonal migrations could explain their presence, but this hypothesis is untenable.
Dicynodonts, with their small body size, sprawling reptilian gait and lack of internal thermoregulatory mechanisms, would have been unable to migrate over long distances.
The geological record does not suggest extended migration of dicynodonts or other Late Permian therapsids; sites of dicynodont remains within Gondwana are primarily restricted to southern Africa.
Distant sites in Asia and Europe where comparable faunal remains have been recorded are unlikely seasonal refuges for dicynodont herds.
The presence of contemporary amphibians, such as the labyrinthodonts, shows that temperatures must have been moderate and water bodies present year-round, as migration would not have been an option.
Although unusual semi-fossorial habits have been reported (for example Diictodon), there is no definitive evidence for underground aestivation or hibernation among dicynodonts.
Rather than invoking preservation bias or seasonal occupation of the habitat to explain the geological record, we should rule out the freezing winters and torrid summers simulated by the climate models.
Palaeoclimatic signatures preserved in Upper Permian sedimentary sequences from southern Africa corroborate those from the fossil record.
The known extent of the fluvial and lacustrine deposits (Fig. 1) suggests the existence of concurrent, possibly interconnected, giant lakes throughout the subcontinent.
Whereas fluvial-dominated deposits formed in foreland basin settings at the southern edge, lacustrine-dominated deposits accumulated in settings of low relief, broad warping and mild faulting at the northern end.
These deposits, thousands of miles inland from the nearest sea, indicate a period during which vast lakes developed.
I will next evaluate the climatic conditions needed to sustain this uniquely wet environment at the heart of a supercontinent.
The dominantly clastic (shales) and lesser chemical (carbonates) deposits in northern Malawi, southern Tanzania and northern Zambia suggest that deposition took place in shallow lake basins which were relatively hydrologically open and in deeper lake basins which were relatively hydrologically closed.
Minor siltstones, subarkoses and arkoses are interbedded within grey, greenish and black shales.
The unbioturbated shales contain rhythmites including seasonal varves.
The clay mineral assemblage predominantly constitute illite and chlorite; smectite is absent or occurs in minor quantities as interlayers.
The pollen flora is dominated by striated bisaccates and polyplicates, and monosaccates which correlate with the Striatiti pollen zone of Permo-Triassic (Lower Beaufort) sequences in southern Africa.
Similar sedimentological attributes are recorded from equivalent sequences throughout southern Africa and even from further south in Antarctica (80-85°S palaeolatitudes).
Sedimentary features in modern lacustrine depositional settings comparable to those found in the Upper Permian sequences are summarized in Table 1.
The integrated climate record of the biotic and sedimentological data suggests cool, temperate, humid, seasonal climate during Upper Permian deposition in southern Africa (55-60°S) and beyond.
The areal extent of Upper Permian deposits in southern Africa alone, not to mention in Gondwana in general, cover several million square kilometres.
Such depositional settings could not have existed under the temperature extremes and humidity (annual precipitation minus evaporation of 0—1mmday) simulated by the models.
The unique Late Permian palaeogeography does not feature in any of the current physical climate models, usually on the grounds that dimensions of unit cells used in sensitivity experiments are too large to include such details, or that the geography is a result of ‘microclimate’ influences.
Both of these arguments are invalidated by the geographical extent of fluviolacustrine deposits in southern Gondwana.
To justify the simulated climate extremes, the extreme seasonal temperatures currently experienced in Canada and Siberia have been invoked.
The high latitudes, low-lying continental interiors, cratonic tectonic setting, predominant metamorphic terrains, coniferous vegetation stands and extensive lakes may indeed be comparable to the Late Permian palaeoenvironments, but the climate-responsive sedimentary record from the lake deposits demonstrates that the analogy ends there.
Summer and winter temperatures in the Canadian interior are generally 0—22°C and -10-28°C, respectively, but summer maxima of 40°C and winter minima of -40°C have been recorded locally.
The northern Great Plains of western Canada (50°—60°N) contain more than one million fresh, brackish and saline lakes.
Laterally continuous thick beds of salts (mirabilite, thenardite and epsomite) are mined from the saline lake deposits.
In the intramontane lakes of the Cariboo plateau in British Columbia, thick salts (natron, epsomite, bloedite and mirabilite) form interstitially within lake beds.
The predominant clay mineral constituents in lake muds from both regions include smectite, illite-smectites and lesser kaolinite.
The west Siberian plain (50°—60°N) where average summer and winter temperatures range from 3 to 23°C and -16° to -28°C, respectively, contain more than one hundred fresh, brackish and saline lakes.
Thick organic-rich evaporites of salts (halite, mirabilite and thenardite) are mined from shallow lakes in West and southeastern Siberia.
The region is characterized by permafrost, and smectite and kaolinite are the common authigenic clay minerals in the soils.
In contrast, evaporite deposits or permafrost structures are not known from Upper Permian sequences in southern Africa.
The biotic record and the sedimentary history of Upper Permian sequences throughout southern Africa and beyond document palaeogeographic settings unparalleled in modern times.
The extensive fluvial environments with freshwater lakes, lush vegetation and thriving fauna (Fig. 2) could have existed only in a moderate climate conditions with adequate humidity.
One means suggested for transfer of moisture into the interior of Pangaea has been monsoonal circulation created by the Permian continental configuration.
Seasonal rains drenching uplands may have contributed to the water budget, but the annual precipitation of 2mm day simulated for high-latitude Gondwana could not have sustained the vast perennial freshwater lakes in southern Africa.
Winds blowing over lakes pick up a tremendous amount of moisture which is then precipitated downwind of the lakes.
This ‘lake effect’ modifies the climate considerably within 40-50km of individual lakes as is observed in the Great Lakes region of North America.
By inference, the giant perennial lakes in southern Gondwana may have moderated the regional climate during the Late Permian.
The fact that the numerical models do not incorporate this unique wet Late Permian palaeogeography could well account for the uniformly erroneous results.
The sedimentary records of lake and associated fluvial deposits should be used to define realistic boundary conditions for palaeoclimate simulations.
This is particularly true for most of Carboniferous—Jurassic Gondwana where the geological history is essentially documented in the records of continental deposits.
Thus, the appropriate geological information, together with cell dimensions that would accommodate even smaller continental deposits, is necessary for sensitivity experiments for the Late Permian or other critical time slices.
If the aim of palaeoclimate modelling is to ‘recreate’ past climates, the geological evidence must be given more weight than it is now.
Agreement between models, which has been construed as showing the accuracy of simulated Late Permian climates, may only reflect the fundamental shortcomings in parameters employed by all models, such as the palaeogeography.
Earth scientists should not be quick to modify geological data to accommodate model simulations; rather, the acceptability of climate simulations should be judged on how well they reproduce independently established geological facts.
This would strengthen the theoretical foundations for numerical modelling, thus permitting accurate reconstructions of the past and realistic predictions of future global climate trends.
FIG. 1 Sketch of known surface and subsurface extent of Upper Permian fluviolacustrine deposits in southern Africa.
See ref. 8 for source.
(For comparison, Lake Victoria, the largest lake in Africa, has a water surface of 68,000km, roughly the area of Ireland.)
Inset: location of Upper Permian sequences referred to in Table 1.
(1) Karonga and Mt Chombe, Chiweta (northern Malawi),(2) Tukuyu, Illima and Ngana Hills (southern Tanzania),(3) Luwanga Valley, northern Zambia.
FIG.2 Palaeoenvironmental reconstruction for southern Africa during the Late Permian.
Shown are palaeogeography, geomorphological features during late Early Permian time, vegetation and some major known sites of dicynodont remains.
Note isotherms for numerically simulated summer and winter surface temperatures (in°C).
The Upper Permian-age Mt Chombe sequence from northern Malawi is underlain by Lower Permian coal measures with associated mudstones and sandstones and is overlain by the lacustrine chiweta bone beds, comprising mudstones and limestones with bone fragments and dicynodont skulls.
Angular to subangular quartz derived mostly from low-grade metamorphic rocks dominates the sediments.
Fresh, angular sodic plagioclase and orthoclase constitute the second most abundant mineral group, but small quantities of microcline and biotite to occur.
Similar facies and clastic mineralogy are observed in the stratigraphically equivalent Ruhuhu beds, Tanzania and Madumabisa mudstones, Zambia (work in progress).
Annual varves from Mt Chombe sequence comprise alternating low-Mg calcite, amorphous organic matter and clay laminae.
Fine laminations comprising low-Mg calcite silt, silt/organic matter, clay/silt, clay/organic matter and silt/sand laminae are abundant.
Couplet comprising clay/calcite/silt laminae and representing 6,000 years of deposition occur in an equivalent sequence from northeast Angola.
Nonglacial varves with couplets comprising calcite/diatomite/organic matter/clay laminae currently form in temperate lakes for example Lake Zu\3rich.
Pedogenic features such as palaeosols, desiccation cracks, red coloration and in situ plant growth are absent from the northern Malawi sequence.
Clay mineral assemblages
Two detrital clay assemblages, illite-chlorite-mixed layers (more seasonal) and chlorite-illite (less seasonal) assemblages, corresponding to three cycles are documented from the northern Malawi sequence.
Regular and irregular mixed layers with open illites dominate during periods with seasonal aridity whereas chlorite-dominated assemblages with tightly closed illite prevail during wetter periods.
Authigenic clays are insignificant.
Illite, mixed layers, chlorite and smectite are reported from the Ruhuhu Beds, Tanzania.
Preliminary data from Madumabisa Mudstones in the Luwanga Valley, Zambia, show illite and mixed layers as the main constituents.
Modern high-latitude temperate lakes have quantitatively comparable major detrital clay mineral assemblages comprising illite, chlorite and mixed layers.
Micro- and Macroflora assemblages
Microflora from northern Malawi sequence comprises (90%) Striatopodocarpites, Vittatina, Densipollenites and Gutullapollenites.
Taeniasporites and Leuckisporites are rare.
Spores are under-represented (5%).
Plant macrofossils such as Glossopteris browniana, G. Indica, Vertebraria and Schizoneura were also reported from northwest Malawi.
Pollen assemblages from Zambia, Zimbabwe and Tanzania have comparable floral composition.
Oxygen isotope signatures
O signatures were measured on early-formed low-Mg calcite cements and septarian vein fills in near-spherical concretions from the Chombe sequence and from equivalent sequences in southern Tanzania. 
O ranges between -11 and -13  PDB in concretion cements, and between 12 and -14  PDB in vein calcites.
Modern meteoric precipitations and regional ground waters at equivalent high latitudes have lighter isotope signatures  O. Palaeotemperatures calculated from  O of the meteoric concretion cements and vein-fills suggest mean annual air temperatures of 10°C.
Similar air temperatures are observed today in geographically equivalent temperate high latitudes.
X-ray structure of a decameric cyclophilin-cyclosporin crystal complex
Gaston Pflûgl, Jôrg Kallen, Tilman Schirmer, Johan N. Jansonius, Mauro G. M. Zurini & Malcolm D. Walkinshaw
HUMAN cyclophilin A (CypA), a ubiquitous intracellular protein of 165 amino acids, is the major receptor for the cyclic undecapeptide immunosuppressant drug cyclosporin A (CsA), which prevents allograft rejection after transplant surgery and is efficacious in the field of autoimmune diseases.
CsA prevents T-cell proliferation by blocking the calcium-activated pathway leading to interleukin-2 transcription.
Besides their ability to bind CsA, the cyclophilin isoforms also have peptidyl-prolyl isomerase activity and enhance the rate of protein folding.
The macrolide FK506 acts similarly to CsA and its cognate receptor FKBP also has peptidyl-prolyl isomerase activity.
Inhibition of this enzymatic activity alone is not sufficient to achieve immunosuppression.
A direct molecular interaction between the drug-immunophilin complex (CsA-CypA, or FK506-FKBP) and the phosphatase calcineurin, is responsible for modulating the T-cell receptor signal transduction pathway.
Here we describe the crystal structure of a decameric CypA-CsA complex.
The crystallographic asymmetric unit is composed of a pentamer of 1:1 cyclophilin-cyclosporin complexes of rather exact non-crystallographic fivefold symmetry.
The 2.8Å electron density map is of high quality.
The five independent cyclosporin molecules are clearly identifiable, providing an unambiguous picture of the detailed interactions between a peptide drug and its receptor.
It broadly confirms the results of previous NMR, X-ray and modelling studies, but provides further important structural details which will be of use in the design of drugs that are analogues of CsA.
The crystal structure of CypA has been solved as a complex with a peptidyl-prolyl isomerase (PPIase) -substrate analogue tetrapeptide and in an uncomplexed form.
NMR studies of the CypA-CsA complex revealed the bound conformation of CsA.
Subsequent modelling studies provided a preliminary structure of CsA docked into CypA.
A number of other crystal forms of the CypA-CsA complex have large unit cells with multiple copies of the complex in the asymmetric unit.
We have solved the tetragonal crystal form with a pentamer of the complex in the asymmetric unit (Fig. 1 a ; see legend for structure determination).
The fivefold rotational symmetry of the pentamer is quite exact and even some 250 of the 509 positioned water molecules obey the fivefold symmetry.
The average root-mean-square deviation (r.m.s.d.) between the five CypA molecules is 0.59  (for all pairwise fits using all atoms).
The refined X-ray structure of CypA bound to a tetrapeptide which was used in molecular replacement has an r.m.s.d. of 1.1  (all atoms) from the pentamer protomers.
The five independent CsA molecules are also closely similar and have an average r.m.s.d. of 0.26  (for all pairwise fits using all atoms).
The cyclophilin pentamers pack in pairs to form decamer discs which sandwich the CsA molecules.
A side view of the decamer (Fig. 1 b ) shows that CsA-binding loops of CypA are on one face of the pentamer whereas the secondary structure elements line up on the opposite surface.
In the crystal form described here, a (crystallographic) twofold rotation axis intersects the fivefold axis orthogonally (Fig. 2).
The environment of each CypA molecule in the ‘decameric cyclophilin-cyclosporin sandwich’ is very similar, with protein-protein interactions made to four CypA neighbours (Fig. 2).
The CsA backbone conformation is similar to that determined from NMR studies of the complex, with an r.m.s.d. of 0.55  (for C α atoms of CsA) between the crystal complex and the modelled docked structure.
The major new finding is the existence of an intramolecular hydrogen bond between the hydroxyl group of MeBmt-1 and the carbonyl oxygen of MeLeu-4.
The docked structure had this hydroxyl group pointing towards CypA forming a hydrogen bond with the carbonyl oxygen of Asn 102 (ref. 24).
The crystal structure shows that CsA binds to CypA with the side chains of MeBmt-1, Abu-2, Sar-3, MeLeu-9, MeLeu-10 and MeVal-11 of CsA making contacts of less than 4  with the CypA residues Arg 55, Phe 60, Met 61, Gln 63, Gly 72, Ala 101, Asn 102, Ala 103, Gln 111, Phe 113, Trp 121, Leu 122, His 126 (Fig. 3 a ).
These thirteen CypA residues define the CsA binding site and are identical to those proposed by the modelled docked structure.
Nine of these residues are also within 4  of the tetrapeptide acetyl-Ala-Ala-Pro-Ala-amc (amc is amidomethylcoumarin) bound in the active site.
The active-site residues of the two complexes have very similar conformations.
The largest side-chain movements are 1.3  for Arg 55 and up to 0.7  for Phe 60, Gln 63 and Trp 121.
The fit between CypA and the binding edge of CsA is excellent and centres round the protruding side chain of MeVal-11.
The solvent-accessible surface area of free CsA in this bound conformation is 1,238  2 , of which 42% (526  2 ) becomes inaccessible in the CypA-CsA protomer, as measured with the program AREAIMOL (SERC, Daresbury, UK).
There are four direct hydrogen bonds between CsA and CypA (Table 1; Fig. 3 a ).
In the modelled docked structure, residues 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 of CsA protrude out into the solvent, and are thought to be involved in binding the effector protein, calcineurin.
In the decamer, this so-called effector region of CsA interacts with two other CypA molecules as well as a (twofold related) CsA molecule (Fig. 3 b).
There are two direct hydrogen-bonds from neighbouring CypA molecules in the ‘decameric sandwich’ to the effector region of each CsA (Table 1; Figs 2 and 3 b ).
The formation of a supramolecular complex in the crystal raises the question of the possible biological relevance of such oligomers.
Unit cell volumes of two other crystal forms of CypA-CsA complexes are consistent with ten molecules per asymmetric unit.
This suggests that the ‘decameric sandwich’ may exist in solution.
An immunophilin of M r 59K is known to associate with two heat-shock proteins (Hsp90 and Hsp70) and the glucocorticoid receptor.
Heat-shock proteins mediate protein folding and some function as oligomers.
For example, the Hsp60 chaperonins are composed of two stacked 7-subunit rings.
Two other protein crystal structures, the 23K human C-reactive protein and a homologous serum amyloid P component, were found to be pentameric.
In both cases this may be biologically relevant.
In the ‘decameric sandwich’, CsA has about 80% of its surface hidden, leaving a solvent-accessible surface of 270  2 ; the CsA binding site (and therefore the PPIase active site) is completely inaccessible.
Each of the five independent CypA molecules (A, B, C, D, E) in the planar pentamer form very similar contacts.
The atom name consists of the molecule name (Fig. 2), residue number, residue type and atom type.
The interatomic distance (A) is given for one of the five contacts.
The range of distances found for the other four molecules is given in parentheses.
The carbonyl oxygen atom of MeVal-11 of CsA is about 3.4Å from CE of His 126.
Hydrogen-bond formation between CsA and His 126 would require 180° rotation about  2 ,which would however preclude the formation of two alternative His 126 hydrogen bonds.
FIG. 1 a , Stereo drawing using MOLSCRIPT of the crystallographic asymmetric unit which consists of a planar pentamer complex of five CypA molecules bound to five CsA molecules.
The red CypA molecule at the top of the diagram corresponds to molecule A in Fig. 2.
CsA molecules are drawn in space-filling mode with carbons yellow, oxygens red and nitrogens blue.
b , Stereo ribbon drawing of the ‘decameric cyclophilin-cyclosporin sandwich’ viewed along the crystallographic dyad and orthogonal to the (vertical) fivefold axis.
The five cyclophilin pairs related by the crystallographic dyad are coloured identically.
The 10 CsA molecules are in the middle of the sandwich interacting with CsA binding loops from the cyclophilin molecules.
The CsA carbon atoms of each CsA are coloured the same as its bound CypA molecule.
METHODS.
Details of X-ray structure determination: intensity data to 2.8Å resolution were collected on tetragonal crystals (space group P4 3 2 1 2 with a=b= 95.2Å,c =280.0A) at the DESY Synchrotron Source (Hamburg) using an image plate detector (200,668 measurements of 32,027 unique reflections;R sym=8.1%; completeness, 98%).
Subsequently an additional data set to 5.0Å was collected with a FR571 rotating anode using a FAST area detector (46,052 measurements of 11,333 unique reflections;R sym =9.3%; completeness, 80.9%).
Self-rotation function calculations with the program POLARRFN (SERC Daresbury Laboratory, UK) using data between 8Å and 5Å (Patterson radius 30A) yielded unique peaks at () and at .
These peaks, together with a crystallographic twofold axis, were interpreted as possibly resulting from 52 point-group symmetry.
Cross-rotation function calculations with XPLOR using the refined model (without CsA) of CypA (ref. 20) and data between 10Å and 3Å gave 5 unique peaks ().
These peaks were consistent with the existence of a local fivefold rotation axis and also provided a calculated self-rotation function which agreed very well with the observed self-rotation function.
Translation function calculations for each of the five cross-rotation function solutions using the program TFSGEN (SERC, Daresbury, UK) and data between 48Å and 3.1Å resulted in strong peaks (14.1–17.9  op—it; s) and indicated space group P 4 3 2 1 2 rather than P4 1 2 1 2.
The program TFPART (SERC, Daresbury, UK) was used to correctly position these five translation function solutions relative to each other(yielding subsequent peak heights increasing from 22.3  to 50.0  ).
The initial R- factor (without CsA) for data between 48Å and 3.1Å was 37.6% and a F o- F c map showed excellent density for the five CsA molecules.
Refinement with XPLOR using data between 48Å and 2.8Å gave an R- factor of 28.4%.
CsA was then built into a F o —F c map and subsequent refinement resulted in an R- factor of 21.3%.
Individual B -factors were then refined and 509 water molecules added to give a final R -factor of 15.7% for all data between 20Å and 2.8Å (32,020 reflections).
All refinement steps were done without imposing non-crystallographic symmetry constraints.
For the final model the r.m.s. deviations from target values are 0.011Å for bond lengths and 2.7° for bond angles.
An estimate of how well the non-crystallographic fivefold symmetry is conserved has been made by applying an exact fivefold rotation for a given atom and determining the r.m.s.d. from the observed positions.
For all CypA atoms, including side chains, the average r.m.s.d. between the observed and five-fold calculated positions, is 0.61Å and for C α atoms this r.m.s.d. is 0.26Å.
The non-crystallographic fivefold symmetry is also strongly conserved between the five CsA molecules with average r.m.s.d. values of 0.27Å for all atoms and 0.15Å for the eleven C α atoms.
The conservation of the fivefold symmetry also holds for 250 of the water molecules which show an average r.m.s.d. from exact fivefold symmetry of 0.3Å.
FIG. 2 Diagrammatic representation of the ‘decameric cyclophilin-cyclosporin sandwich’ viewed along the fivefold axis.
The top face of the decamer is composed of the pentamer labelled A, B, C, D, E and the bottom symmetry-related face is labelled A ‘, B’, C', D', E'.
The decamer has a diameter of 105Å and a depth of 66Å.
The hole through the middle has a diameter of 16Å.
The crystallographic dyad [110]orthogonally intersects the fivefold axis which lies in the (110) plane and is inclined 16.8° from the c axis.
The two unique noncrystallographic twofold axes (L 1  and L 2 which were major peaks in the self-rotation function) are shown.
The diagram also indicates the intermolecular contacts: A is in contact with E, B, A' and B', while CsA-A makes contacts with A, B, A' and CsA-A'.
FIG. 3 a , Stereo drawing of one of the five CsA-CypA complexes.
The ribbon representation of CypA has helices coloured green, strands coloured red and turns coloured pale blue.
Those 13 CypA residues involved in CsA binding are also drawn (see text).
CsA has the sequence c- (), where Me indicates N -methylation and MeBmt is (4R)-4-[(E) -2-butenyl]-4,N- dimethylthreonine.
CsA is coloured with carbons grey, oxygens red, nitrogens blue and all bonds yellow.
CsA residue numbers are shown.
The four CsA…
CypA hydrogen bonds are drawn as dashed black lines (see Table 1).
The intramolecular hydrogen bond between the hydroxyl group of MeBmt and the carbonyl oxygen of MeLeu4 is also shown.
b , Stereo drawing of the environment of a CsA molecule in the ‘decameric sandwich’.
The central CsA molecule is drawn with bonds coloured yellow CypA residues which have any atom 4Å from any atom of the central CsA molecule are drawn.
Hydrogen bonds are shown as dashed lines.
No water molecules are included.
Residues 9, 10, 11, 1, 2 of CsA sit in the binding pocket of the blue CypA molecule.
Residues 2, 3, 4 are within 4Å of a dyad-related CsA molecule drawn here with green carbons and pink bonds.
CsA residues 4, 6, 7, 8 and 9 in the effector region make contact to two CypA molecules in the decameric sandwich (coloured here in green and red).
The two direct hydrogen bonds in the effector region from Ala 7 to Lys 31 and Glu 81 are shown.
A long-period globular-cluster pulsar in an eclipsing binary system
A. G. Lyne, J. D. Biggs, P. A. Harrison & M. Bailes
PULSARS that are members of binary systems in globular clusters are all rapidly rotating, and it is assumed that they have been spun up by accretion from binary companions.
Here we report an exception: PSR1718–19, in the globular cluster NGC6342, is in a 6.2-hour eclipsing binary system, but has the relatively long period of 1s.
Its magnetic field is strong, 10 12 G, and its spin-down age is small, 10Myr.
Furthermore, the mass of its companion is only 0.1–0.2 solar masses (M  and;).
The eclipses show that the binary system is embedded in a cloud of material which must have been ejected from the companion star, although calculations suggest that the companion is well inside its Roche lobe.
The pulsar's radiation may be causing expulsion of material beyond the Roche lobe, as in the ablating binary systems containing PSR-1744–24A and PSR1957+20, even though the incident flux at the companion is orders of magnitude smaller than in these cases.
Pulsars may therefore have a much greater influence on their companions than has been supposed.
The binary radio pulsar PSR1718–19 was discovered in 1990 in a survey of globular clusters at Jodrell Bank at a frequency of 610MHz.
Subsequent measurements were carried out with the 76-m Lovell telescope at frequencies between 408MHz and 1,660 MHz.
Arrival times were obtained by convolution of the pulses with an appropriate template and then corrected for the Earth's motion using the JPL DE200 barycentric ephemeris.
A simple model for the pulsar period, period-derivative, position and binary motion was fitted to the barycentric arrival times (Table 1).
The pulsar is in a very short period, circular orbit.
Although the masses m of the two objects cannot be determined uniquely, some information can be obtained from the mass function, calculated from only two observables, the projected pulsar semi-major axis a p sin i , and the orbital period, where subscripts p and c refer to the pulsar and companion respectively and i is the unknown inclination angle of the orbit to the plane of the sky.
Although the inclination angle cannot be determined, the a priori probability that it is less than   must be at least and has 95% probability of being less than .
The corresponding separation of the objects,, is about 1.4x10 6 km and is almost independent of inclination.
During the course of the confirming observations, it became clear that the flux density of the pulsar was varying throughout the orbit, apparently because of partial eclipse by material associated with the companion star.
The form of the eclipses was determined at 408, 606, 1,404 and 1,660MHz.
The results, averaged over several orbits at each frequency, are summarized in Fig. 1.
Although the eclipse is only partial at the two highest frequencies, so that the pulses are observed throughout the orbit, strong pulses are seen for only about one-quarter of the time at 606MHz, close to phase 0.75 when the pulsar is nearest to the Earth.
There was only a weak detection at 408MHz, again at about the same phase.
The lack of any hard eclipse at high frequencies suggests that the eclipse is due to scattering or absorption of the radio waves as they pass through ionized matter surrounding the companion star.
Although the spectral index at phase 0.7, close to the maximum, is about -2.0 between 606MHz and 1,660MHz and typical of most pulsars, at 408MHz the flux density is actually less than that at 606MHz and is lower than the extrapolated spectrum by a factor of about 4 (Table 1), indicating that strong absorption or scattering is occurring even when the companion is on the far side of the pulsar.
This and the long duration of the eclipse at low frequency require that this material extends well beyond the pulsar and of course the companion's Roche lobe, the region within which matter is gravitationally bound to the star.
Although Roche-lobe overflow from the companion star seems the most likely source of this material, there is a problem.
The radius R L of the Roche lobe is given by  If the companion is a main-sequence star, then its radius R c is approximately given by .
The eclipses show that , in which case the ratio of R c to R L is 0.4, so that the surface of the companion is well inside its Roche lobe and there should be no significant mass loss.
If the companion is a helium main-sequence or white dwarf star, it will have an even smaller radius for a given mass and the conclusion remains valid.
One possibility is that the eclipsing material results from the ablation of the surface of the companion star by radiation from the pulsar, derived from its spin-down energy.
This has been proposed to explain the eclipses seen in the two other eclipsing pulsars with low-mass companions, PSR1957+20 (ref. 8) and PSR1744–24A (ref. 9).
In the case of PSR1718–19, however, the pulsar has comparatively little kinetic energy, and in particular, the present pulsar rotational energy loss rate of  provides a maximum energy flux density at the companion star of only 3x10 8 ergs -1 cm -2 , assuming a moment of inertia  for the neutron star and that the energy is radiated isotropically.
This is many orders of magnitude less than that of PSR1957+20 and probably about two orders of magnitude less than our best estimate for that of PSR1744–24A, although  is unknown because of gravitational contamination by the cluster.
The energy flux of PSR1718–19 at the surface of the companion is a few orders of magnitude below the critical flux  necessary for substantial swelling of the companion due to irradiation.
This flux may be enhanced by beaming effects, but would still be insufficient to achieve F Ch .
It does seem, however, that Roche-lobe overflow is taking place, and that pulsar radiation is responsible and may play a much larger role in determining the evolution of companion stars than previously thought.
There is substantial evidence that the pulsar is associated with the globular cluster NGC6342.
The pulsar lies within about 2.3 arcmin of the centre of the target cluster, well within the tidal radius of 9 arcmin, although it is outside the core radius of 8arcsec.
The cluster is believed to be 11.6kpc away, at galactic latitude b=+9.7°,and its distance above the galactic plane is about 2kpc.
Observations of other pulsars in globular clusters show that the layer of ionized gas causing dispersion extends to only about 1kpc (ref. 12) and gives a total dispersion measure contribution of DM20/sin b cm -3 pc.
In this case, the expected DM is therefore 120cm -3 pc, a little high but reasonably consistent with the observed value of 71cm -3 pc, given the large spread of DM sin b in other clusters.
Furthermore, the proportion of pulsars with binary companions is two orders of magnitude greater in globular clusters than in the galactic disk.
In conclusion, the position, distance and binary nature all suggest that the system is probably associated with the cluster.
The measured period derivative of PSR1718–19 gives a characteristic age of 10Myr.
In the absence of any accretion, this is generally accepted as being an upper limit to the age of the pulsar, indicating that the pulsar is young compared with other globular cluster pulsars.
The large value of  also indicates that the pulsar has a surface magnetic flux density of 1.3x10 12 G, about two orders of magnitude greater than any other cluster pulsar and more typical of pulsars in the galactic plane.
At its distance from the cluster core, any contribution to the period derivative from acceleration in the cluster gravitational field is negligible.
What is the origin of this unusual system?
Because star formation and hence the formation of neutron stars by supernova collapse in NGC6342 ceased long ago, the apparent youth of the pulsar suggests that a major event has occurred at some time during the last 10Myr.
The large 1-s spin period is close to its equilibrium value, suggesting Eddington-limited accretion at some time in the near past.
The most likely formation path therefore seems to be collision of an old neutron star with a main-sequence star 10Myr ago, leading to catastrophic mass transfer to the neutron star and considerable loss of matter from the system.
An alternative is that the neutron star was in fact formed recently, in the accretion-induced collapse of a white dwarf following accretion from a lower-mass companion.
Such a collapse is accompanied by sudden mass-loss, giving the system a velocity impulse which could result in ejection from the cluster core.
Any orbital eccentricity produced by the collapse must have been subsequently removed by tidal forces.
If PSR1718–19 is not located in the globular cluster, then the neutron star is probably young and the system's origin could be similar to that of the Her X-1 system.
In this scenario (ref. 6 and references therein), the system evolved from a close binary system consisting of a  star and a  star.
The more massive star evolved and expanded in its giant phase, resulting in a common-envelope phase that reduced the orbital separation, and then underwent a supernova explosion without disrupting the system.
Finally, in the PSR1718–19 system, the orbit was circularized and reduced to such an extent that the pulsar's radiation could cause substantial mass loss from the companion.
If the pulsar is a rejuvenated old neutron star, the large magnetic field suggests that there has been little or no decay from its original value, lending support to work suggesting the field decay may not occur, in contrast to other evidence.
On the other hand, if it is a galactic pulsar or if it were formed by accretion-induced collapse, it may be young and the large magnetic field would not be as surprising.
FIG. 1 a , Timing residuals for PSR1718–19, obtained assuming the simple slowdown model given in Table 1, plotted as a function of orbital phase.
The advance and retardation of the pulses can be seen as the pulsar orbits the companion.
The pulsar is closest to the Earth at phase 0.75 and behind the companion at phase 0.25. b-e,Time-averaged pulse flux density as a function of orbital phase at frequencies of 1,660, 1,404, 606 and 408 MHz respectively.
Vertical disparities, differential perspective and binocular stereopsis
Brian J. Rogers & Mark F. Bradshaw
TO calculate the depth difference between a pair of points on a three-dimensional surface from binocular disparities, it is necessary to know the absolute distance to the surface.
Traditionally, it has been assumed that this information is derived from non-visual sources such as the vergence angle of the eyes.
It has been shown that the horizontal gradient of vertical disparity between the images in the two eyes also contains information about the fixation distance.
Recent results, however, indicated that manipulations of the vertical disparity gradient have no effect on either the perceived shape or the perceived depth of surfaces defined by horizontal disparities.
Following the reasoning of Longuet-Higgins and Tyler, we suggest that vertical disparities are best understood as a consequence of perspective viewing from two different vantage points and the results we report here show that the human visual system is able to exploit vertical disparities and use them to scale the perceived depth and size of stereoscopic surfaces, if the field of view is sufficiently large.
Figure 1 a and b depicts, from behind, a pair of eyes viewing a rectangular pattern lying in a fronto-parallel plane which is either close to the observer (a ) or far away (b ).
On the retina of the left eye in 1a , the (inverted) image of the left-hand edge is shown as taller than that of the right-hand edge, to reflect the fact that the left-hand edge is nearer that eye, and therefore subtends, at its nodal point, a distinctly larger angle than the right-hand edge.
For the right eye the converse is true.
For a distant surface of the same angular extent (Fig. 1 b ), the difference in angular size of the two edges becomes vanishingly small.
It follows that the angle a vertical edge subtends at the left eye divided by the angle it subtends at the right eye is greater than 1 for the left-hand edge of the pattern, but is less than 1 for the right-hand edge.
We refer to this ratio, or rather the ratio of the tangents of the two angles, as the vertical size ratio (VSR).
It is the ratio of the inverse distances of the edge from the two eyes, and is therefore a well defined function of horizontal eccentricity, independent of vertical elevation.
The first equation of Fig. 2 expresses the VSR as a function of e , the horizontal eccentricity;D , the distance of the plane; and IOD, the interocular distance.
Its dependence on e and D (for IOD=6.5cm) is illustrated on the left-hand side of Fig. 2 and may be described as a manifestation of differential vertical perspective.
It is clear that (as Mayhew and Longuet-Higgins showed in the general case) the sensitivity of VSR to e is a strong cue to the value of D , the observer's distance from the surface.
Mayhew and Longuet-Higgins' theory established that binocular viewing of an extended surface introduces differential vertical perspective cues that vary with the distance to the surface.
Figure 1 shows that the binocular viewing of a fronto-parallel surface close to the observer also generates a gradient in the horizontal size ratio (HSR) as a function of eccentricity, which we refer to as differential horizontal perspective.
As with the differential vertical perspective cue, the horizontal perspective cue is a consequence of the perspective viewing of a surface from two spatially separate vantage points and it also varies with the absolute distance to the surface (Fig. 2 b ).
The distinction between the two cues is important because manipulating vertical disparities in the way described by Sobel and Collett, for example, has the effect of creating both differential vertical and differential horizontal perspective cues.
Consequently a positive result, if it had been obtained, could not be attributed unambiguously to the presence of the vertical perspective cues.
Figure 2 a and b shows that the binocular size ratios of a small element seen by the two eyes increase with eccentricity from the median plane and reach maxima at eccentricities of 45 degrees.
Consequently, the failure of both Cumming et al.
and Sobel and Collett to find an effect of vertical disparities might have been due to the relatively small angular extents (8–11° and 30°) of the stereoscopic surfaces used in their experiments.
To maximize the chances of showing the effects of the differential perspective cues in the experiments reported here, observers were presented with large-field (80x70 °) displays.
To test whether human observers use the differential perspective cues to scale perceived depth, observers were asked to make judgements about the amount of perceived peak-to-trough depth of sinusoidal corrugations defined by horizontal disparities.
The differential perspective cues (either vertical or horizontal, or both together) were presented on different trials and were appropriate to viewing a surface at either 28cm or infinity.
The results show that a surface containing both differential vertical and differential horizontal perspective cues appropri- ate to viewing the surface at infinity was judged to have more peak-to-trough depth than the equivalent surface with perspective cues appropriate to viewing at 28cm.
The average ratio of perceived depth in the two conditions over the 10 observers tested was nearly 1.9:1 (Fig. 3).
When the corrugated surfaces contained only differential vertical perspective cues (vertical disparities) appropriate to infinity and 28-cm viewing, the average ratio of perceived depths in the two conditions was 1.7:1.
In contrast, when the corrugated surfaces contained only differential horizontal perspective cues, the average ratio of perceived depth was only 1.15:1.
In the same experiment, observers were also asked to estimate the perceived separation (size) between the peaks of the corrugations.
These results showed a similar pattern, with observers reporting a larger separation between the peaks of the corrugations when the perspective gradients were appropriate to viewing the surface at infinity.
The differences in perceived separation were smaller than those for perceived depth, which is consistent with the different scaling required for size and depth constancy.
Our results show that horizontal gradients of VSR between the two eyes, differential vertical perspective, do affect the amount of perceived depth in stereoscopic surfaces, as predicted by Mayhew and Longuet-Higgins' computational theory.
In addition, the results show that gradients of HSR between the two eyes, differential horizontal perspective, which are similarly created by binocular viewing of a close, fronto-parallel surface, also affect the amount of perceived depth in stereoscopic surfaces, albeit to a smaller extent.
Why should differential vertical perspective cues be more effective than differential horizontal perspective cues in scaling depth and size?
A plausible answer is that the VSR is a function of e and D alone, whereas the HSR is a function of e, D and the angle of slant of the surface about a vertical axis.
Hence vertical perspective cues provide the only consistent and reliable information about the distance to the surface and these were found to be more effective in practice for depth and size scaling.
Moreover, our results show that the amount of perceived depth and the perceived separation of corrugations (size) were both affected when the differential perspective cues were present only in the surrounding flat regions of the stereo images and were absent in the corrugated surfaces themselves (Fig. 3, far right).
This result suggests that the human visual system exploits the fact that the differential perspective effects increase with increasing eccentricity and consequently pools this information across quite large visual extents to obtain an estimate of absolute distance which is used for scaling disparities.
Finally, our most recent results have shown that (1) the differential perspective cues described here also affect the perceived absolute distance to the surface (such that a surface containing perspective cues appropriate for near viewing is perceived to be closer to the observer), and (2) the shape of the apparent fronto-parallel surface systematically varies with the differential vertical perspective cues generated by surfaces at different absolute distances from the observer, as Helmholtz informally demonstrated over a hundred years ago.
FIG. 1 The images created by the binocular viewing of a flat, rectangular, fronto-parallel surface either close to the observer (a ) or far away (b ), but of the same overall angular extent.
When the surface is close, there are opposite gradients in the vertical angular subtense of individual chequerboard squares (from left to right) to the two eyes, because the left-hand edge of the surface is closer than the right-hand edge, at the left eye, and vice versa at the right eye.
This effect can be understood intuitively as a consequence of the perspective viewing of a surface from two slightly different positions.
The gradient in the vertical size ratio is referred to as differential vertical perspective.
Panel a also shows that there are opposite gradients in the horizontal angular subtense of individual chequerboard squares (from left to right) to the two eyes, again as a result of the unequal distances to the two eyes.
The gradient in the horizontal size ratio is referred to as differential horizontal perspective.
As the surface approaches infinity (b ), the distances from the two eyes to all squares on the surface become more similar and thus the perspective views become identical.
FIG. 2 a , How the vertical size ratio (VSR) of a small element on a fronto-parallel surface (measured in angular units) varies with cyclopean eccentricity,e , and the normal distance to the surface,D .
The equation used to generate the graph is shown underneath, with the interocular distance IOD set to 6.5cm.
As the fronto-parallel surface approaches infinity, the vertical size ratio of a small element on that surface will always be close to 1.0 for all eccentricities (because the distances from the two eyes are nearly equal).
b , How the horizontal size ratio (HSR) of a small element on a fronto-parallel surface (measured in angular units) varies with e , and D .
The equation used to generate the graph is shown.
The HSR will also be close to 1 for all eccentricities as the surface approaches infinity (b ).
For the fronto-parallel surface illustrated here, there is a unique relationship between the values of the VSR and the HSR for all distances and eccentricities.
As a consequence, this relationship provides unambiguous information about the fronto-parallel characteristic of the surface with respect to the head.
Unlike the VSR, the value of the HSR depends on the angle of slant of the surface about a vertical axis, as well as on e and D .
The VSR (the size ratio of a vertical element), cannot be affected by the slant of the surface about a vertical axis and is dependent on e and D alone.
O. J. Braddick (personal communication) has pointed out that unlike monocular perspective cues, the differential perspective cues described here could be exploited without the need to make assumptions about the homogeneity or isotropy of the elements making up the surface.
FIG. 3 In the experiments described here, observers sat in a modified Wheatstone stereoscope with mirrors at 45 deg to the line of sight and viewed the rear-projected images created on two translucent Mylar screens 57cm from the observer's eyes.
The images subtended 80° (horizontally) by 70° (vertically).
The stereoscopic images were accurately synthesized to mimic the viewing of a flat, densely textured, fronto-parallel surface at a distance of either 28cm or infinity.
The simulated fronto-parallel surface surrounded a central rectangular region (25 by 20°) which contained horizontal sinusoidal corrugations of 0.2 cycles per degree and 10 arc min peak-to-trough amplitude specified by horizontal disparities.
On separate trials, observers were asked to estimate either (1) the perceived peak-to-trough depth of the corrugations, or (2) the perceived periodicity (vertical separation) of the corrugations.
Observers were allowed to choose their own units (inches or cm) to make the judgements.
Because individual observers use the numbers of cm or inches of perceived depth in very different ways, the average amount of perceived depth was normalized for each observer using the average estimate of the amount of depth seen in the corrugations when the vertical perspective cues were correct for the 57-cm viewing distance (dashed line).
The normalized perceived depth, averaged over 10 observers, together with the standard errors of the estimates, are plotted as a function of the simulated viewing distance (28cm or infinity) for the three different conditions:(1) both vertical and horizontal perspective cues present (V+H).
(2) only vertical perspective cues present (V) and (3) only horizontal perspective cues present (H).
In all three cases the difference in perceived depth for the two simulated viewing conditions was statistically significant (P0.05 ).
The 1.9:1 difference in the amount of perceived depth for the two simulated viewing distances when both vertical and horizontal perspective cues were present is very much less than would be required for complete depth constancy.
The most likely reason for the incompleteness of the depth scaling is the presence of contradictory vergence angle information, which remained constant and appropriate for the 57-cm distance of the display screens throughout the experiments.
The results also show that most of the effect on the perceived depth can be attributed to the presence of the vertical perspective cues although the small effect of horizontal perspective cues was present in the estimates of eight out of ten observers and was statistically significant.
Masking the displays down so that only the central 25x20° area was visible abolished the effect of the differential perspective manipulations.
This result supports our speculation that the failure of Cumming et al.
and Sobel and Collett to find an effect of vertical disparities was due to the relatively small sizes of their displays.
In contrast, the right-hand pair of bars show the average amount of perceived depth for the two simulated viewing distances in the ‘window’ condition in which the vertical and horizontal perspective cues were present only in the peripheral fronto-parallel regions and the central region containing the stereoscopic corrugations provided consistent perspective cues for the actual 57-cm viewing distance.
Three-dimensional fluctuation conductivity in superconducting single crystal K 3 C 60 and Rb 3 C 6O 
X.-D.
Xiang, J. G. Hou, Vincent H. Crespi, A. Zettl & Marvin L. Cohen
THE superconducting transition temperature,T c , defines the point at which the free energies of the superconducting and normal states of a material become equal.
Just above T c , thermodynamic fluctuations produce small, transient regions of the superconducting state, giving rise to an anomalous increase in the normal-state conductivity known as paraconductivity.
This situation is analogous to the fluctuating regions of correlated spins found near the Curie-Weiss transition in ferromagnets.
Such fluctuations are of theoretical significance in that they provide a direct probe of critical phenomena in general, and a stringent test of scaling theories, which describe the approach to the critical point.
Paraconductivity effects are strongly dependent on the dimensionality of the system, although for conventional superconductors, three-dimensional fluctuation conductivity has to our knowledge never been observed.
Here we report the observation of pure, three-dimensional paraconductivity in single crystals of the recently discovered superconductors K 3 C 60 and Rb 3 C 60 .
In addition to probing the critical state near T c , these measurements allow the indirect determination of the residual, normal-state resistivity.
High-quality single-crystal specimens of K 3 C 60 and Rb 3 C 60 were prepared by doping vapour-transport-grown C 60 crystals with alkali metals.
The synthesis followed a method similar to that described previously for K 3 C 60 .
We used the standard in-line four-probe contact configuration and kept the d.c. probing current small (10–100μA) to minimize Joule heating effects.
The insets to Fig. 1 a and b show, for K 3 C 60 and Rb 3 C 60 , respectively, the (normalized) resistivity  (T)as a function of temperature over an extended temperature range.
As demonstrated previously for , the temperature dependence of  for Rb 3 C 60 is metallic.
This behaviour is in contrast to the nonmetallic temperature dependence of  (T)found for Rb-doped C 60 when C 60 crystals grown from a CS 2 solution were used.
Although the origin of this discrepancy is unknown, a nonmetallic  (T)may result from incomplete doping or an impure host crystal.
Our resistively determined T c values (transition midpoint) for K 3 C 60 and Rb 3 C 6 are 19.8K and 30.2K, respectively.
We note that the overall functional form for  (T), except at temperatures below 50K, is similar for K 3 C 60 and Rb 3 C 60 .
The temperature dependence of  (T)is reproducible over many samples in both cases.
Figure 1a and b also shows  (T)for K 3 C 60 and Rb 3 C 60 in greater detail near T c (the temperature scale has been normalized to T c in each case).
Just above T c , the resistivity for both materials deviates from its normal-state behaviour before dropping precipitously at T c .
We associate this deviation with superconducting fluctuations.
It should be recognized that identification of fluctuation effects of small magnitude requires data with a high signal-to-noise ratio.
In an earlier investigation of the resistivity of K 3 C 60 , fluctuation effects near T c were not resolved because of large scatter in the data.
The paraconductivity, ' , is obtained by subtracting the extrapolated normal-state conductivity  n from the measured conductivity.
To establish an appropriate baseline for the paraconductivity, we have tried various power-law extrapolations using the temperature range 1.4 T c T2T c to establish fitting parameters for the extrapolation.
For both materials, a linear -T curve provides an adequate fit (solid line in Fig. 1 a and b ).
In K 3 C 60 , a T curve (dashed line in Fig. 1 a ) provides a slightly better fit at higher temperatures (T60 K).
But as shown in Fig. 1 a , the difference between the two extrapolations is small in the relevant temperature range near T c , and both are consistent with  measured near T c at high magnetic field (also shown in Fig. 1 a ).
Without further physical basis, in our analysis we shall use the T extrapolation for K 3 C 60 and the linear -T extrapolation for Rb 3 C 60 .
Our conclusions of three-dimensional paraconductivity are not sensitive to which extrapolation is used.
The baseline choice does affect the determined numerical value of the residual normal-state resistivity (see below), but different reasonable extrapolations lead to resistivities all within 20% of one another.
As first derived by Aslamazov and Larkin (AL), the excess conductivity  is given by  where D is the dimensionality of the specimen and t is the reduced temperature defined by .
This AL term is known as the regular fluctuation conductivity, which is due to the direct acceleration of the fluctuation-induced superconducting pairs of quasiparticles.
In addition to the AL term, Maki and Thompson (MT) have derived another contribution known as the anomalous fluctuation conductivity.
The MT term results from the scattering of the normal quasiparticles by the superconducting fluctuations and is small when ‘pair-breaking’ effects are large.
In three dimensions, the excess conductivity may be expressed as  where  is a pair-breaking parameter.
The first term on the right is the AL term, and the second is the MT term.
is a prefactor to be defined below.
Figure 2a and b shows on log-log plots the experimentally determined  ' against T/T c for K 3 C 60 and Rb 3 C 60 .
The insets show log-log plots of  ’ against t for the same data sets.
The paraconductivity data for K 3 C 60 and Rb 3 C 60 can be well accounted for by assuming an effective dimensionality D=3.
For K 3 C 60 (Fig. 2 a ), we find that including a MT contribution improves the fit (although the AL term dominates).
From our best fit, we obtain a pair-breaking parameter  0.58 for K 3 C 60 .
For Rb 3 C 60 (Fig. 2 b ), we find that a good fit is obtained only if the MT term is negligible, which implies a large  .
This is consistent with Rb 3 C 60 having a stronger electron-phonon coupling constant (resulting in a higher T c ) than K 3 C 60 (ref. 9).
Only for D =3 do we obtain good fits to the paraconductivity data of K 3 C 60 and Rb 3 C 60 .
The inset to Fig. 2 b shows how the data of Rb 3 C 60 compare to paraconductivity fits with D =1 and D =2 in addition to D =3.
We observe no evidence for granular superconductivity.
The coherence volume of the superconducting order parameter grows as the temperature approaches T c unless limited by reduced dimensionality.
For a granular superconductor with grain size of L , the functional form of the excess conductivity crosses over from three-dimensional behaviour to zero-dimensional behaviour when the Ginzburg-Landau coherence length  (T)exceeds L/3 as T approaches T c (ref. 10).
In the presence of 0-D crossover, the data of Fig. 2 a and b would deviate upwards away from the theoretical curves based on 3-D fluctuations with decreasing reduced temperature t , and there would be a region of steeper slope (-2) at small t .
Such behaviour is not observed for either K 3 C 60 or Rb 3 C 60 (see insets to Fig. 2 a and b ).
The absence of a 0-D crossover down to t 0.0005 in our data gives a lower limit for the domain size of about 0.6μm.
This dimension is at least 100 times larger than the measured values of  (0), and therefore guarantees that physical parameters measured on these samples reflect intrinsic properties.
An important parameter in describing electronic transport in K 3 C 60 and Rb 3 C 60 is the absolute magnitude of the resistivity.
Because of uncertainties in sample dimensions, contact position and current distribution profiles (if a van der Pauw configuration is applied), it is difficult to make an accurate direct determination of the resistivity.
Experimentally, we observe identical normalized fluctuation resistivity curves (therefore, identical  '/  n ) in different samples with somewhat different estimates of  (0)based on direct measurements.
However, the normal-state conductivity  n may be determined indirectly through the measured normalized conductivity ( '/  n ), because the excess conductivity prefactor  exc is related to the independently determined coherence length  (0)by  Using equation (2) together with the experimentally determined values ((ref. 11) and  (ref. 12), we obtain the zero-temperature residual normal-state resistivities  and , where the subscripts K and Rb represent K 3 C 60 and Rb 3 C 60 , respectively.
The different extrapolations of the normal-state resistivity produce an uncertainty of about 20% in  (0).
The resistivity values are reasonably consistent with our most reliable direct measurement on K 3 C 60 (0.5m  cm) and with infrared studies on Rb 3 C 60 (0.4 m  cm).
The results also agree with our theoretical calculation ( (0)K 0.2m  cm) based on H c2 measurements and a theoretical calculation () in which a maximum disorder (defined as equal distribution of two possible orientations of C 60 in a face-centred cubic structure) was assumed for both K 3 C 60 and Rb 3 C 60 .
Our results suggest that Rb 3 C 60 may have a more C 60 orientational disorder than K 3 C 60 .
As this is, to our knowledge, the first observation of pure 3-D paraconductivity in any isotropic superconductor, it seems appropriate to address the difficulty of observing similar behaviour in other materials (most conventional superconductors are, of course, three-dimensional).
For conventional 3-D superconductors, the fractional change in normal conductivity, too small to be observable in any meaningful temperature interval above T c .
Here E F is the Fermi energy,k F the Fermi wave vector, and l the mean free path.
To observe 3-D fluctuation conductivity, large concentrations of impurities or defects have to be induced, and these are usually accompanied by granularity or reduced dimensionality.
For anisotropic-layered high- T c materials, the situation is more complicated.
Paraconductivity has been reported for many different compounds in various forms, but no consensus about the dimensionality in these materials has been reached.
In the fullerene-based superconductors, the intrinsic orientational disorder (leading to a relatively high intrinsic resistivity or short mean free path), short coherence length and high T c together greatly extend the useful temperature range for measurement of the fluctuations and allow direct observation of the fluctuation phenomena in pure single crystals.
Our results demonstrate that these systems are genuinely 3-D superconductors as opposed to lower-dimensional or granular superconductors.
Extremely-high-velocity H 2 O maser emission in the galaxy NGC4258
N. Nakai, M. Inoue & M. Miyoshi
WATER-VAPOUR maser emission at 22.23508GHz has been observed in star-forming regions of our own galaxy and in the active nuclei of other galaxies.
Maser emission from active galactic nuclei is typically 10 5 times more luminous than in our galaxy, and the active galaxies concerned always exhibit radio or optical jets ejected from the nuclei.
The superluminous masers are not well understood, but appear to be related to the mass outflow.
Using 16,000-channel spectrometers at the Nobeyama 45-m radio telescope, we have found H 2 O maser emission in the nucleus of the galaxy NGC4258, offset by 1,000kms -1 from the motion of the nucleus itself.
This is much higher than the typical velocities of galactic masers (less than a few hundred kilometres per second).
We suggest that the high-velocity maser emission in NGC4258 might be from masers orbiting a massive central black hole, or ejected in a bipolar outflow.
More intriguingly, the features may not be Doppler in origin, but due to up- and down-shifted frequencies by Raman scattering in a dense plasma.
Further high-resolution observations will be needed to distinguish between these possibilities.
NGC4258 is a spiral galaxy at a distance of 6.6Mpc (ref. 7) with unusual 7-kpc-long bipolar jets or bubbles of radio continuum emission.
Extremely luminous water-vapour masers of 100 times the luminosity of the Sun,L  and;(ref. 3), have been detected within 1parsec (3x10 18 cm) of its nucleus.
Our observations of the maser emission were made from January to June 1992 with the Nobeyana 45-m telescope.
The detector was a cooled high-electron-mobility transistor receiver equipped with a circular polarizer, combined with 2,048-channel acousto-optical spectrometers (AOS).
We used an array of eight such AOSs arranged to detect different frequencies, resulting in a total frequency range of 285MHz and a velocity coverage of 3,850kms -1 .
The spatial resolution of the antenna was 74 .
Figure 1 shows the spectrum of H 2 O maser emission towards the centre of NGC4258.
In addition to the known central features at the systemic velocity of the galaxy (corresponding to the velocity of its centre ), there are strong redshifted features with intensities of about one-half or one-third of the main features at  (where LSR stands for local standard of rest) and weak blueshifted features with intensities of about one-tenth at — 300 to -460kms -1 .
The velocities relative to the systemic velocity ;) are 740 to 980kms -1 and -760 to — 920kms -1 , respectively.
In the spectrum obtained in June 1992, another component at ) was detected, with a flux density of 59mJy.
No significant emission stronger than 51mJy (3  ) could be recognized outside the velocity range in Fig. 1.
The linewidth of individual components of the high-velocity features is .
The features varied in intensity during the observing period.
In the observed frequency range, no other molecular or recombination line has been detected so far in interstellar space.
Molecular lines of HDO and HO 37 Cl are expected at frequencies corresponding to v rel =-971 and 912kms -1 , respectively, but these lines have not yet been detected in space and must be very weak.
These facts indicate that the extremely-high-velocity features are actually H 2 O maser emission from NGC4258.
Spatial mapping of the H 2 O maser emission showed that the redshifted features lie within 12  (380pc) of the nucleus of the galaxy.
The blueshifted features were too weak for us to measure their positions.
Furthermore, we have made very-long-baseline interferometer (VLBI) observations of the main features and of the strongest redshifted feature at v LSR =1,322 kms -1 , by using the 45-m and the Kashima 34-m telescopes.
The result indicates that the 1,322kms -1 feature is located within 0.05  (1.6pc) from the main features.
The isotropic luminosity of individual high-velocity components is calculated to be L=0.1–6L  and;, which is comparable to the total luminosity of the most powerful maser source in our Galaxy, W49N, and the total luminosities of redshifted and blueshifted features are  and , respectively.
The total luminosity of the main feature is 101 L and;.
Figure 2 shows the time variation of the flux densities and velocities at peak intensities for the strongest four redshifted components at .
The synchronized variations between the redshifted components in the flux and the peak velocity suggest that these maser components have a common pumping source and are distributed within 0.1pc each other.
The variability of the shifted features does not seem to correlate with that of the main features.
The linewidths of the components of 1,290, 1,322, and 1,435kms -1 remained nearly constant for half a year, indicating saturated maser emission, but the line-width of the 1,385kms -1 component varied with the flux density,S,roughly as S —0.5 , suggesting an unsaturated maser.
The variability of the blueshifted features could not be measured, because their intensity was too low.
Velocities up to  are well out of the range of the rotation velocity (250kms -1 ) of the galaxy NGC4258 7 and are much higher than any velocities known for molecular gas in our Galaxy or other galaxies (for example for H 2 O maser in  for CO in the galaxy  for OH in the galaxy NGC253 13 ).
The true velocities may be higher than the velocities measured in projection.
To explain such extreme velocities, we consider three possibilities.
The first is that the masers are emitted from a circumnuclear molecular torus rapidly rotating around a compact massive object, such as a black hole.
Assuming a radius of 1pc for the torus, a mass of 2x10 8 M  and;for the nuclear object can produce keplerian motion at 1,000kms -1 .
In this case, the explanation for the stronger main features, for which , must match that for the weaker high-velocity features.
The second possibility is that the high-velocity masers are emitted in molecular gas flowing out from (or flowing in towards) the nuclear region.
If this is a bipolar flow perpendicular to the galactic disk, the outflow velocity becomes 3,000kms -1 , corrected for the inclination angle of the disk (72°).
Such a mass outflow from the nuclear region of NGC4258 cannot be ruled out, because strong radio continuum emission and optical jets or bubbles are emitted from the nucleus, indicating some outflow mechanism at work in the region.
Recently optical studies of the galaxy reveal velocities as high as 600kms -1 , which have been interpreted as ballistic motions of 2,000kms -1 (after projection effects are taken into account).
The bond strength of O-H in a water molecule is 119kcalmol -1 or 5.2eV, corresponding to the kinetic energy of the molecule if it moves at only 7.4kms -1 .
Thus for the molecule to survive rapid motion at 1,000kms -1 or 3,000kms -1 , the molecular gas must be gradually accelerated, so that the conversion of the energy to the internal motion of molecule by external shocks is very small.
The main maser features may have originated from the slowly rotating disk or from the outflow gas near the galactic nucleus.
The third possibility is that the shifted features are not due to the Doppler motion of the gas but due to stimulated Raman scattering of the main features.
Stimulated Raman scattering in a plasma has been investigated in terms of forward scattering, shock waves and (recently) backward scattering, and the results have been applied to high-velocity features of water masers.
If the maser radiation of the main features intersects dense, plasma-like, compact ionized regions, the stimulated Raman scattering in the plasma (due to nonlinear interaction between the longitudinal and transverse waves) is expected to produce additional waves with up- and down-shifted frequencies, which are separated by the plasma frequency from the original one.
Although the shifted maser could also produce emission at a frequency separated from the main features by twice the plasma frequency, no significant emission stronger than 51mJy (3 )is found at .
Deguchi has made a detailed quantitative analysis of stimulated Raman backward scattering for the astrophysical conditions.
According to his calculations, it is possible to create the Raman instability in plasma with an electron density of 10 7 cm -3 (the value for the extragalactic masers), overwhelming the loss of photons due to free-free absorption.
The bidirectional collimated ejection in the nuclear region of NGC4258, indicated by radio continuum and optical jets, favours the second possibility, whereas the symmetry of the shifted maser features with respect to the central velocity favours the model of stimulated Raman scattering.
The bipolar outflow model does however raise the question of how molecules can survive in a strong shock in a medium with the extremely high velocity of 1,000km s -1 (for comparison, the sound velocity in interstellar space is only a few kilometres per second).
The stimulated Raman scattering, on the other hand, requires some special conditions.
For example, the efficiency of the production of scattering photons must be unusually high, 0.01–0.1, in the dense plasma.
To produce the blueshifted (higher-frequency) features with observed fluxes, another maser beam must interact with the main maser at an intersecting angle of nearly 180° (ref. 21).
The models must account for the absence of significant maser emission () between the main and shifted features.
Further observational (especially VLBI) and theoretical investigations are required to discriminate between models of the extremely-high-velocity features.
Results for other galaxies, such as NGC3079, will be reported elsewhere.
FIG. 1 Spectrum of H 2 O maser emission towards the centre of NGC4258 (right ascension α =12h16 min 29.36s, declination  =47°34 ‘53, in 1950.0) displayed from v LSR = -600 to 1,600kms -1 , although the observed velocity range is v LSR = -1,200 to +2,650kms -1 .
No significant emission can be recognized outside the velocity range displayed.
The upper scale is the velocity relative to the centre of NGC4258 (moving at 460kms -1 ).
FIG. 2 Time variation of the flux densities (a ) and the velocities at peak intensities (b ) for the strongest four redshifted components at v LSR 1,290, 1,322, 1,385 and 1,435kms -1 .
Although the relative strengths of these components varied, the absolute flux densities of all components generally decreased during January to June.
This trend does not seem to correlate with the variability of the main features.
The peak velocities of all four components also shifted by 1kms -1 from January to April and were almost constant from April to June.
Innervation directs receptor synthesis and localization in Drosophila embryo synaptogenesis
Kendal Broadie & Michael Bate
IN the Drosophila embryo, motor neurons form stereotyped synapses (neuromuscular junctions) on identified muscles.
We have used a mutant (prospero)that removes or delays innervation to assay the role of the presynaptic motor neuron in the development of the receptive field of the postsynaptic muscle.
prospero (pros)is not expressed in the muscles or their precursors.
Here we find that the muscle defines the correct synaptic zone in the absence of the motor neuron by restricting putative guidance molecules to this specialized membrane region.
Furthermore, the muscle expresses functional transmitter receptors at the correct developmental time without innervation.
On the other hand, the muscle does not localize receptors to the synapse without instruction from the motor neuron, nor does a second, much larger, synthesis of receptors occur in muscles deprived of innervation.
In muscles receiving delayed innervation, or muscles innervated at aberrant synaptic sites, both receptor clustering and receptor synthesis are delayed or redirected, consistent with the new pattern of innervation.
We conclude that the muscle autonomously defines the synaptic site, whereas the motor neuron directs the development of the muscle's receptive field by stimulating the synthesis and localization of transmitter receptors.
The first sign of postsynaptic neuromuscular junction (NMJ) differentiation is the expression of adhesive molecules on the muscle surface.
In some cases (for example connectin), these molecules are initially expressed ubiquitously on the muscle and only become localized to NMJ sites during and following neuromuscular contact.
In other cases (like fasciclin III), expression begins near the time of neuromuscular contact and is always restricted to NMJ sites.
But in both cases we find that these molecules are expressed at the correct developmental stage and localize normally to the putative NMJ sites in the absence of the motor neuron (Fig. 1).
Thus, without innervation, the muscle ‘knows’ the location of the normal NMJ sites and is able to restrict expression of certain molecules to these specialized membrane regions; definition of NMJ sites is independent of innervation.
Fasciclin III is normally expressed at the NMJ at least through the end of embryogenesis.
In aneural (pros)muscles, fasciclin III expression persists at the putative synaptic site for several hours, but is lost before the end of embryogenesis (data not shown).
We never detected expression of fasciclin III or connectin at aberrant synaptic sites in the late embryo.
Thus innervation is required to maintain a synaptic site, but is insufficient to direct the expression of these molecules.
In normal Drosophila synaptogenesis, functional glutamate receptors (gluRs) are expressed on the muscle surface within several minutes of the initial neuromuscular contact (13–13.5h after egg laying (AEL)) and a peak gluR density is rapidly obtained (by 14–14.5AEL; Fig. 2).
Initially, gluRs are homogeneously expressed on the muscle surface and do not cluster at synaptic sites or elsewhere.
In pros mutants, this phase of gluR expression is indistinguishable from normal (Fig. 2); functional gluRs are expressed at the correct stage and increase in density with the same time course as in normally innervated muscles.
Thus, the initial expression of gluRs is also innervation-independent.
By 14h AEL, gluRs begin to localize to neuromuscular contact sites which prefigure the mature NMJs (Fig. 2); a phenomenon predominantly, perhaps exclusively, attributable to the lateral movement of previously unlocalized receptors.
In normal development, clustering progresses rapidly until gluRs are highly localized to the synaptic zone (by 16h AEL; Figs 2 and 3).
In contrast, no gluR clustering occurs in muscles lacking innervation (Figs 2, 3); the same low-density, homogenous expression of gluRs characteristic of early development persists to the end of embryogenesis.
In muscles where motor neuron contact is delayed, gluR clustering at neuromuscular contact sites is similarly delayed.
Likewise, in muscles with aberrant sites of neuromuscular contact, gluRs are localized to these aberrant contacts in preference to the normal synaptic zone (Fig. 3).
Thus, innervation appears both necessary and sufficient to direct the localization of postsynaptic receptors to synaptic sites.
The third, and final, stage in the development of the muscle's receptive field is a large increase in gluR density at the NMJ sites (Fig. 2).
This second phase of gluR appearance starts at 16–17h AEL and continues through the end of embryogenesis (21h AEL).
Unlike the initial expression of gluRs, the second phase appears to represent the localized expression of gluRs near the NMJ as no increase in gluR density is observed in extrasynaptic sites.
This second phase of gluR expression is completely absent in pros mutants lacking muscle innervation (Fig. 2).
But in muscles with delayed innervation, or muscles aberrantly innervated, the second phase of gluR expression is stimulated and, by the end of embryogenesis, dense concentrations of gluRs are clustered at NMJ sites (Fig. 3).
Thus the second phase of gluR expression is innervation-dependent and the motor neuron is necessary and sufficient to stimulate the high expression of receptors in the muscle during late embryogenesis.
The use of the pros mutant to remove innervation allows us to divide postsynaptic development into innervation-independent and innervation-dependent events.
We find that the delineation of the synaptic zone by the localization of adhesion molecules and the initial phase of gluR expression are both innervation-independent.
In contrast, the localization of gluRs to the synaptic zone and the second, localized expression of gluRs at the synaptic zone are both innervation-dependent.
These findings strongly suggest a simple model: the muscle directs the motor neuron to the synaptic zone by means of preferential adhesion mechanisms and the motor neuron subsequently directs the localization of gluRs to the synaptic zone and, either directly or indirectly, stimulates the further expression of gluRs during later synaptogenesis.
Formative interactions during Drosophila neuromuscular synaptogenesis have striking parallels with synaptogenesis at the vertebrate NMJ.
Selective adhesion mechanisms are known to be involved in nerve-muscle recognition and control of synaptic development in several vertebrate systems.
Furthermore, motor neurons stimulate both receptor clustering and the increased synthesis of receptors by synaptic nuclei at the vertebrate NMJ.
Indeed, some of the molecules involved in these interactions (such as agrin) have already been identified.
It appears, therefore, that synaptogenic mechanisms have been strongly conserved and it seems likely that similar molecular and genetic pathways control these interactions in Drosophila and other organisms.
Genetic screens in Drosophila have already been used to identify genes that are required early in the development of the nervous system for neurogenesis and axon guidance, as well as others required for the proper functioning of the mature NMJ (like ion channels).
This report defines an embryonic synapse in Drosophila which is accessible to experimental analysis.
These studies can be extended, using genetic and molecular screens, to identify genes required for the construction of a synapse.
FIG. 1 pros encodes a nuclear protein expressed in neuronal precursors during early Drosophila neurogenesis.
Mutations in pros alter neuronal fates and delay or prevent pioneering of motor nerves during embryogenesis.
Thus most muscles receive no innervation during the normal stages of neuromuscular synaptogenesis, although many are innervated by the end of embryogenesis.
Upper panels compare patterns of innervation in late wild-type and pros/pros embryos (16h AEL) in the ventral half of one abdominal (A2-A4) hemisegment; central nervous system (CNS), left; anterior, top.
Scale bar, 10μm.
Wild-type embryos have two motor nerves per hemisegment, with motor axons synapsing on all muscles by this stage.
We focus on ventral longitudinal muscles 6/7, innervated by a shared motor neuron (RP3) in the cleft between the muscles (NMJ).
pros mutants lack motor nerves and muscles 6/7 are not innervated by RP3 or other neurons.
RP3 and muscles 6/7 express fasciclin III (lower panels) from early NMJ synaptogenesis (12–12.5h AEL) until the end of embryogenesis (shown here 16h AEL).
In pros mutants where RP3 fails to innervate muscles 6/7, fasciclin III is expressed by muscles at the correct stage in a restricted region corresponding to the normal NMJ (arrows delineate extent of expression).
Expression without RP3 continues for many hours (shown here 16h AEL) but declines before the end of embryogenesis.
A similar expression pattern is observed for another cell-surface protein (connectin) in a more dorsal muscle group (not shown).
METHODS.
A null prospero mutation (pros ) was used.
ru h th st p P  pros red e/TM3 Sb p P  e flies were outcrossed to wild-type (Oregon-R), their Sb + progeny were crossed and eggs collected.
Embryos were staged and dissected as reported earlier.
Homozygous pros embryos were distinguished by a grossly aberrant CNS.
Embryos were stained with an anti-horseradish peroxidase antibody (Cappell), which recognizes a cell-surface antigen on all Drosophila neurons.
Alternatively, embryos were stained with anti-fasciclin III.
Antibody staining was as previously reported.
Analyses limited to abdominal segments (A2-A6); at least 10 embryos (N100 hemisegments) of each genotype were examined in all staining protocols.
FIG. 2 Synaptic communication at the Drosophila NMJ is mediated by a large conductance L-glutamate receptor (gluR).
Here we compare the development of the excitatory junctional current (EJC) in normally innervated and aneural (pros)muscle 6 by the focal iontophoresis of L-glutamate at the developing NMJ. a , In innervated muscle, functional gluRs are first detected at 13–13.5h AEL (shock artefact indicates time of glutamate application).
In pros mutants lacking innervation of muscle 6 (aneural muscle), functional gluRs are expressed at the correct stage (13.5h AEL) and, initially, gluR density rapidly increases (14h AEL).
But gluRs fail to localize at the NMJ and, by 16h AEL, the EJC at the innervated junction is 10-fold greater than the uninnervated site.
EJC amplitude in aneural muscle does not increase significantly through the end of embryogenesis. b , Earlier studies indicated that the initial increase in EJC amplitude occurs predominantly through the lateral movement of existing gluRs (14–16h AEL) and latterly (16h onward) by the increased expression of gluRs at the synaptic site.
In aneural muscle, gluRs are expressed at the correct stage, but the increase of EJC amplitude associated both with gluR localization and, later, by the increase in gluR expression at the NMJ fail to occur.
METHODS.
Wild-type and mutant (pros/pros)embryos were staged and dissected as reported earlier.
Whole-cell voltage clamp (-60mV) recordings of muscle 6 were obtained using standard patch-clamp techniques.
The glutamate-gated EJC was studied by L-glutamate iontophoresis at the developing NMJ.
A stock solution of 0.1ML-glutamate (monosodium salt, pH 8; Sigma) was applied through pipettes (10–20 Megohms) with short pulses (20ms) of negative current (Farnell Pulse Generating System).
Each point represents the mean peak EJC amplitude from at least 5 embryos of each genotype (mean  s.e.m.).
Innervation was assayed with anti-horseradish immunocytochemistry (Fig. 1 legend) following recording.
FIG. 3During NMJ development, gluRs in muscle membrane are rapidly localized to the synaptic zone.
Here we compare gluR localization in normally innervated, aneural and aberrantly innervated muscle 6 by localized application of L-glutamate to discrete regions of the muscle surface.
Each grid position on muscle 6 is associated with a current recording of the L-glutamate response in the voltage-clamped muscle; the muscle was subsequently stained with anti-horseradish peroxidase (HRP) /anti-fasciclin III antibodies to reveal sites of innervation.
In normally innervated muscle, gluRs are strongly localized to the synaptic region and excluded from extrasynaptic sites by 16h AEL (shown here); a large L-glutamate response is obtained only in the region innervated by RP3.
In pros mutants lacking innervation (aneural muscle), no localization of gluRs occurs at the normal synaptic zone (arrow; revealed with anti-fasciclin III antibody) or elsewhere.
At 16h AEL (shown here), a uniform EJC response is observed to L-glutamate iontophoresis in all muscle regions; similar recordings are obtained through the end of embryogenesis.
In pros mutants, muscle 6 is incorrectly innervated at a low frequency in late embryos (aberrant innervation).
GluRs are localized to aberrant NMJs (arrow; revealed with anti-HRP antibody) and excluded from non-innervated muscle regions, including the normal NMJ site.
At 22h AEL (shown here), EJC amplitude indicates increased gluR synthesis has occurred at the aberrant NMJ as in later stages of normal synaptogenesis.
METHODS.
Distribution of gluRs on the surface of muscle 6 was assayed as previously.
Muscle 6 was voltage-clamped at -60mV using standard whole-cell patch-clamp techniques.
A 0.1ML-glutamate solution (pH 8) was applied through pipettes (50–75 ) to discrete domains of the muscle surface with short pulses (20ms) of negative current.
Each domain of 10x10μm was sampled in turn and recorded with grid position on a digital audio recorder.
After recording, innervation was assayed by double staining with anti-HRP and anti-fasciclin III (see Fig. 1 legend); anti-HRP revealed innervation, anti-fasciclin III revealed normal zone of RP3 innervation.
At least 5 embryos (N=10 segments) were analysed for each genotype.
Scale bars, 5μm.
Retinoic acid alters hindbrain Hox code and induces transformation of rhombomeres 2/3 into a 4/5 identity
Heather Marshall, Stefan Nonchev, Mai Har Sham, Ian Muchamore, Andrew Lumsden & Robb Krumlauf
IT has been suggested that Hox genes play an important part in the patterning of limbs, vertebrae and craniofacial structures by providing an ordered molecular system of positional values, termed the Hox code.
Little is known about the nature of the signals that govern the establishment and regulation of Hox genes, but retinoic acid can affect the expression of these genes in cell lines and in embryonic tissues.
On the basis of experimental and clinical evidence, the hindbrain and branchial region of the head are particularly sensitive to the effects of retinoic acid but the phenotypes are complex and hard to interpret, and how and if they relate to Hox expression has not been clear.
Here we follow the changes induced by retinoic acid to hindbrain segmentation and the branchial arches using transgenic mice which contain lacZ reporter genes that reveal the endogenous segment-restricted expression of the Hox-B1 (Hox-2.9), Hox-B2(Hox-2.8) and Krox-20 genes.
Our results show that these genes rapidly respond to exposure to retinoic acid at preheadfold stages and undergo a progressive series of changes in segmental expression that are associated with specific phenotypes in hindbrain of first branchial arch.
Together the molecular and anatomical alterations indicate that retinoic acid has induced changes in the hindbrain Hox code which result in the homeotic transformation of rhombomeres (r) 2/3 to an r4/5 identity.
A main feature of this rhombomeric phenotype is that the trigeminal motor nerve is transformed to a facial identity.
Furthermore, in support of this change in rhombomeric identity, neural crest cells derived from r2/3 also express posterior Hox markers suggesting that the retinoic acid-induced transformation extends to multiple components of the first branchial arch.
In the process of defining the regulatory elements required for spatially restricted domains of Hox-B expression, we have produced lines of mice carrying Hox/lacZ transgenes that reproduce the endogenous pattern of Hox-B1 expression, including its ability to respond to retinoic acid (H.M. et al.,manuscript in preparation).
In addition, we have mapped regions responsible for the rhombomeric expression of Hox-B2 in r4 and second arch neural crest (M.H.S. et al.,unpublished), and produced lacZ transgenic lines that reflect the endogenous patterns of Krox-20 expression in hindbrain segmentation.
These transgenic mice provide a convenient set of cellular markers for segmental expression in r3/4/5, the neural crest and motor nerves associated with this region.
To investigate the effects of retinoic acid on Hox expression and segmental patterning in the hindbrain, we have exposed mouse embryos at several early stages to concentrations of retinoic acid (20mg per kg) that are known to induce craniofacial abnormalities.
The Hox/lacZ transgenic lines were used to monitor molecular and anatomical changes in segmentation throughout a detailed time course.
The results were independently confirmed by in situ hybridization of the endogenous genes at selected stages (data not shown).
Our results focus on the reproducible phenotype generated by retinoic acid treatment at 7.5 days post-coitum (d.p.c.).
The Hox-B1/lacZ transgene, like the endogenous gene, is initially activated in a broad domain at preheadfold stages, with an anterior limit mapping to the future r3/4 boundary.
There is a progressive restriction of the anterior domain of expression which is limited to rhombomere 4 in the hindbrain by 9.5 d.p.c.
(Fig.1 a-d ).
At 10.5 d.p.c.
Hox-B1 is also expressed in the facial motor nerve (vii), whose β -galactosidase-stained axons exit the hindbrain from r4 and innervate the second branchial arch (Fig. 1f, f').
Staining also appears adjacent to the midline in r5 (Figs 1 e and 2a),a region that could correspond with the location of motor neuron cell bodies.
To visualize the positions of all efferent neurons that exit via the vii/viii nerve, we therefore applied the retrograde axonal tracer DiI to the exit point in r4.
This revealed that in normal embryos r5 motor neurons are in two subsets: a medial group of 10–20 neurons whose axons project anteriorly along the side of the floor plate, and a larger lateral group whose axons extend laterally before turning anteriorly into r4 (Fig. 2 c, f).
Both groups belong to the facial branchial motor nerve.
In addition to the facial motor neurons in the basal plate of r4, retrograde tracing from the vii/viii nerve exit point revealed a segment-specific group of sensory efferent neurons belonging to the vestibuloacoustic nerve whose primary dendrites extend across the midline.
Later in development the cell bodies of these neurons translocate into the other side of the brain (H. Simon and A.L., manuscript submitted).
This neuronal organization is unique to the r4/5 region and in r2/3 we found that trigeminal efferent neurons traced from the exit point in r2 are more laterally placed, with their axons all extending laterally through the neuroepithelium (Fig. 2b, f ).
Expression of the Hox-B1/lacZ transgene in r4 and r5 therefore co-localizes with two distinct groups of neuronal cells that are not present in r2 and r3.
Retinoic acid rapidly alters Hox-B1 expression, and 4h after application there is an anterior shift of the expression boundaries in both mesoderm and neural ectoderm (Fig. 1 a' ).
At 8.5d.p.c. (20 h after treatment with retinoic acid) in both treated and control embryos post-otic domains of expression regress posteriorly, but in treated embryos the pre-otic domain is very broad and extends from r4 into the midbrain (Fig. 1 b, b').
But, this broadened domain is transient and by 9.5d.p.c. becomes progressively restricted to two stripes in the hindbrain corresponding to r2 and r4 (Fig. 1 c, c' ).
Between 9.5–10.5 d.p.c.
the retinoic acid-induced ectopic expression of Hox-B1 also appears in the motor nerve associated with r2/3.
The cell bodies along the midline of r2 and r3 now express the transgene, as well as the nerve that exits r2 and innervates the first branchial arch (Fig. 1 d'-f').
The positions of efferent neurons in r2 and r3 and the courses through the neural epithelium of their axonal projections revealed by DiI tracer injection, show alterations consistent with their transformation to a more posterior phenotype.
In r2, medial efferent neurons extend processes across the midline as normally seen only in r4.
The neurons in r3 now include a medial, anteriorly extending group that resembles those of r5 (Fig. 2 d, e, f); these and the medial branchial motor neurons of r2 exhibit strong Hox/lacZ staining, reduplicating the pattern of r4/5.
The balance of r3 motor neurons are revealed by tracer injections into the seventh nerve exit point (r4) rather than the fifth (r2), indicating that these too may be ‘facial’ motor neurons (Fig. 2 d, e).
A diagrammatic summary of the nerve pathways of normal and retinoic acid-treated embryos is shown (Fig. 2 f ).
These data show that there has been a posterior transformation of the trigeminal territory to a facial/vestibuloacoustic identity, and illustrates that retinoic acid induces changes in Hox-B1 expression that lead to the duplication of the r4/5 patterns in r2/3 without changing the normal r4/5 domains.
If this represents a true transformation, then other aspects of the segmental Hox code should also be altered.
Therefore we examined another Hox/lacZ transgenic line that reproduces the subset of Hox-B2 expression found in r4, and its neural crest migrating into the second branchial arch (Fig. 1 g-i ).
At 8.0d.p.c., retinoic acid causes an expansion of the r4 stripe in an anterior direction into the midbrain, and at 8.5d.p.c. there is also expression in neural crest cells migrating from this broadened domain (Fig. 1 g', h').
Between 9.0–9.5d.p.c., these patterns becomes refined with a progressive restriction leading to the appearance of stripes of expression in r2 and r4 and a stream of crest cells migrating from each (Fig. 1 i' ).
These dynamic changes in spatial expression are identical to those observed with Hox-B1 , therefore the combination of Hox genes expressed in r4 (ref. 10) is reproduced in r2 upon exposure to retinoic acid.
The Hox-B1 experiments showed that a marker for r5 (expression in neural cell bodies) was activated in r3 and we wanted to examine whether there were other changes to segmental expression in r3.
We have used a line of transgenic mice that accurately reveals the normal spatial and temporal patterns of Krox-20 expression in r3 and r5 (Fig. 3a-e ; ref. 23).
In initial stages, as reported for both Xenopus and mouse embryos treated with retinoic acid, we find that although there is a clearly defined segment in the r3 position, the r3 stripe of Krox-20 expression is absent.
There is no change in the r5 pattern of expression (Fig. 3 f-h, f'-h').
We found, however, that these patterns are modified at later stages when a new domain of Krox-20 emerges in r3 (Fig. 3i, j, i', j').
Taken together with our other data, this pattern represents a duplication of the r5 expression in r3, rather than a delay in the onset of r3 expression.
The temporal changes in segmental expression and anatomical variation induced by retinoic acid are summarized in Fig. 4.
Initially retinoic acid inhibits the appearance of markers in the r1–3 region, such as Krox-20 , and expands those of the r4 in an anterior direction to the midbrain.
There are no apparent changes in the Hox code in the r5–7 region.
Accompanying the expanded domain of r4 expression, neural crest cells migrating from this region also express r4 markers.
An important finding is that these changes are not stable; expression of r4 markers continues in r2 but they are specifically downregulated in r1 and r3.
Together with this downregulation there is an activation of r5 markers in r3.
Owing to the fact that there are underlying molecular mechanisms that modify these early retinoic acid-induced patterns, the net effect of retinoic acid application to preheadfold-stage mouse embryos is a duplication of the r4/5 Hox code in r2/3, which ultimately results in a homeotic transformation of rhombomeric phenotypes.
It is important to note that segmentation in the hindbrain has a role outside the neural epithelium in patterning the branchial region by way of the neural crest, and the experimental and clinical dysmorphologies induced by retinoic acid frequently include the appearance of structural alterations in the first branchial arch.
Because we observe changes in Hox expression in neural crest and motor nerves as well as in the early neural epithelium, multiple groups of cells that will enter and populate the first branchial arch may have adopted a second branchial arch identity.
Therefore some of the clinical retinoic acid-treated phenotypes could be explained by alterations in Hox expression similar to those reported here.
The early retinoic acid-induced ectopic expression of the r4 Hox code in a broad anterior region of the hindbrain does not permanently result in this entire region adopting an r4 identity, as has been proposed.
Rather, our results imply that at the preheadfold time of treatment (7.5d.p.c.), a certain degree of regional variation has already been specified at the level of rhombomere pairs; retinoic acid is unable to override the specification choice of an odd- or even-numbered character.
This is implied by the subsequent downregulation of the Hox-B1 and B2 domains specifically in r1 and r3.
An important point in these experiments is that retinoic acid application at 7.5d.p.c. causes the rhombomere transformations, but the rhombomeres themselves appear normal in size.
Hence retinoic acid does not seem to alter the relative growth and elaboration of rhombomeres, but induces changes in their identity.
But we have noted that treatments of retinoic acid at even earlier stages of embryogenesis (7.0d.p.c.) causes more extensive alterations in midbrain/forebrain structures and result in a compression of the most rostral rhombomeres (r1-r3) in the hindbrain, as observed in other vertebrate embryos.
Initial analysis of lacZ staining patterns in such embryos suggests that, despite this compression, there has also been a duplication of r4 markers in the r2 region.
Therefore differences in the timing of retinoic acid exposure can independently alter processes of growth and regional identity in the hindbrain, which could explain much of the phenotypic variation in retinoic acid-treated embryos.
Note added in proof:We have adopted the revised nomenclature for vertebrate Hox genes suggested by the Beechwood Ridge Nomenclature Committee which replaces Hox-2 with Hox-B as a complex and, individually Hox-2.9=Hox-B1 and Hox-2.8=Hox-B2 .
FIG. 1 Retinoic acid (RA) induces Hox expression of r4 and second arch neural crest markers in r2 and first branchial arch.
Hox-B1 response to RA. a-f , The normal pattern of expression found in untreated embryos carrying the Hox-B1/lacZ transgene. (a ) Lateral view of 7.75 d.p.c.
embryo showing expression of Hox-B1 extending along the neural epithelium to the presumptive future r4 region of the hind- brain.
Anterior expression becomes restricted to r4 and gradually regresses posteriorly along the spinal cord as seen in the lateral views at 8.5 d.p.c.
(b ) and 9.5 d.p.c.
(c).
The dorsal view of the 9.5d.p.c. embryo (d)clearly shows that the later phase of Hox-B1 expression is restricted to r4 and a small population of neural crest cells migrating laterally from the region.
At 10.5 d.p.c.
(e)a small domain of expression appears along the ventral midline of r5 adjacent to the floorplate and represents the cell bodies of the facial nerve.
Below each panel is a similar transgenic embryo at the same stage and plane of view which has been exposed to RA (a'-f').
At 7.75 d.p.c.
(a ') expression has expanded to a more anterior domain.
By 8.5d.p.c. (b' ) expression posterior of r4 begins to regress as in the control, but there is a broadened domain extending from r4 into the midbrain.
This anterior domain eventually resolves at around 9.5d.p.c. (c', d' ) to give a two-stripe pattern of expression in r2 and r4.
There is also expression in the motor nerve cell bodies along the midline of r3 at 9.5d.p.c. (d')and r3+r5 at 10.5d.p.c. (e').
The transgene is expressed in both treated and untreated embryos in the facial motor nerve (vii) exiting r4 and innervating the second branchial arch (b2)(f, f').
In addition to a normal facial motor nerve, RA induces the expression of the Hox-B1/lacZ transgene in a second motor nerve that exits from r2 and innervates the first branchial arch indicated by the open arrow head (f').
This is the normal position of the trigeminal motor nerve.
By 10.5 d.p.c.
there is a complete duplication of the normal r4/5 pattern of expression in r2/3. ov, Position of the otic vesicle; r, rhombomere.
Hox-B2 response to RA. g-i , Normal staining patterns of a Hox-B2/lacZ transgene which is primarily expressed in r4 and neural crest migrating into the second branchial arch.
Some patchy expression can be found in cells of the posterior ectoderm. g , Lateral view at 8.5 d.p.c..h , Dorsal and i , lateral views of a 9.5 d.p.c.
embryo. g'-i' , In embryos exposed to RA the early r4 expression domain expands at 8.0 d.p.c.
(g') as observed using the Hox-B1 markers.
Neural crest (nc) streams from the entire expanded region as seen in the dorsal view at 8.5 (h').
The early expression is modified and becomes restricted to r2 and r4 and their migrating crest populations which is seen in a lateral view of a 9.0d.p.c. embryo (i ').
METHODS.
Permanent lines of transgenic mice were produced by microinjection into fertilized eggs from F 1 backcrosses (CBAxC57) and transferred to pseudopregnant females.
The genomic constructs were isolated from the mouse Hox-B1 and B2 genes into which the E. coli β -galactosidase reporter gene was inserted to create fusion proteins (H.M. and M.H.S., manuscripts in preparation).
Embryos were stained for β -galactosidase activity in whole preparations as described previously.
All- trans retinoic acid (25mgml -1 in dimethylsulphoxide) was diluted 1/10 in sesame seed oil and 200μl of this was given to pregnant females at 7.5d.p.c. by gavage for a final dose of 20mgkg -1 as previously described.
FIG. 2 Hox-B1 marks the neurons of the facial motor nerve in r4/5 and retinoic acid (RA) induces a duplication of the facial motor nerve in trigeminal territory.
a , A flat mounted hindbrain preparation of an untreated 10.5 d.p.c.
embryo highlighting the staining of the Hox-B1/lacZ transgene in the facial motor nerve exiting r4, and along the midline in r5 adjacent to the floor plate.
b , Cell bodies of the trigeminal nerve in r3 of a normal embryo are not located at the ventral midline but are distributed more laterally (arrowhead) and send their axons directly lateral before turning anteriorly and crossing into r2. c , DiI retrograde tracing of the facial motor nerve in a normal embryo shows that the cell bodies in r5 (indicated by the white arrow) are located along the midline and project their axons anteriorly into r4.
The transgene staining is co-localized with the cell bodies of the facial nerve.
In b and c one half of the hindbrain is shown with the floor plate and ventral midline to the right, and the dorsal/lateral edge to the left.
d , In RA-treated embryos labelled with an injection of DiI at the exit point in r2, the cell bodies of the efferent axons in r3 have the characteristics of the facial nerve (in the normal r5) in that they are located along the lateral border of the floor plate and initially have a direct rostral trajectory (large arrow).
r2 neurons also extend processes across the floor plate (small arrow head) as in the normal r4.
In this specimen, DiI was injected at both the r2 exit point (on the right side of the embryo) and at the r4 exit point on the left side.
e , Inset showing both sides of the specimen in d .
Note that lateral motor neurons in r3 are traced by dye applied to the r4 exit point (and not r2 as in normal embryos); thus the r3 territory is shared by the rostral r4-labelled cells (left side) and the caudal r2-labelled cells (right side).
Confocal Z-series maximum brightness projection displayed in false colour LUT. f , Diagrammatic summary showing the positions of the axons, cells bodies and the Hox-B1/lacZ expression (stipple) in normal and RA-treated flat-mounted 10.5 d.p.c.
mouse embryo hindbrains; it appears that the trigeminal nerve has been transformed into a facial identity.
ov, Otic vesicle; cb, cell bodies of the facial motor neurons; fp, floor plate; b, basal plate; a, alar plate.
METHODS.
Flat-mount slide preparations were made by isolating the region of the hindbrain concerned, cutting at the dorsal midline, opening out and flattening the tissue, and mounting in glycerol.
One half was stained with β -gal to verify phenotype, and in the other half efferent cranial nerves emerging from the hindbrain were traced in paraformaldehyde fixed embryos 10–10.5d.p.c. by injecting small volumes DiIC 18 (1,1'-dioctadecyl-3,3,3',3' — tetramethylindocarbocyanine perchlorate, molecular probes, 5mgml -1 in dimethylformamide) at their exit points.
After 24h at room temperature to allow diffusion along axonal membranes, hindbrains were dissected from the embryos, flat-mounted in fixation buffer and viewed both under green excitation on a fluorescence microscope (Zeiss, set 15) and a confocal microscope (BioRad) using the 514 nm laser line.
FIG. 3 Retinoic acid represses the early r3 stripe of Krox-20 expression and reactivates expression at later stages.
a-e , Lateral views of the temporal and spatial patterns of expression reflected by the Krox-20 gene in control transgenic embryos.
At 8.25 d.p.c.
staining first appears in r3 (a ) and after a few hours is joined by staining in r5 (b ).
This pattern persists up to 9.5d.p.c. (c)when both stripes of expression are at their strongest.
At 10.0d.p.c. (d)Krox-20 expression begins to be downregulated in r3 and is followed, at 10.5d.p.c. (e)by the downregulation of expression in r5;f-j (lateral views) and f'-j' (dorsal views) show that retinoic acid treatment alters this pattern.
The gene is not initially activated in r3 at 8.25 d.p.c.
as shown in f and f' .
At 8.5 d.p.c.
(g, g' ) expression appears in r5 and not in r3.
At a stage when both endogenous stripes would be present and at their highest level, the treated embryos express the gene only in r5 (h, h' ).
At 10.0 d.p.c., expression is beginning to appear in r3 (i, i')and this pattern persists until 10.5 d.p.c.
(j, j')when expression of Krox-20 begins to be downregulated in r5, but remains at a high level in r3. ov, Otic vesicle; r3, r5 rhombomeres 3 and 5.
FIG. 4 Temporal changes in the hindbrain Hox code induced by retinoic acid.
a , Diagrammatic representation of the normal pattern of expression of Krox-20 ,Hox-B1 , and the r4 domain of Hox-B2 in untreated 8.5 d.p.c.
embryos.
When a single dose of RA (20mgkg -1 ) is given to 7.5 d.p.c.
embryos the patterns of expression undergo a series of modifications between 8.5–10.5 d.p.c., as indicated by the series of sketches.
b , Initially Krox-20 does not appear in r3, but does appear in r5.
Hox-B1 and Hox-B2 are expressed in r4 through an expanded domain which extends to the midbrain. c , Neural crest migrating from this expanded domain expresses Hox-B2,instead of just the cells migrating from r4 in con- trol embryos.
d , Around 9.0d.p.c. expression of Hox-B1 and Hox-B2 declines (as indicated by dots of colour) in r1 and r3 and there are two distinct populations of neural crest cells adjacent to r2 and r4 expressing Hox-B2. e,By 9.5 d.p.c.
Krox-20 begins to appear in r3 (dots), and there is staining of Hox-B1 along the midline of r2/3/4 which corresponds to cell bodies of both the normal facial nerve and the transformed nerve which will exit from r2. f , By 10.5 d.p.c.
there is a complete duplication of the r4/5 patterns of expression of Hox-B1, Hox-B2 and Krox-20 in r2/3, including the associated motor nerves and neural crest.
Cell bodies in r2-r5 and both motor nerves express Hox-B1.
Krox-20 is highly expressed in r3 and r5.
These changes show that RA has altered the Hox code in a manner that leads to the posterior transformation of r2/3 in the first branchial arch.
MB, midbrain; HB, hindbrain; SC, spinal cord; OV, otic vesicle; mnVII, facial motor nerve; nc, neural crest.
Proliferation of oligodendrocyte precursor cells depends on electrical activity in axons
B. A. Barres & M. C. Raff
OLIGODENDROCYTES myelinate axons in the vertebrate central nervous system.
It would, therefore, make sense if axons played a part in controlling the number of oligodendrocytes that develop in a myelinated tract.
Although oligodendrocytes themselves normally do not divide, the precursor cells that give rise to them do.
Here we show that the proliferation of oligodendrocyte precursor cells in the developing rat optic nerve depends on electrical activity in neighbouring axons, and that this activity-dependence can be circumvented by experimentally increasing the concentration of platelet-derived growth factor, which is present in the optic nerve and stimulates these cells to proliferate in culture.
These findings suggest that axonal electrical activity normally controls the production and/or release of the growth factors that are responsible for proliferation of oligodendrocyte precursor cells and thereby helps to control the number of oligodendrocytes that develop in the region.
To examine the role of axons in the proliferation of oligodendrocyte precursors, we transected one of the optic nerves in postnatal day 8 (P8) rats.
After 4 days, the average number of mitotic figures per section was 90% lower in transected nerves than in the uncut control nerves (Fig. 1a, b).
To test the possibility that the axons normally display a glial mitogen on their surface (as has been suggested for axons in the peripheral nervous system (PNS)), which is lost when the axons degenerate and are phagocytosed after transection, we studied the effect of transection on mitosis in postnatal optic nerves of C57B1/6 and C57B1/6-WLD mice.
C57B1/6-WLD mice have a genetic defect that prolongs the survival of the distal stumps of transected axons in both the PNS and central nervous system (CNS).
Despite the lack of axonal degeneration in the transected optic nerves of C57B1/6-WLD mice (which we confirmed by labelling with the RT97 monoclonal antineurofilament antibody), the decrease in mitotic cells after transection was not significantly different in these mice than in normal C57B1/6 mice (Fig. 1 c),making it unlikely that the loss of an axolemmal mitogen is the cause of the decrease in proliferation.
To test the possibility that electrical activity mediates the axonal effects on glial cell proliferation, we injected tetrodotoxin (TTX) into one eye of P15 rats to eliminate the electrical activity of retinal ganglion cell axons and examined the nerves 2 days later.
The number of mitotic cells per section was decreased by about 86% in TTX-treated rats compared to sham injected rats (Fig. 2 a).
To determine if the effect of TTX was specific to oligodendrocyte precursor cells, we injected TTX into one eye of P7 rats and 2 days later injected the rats with the thymidine analogue bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) to label cells synthesizing DNA.
One hour later we dissociated the nerves, cultured them for a few hours, and double-labelled them with an anti-BrdU antibody and an antibody that labels oligodendrocyte precursor cells.
The average number of BrdU-labelled oligodendrocyte precursor cells fell by 80% in the TTX-treated nerve, but there was no significant change in the numbers of BrdU-labelled cells in the remaining population, indicating that TTX specifically blocks proliferation of the oligodendrocyte precursor cells (Fig. 2b).
The effect is unlikely to be directly on the precursor cells, which also have TTX-sensitive Na + channels, as TTX did not inhibit the platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) -stimulated division of purified oligodendrocyte precursor cells in vitro (Table 1).
To determine whether TTX blocks proliferation of oligodendrocyte precursor cells by decreasing the production or release of a mitogen, we injected TTX into one eye of P10 animals and examined their optic nerves 2 days later; in these experiments, some of the animals also received a subarachnoid injection of COS cells that were genetically engineered to secrete the AA form of PDGF into the cerebrospinal fluid, from where it is delivered to the optic nerve.
The animals that received the PDGF-secreting COS cells were protected from the anti-proliferative effects of nerve transection (Fig. 3), whereas animals that received nontransfected COS cells were not (data not shown).
These results, together with previous observations that isolated oligodendrocyte precursor cells in the absence of neurons retain high sensitivity to the mitogenic effects of PDGF, suggest that electrical activity in axons normally stimulates the production and/or release of mitogens that specifically stimulate the proliferation of oligodendrocyte precursor cells.
The recent discovery that many CNS neurons make PDGF, raises the possibility that electrically active axons release PDGF, which stimulates oligodendrocyte precursors to proliferate.
Axons, however, have not been shown to secrete protein signalling molecules, whereas type-1 astrocytes, a major class of glial cells in the optic nerve, have; moreover, type-1 astrocytes make the AA form of PDGF both in vivo and in vitro.
It seems likely that type-1 astrocytes are a major source of PDGF in the developing rat optic nerve, as the number of oligodendrocyte precursor cells in the nerve appears to be limited by the amount of PDGF present, and the number of these precursor cells plateaus at P14, just when the number of type-1 astrocytes plateaus.
Thus we favour the possibility that electrically active axons produce a signal that stimulates type-1 astrocytes to produce and/or release PDGF.
Consistent with this possibility, we find that optic nerve type-1 astrocytes in serum- and neuron-free cultures do not secrete molecules that stimulate oligodendrocyte precursor cells to proliferate in vitro (our unpublished observations).
An alternative possibility is that electrically active axons release substances such as K + or glutamate that potentiate the mitogenic effect of PDGF or other growth factors.
As shown in Table 1, however, we have failed to find evidence that K + or glutamate potentiate the mitogenic effect of PDGF on purified oligodendrocyte precursor cells.
Whatever the mechanism, our findings suggest that axonal electrical activity normally stimulates the proliferation of oligodendrocyte precursor cells, thereby increasing the number of oligodendrocytes that develop locally.
These findings may account for the previous reports that premature eye opening accelerates optic nerve myelination, whereas dark rearing delays it.
They may also explain the observations that eye removal profoundly inhibits gliogenesis in the optic tectum of the frog and mouse.
Electrical activity has previously been found to affect glial development: intracranial infusion of TTX into embryonic cats altered the ultrastructure of glial cells in the optic nerve.
Our results also raise the possibility that demyelinating lesions that cause a conduction block along axons, as occurs in multiple sclerosis, may fail to remyelinate in part because the silent axons fail to stimulate oligodendrocyte precursor cells to proliferate.
This study raises several important questions.
How do electrically active axons signal oligodendrocyte precursor cells to divide?
Do active axons stimulate developing Schwann cells or their precursors to divide?
Do similar mechanisms operate to mediate communication between active neurons and neighbouring glial cells in the adult nervous system?
The answers should have important implications for understanding how the normal nervous system develops and functions and how it responds to injury and disease.
About 10,000 oligodendrocyte precursor cells, purified to greater than 99.9% homogeneity by sequential immunopanning as described previously, were plated onto PDL-coated wells of a 96-well Falcon culture dish in 100μl of serum-free Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium containing insulin (5μgml -1 ), transferrin (100μgml -1 ), bovine serum albumin (100μgml -1 ), progesterone (60ngml -1 ), putrescine (16μgml -1 ), sodium selenite (40ngml -1 ), thyroxine (40ngml -1 ), triiodothyronine (30ngml -1 ) and PDGF-AA (Peprotech; 0.5ngml -1 , unless otherwise noted), TTX, K + or glutamate.
After 24h, BrdU (10μM) was added, and 24h later, the cells were fixed and labelled with an anti-BrdU monoclonal antibody.
The results shown are means  s.e.m.
of three cultures.
The decreasing BrdU incorporation with increasing glutamate concentration was due to cell death.
FIG. 1 The effect of nerve transection on cell proliferation in the developing optic nerve in rats (b)and in C57B1/6 and C57B1/6-WLD mice (c).
A typical mitotic figure in a P12 optic nerve section stained with the nuclear counterstain, propidium iodide, is shown in a.
METHODS.
P8 (a, b)rats or P12 (c)mice were anaesthetized with ether and the right optic nerve was cut just behind the eyeball.
Four days later, the rats were reanaesthetized with ether and perfused with 4% paraformaldehyde, as previously described.
The optic nerves were incubated in 4% paraformaldehyde at 4°C overnight, transferred to 30% sucrose in PBS until equilibrated, frozen in OCT compound (Miles) and cut into 8μm longitudinal sections, which extended the entire length of the nerve, with a Bright cryostat.
The sections were collected onto gelatinized glass microscope slides, air dried, post-fixed in 70% ethanol for 10min at -20°C, and stained with propidium iodide (4μgml -1 ) in minimal Eagle's medium buffered with HEPES (MEM/HEPES) and containing DNase-free RNase A (100μgml -1 ) for 30min at 37°C.
The slides were washed three times in PBS and mounted in Citifluor.
The number of mitotic figures per section was determined by averaging the number of mitotic figures counted in five optic nerve sections per animal.
In this and the following figures, the results obtained in four animals are shown as means  s.e.m.
The section shown in a was examined with a MRC-600 laser-scanning confocal imaging system in conjunction with a Nikon Optophot microscope.
Scale bar, 8μm.
FIG. 2 The effect of an intraocular injection of tetrodotoxin (TTX) on mitosis (a)or BrdU incorporation (b)in the developing rat optic nerve.
METHODS.
TTX (0.5μl TTX; 10 -4 M) was injected slowly over about 2min with a 5μl Hamilton syringe through a 34 gauge needle into the right eye of ether-anaesthetized P15 (a)or P7 (b)rats as previously described.
Control animals received an identical volume of the corresponding acetate buffer vehicle (pH7).
Injections were made into the vitreous by placing the needle just posterior to the corneoscleral junction, and the success of the injection was confirmed by ensuring that the pupillary response was eliminated.
The optic nerves were studied after 2 days.
In a,optic nerve sections were prepared as  described in Fig. 1.
In b,cells in S phase were labelled in vivo by an intraperitoneal injection of BrdU (0.1mgg -1 body weight; Boehringer-Mannheim), which is incorporated into replicating DNA.
The animals were sacrificed 60min later and optic nerve cell suspensions were prepared as previously described.
Cells were plated onto poly-D-lysine (PDL) -coated coverslips and cultured for several hours before fixation with 4% paraformaldehyde for 90s at room temperature.
Cells were double-labelled by immunofluorescence with monoclonal anti-BrdU and A2B5 antibodies as previously described.
Oligodendrocyte precursor cells were identified by their characteristic morphology and by the presence of A2B5 (ref. 24).
FIG. 3 The effect of increasing PDGF levels on cell proliferation in normal developing optic nerve and after TTX treatment.
METHODS.
TTX was injected into the right eye of P10 rats and both optic nerves were examined 2 days later, as described in Fig. 1.
Some animals also received a subarachnoid injection of COS-7 cells that were transiently transfected with a PDGF-A complementary DNA and which secreted PDGF into the cerebrospinal fluid.
The COS-7 cells were  transfected 18 hours before injection with the PHYKA5 PDGF plasmid expression vector, as previously described.
Two million cells in 3μl were slowly injected under ether anaesthesia through the right frontal skull into the subarachnoid space using a 10μl Hamilton syringe.
Identical injections of mock-transfected COS-7 cells had no effect on mitosis in postnatal optic nerves.
Evidence for heterogeneous reactions in the Antarctic autumn stratosphere
J. G. Keys, P. V. Johnston, R. D. Blatherwick & F. J. Murcray
REACTIVE chlorine compounds are known to cause ozone depletion in the Antarctic stratosphere, but they can be bound into an inactive form through reactions with nitrogen dioxide.
In the spring, NO 2 can be converted to a long-lived reservoir species, HNO 3 , on the surface of polar stratospheric clouds.
This removes NO 2 from the stratosphere and allows chlorine-catalysed ozone destruction to proceed.
It has been suggested that similar reactions may take place on background sulphate aerosols in the Antarctic stratosphere, but as yet there has been no unambiguous evidence for these reactions in the absence of polar stratospheric clouds (although there have been observations of ozone loss attributed to volcanic aerosols).
Here we present measurements of Antarctic stratospheric NO 2 and HNO 3 concentrations taken in 1991.
Our results demonstrate that reactive nitrogen was converted to HNO 3 in autumn, before temperatures were low enough for polar stratospheric clouds to form.
We conclude that heterogeneous chemistry on background aerosols was responsible for this conversion, which brought with it the potential for additional ozone loss in the autumn.
Antarctic ozone depletion is believed to be dominated by reactive chlorine in the stratosphere participating in a catalytic cycle involving the ClO dimer, Cl 2 O 2 (ref. 6).
The importance of NO 2 in the Antarctic stratosphere stems from its influence on the partitioning of chlorine between the reactive form, ClO, and the less reactive form, chlorine nitrate, ClONO 2 (see for example ref. 7):
Here we examine seasonal changes in NO 2 , and in its long-term storage reservoir, HNO 3 .
Figure 1 shows the history of vertical column NO 2 during 1991.
The data were acquired using ground-based differential absorption spectroscopy at Arrival Heights, Antarctica (78°S, 167°E).
In autumn, there is a progressive loss of NO 2 as the nights grow longer.
When the Sun first reaches solar zenith angles greater than 95 ° near day 55, continuous daytime photolysis of NO 3 ceases, allowing the production of N 2 O 5 through the reactions  
NO 2 column amounts remain low during winter and in the springtime polar vortex, and later in spring gradually recover to their summer maximum values.
Superimposed on the general slope of the springtime recovery are large cyclic increases in NO 2 , which are a consequence of planetary wave activity moving the NO y and ozone depleted vortex away from the observing site.
In January 1991 a Fourier transform infrared spectrometer (FTIR) was installed at the Arrival Heights laboratory to measure HNO 3 in absorption, and in particular to observe the behaviour of the nitric acid column in autumn as the Sun left the polar cap.
Measurements were made throughout the year as conditions permitted.
Data were analysed by comparing observed and synthetic spectra for the  5 bands of HNO 3 in the 866cm -1 to 870cm -1 spectral region, where there are seven well defined manifolds of HNO 3 and an absence of other absorbers.
Synthetic spectra were generated using the latest line strengths available (A. Goldman, personal communication) and ray tracing through a multilayer model of the atmosphere.
Results of the autumn and spring nitric acid measurements are shown in Fig. 2, together with total column ozone data.
It can be seen that during autumn there is a steady increase in the HNO 3 column amount, followed by a decline over winter and a recovery in late spring.
The conventional understanding of nitric acid photochemistry is that HNO 3 is produced by the reaction of NO 2 with OH, and destroyed by photolysis and by reaction with OH.
In the Antarctic stratosphere, the lifetime is likely to be many weeks.
As autumn progresses, the gas-phase model predicts no substantial increase of HNO 3 (refs. 8,9).
A simulated conversion of N 2 O 5 to HNO 3 on background aerosols, however, shows column nitric acid to increase between days 55 and 75 in autumn by about 3.0x10 15 molecule cm -2 (ref. 9).
Those calculations also show that the overnight decay of NO 2 at Arrival Heights agrees best with the model when the effect of background aerosols is included.
A straight-line fit to the nitric acid data of Fig. 2 present between day 55 (when N 2 O 5 formation starts) and the end of the season shows a rate of increase in the column amount that is very close to the model calculations above.
The NO 2 and HNO 3 data of Figs 1 and 2 are therefore consistent with the view that the autumn increase in HNO 3 is due to a surface-catalysed reaction on background aerosols  Laboratory work has shown that the N 2 O 5 uptake in this reaction is surprisingly fast, and fairly insensitive to the sulphuric acid concentration in the aerosol or the temperature.
Perhaps more important for data interpretation, the nitric acid is believed to be returned to the gas phase, and is therefore measurable using ground-based FTIR techniques, unlike heterogeneous reactions on polar stratospheric cloud surfaces in the Antarctic spring where HNO 3 can be sequestered in the solid phase.
By the end of autumn, then, most of the NO y can be expected to be in the form of nitric acid.
By the beginning of spring, the column amount of HNO 3 has fallen to 1.6 x10 16 moleculecm -2 , about half the value at the end of autumn.
The temperature at 20km altitude on day 240 was 186K (ref. 13).
Our interpretation is that gas-phase HNO 3 has by that time been sequestered in the condensed phase by heterogeneous reactions on polar stratospheric cloud surfaces, forming nitric acid trihydrate as temperatures fell below 196K in winter  It is probable that a substantial fraction of nitric acid has not only been lost from the gas phase, but also removed from the stratosphere by the growth and subsequent sedimentation of aerosol particles.
Evidence of such ‘denitrification’ is provided in Antarctic measurements from aircraft.
Figure 2 shows that for spring there was a cyclical pattern of peaks and troughs in both O 3 and HNO 3 , with peaks for example near days 260 and 275.
The peaks also correlate with high NO 2 values, so our assumption is that in these episodes we are measuring lower-latitude air as the denitrified polar vortex moves away from the site under the influence of planetary wave activity, as has been demonstrated with previous NO 2 data.
The nitric acid amount as measured inside the vortex reaches its lowest levels of 1.1x10 16 molecule cm -2 near day 287, and it can be seen in Fig. 2 that this coincides with minimum ozone amounts of about 140Dobson units (DU).
The HNO 3 column amount measured inside the vortex is in close agreement with values observed in 1986 (ref. 17), and a little higher (within the errors) than that recorded from the Arrival Heights laboratory in 1987.
Considerable variability can be expected during spring and from year to year, both because the location of the vortex varies with respect to the observing site, and because of the large horizontal gradient in HNO 3 across the vortex edge.
As spring progresses and the days lengthen, the O 3 and NO 2 column amounts recover, and at the same time there is a steady increase in the column amount of gas-phase HNO 3 .
Some of this increase can be attributed to the evaporation of remaining nitric acid from the condensed phase as temperatures rise.
This process is augmented by its three-body production from NO 2 and OH, and is in competition with destruction by photolysis  It is thought, however, that the lifetime of HNO 3 against photolysis in the cold Antarctic stratosphere is many weeks.
Changes in HNO 3 during late spring are also likely to be due to meridional mixing as the vortex begins to break up.
Long periods of cloud cover hindered data acquisition during the 1991–92 summer period.
The limited data show, however, that nitric acid amounts at the end of December 1991 and in mid-January 1992 were 2.0x10 16 molecule cm -2 , consistent with the measurements for January 1991.
The 1991 autumn measurements were made before the eruption of Mount Pinatubo, so we can discount the effects of heterogeneous chemistry due to an increased volcanic aerosol loading as observed at lower latitudes.
By the end of September, however, there was evidence of volcanic aerosol in the polar vortex.
The significance of the data lies in the way that odd nitrogen is partitioned in autumn in the long-lived reservoir of HNO 3 , rather than the temporary reservoir of N 2 O 5 .
In the Antarctic lower stratosphere, for solar zenith angles typical of late autumn and early spring, the lifetime of HNO 3 against photolysis is many weeks, whereas that of N 2 O 5 is a few days.
Conversion of NO 2 to HNO 3 therefore effectively removes NO x  from the atmosphere and thus its potential to lock up chlorine in a nonreactive form.
We believe that the consistently low values of HNO 3 measured inside the vortex in spring (Fig. 2) result from conversion of HNO 3 from the gas to the solid phase, probably accompanied by loss from the atmosphere altogether by sedimentation.
The very low values of NO 2 observed at the end of autumn and the beginning of spring imply that the NO x  reservoir is almost empty, with the remaining fraction lying at altitudes above the ozone depletion region.
An accelerated loss of NO 2 through aerosol chemistry is therefore likely to increase the rate of ozone reduction in autumn, but have little effect in spring when ozone losses will be dominated by heterogeneous reactions on polar stratospheric clouds in the lower stratosphere.
We therefore argue that aerosol chemistry in Antarctica will, through its added influence in autumn, contribute to both the extent and the duration of the annual ozone depletion.
The consequences at mid-latitudes of NO x reduction through aerosol chemistry are difficult to assess.
Any ozone depletion is likely to be small, however, because despite the huge increases in reactive surfaces provided by the Pinatubo aerosol, which resulted in a mid-latitude loss of 20% NO 2 , there was no apparent reduction in the ozone column.
In this analysis we have not attempted to quantify the role of chlorine chemistry in the partitioning of NO y  .
Heterogeneous conversion of ClONO 2 and HCl to HNO 3 is likely to be unimportant on background aerosols, whereas conversion of N 2 O 5 to HNO 3 by reaction (4) is likely to be important.
We conclude that the build-up of the HNO 3 column in autumn is consistent with N 2 O 5 uptake on background aerosols, and that the loss of HNO 3 over winter is consistent with reactions occurring on polar stratospheric clouds.
Because of the importance of coupling between depleted NO x  , elevated ClO x and ozone loss, we suggest that the data have significance in the wider global context, even though mid-latitude ozone loss through background aerosol chemistry has not been demonstrated directly.
FIG. 1 Three-day running averages of NO 2 vertical column amounts for 1991 in units of molecules cm -2 , for morning and evening when the Sun is at a solar zenith angle of 90°.
The lower morning values are a consequence of overnight conversion of NO 2 to other reservoirs of NO y .
The seasonal trend in this overnight decay of NO 2 is best fitted by model results when the effects of reactions on background aerosols are included.
The approximate vertical column has been obtained by dividing the slant column by 20.
FIG. 2 Nitric acid vertical column amounts in units of moleculescm -2 derived from direct-Sun FTIR observations in the 866–870cm -1 spectral region, and the approximate ozone column obtained from scattered sunlight measurements at twilight.
We attribute the steady increase in nitric acid during autumn and the reduction during winter to the effects of heterogeneous chemistry.
Wave-driven variations in the ozone column in spring can be seen to correlate with those in the HNO 3 data.
We have taken the HNO 3 vertical profile for 65°S in May from the LIMS satellite results, autumn temperatures from the May 80°S zonal mean climatology of Barnett and Corney, and springtime temperatures from balloonsonde flights.
Errors could be introduced by inaccurate assumptions made in obtaining the vertical profiles of temperature, pressure and nitric acid and by uncertainties in the line parameters, although sensitivity tests of retrievals using LIMS profiles for January and May with appropriate temperature and pressure data show a change of only 1%.
As a further test, we used a greatly perturbed nitric acid vertical profile for spring in which HNO 3 was removed between 15 and 20km.
Temperature data were taken from ref. 24.
With this profile, HNO 3 column amounts are 17% lower than with our ‘standard’ profile, so that an autumn/spring offset of this magnitude could conceivably result from inadequate knowledge of the actual HNO 3 vertical distribution.
In general we estimate that sources of error in the retrievals limit the precision to about 10% but that the absolute errors, taking into account uncertainties in the line parameters, are more likely to be of the order of 15%.
Primitive dinosaur skeleton from Argentina and the early evolution of Dinosauria
Paul C. Sereno, Catherine A. Forster, Raymond R. Rogers & Alfredo M. Monetta
WE report here the discovery of a primitive dinosaur skeleton from Upper Triassic strata in northwestern Argentina.
The 1-m-long skeleton represents a new taxon,Eoraptor lunensis gen. et sp. nov., which is close to the predicted structure and size of the common dinosaurian ancestor.
The skull, which has a unique heterodont dentition, does not exhibit any of the specializations of the major dinosaurian clades (Ornithischia, Sauropodomorpha, Theropoda).
The forelimbs are less than half the length of the hind limbs, which suggests an obligatory bipedal posture.
Although close in overall form to the common dinosaurian ancestor, the functionally tridactyl, grasping/raking hand and other features show that Eoraptor is allied phylogenetically with theropods.
The discovery of Eoraptor supports the hypothesis that dinosaurs diverged rapidly at small body size from a common ancestor, with the principal herbivorous and carnivorous lineages present by the middle Carnian.
Skeletal remains of the earliest (middle Carnian) dinosaurs are rare and have been unearthed mostly from the fossiliferous Upper Triassic Ischigualasto Formation in northwestern Argentina.
These dinosaurs include the ornithischian Pisanosaurus and the theropod Herrerasaurus.
The new skeleton, a contemporary of Herrerasaurus in the lower third of the formation (R.R.R., C. C. Swisher, P.C.S., C.A.F. and A.M.M., manuscript in preparation), represents a third species.
Despite its small size, closure of sutures in the vertebral column and partial fusion of the scapulocoracoid suggest that the skeleton had reached adult size.
Order Saurischia
Suborder Theropoda
Eoraptor lunensis gen. et sp. nov.
Etymology.
Eos,dawn (Greek) in reference to its primitive structure and early temporal occurrence;raptor,plunderer (Latin) in reference to its carnivorous habits and grasping hand;luna,moon (Latin) and -ensis,place (Latin), in reference to the type locality.
Holotype.
PVSJ 512 (Museo de Ciencias Naturales, Universidad Nacional de San Juan, San Juan, Argentina), an articulated skeleton lacking only the distal caudal vertebrae (Figs 1 and 2).
The skeleton was preserved in a muddy siltstone in close association with many of the common vertebrates in the Ischigualasto fauna (Herrerasaurus, Saurosuchus,Aetosauroides, Ischigualastia, Exaeretodon,and an undescribed small carnivorous cynodont).
Horizon and locality.
Ischigualasto Formation (Upper Triassic: middle Carnian); Valley of the Moon (Ischigualasto Provincial Park, Ischigualasto-Villa Unión Basin, northwestern Argentina)(R.R.R. et al.,manuscript in preparation).
Diagnosis.
Small 1-m-long theropod with external naris slightly enlarged, premaxilla with slender posterolateral process, and leaf-shaped premaxillary and anterior maxillary crowns.
The skull follows a primitive saurischian design, with transversely narrow proportions, a relatively large antorbital opening, a small subnarial foramen beneath the external naris, and a forked posterior process on the jugal (Fig. 1a, b).
Derived cranial characters that distinguish ornithischians, sauropodomorphs, and theropods, however, are absent.
For example, there is no development of an intra-mandibular joint, as occurs in Herrerasaurus and other theropods, and the external naris and the narial fossa are not greatly enlarged as in sauropodomorphs.
The dentition is heterodont (Fig. 1 b, c).
The posterior half of the upper tooth row has serrated, recurved crowns typical of theropods.
The crowns in the anterior half of the tooth row, in contrast, are leaf-shaped with a basal constriction that most closely resembles the crown shape in basal sauropodomorphs.
The skeleton exhibits several dinosaurian hallmarks, such as a long deltopectoral crest on the humerus, reduction of the outer digits of the hand (Fig. 2), and an ascending process on the astragalus.
Similar to the skull, the skeleton lacks many derived characters that distinguish later dinosaurs.
There are only three sacral vertebrae that support the pelvis, the lowest number that occurs among dinosaurs, and the hand retains a fifth digit, albeit reduced to a short metacarpal.
There are no pneumatic cavities in the presacral vertebrae, as often occurs among saurischians, but all of the long bones of the skeleton are strongly hollowed as in theropods.
A detailed cladistic analysis of the early branching history of Dinosauria supports a basal split into ornithischians and saurischians, the latter including herrerasaurids (Fig. 3 a).
Although Eoraptor is structurally close to the common dinosaurian ancestor, several advanced features place it among the saurischians as the most primitive known theropod (Fig. 3).
Key saurischian synapomorphies (derived characters) present in Eoraptor include a subnarial foramen in the skull (Fig. 1 c,sf) and modifications that increase the flexibility of the neck (epipophyseal processes and slender, interconnecting ribs).
Features that link Eoraptor with Herrerasaurus and other theropods include a predatory manus with trenchant unguals and enhanced grasping and raking capabilities (elongate distal phalanges, metacarpal pits for phalangeal hyperextension).
The discovery of Eoraptor has opened a window into the early evolution of theropods.
The contemporaneous occurrence of a dinosaur as primitive as Eoraptor with the ornithischian Pisanosaurus and more advanced theropod Herrerasaurus supports the hypothesis that dinosaurs diverged rapidly at small body size from a common ancestor during the early Carnian (Fig. 3 b).
By the middle Carnian, the principal herbivorous and carnivorous lineages of dinosaurs were established.
FIG. 1 PVSJ 512,Eoraptor lunensis,new species.
a,
Stereopair and
b,
reconstruction of the skull in right lateral view.
c,
Right posterior premaxillary and anterior maxillary teeth in lateral view.
Abbreviations: a, angular; antfo, antorbital fossa; ar, articular; d, dentary; emf, external mandibular fenestra; ec, ectopterygoid; f, frontal; j, jugal; l, lacrimal; m, maxilla; n, nasal; nf, narial fossa; p, parietal; pm, premaxilla; po, postorbital; popr, paroccipital process; prf, prefrontal; q, quadrate; qf, quadrate foramen; qj, quadratojugal; sa, surangular; saf, surangular foramen; sf, subnarial foramen; sq, squamosal.
Scale bar,a,5cm;c,1cm.
FIG. 2 Eoraptor lunensis,new species.
Skeletal reconstruction based on PVSJ 512 (length 1m).
Quasi-periodic oscillations in X-ray emission from the Seyfert galaxy NGC5548
I. E. Papadakis & A. Lawrence
EFFORTS to use the variability of X-ray emission from active galactic nuclei (AGNs) as a diagnostic of physical processes in the unresolvable cores have been hampered by the discovery that the variable emission has a ‘red noise’ character, which seems to indicate the absence of any preferred timescale.
The only exception is the claim of a precise periodicity in emission from NGC6814 3 .
Here we analyse archival Exosat observations of the bright Seyfert galaxy NGC5548, and find in the power spectrum a broad peak corresponding to quasi-periodic oscillations (QPOs) with period of .
Both the frequency and magnitude of the QPOs vary systematically with total X-ray luminosity.
Similar behaviour has been seen in compact galactic X-ray binaries, and we suggest that intensity-correlated QPOs may be a generic feature of accretion onto a compact object.
If the QPOs in NGC5548 derive from instability or variability in an accretion disc around a black hole, the black hole mass can be only a few hundred thousand solar masses, an uncomfortably small number for most AGN models.
NGC5548 was observed 12 times with the low-energy imaging system (CMA) and the medium energy (ME) proportional counter array on board the Exosat observatory.
We extracted light-curves from archival data using the Exosat data-base system on the Leicester University Starlink node, and used our own techniques to estimate the power spectrum and fit models.
(Roughly, this involves averaging the usual periodogram in log-log space, giving unbiased independent estimates of known variance, and with distributions close to gaussian.)
We use only the ME observations as the CMA count rate is typically an order of magnitude lower.
Four observations were excluded because of low signal-to-noise ratio or background subtraction problems.
The remainder (see Table 1) were divided into four groups depending on their quality:(1) two long observations (60,000s) with f.r.m.s.8%, where f.r.m.s. is the fractional root mean square amplitude of variability seen;(2) a long observation with low f.r.m.s.5%;(3) three short observations (35,000s) with high f.r.m.s;(4) two short observations with low f.r.m.s.
In the best observations, group 1, the power spectra of both observations show three features (Fig. 1 c, e ): a red-noise component which rises towards low frequencies, a broad peak with a centroid frequency around 2mHz and a flat component at high frequency due to Poisson noise.
The broad feature, which we can loosely refer to as a quasi-periodic oscillation (QPO) cannot be seen directly in the light curve, because many cycles need to be averaged to overcome Poisson noise.
In group 2 the red noise is weak, and there is marginal evidence for a similar broad feature (Fig. 1 b ).
In group 3 the individual observations are too short to see much, but we have constructed an ensemble average power spectrum (Fig.1 a ) which shows no definite evidence for red noise, but strong evidence for a broad feature.
Finally, in group 4, we have again constructed an ensemble average, but there are no significant features.
In the three long observations, models with only a power-law component give values of  with a probability at or below 10% in two out of three cases.
Grouping all three observations, we have  with 50 degrees of freedom.
The probability that a power law can explain all three observations is therefore less than 5%.
We can stir in the other two data sets, taking Poisson noise only as the null hypothesis; again, the probability that power-law and/or Poisson noise explains all the data sets is less than 5%.
A grouped F -test shows that addition of the QPO component is a significant improvement at better than 95% confidence.
Of course, 2 is a global statistic, and is not very sensitive to local features.
On the other hand, our log-power estimates have only approximately a gaussian distribution, and this might lead to incorrect calculation of the likelihood of local peaks.
We therefore did a more rigorous test by calculating a periodogram normalized to the values expected from the null hypothesis of power-law/Poisson noise only, and binning up.
This gives variables of exactly known distribution, so that we can calculate the significance of any given peak under the null hypothesis.
The result is shown in Fig.2; in three out of five cases a high peak is present at over 95% confidence.
The probability of this occurring is only 0.1%.
Statistically, the QPO feature is certainly real, but is probably not present in all observations.
Now we consider possible systematic problems.
The background light curves corresponding to Fig. 1 a and b were clean; the power spectra showed no peaks.
The background light curves corresponding to Fig. 1 c and e were less clean, but the power spectra show no significant feature near the observed source QPO, and there is insufficient background variation to account for the QPO signal.
The only other known bright source in the field of view of NGC5548 is the BL-Lac object 1E1415.6+2557.
However, in an observation immediately after the 1986/062 observation of NGC5548, this object showed no variability.
We are therefore convinced that the broad peaks in the power spectrum of NGC5548 are related to a physical mechanism that operates in the Seyfert nucleus.
Figure 1 shows the power spectra stacked in order of mean count rate for the observation.
The broad feature shifts in frequency.
To assess this objectively, we fitted the power spectra to the following function  where  is the power spectral density at frequency .
The first term is a power law to describe the red noise.
The second term is a gaussian to describe the broad peak.
(C is the constant Poisson noise level.)
The best-fit values for parameters are given in Table 1; the uncertainties are 68% confidence, if all the other parameters are allowed to vary.
We also show the overall f.r.m.s. amplitude of the QPO feature, obtained by integrating the fitted gaussian over all frequencies.
The full function was applied to the data sets of groups 1 and 2.
(Table 1 also shows the results of fitting a red-noise component only.)
For group 3, there is no significant red noise, so we fitted the QPO part only.
Finally, in group 4, we have not attempted to fit any model.
The parameter values of the QPO feature are much better constrained than the red-noise part.
Figure 3 a and b shows the centroid frequency and f.r.m.s. amplitude of the QPO feature as a function of source intensity.
The fitted values for the 1984/193 observation (Figs 1 b, 2c)should be treated with caution, as the evidence for the presence of a QPO feature is only marginally (85%) significant.
By eye, it looks as though the formal fit gives a feature which is rather too narrow, and thus at too high a frequency.
For completeness, the relevant data are included in Fig.3 as bracketed points.
The result is that the centroid frequency of the QPO increases (roughly linearly) with the source intensity, whereas the strength (f.r.m.s.) of the QPO decreases as the source brightens.
There is no evidence for any change in the fitted width of the QPO.
Within our own Galaxy, both red-noise and broad QPOs are well known in low mass X-ray binaries (LMXBs), and frequently show an identical correlation of frequency and amplitude with source intensity.
The kind of correlations we have seen are those shown by the ‘Z sources’ when on the horizontal branch of the X-ray colour-intensity diagram.
These are objects for which the compact object is normally thought to be a neutron star; the most popular model for the QPOs involves interaction between an accretion flow and the magnetosphere of the neutron star.
AGNs, on the other hand, are generally believed to contain massive black holes.
Of the three known strong cases for X-ray binaries containing black holes (Cyg X-1, LMC X-3 and A0620–00), the first two show no QPO, and for the third there is no information available.
Another object often suspected to be a black-hole candidate on spectral grounds, GX 339–4, does show a 6-Hz QPO, but there is no dynamical proof that the compact object is too massive to be a neutron star.
Furthermore the companion star is of low mass, whereas both Cyg X-1 and LMC X-3 are high-mass X-ray binaries.
It is thought that high-mass X-ray binaries accrete primarily from a stellar wind escaping from the companion star whereas LMXBs accrete by means of Roche-lobe overflow into a disc; a viable hypothesis is that QPOs are a generic feature of disc accretion, regardless of the precise nature of the compact object.
An obvious possibility is that the QPO timescale (500s) is an orbital period; the modulation could arise directly from the presence of bright spots on an accretion disc, or could drive physical variations, as in the accretion disc corona model.
For a keplerian orbital period of 500s, however, if the X-ray emission comes from outside 3 Schwarzschild radii, the black-hole mass can be no larger than 10 6 solar masses ().
This is worryingly small; an estimated dynamical mass for NGC5548, from emission line variability, is  (ref. 18).
Another possibility is that the timescale represents recurrence in a physical limit-cycle, for example unstable flaring in a pair-plasma.
Using the formulae of Moskalik and Sikora and assuming that X-ray emission comes from 3 Schwarzschild radii, we find in this case that the black-hole mass can be no larger than  and;, again a worryingly small mass.
Finally, oscillations could represent  acoustic modes in an unstable accretion disc, but predictions for this are less certain, depending on the (unknown) viscosity parameter as well as on the accretion rate.
Overall it seems likely that the existence, speed and intensity-correlated behaviour of QPOs in AGNs will provide severe constraints on models.
FIG. 1 Power spectra of various observations of NGC5548 arranged in order of source count-rate, together with model fits (see text and Table1).
a , Ensemble average spectrum of the three group 3 observations, 1984/032, 1985/173 and 1985/186.
The average count rate of the three observations (3.06 countss -1 ) has been taken to represent the group.
b , Spectrum of the group 2 long observation 1984/193 (3.12countss -1 ).
c , Spectrum of the group 1 long observation 1986/062 (4.17countss -1 ).
d , Ensemble average spectrum of the two group 4 observations, 1984/062, and 1985/062 (average 4.23countss -1 ).
e , Spectrum of the group 1 long observation 1986/019 (5.27 countss -1 ).
The power spectra and their errors have been estimated using the technique of ref. 9, which involves grouping logarithms of periodogram values.
Thus results in estimates that are independent, unbiased for broad features, with exactly known variance and probability distribution close to gaussian after only modest grouping.
In all cases, the original light curve started with 100-s binning, and was first normalized to its mean value, so that the resulting power spectrum estimates represent contribution per Hertz to fractional variance.
For the long observations (b, c, e)the power spectrum was estimated exactly as above, with periodogram estimates grouped 20 at a time, except for the lowest two points, which represent groups of 10.
(This is a compromise between having errors as close as possible to gaussian and maximizing the low-frequency ‘handle’ on the red noise.)
For the shorter observations, we preferred to match the frequency resolution in the QPO region rather than maximize information at low frequencies; we therefore split each individual observation into lengths of 5,000s, which gave 11 independent data sets for each group.
A log-periodogram was calculated for each data set, and binned in groups of 2; the ensemble average has 22 independent periodogram points per power spectrum estimate.
FIG. 2 Tests of the significance of the broad QPO feature in each of the data sets of Fig.1.
For the long observations (1984/193,1986/019 and 1986/062) the null hypothesis was that only red noise was present (other than the experimental Poisson noise).
We therefore divided the periodogram values by the best-fit power law (see Table1), and binned the results so that the QPO features would on average appear mostly in a single high-valued bin.
(Note that we chose the bin size, but did not choose the bin placing.)
The resulting variables will be  distributed with 2 M degrees of freedom, where M is the bin size.
(We used M =60 for all the long observations.)
The dotted lines show the expected mean level of the  variables, and the levels at which there is a 5% and 1% probability of being exceeded by one or more bins somewhere within the whole periodogram.
The QPO is significant at better than 99% confidence for 1986/062, and at 96% confidence for 1986/109, but only at 60% confidence for 1984/193.
For the short observations, the null hypothesis is that only Poisson noise is present.
We worked from the 11 short sections in each case, as in the analysis of Fig.1.
Each periodogram was divided by the Poisson variance and binned in groups of 2; than an ensemble average of the 11 normalized periodograms was taken.
This gives  variables with 44 degrees of freedom.
The dotted lines show expected mean, and 95% and 99% confidence, as before.
The QPO is significant at 98% confidence in the data set with the 1984/32, 1985/173 and 1985/186 observations.
In the other data set, there are no significant features.
FIG. 3 Dependence of QPO properties on source intensity.
a , Centroid frequency of the QPO. b , Fractional r.m.s. amplitude of the QPO.
In all cases, the values are the best fit values from model fits, as in Table 1.
The values from the 1984/193 observation have been bracketed, as it is not clear whether the QPO feature is real in this case, and the fit does not look realistic.
The fossil record and the early evolution of the Metazoa
S. Conway Morris
The appearance of the multicellular animals, or Metazoa, in the fossil record about 600 million years ago marks a revolution in the history of life.
Molecular biology is continuing to increase our understanding of metazoan evolution, yet information from fossils is still an important component in deciphering metazoan phylogeny, and data on rapidly radiating animal groups place early metazoan evolution in a new perspective.
WOULD you like a game of ‘Metazoan Phylogeny’?
The prospect is daunting.
The board encompasses the entire Earth: the only game ever attempted has already taken almost a billion years and shows no signs of a conclusion.
The number of players varies (around 35 at the last count), and the strategic implications of such rules as may exist have not been fully worked out.
Ideas about metazoan phylogeny are legion and often contradictory.
A few principles are widely, but not universally, accepted, but no coherent phylogeny for the roughly 35 metazoan phyla exists.
Speculation has been based mostly on anatomy, both adult and larval; meanwhile ultrastructural studies, immunology and biochemistry have added to the debate, and sometimes the confusion.
Now, the picture has changed for ever.
The true outlines of metazoan phylogeny seem to be emerging.
This is due to advances in molecular biology, most notably data from ribosomal RNA.
If the broad outline of metazoan phylogeny is now becoming clear, then surely all we need to do is commiserate with the authors of innumerable failed schemes constructed over the past century and promptly move on to more interesting problems.
This would be a mistake, for three reasons.
First, the power of molecular phylogeny is not unlimited.
If diversification is rapid, then the precise order of branching is very difficult to resolve.
At present, unresolved branchings (polychotomies) persist, especially in triploblastic protostomes.
Second, the new schemes of metazoan phylogeny tell us nothing about the actual anatomical and functional transitions between related phyla.
For instance, molecular evidence suggests a close alliance between molluscs and annelids, but it is hard to imagine how an animal like the most primitive known annelid (an archiannelid?) was transformed into a primitive mollusc (a chiton?).
The morphological gaps that, by definition, separate phyla, remain inviolate.
We remain uninformed both about the now-extinct intermediates and the evolutionary processes that would have been responsible for the diversification of early multicellular animals into what we now perceive as distinct phyla, each with its own body plan.
Third, the new view of metazoan phylogeny requires a radical review of existing data, especially about ultrastructure, functional anatomy and biomineralization.
Convergent evolution is likely to have been rampant.
If these problems can be solved, we would have an enhanced understanding of the constraints that guide evolutionary processes, the role of intrinsic and extrinsic factors in diversification, and a new appreciation of metazoan diversity: in short, the rules of the game.
My purpose here is to review how the fossil record of early metazoans might be integrated with the new phylogeny.
Three types of fossil deposit yield relevant information: Ediacaran-type assemblages of soft-bodied animals from the latest Precambrian (Vendian), typified by the Ediacara fauna of South Australia; the earliest assemblages of animals with hard parts, from the Lower Cambrian; and the distinctive faunas from the Lower and Middle Cambrian, exemplified by the Burgess Shale of western Canada (Fig. 1).
All these deposits have attracted wide attention because of the apparent abundance of novel body plans.
These so-called ‘bizarre’ fossils may help to unravel the basic structure of metazoan evolution (Fig. 2).
Pre-Ediacaran metazoans?
When did metazoans appear?
The objective fossil record starts with the first Ediacaran assemblages (560–600 million years (Myr) ago), but some evidence suggests that metazoans were already in existence as early as 800–1000Myr ago.
Several lines of evidence indicate that metazoans originated at around that time, such as a decline in the diversity of stromatolites, possibly indicative of grazing and burrowing of the microbial-mat communities by metazoans.
Other explanations for stromatolite decline, however, are also plausible.
These include changes in ocean chemistry or the microbial mats adapting to the evolution and arrival of a wide range of new types of protistan.
Second, trace fossils, including what may be metazoan faecal pellets, are found in rocks of this age.
But protistans can produce structures similar to metazoan faecal pellets, and no systematic survey for pre-Ediacaran traces, including bioturbation fabrics and geochemical anomalies around possible burrows, has been undertaken.
Third, evidence from molecular biology indicates that the major lineages of Metazoa were distinct at least 700Myr ago (suggestive of even earlier origins), but this too is disputed.
Molecular evidence indicates a major diversification of eukaryotes perhaps 1,000Myr ago.
Were metazoans part of that evolutionary event?
Millimetres in size, perhaps interstitial in sediments, their inability to fossilize or leave obvious traces could explain their absence from Proterozoic rocks.
The reconciliation of this idea with what is known of subsequent evolutionary events remains problematic (Fig. 1).
If triploblasts (metazoans with three germ layers) occur in Ediacaran assemblages, then perhaps they too had an extended history in parallel with early diploblasts (two-layered animals such as modern coelenterates).
Why the first, albeit hypothetical, metazoans never grew beyond a few millimetres in size is not understood.
A persistently low concentration of atmospheric oxygen is one possible explanation, but alternatives include the late acquisition of collagen (not unconnected with the oxygen-concentration idea).
Ediacaran metazoans
The soft-bodied Ediacaran animals occupied a wide range of Vendian (Latest Proterozoic) marine environments and are now known from all over the world.
Many of the fossils are generally interpreted as coelenterates, and some segmented forms as arthropods, annelids or other triploblasts.
Nevertheless, Ediacaran fossils may not be representative of all Vendian metazoans.
A newly described assemblage from black shales in the Doushantuo Formation (Yangtze Gorges) in China includes tubular fossils that might have been occupied by metazoans.
The presence of fossils of seaweeds from the same deposits suggests that the remains of soft-bodied animals, not just their traces, will be found there in the future.
Molecular evidence is also consistent with the early appearance of coelenterates (cnidarians and ctenophores), but probably not independently of other metazoans.
Only sponges and the microscopic placozoans may have branched off earlier.
The chance of placozoans fossilizing is minuscule, but the apparent absence of Precambrian sponges is puzzling.
Siliceous spicules of demosponges occur in strata in Iran that may be of Ediacaran age, and claims for Precambrian sponge spicules need re-examination, especially as protistan biomineralization, possibly of silica, is known from the preceding Riphean Period (Fig. 1).
The primitive position of coelenterates r4–8 accords well with the domination of the Vendian radiation by diploblastic animals.
This supposition has been overshadowed by the ‘Vendobionta’ hypothesis, in which Ediacaran animals are thought to constitute an extinct clade of multicellular eukaryotes, neither diploblast nor triploblast, with a unique construction of tough cuticle and mattress-like body, and possibly the absence of alimentary tract, musculature and nervous tissue.
This concept is open to debate, in that at least some Ediacaran fossils can be compared with known metazoans.
Inaria , for example, may be an actinian coral, and the fivefold arrangement of putative feeding grooves in the minute epibenthic Arkurua suggests an affinity with echinoderms.
Other organisms show evidence for muscular activity and so presumably a nervous system, as well as the inferred presence of a circulatory system.
An analogue of Ediacaran organization may be found in the modern deep-water scleractinian coral Leptoseris fragilis : instead of tentacles, it uses its ciliated surface as a food-gathering organ, and has an internal canal-like gastrovascular system that communicates with the exterior through pores.
So is the Vendobionta concept completely redundant?
Not necessarily, because the Proterozoic may have witnessed the achievement of the multicellular grade of organization several times, and in quite unrelated lineages.
As for coelenterates, though, several arguments suggest that all four extant cnidarian classes can be recognized in early metazoan assemblages.
Anthozoans are represented by pennatulacean-like fossils such as the Ediacaran Charniodiscus .
Relatives in the Burgess Shale show what may be zooids.
Actinians may have occupied bowl-like fossils such as the Vendian Beltanelliformis and the Cambrian Berguaria .
Biomineralization of cnidarians produced a variety of primitive coral-like fossils.
Kimberella may be a cubozoan, represented today by the venomous box-jellies, whereas forms such as Ovatoscutum may represent the floats of hydrozoans, as in the present-day Portuguese man-of-war.
Jellyfish-like Ediacaran forms have been compared with ‘true’ jellyfish, or scyphozoans, but there the evidence is more tenuous.
Probably related to the scyphozoans are the enigmatic conulariids, with ribbed phosphatic tests and a characteristic tetra-radial symmetry.
The Lower Cambrian carinachitiids (Fig. 3 f ) and hexagulaconulariids are probably conulariids, and the Ediacaran Conomedusites may also belong in this group.
The xianguangiids, from the Burgess Shale-type fauna at Chengjiang in China (Fig. 1), are interpreted as anthozoan-like cnidarians on account of a basal disc, polyp-like body with possible septal impressions, and a distal crown of tentacles.
The tentacles, however, are unique in bearing closely spaced pinnules, a feature overlooked in the original description.
One group of Ediacaran medusiforms is characterized by tri-radial symmetry.
Cambrian descendants of these so-called trilobozoans (such as Albumares and Tribrachidium ; Fig. 3 a ) may be represented by the anabaritids; their calcareous tubes are tri-radial (Fig. 3 d ), as defined by internal keels (Fig. 3 b, e ).
Rare branching in anabaritid tubes is consistent with a cnidarian grade.
Cnidarians may also be represented by the tube-like byroniids, the possibly tentacle-bearing Cambrorhytium , the paiutiids with septate tubes, and conceivably the tubular cloudinids.
The last constitute an important Vendian group, and are among the first metazoans to have acquired hard parts.
Another candidate is the Burgess Shale Echmatocrinus , currently interpreted not as a cnidarian at all, but as an echinoderm, the earliest crinoid: the supposed tube feet are very large and could instead be anthozoan-like tentacles.
In contrast,Echmatocrinus had plated structures on its polyp and tentacles but, unlike the co-occurring eocrinoids, the plates appear not to show a stereom structure.
The sister group of the Cnidaria is the Ctenophora, the comb-jellies.
A pelagic habit and a delicate, gelatinous body account for their poor fossil record.
Fasciculus , from the Burgess Shales and adjacent localities, is an early ctenophore, but differs from extant and Devonian ctenophores in the number of comb-rows.
Triploblasts inherit the Earth
If Ediacaran assemblages are dominated by coelenterates, the ensuing Cambrian radiations are largely the irruption of triploblastic phyla.
There are essentially two kinds of coelomate triploblastic metazoans: the protostomes and the deuterostomes.
Protostomes, such as annelids and arthropods, are usually regarded as having spiral, determinate embryonic cleavage, and the embryonic blastopore is situated at the rear, at or near the site of the future mouth.
Deuterostomes, in contrast (principally echinoderms and chordates) generally have radial, indeterminate cleavage, and the blastopore is associated with the position of the adult anus.
Fossil evidence for the ‘Cambrian explosion' r56–59 is evident from the widespread rise of animal skeletons, the major diversification of trace fossils and the Burgess Shale-type faunas.
But it would be unwise to draw too strong a line between Ediacaran and Cambrian faunas.
The Ediacaran Dickinsonia may be a stem-group protostome: it is segmented, bilaterally symmetrical and has a clear anteroposterior axis.
Other Ediacaran taxa could also be protostomes.
Spriggina (Fig. 4 e ) could be a stem arthropod, and Redkinia could represent mandible-like jaws: and if Arkurua is interpreted as an echinoderm, the deuterostome lineage is also present in Ediacaran times.
Triploblastic diversification was rapid on a geological time-scale, and resolution of the branching order is consequently difficult.
Refined stratigraphy, including recent advances in chemo- and magnetostratigraphy, may resolve some orders of appearance on a global scale.
As far as fossils go, though, local taphonomic bias in favour of the preservation of either articulated scale-like armour, phosphatized skeletal fragments or soft parts leads to a sporadic and incomplete record.
The ‘Cambrian explosion’ is a real evolutionary event, but its origins are obscure.
At least 20 hypotheses have been proposed, and although arguments linking diversification to oxygen levels, predation, faunal provinciality and ocean chemistry all attract support, it is the case that ‘The emergence of Metazoa remains the salient mystery in the history of life’(p. 17, ref. 58).
Deuterostome radiations
Molecular data r6–8 suggest a profound evolutionary gulf between deuterostomes and protostomes.
Among the Cambrian deuterostomes, the echinoderms have a good fossil record, and the inter-relationships between many of the supposedly disparate classes are becoming clearer.
If the characteristically echinoderm skeleton of calcareous ‘stereom’ was acquired before the equally distinctive water-vascular system, then the aberrant cornutes (which have the first, but not the second) are a very early branch of echinoderms.
The chordate-like features of cornutes, which have been proposed to indicate a close relationship with chordates, arose by convergence.
The most primitive echinoderm with a water-vascular system appears to have been Helicoplacus , notable in having three rather than five ambulacra.
These observations need to be reconciled with the pentaradial arrangement in the Ediacaran Arkurua , and also suggest an alternative assignment for trilobozoans (Fig. 3 a ).
The cambroclaves may be allied to echinoderms, albeit more tentatively, because of their arm-like arrays of articulated sclerites (Fig. 3 c ).
These structures seem to suggest a sessile, echinoderm-like form rather than the creeping, slug-like habit previously suggested for these animals.
Chordates appear with Pikaia from the Burgess Shale.
This creature superficially resembled the modern amphioxus and had a bilobed head and pair of tentacles, as well as myotomes and a notochord which, unlike the amphioxus, appears not to have extended to the anterior.
Gill slits may have been present, but are hard to identify with certainty in the compressed material available.
Apart from conodonts, unequivocal evidence for fish does not occur until the Ordovician.
In particular, the fossil Anatolepis , which first occurs in the Upper Cambrian and has been interpreted as the dermal scales of a heterostracan fish, is more likely to have belonged to an arthropod.
The record of hemichordates is moderately good; the organic tubes of rhabdopleurid pterobranchs have a fair preservation potential, and the Burgess Shale ‘Ottoia ’tenuis may be an enteropneust similar to the extant acorn-worm Balanoglossus (unpublished observations by S.C.M.).
The nature of the deuterostome ancestor is speculative.
The eldoniids, a group of medusiform animals each with a prominent coiled gut (Fig. 4 a ) may repay consideration in this regard.
They could represent a group of pre-echinoderm deuterostomes, as neither stereom nor a true water-vascular system appears to be present.
Groups that may be related to the eldoniids include rotadiscids, paropsonemids and Velumbrella .
Protostome radiations
Platyhelminthes appear to be the most primitive triploblasts but, apart from possible trace fossils, their fossil record is almost non-existent.
Again, fossils have little to say about the aschelminthes (nematodes, rotifers and others) which may, in any case, be a polyphyletic grade.
The nematodes and the related nematomorphs may be relatively primitive, but the present proximity of groups such as the rotifers and the related acanthocephalans could require revision.
The branching pattern of the remaining protostomes is just as contentious.
Lake upset established orthodoxy by arguing that the arthropods are paraphyletic, arising before annelids and molluscs.
In contrast, R.A. Raff (personal communication) regards arthropods as the sister group of molluscs-annelids-brachiopods-pogonophorans, the latter assemblage arising as an unresolved polychotomy.
Arthropods and pre-arthropods.
The fossil record of Cambrian arthropods is moderately good, and even the riot of supposedly disparate forms from the Burgess Shales seem to fall into a phylogenetically coherent scheme.
The available cladograms are as yet tentative, but as information about arthropods from the Burgess Shale-like Chengjiang and the Sirius Passet fauna from northern Greenland becomes available, cladistic analyses should improve.
More important is the nature of the pre-arthropod stocks.
Apart from Spriggina (and possibly Redkinia ), the anomalocariids currently attract much interest.
They are very diverse, but they all have prominent lobate appendages, a well developed head with eyes, and sometimes a tail-fan.
Undescribed material from localities adjacent to the Burgess Shale (D. Collins, personal communication) and the Sirius Passet fauna will help to make sense of this intriguing group.
Anomalocariids may achieve importance, not as a supposedly unique clade of extinct animals, but as a group close to the ancestry of modern arthropods.
The onychophorans, represented today by Peripatus of southern tropical forests and its relatives, is now known to have enjoyed considerable success in the Cambrian.
These early, marine forms included the hitherto enigmatic Hallucigenia , as well as Microdictyon , which before its discovery in the Chengjiang fauna (Fig. 1) was known only from dispersed phosphatic sclerites.
The Chengjiang fauna has yielded several other onychophores, and other examples include Xenusion from Scandinavia.
Facivermis is peculiar because the anterior region bears five pairs of lobopod-like appendages, whereas the rest of the body is smooth.
Sclerotization of such an animal, with jointed limbs replacing lobopods, could lead to an animal similar to phosphatized Ordovician fossils from , regarded as primitive pentastomids (still extant as parasitic animals whose postulated position in the crustaceans has been recently confirmed by molecular evidence).
There is insufficient information to resolve the phylogenetic relationships between anomalocariids, onychophores and arthropods exactly, but the first group may be a glimpse of what early arthropod-like protostomes were really like.
Recent molecular analysis of extant onychophorans supports their place in the arthropods, but questions their primitive status.
Annelids, molluscs and relatives.
Further protostome diversification led to a plexus of annelids, molluscs and near relatives.
If the scheme of Lake is followed, then the annelids arose next.
In the Burgess Shale there is an undescribed worm (Fig. 4 b ) with prominent lateral extensions that may be close to the basal annelid stock.
The first definitive record of the annelids is as polychaetes, which are diverse in the Burgess Shale: their absence from the Chengjiang fauna may not be significant because they are present in the slightly younger Sirius Passet fauna.
There is general agreement that pogonophorans are related to annelids.
The elongate, organic-walled tubes of sabelliditids, abundant in the Vendian and lower Cambrian, may have housed pogonophorans.
There are, however, differences in wall ultrastructure between these and modern pogonophoran tubes.
Molecular data suggest that the nemerteans, traditionally placed close to the platyhelminths, are coelomate protostomes, perhaps related to the annelids, but with a distinctive coelom (rhynchocoel surrounding the proboscis).
The nemertean fossil record is very meagre, but amiskwiids (represented by Amiskwia from the Burgess Shale) may represent an early stage of their divergence.
Molecular evidence likewise places the brachiopods close to the annelids, and the chaetae in both groups are similar.
Understanding of the initial radiation of brachiopods is improving, especially with the description of supposedly enigmatic groups.
But pitfalls remain; for example, a putative brachiopod-like shell from the lower Cambrian of Irkutsk could be a percussion fracture formed when the drill core was broken open, a telling illustration of the difficulties sometimes incurred in interpreting problematic fossils.
Tommotiids, only known from dispersed phosphatic sclerites, have been reconstructed as slug-like animals.
Some sclerites, however, recall brachiopods, and comparison of shell ultrastructure supports the possibility that tommotiids and brachiopods are related.
A relationship between annelids and brachiopods may be difficult to reconcile with data from haemerythrin sequences that indicate a close relationship between priapulids and the inarticulate brachiopod Lingula .
Nevertheless, current evidence suggests that priapulids (and the closely related kinorhynchs and loriciferans, both without a fossil record), are part of the coelomate protostome radiation.
Whether Cambrian priapulids will throw light on early protostome relationships is difficult to judge.
Fossils called palaeoscolecidans, known to bear phosphatic sclerites, may be of interest here: specimens from the Sirius Passet fauna display what look like spiny snouts similar to those that distinguish priapulids, suggestive of a close relationship.
Conversely, rows of phosphatic sclerites similar to those of palaeoscolecidans have been found in a Burgess Shale priapulid (Fig. 4 d ).
Of potential significance also is the Chengjiang priapulid Cricocosmia , which has two rows of convex shell-like sclerites on its trunk.
Molluscs may have evolved from a flatworm-like ancestor independently of the annelids, but molecular evidence supports the possibility of an annelid link.
The fossil record is silent on this transition, but the earlier stages of mollusc evolution are becoming clear.
Cardinal evidence comes from the halkieriids (Fig. 4 c ), which had an articulated armour of sclerites together with prominent anterior and posterior shells.
A number of mollusc-like shells are known from the Cambrian and it is likely that some derive from halkieriid or related scleritomes.
Triplicatella , from South Australia and possibly southern Siberia, very probably comes from the scleritome of the halkieriid.
Thambetolepis .
Prominent folds on the shell margin of Triplicatella may mark sites of  exhalant and  inhalant water currents, perhaps connected with gills similar to molluscan ctenidia.
In turn, similarity of sclerite structure suggests a link between halkieriids and the Coeloscleritophora, a diverse Cambrian group that includes siphogonuchitids, sachitids and chancelloriids.
The first of these probably had a scleritome similar to halkieriids, with at least one shell and two types of sclerite.
Chancelloriid sclerite structure does not support their earlier assignment to sponges, but overall body shape is consistent with a sessile habit.
Chancelloriid sclerites were evidently embedded in a resistant cuticle (Hou Xianguang, personal communication).
Sachitids may be intermediate in form between chancelloriids and halkieriids.
Trace fossils
Even if no soft-bodied fossils had been preserved in the Cambrian, their adaptive radiations would be evident from the record of trace fossils.
Although some traces, such as scratch marks, can be attributed to arthropods (or perhaps the related anomalocariids), in general tying traces to their makers is difficult.
Trace fossils have consequently played little part in discussions of metazoan phylogeny, but they may nevertheless contribute useful information.
Although many kinds of trace fossil are known from a long geological time span, some are confined to the Cambrian and could record extinct body plans, as well as details of early metazoan activities such as locomotion and feeding.
For example, the giant trace Climactichnites from the Upper Cambrian of North America is believed to have been constructed by an otherwise unknown Metazoan of novel appearance.
Phyla and the role of problematic taxa
Schemes of metazoan phylogeny based on molecular evidence but which have been broadened to include information from fossils have been presented before.
I have taken it a stage further with the inclusion of many groups usually seen as problematic, linking them with more familiar body plans.
But this is not meant to belittle the magnitude of the adaptive radiations that took place in the Vendian and Cambrian periods.
Within a period of about 20Myr (taking the Ediacaran faunas as 560Myr old and the base of the Cambrian as 540Myr old), the oceans changed from habitats housing a rich but effectively microscopic biota, to one teeming with macroscopic animals engaged in a wide range of ecologies and presumably showing a degree of behavioural sophistication.
Is it realistic to talk of a multiplicity of body plans in the Cambrian, far exceeding that of the present day?
At the other extreme, the argument that extant phyla maintain their identity back to the Cambrian offers no more than a tautology.
Such phyla so persist because the only way they can be recognized is by reference to themselves.
Consider the potential disagreements that surround the interpretation of various Cambrian fossils: are the pseudobrachiopods ‘truly’ brachiopods?
Are the anomalocariids ‘really’ arthropods?
Are hyoliths or stenothecoids ‘actually’ molluscs?
Definitions of major groups are less secure than sometimes imagined.
I argue that the supposed problematic taxa, now in immin- ent danger of elevation to a classic status as evolutionary enigmas, hold the key to understanding many aspects of early metazoan evolution.
This view contrasts with that of a ‘pool’ of generalized coelomate ancestors from which at least the main phyla of protostomes were derived.
In such models the problematic taxa are further and separate derivatives, useful for documenting the range of metazoan morphospace but irrelevant for establishing relationships at the base of metazoan evolution.
Conclusion
Future advances will depend largely on molecular biologists and palaeontologists, although no data-source should be neglected.
The former need to tackle new gene sequences and extend the database.
It is necessary also to enlarge our understanding of developmental mechanisms, and there is growing interest in the widespread occurrence of at least some regulatory genes in disparate phyla.
What is equally important to know, however, is how these genes have either been co-opted or have changed their function, not only among metazoan phyla but in their protistan ancestors.
What can palaeontologists contribute?
The discovery of Cambrian faunas similar to that of the Burgess Shale is likely.
Further preparation of collections of calcareous and phosphatic shelly Cambrian fossils may well produce dividends, and such disarticulated remains that are etched out of the rock should be held up against articulated scleritomes, either actual or hypothesized.
The diversification of trace fossils still lacks a biological context, and there is an urgent need to test whether at least some Ediacaran fossils could be assigned to the Vendobionta, rather than to Metazoa.
And yet, at the heart of the matter, a coherent explanation for the origin and scope of the early metazoan radiations is still missing.
Family trees based on molecular data can be festooned with fossils but this is perhaps rather premature.
Instead, we should be asking how the diversity of body plans so evident in the Vendian and Cambrian affected the shape of things to come.
Evolutionary innovations such as nerve tracts, seriation, mesoderm, spacious body cavities and circulatory systems, all implied by the fossils already available, must have had profound phylogenetic consequences.
Again, the causes of this diversification still remain a mystery, although changes in the concentration of atmospheric oxygen, trophic resources, and ecological response, especially to predation, may have all played a part.
Certainly the acquisition of hard parts as a deterrent to predators is a compelling hypothesis.
Increasing evidence for major changes in the environment during the Vendian and Cambrian also require further assessment.
The once stagnant field of metazoan phylogeny is being rejuvenated by new discoveries that promise to call a wide range of scientific disciplines.
‘Metazoan Phylogeny’ is exciting to play, and we may, at last, be on the verge of working out some of the rules of the game.
FIG. 1 The geological framework of early metazoan evolution and related biological events.
The geochronological scale takes the Precambrian-Cambrian boundary at 540Myr ago and the Ediacaran faunas as 580–560Myr ago.
The stratigraphic divisions of the Vendian and Lower Cambrian (M, Manykay; T, Tommotian; A, Atdabanian; B, Botomian; T, Toyonian) follow the Russian and Siberian standards.
Metazoans are hypothesized to have arisen as part of a major eukaryotic radiation, 800–1,000Myr ago.
Tangible fossil evidence includes the Ediacaran radiations of mostly cnidarian grade, but also stem protostomes and possible deuterostomes.
The ‘Cambrian explosion’ is largely a triploblastic radiation, but diploblasts and triploblasts may have diverged substantially before Ediacaran times.
FIG. 2A provisional phylogeny of metazoan relationships.
The backbone of relationships between extant phyla is based on data from molecular biology, especially the phylogeny of Lake (ref. 7).
This phylogeny is chosen because some evidence from the fossil record may be in agreement.
This includes the (1) early appearance of cnidarians, including many Ediacaran taxa, the (2) dickinsoniids as a stem protostome group, and (3) sprigginids (? and Redkinia ) as stem arthropods.
Alternative cladograms based on various analyses of ribosomal RNA are available and while sharing features in common, differ in other respects, especially with respect to protostome relationships.
The provisional phylogeny used here seeks to do two things.
First, emphasize the importance of extinct groups (n =29, marked with an asterisk), many of which are generally regarded as major bodyplans, but may have morphological characters that could reveal more clearly relationships between disparate extant phyla.
Second, this cladogram is an exercise in inference because many of the extinct groups remain poorly documented; the text offers justification for many of the placements.
Note that the levels of branching are arbitrary and no precise metric is applied to distance between the nodes.
A number of clades are still too poorly known to be included.
These include mobergellids, rhombocorniculids, nectocariids, cribricyathids, radiocyathids, escumasiids, myoscolexids, coleoliids, agmatans, typhloesids and ainiktozoonids.
FIG. 3 Vendian and Cambrian metazoans. a, Tribrachidium heraldicum , a discoidal Ediacaran fossil with three ‘arms’ from the Pound Subgroup, South Australia; magnification, 2.9x.
Tribrachidium has been attributed to the trilobozoans (a possible group of early cnidarians) or alternatively a proto-echinoderm with the tri-radial symmetry preceding the penta-radial arrangement of most later echinoderms.
b ,e ,Anabarites compositus from the Lower Cambrian of northern Siberia showing steinkern of tube (b ; x50) and detail of porous blade-like extensions (e , x200) that arise in three rows along the interior wall of the tube.
(Specimen kindly made available by V.V. Missarzhevksy.)c ,Deltaclavus graneus , a series of articulated sclerites from the Lower Cambrian of Hubei, China, x90.
More complex arrays of sclerites have an ‘arm-like’ structure that could indicate a relationship to echinoderms (see Fig. 2).
d, Anabarites trymatus from the Lower Cambrian of south Australia, steinkern showing triradial symmetry of tube; magnification, 150x. f, Carinachites spinatus , an early? conulariid (Cnidaria) from the Lower Cambrian of Shaanxi, China; magnification, 36x.
FIG. 4 Burgess Shale-type fossils (a-d ) and a possible stem arthropod (e ).
a ,Eldonia ludwigi , an early deuterostome that may show features of pre-echinoderms; magnification, 1.1x.
Specimen from Middle Cambrian (Burgess Shale), British Columbia.
b , Undescribed worm from Middle Cambrian (Burgess Shale), British Columbia, possibly representing an early annelid; 3.2x. c , Articulated halkieriid from the Lower Cambrian (Buen Formation) of the Sirius Passet fauna, north Greenland; 1.5x.
Halkieriids appear to represent a very early stage of mollusc evolution.
d , The priapulid worm Louisella pedunculata from the Middle Cambrian (Burgess Shale), British Columbia; 0.85x.
The trunk bears rows of sclerites, closely similar in arrangement to those of palaeoscolecidans. e, Spriggina floundersi , with segmented body and cephalic shield, a possible member of the arthopod stem group from the Vendian Pound Subgroup, south Australia; 2.3x.
Bcl-2 blocks apoptosis in cells lacking mitochondrial DNA
Michael D. Jacobson, Julia F. Burne, Michael P. King, Toshiyuki Miyashita, John C. Reed & Martin C. Raff
WHEN the mammalian proto-oncogene bcl-2 is overexpressed it can protect various types of cells both from normal and from experimentally induced apoptosis, but the molecular mechanisms involved are unknown.
Although the Bcl-2 protein is membrane-associated r7–10 , its subcellular location is controversial: two studies have suggested that it is mainly associated with the nuclear envelope and endoplasmic reticulum, whereas another study has suggested that it is mainly located in the inner mitochondrial membrane.
The latter study has suggested that Bcl-2 might protect cells from apoptosis by altering mitochondrial function and that mitochondria may be involved in apoptosis.
Here we report that human mutant cell lines that lack mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), and therefore do not have a functional respiratory chain, can still be induced to die by apoptosis, and that they can be protected from apoptosis by the overexpression of bcl-2,suggesting that neither apoptosis nor the protective effect of bcl-2 depends on mitochondrial respiration.
We also show that the Bcl-2 protein in overexpressing cells is associated with the nuclear envelope and endoplasmic reticulum, as well as with mitochondria.
We studied a human fibroblast cell line that was entirely depleted of mtDNA by long-term exposure to low concentrations of ethidium bromide as previously described.
Although nearly all of the proteins located in the mitochondria are encoded in the nuclear genome and imported from the cytosol, 13 polypeptide components of the multisubunit enzyme complexes of the electron-transport chain present in the inner mitochondrial membrane are encoded by the mitochondrial genome.
Therefore, in cells that have no mtDNA (termed  cells), the electron-transport chain cannot function and the cells cannot carry out oxidative phosphorylation.
Consequently, these mutant cells rely exclusively on glycolysis for their energy requirements and require exogenous pyruvate and pyrimidines for growth.
Accordingly, the  cells and, for convenience, the parental line from which the mutant line was derived, were maintained in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (FCS), pyruvate and uridine.
Many cell types undergo apoptosis when they are deprived of serum or specific growth factors (reviewed in ref. 15), and this was the case both for the parental and for the  cells (Fig. 1 a).
When grown in the absence of FCS, many of the cells died asynchronously over several days, with morphological features that are characteristic of apoptosis: when viewed by time-lapse video recording, the cells showed active surface blebbing and then shrank and often fragmented (not shown), and when stained with propidium iodide or viewed in an electron microscope, the nuclei of the dead cells were condensed and often fragmented (Fig. 2c, f).
A similar proportion of parental and  cells died under these conditions (Fig. 1a);in both cases, the proportions of apoptotic cells were greater than those shown in the figure, as many of the dead cells detached from the substratum and therefore were not counted.
High concentrations of the protein kinase inhibitor staurosporine will induce many cell types in culture to undergo apoptosis, perhaps because it blocks the intracellular signalling pathways activated by the extracellular survival factors that many cells require to live.
As shown in Figs 1 b and 2b and e,more than 95% of both the  and the parental cells underwent apoptosis within 24h when treated with 1μM staurosporine in the presence of 10% FCS.
Thus cells without mtDNA can undergo apoptosis when either deprived of survival factors or exposed to high concentrations of staurosporine.
To determine whether the overexpression of bcl-2 could protect  cells from apoptosis induced by FCS withdrawal or staurosporine treatment, we introduced a human bcl-2 cDNA into  and parental cells using a  retroviral vector.
The vector also contained the selectable marker neo r , which enabled us to select for G418-resistant,bcl-2 -expressing subclones.
Each of three independent, stably transfected  /bcl-2 cell lines was found to express high levels of Bcl-2 protein, as determined by staining with a monoclonal anti-Bcl-2 antibody (see below), and to be relatively resistant to the lethal effects of serum deprivation (Fig. 1a)or staurosporine treatment (Fig. 1b).
We also tested an unrelated human osteosarcoma-derived  cell line ( 13.1;M.P.K. and G. Attardi, unpublished observations, and ref. 18), and it behaved in the same way: the cells could be induced to undergo apoptosis by either serum deprivation or staurosporine treatment, and they were protected by transfection with bcl-2 (not shown).
When  cells were acutely infected with the bcl-2 -expressing retrovirus, only about 5% of the cells seemed to be successfully transfected, as judged by staining with the anti-Bcl-2 antibody; after treatment with staurosporine, the small number of cells that survived were all intensely stained by the antibody (not shown).
Thus bcl-2 can protect cells from undergoing apoptosis even if the cells lack a functional respiratory chain.
To be certain that the  and  /bcl-2 cells that we studied lacked a functional respiratory chain, we tested their respiratory function in two ways.
First, we showed that, unlike the parental cells, the  cells were unable to proliferate in medium lacking pyrimidines: when 10 7  cells were plated in 20 culture dishes, no colonies were detected after 4 weeks (data not shown).
Using identical conditions, it has been shown that injection of a single mitochondrion (containing 10mtDNA molecules) into  cells results in the complete repopulation of the recipient  cells with mtDNA and permits their subsequent proliferation in the absence of pyrimidines.
Second, we examined bcl-2- transfected and untransfected parental (pt) and  cells for their rates of oxygen consumption (as previously described) and found that the  and  /bcl-2 cells respired at a rate less than 3% of that of the pt cells.
The values (fmol O 2 per cell per min, means  s.e.m.,n=8)were:, and .
These results also show that the overexpression of bcl-2 does not significantly alter the levels of mitochondrial respiratory chain activity in either the parental or the  cells.
When the subcellular distribution of the Bcl-2 protein was analysed in the  /bcl-2 or pt/ bcl-2 cells lines by immunofluorescence with a mouse monoclonal anti-Bcl-2 antibody and laser-scanning confocal microscopy, the protein seemed to be located mainly in the nuclear envelope and endoplasmic reticulum (ER)(Fig. 3a, b).
When, however, the cells were double-labelled with the anti-Bcl-2 antibody and either human autoantibodies against a set of mitochondrial proteins or a rabbit antiserum against ER proteins, it could be seen that Bcl-2 was present in the mitochondria (Fig. 3e, f),as well as in the nuclear envelope and ER (Fig. 3c, d).
Although the anti-Bcl-2 antibody did not label the plasma membrane, we cannot exclude the possibility that it labelled other organelles in addition to the nuclear envelope and ER.
The pattern of labelling with the anti-Bcl-2 antibody was the same in bcl-2 -transfected parental and  cells, whereas untransfected cells were not labelled above background (not shown).
In preliminary studies, we have found that in primary rat glial and neuronal cells that were transfected with human bcl-2,the anti-Bcl-2 antibody also seemed to stain the nuclear envelope and ER (M.D.J. and J. Voyvodic, unpublished data).
In a recent independent study, Alnemri et al.
found Bcl-2 mainly in the nuclear envelope and ER of insect cells that had been transfected with a human bcl-2 complementary DNA (consistent with an earlier study by Liu et al.,which found endogenous Bcl-2 localized to both mitochondrial and non-mitochondrial sites of human tonsilar B cells).
Thus, at least in cells that overexpress bcl-2,the Bcl-2 protein is not confined to mitochondria.
We have shown the following:(1) cells without mtDNA, and therefore lacking respiratory chain activity, are still able to undergo apoptosis when either deprived of survival factors or exposed to high concentrations of staurosporine;(2) such cells can be protected from apoptosis by the overexpression of bcl-2;(3) the overexpression of bcl-2 in cells (with or without mtDNA) does not significantly alter respiratory chain activity;(4) the Bcl-2 protein in these cells is associated with the nuclear envelope and ER, as well as with mitochondria.
Taken together, these findings exclude the possibility that either apoptosis or the protective effect of bcl-2 involves the mitochondrial respiratory chain, at least in these cells under the conditions that we have studied, and raise the possibility that the Bcl-2 protein might exert its protective effect while bound to the continuous nuclear and ER membrane.
FIG. 1 Apoptotic cell death of parental (pt) and mutant ()cells, and of bcl-2- overexpressing parental (pt/ bcl-2 ) and mutant () cells after withdrawal of FCS (a)or treatment with 1 μM staurosporine (b).
METHODS.
The  701.2 a cell line ( cells) was derived from a simian virus 40 T-antigen-gene-transformed derivative of the human fibroblast line GM701 (ref. 25)(pt cells) by long-term exposure to low concentrations of ethidium bromide (M.P.K. and G. Attardi, unpublished data).
These cells completely lack mitochondrial DNA, are unable to carry out cellular respiration, require pyruvate (110μgml -1 ) and uridine (50μgml -1 ) to grow, and their mitochondria appear abnormal in electron micrographs (our unpublished observations).
Bcl-2-overexpressing cell lines were isolated by selecting G418-resistant clones of pt and  cells that were infected with Zip-bcl-2 (ref. 26)(T.M. and J.C.R., manuscript in preparation).
Three independent transfected  cell lines were isolated and studied.
The results with one of these Bcl-2-expressing subclones are shown; in similar independent experiments, the behaviour of the other subclones was indistinguishable.
To assay for apoptosis, cells were removed from culture dishes with trypsin, EDTA, washed once in DMEM, 10%FCS, resuspended in DMEM, and then plated on poly-D-lysine-coated 13mm glass coverslips in 24-well Falcon plates at a density of 10,000 cells per well.
a,
The cells were plated in serum-free DMEM (time=0).
b,
The cells were cultured in DMEM, 10%FCS and staurosporine was added at various times.
After the treatment period (time after plating for serum withdrawal (a)or time after staurosporine addition (b)),the cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde in 0.1M phosphate buffer pH 7.4 (PB) for 10min at room temperature, followed by acid-alcohol for 10min at -20°C, and then stained with propidium iodide (0.05μgml -1 in phosphate-buffered saline) containing 100μgml -1 DNase-free RNase A for 30min at 37°C to visualize the nuclei.
The cells were mounted in Citifluor (City University, London) and examined with a Zeiss Universal fluorescence microscope and photographed with Tri-X film rated 400ASA.
Apoptotic nuclei were easily distinguished from normal nuclei; they were condensed, brightly fluorescent and often fragmented (see Fig. 2 b, c).
The results shown are means  s.e.m.
of quadruplicate measurements in one experiment, but similar results were obtained in at least three independent experiments.
For all cell types, the proportion of apoptotic cells after 48 and 72h was less than 4% when cultured in DMEM, 10%FCS.
FIG. 2 Propidium iodide fluorescence (a-c)and electron microscopy (d-f)of  cells cultured in 10% FCS for 48h (a, d),in 10% FCS and 1μM staurosporine for 18–20h (b, e),or in the absence of FCS for 48h (c, f).
The dead cells in b, c and e, f show characteristic features of apoptosis.
Note that the apoptotic cells in e, f are about three times smaller in diameter than the normal cell in d.
Scale bars, 25μm in a-c, 10 μm in d and 3–4μm in e, f.
METHODS.
Cells were fixed, stained with propidium iodide and photographed as described in Fig. 1.
For electron microscopy, the cells were fixed in 2% glutaraldehyde in PB for 45min at 37°C, post-fixed in 1% osmium tetroxide for 30min at 4°C, stained in uranyl acetate, dehydrated through graded ethanol and embedded in Epon 812 resin.
Thin sections were cut parallel to the substratum, stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate, and examined with a Jeol 100CXII electron microscope at 80kV.
FIG. 3 Laser-scanning confocal fluorescence micrographs of bcl-2- transfected parental (a, c-h)and  (b)cells, showing the distribution of the Bcl-2 protein (a, b, c, e),ER proteins (d)and mitochondrial proteins (f-h).
c, d,Paired images of Bcl-2 and ER proteins in the same field, whereas e, f are paired images of Bcl-2 and the mitochondrial proteins in the same field.
g, h,Paired images of mitochondrial proteins in the same cell labelled with two different antimitochondrial antibodies to verify the mitochondrial specificity of the antibody shown in f;the same antibodies were used in f and g.
Note that the nuclear envelope, ER and mitochondria are labelled by the anti-Bcl-2 antibody.
Scale bar, 20μm in a, b, e-h and 10μm in c, d.
METHODS.
In a, b, e-h,the cells were fixed in methanol for 10min at -20°C.
In c, d,they were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde in PB for 10min and then permeabilized in 0.1% Triton X-100 for 15min, both at room temperature.
After washing, the cells were incubated in 50% normal goat serum (NGS) for 30min at room temperature.
Bcl-2 was labelled with a mouse IgG1 monoclonal anti-human Bcl-2 antibody (supernatant diluted 1:1), which was visualized in a, b and e with a fluorescein-coupled sheep anti-mouse immunoglobulin (Sh anti-MIg-Fl, Jackson Laboratories, diluted 1:100), and in c with biotin-coupled sheep anti-MIg (Sh anti-MIg BT) followed by fluorescein-coupled streptavidin (SA-Fl)(both from Amersham, diluted 1:100).
ER proteins were labelled with a rabbit polyclonal antiserum against rough ER proteins (diluted 1:100).
The antibody was visualized with Texas-red-coupled goat anti-rabbit immunoglobulin (Jackson Laboratories; diluted 1:100).
Mitochondrial proteins were labelled with an autoimmune serum from a patient with primary biliary cirrhosis (The Binding Site; diluted 1:200) and visualized with a sheep anti-human Ig-Fl (Wellcome, diluted 1:50).
The mitochondrial specificity of the human autoantibodies was verified by double-labelling pt/ bcl-2 cells with these autoantibodies (g)and a mouse monoclonal antibody against subunit IV of cytochrome c oxidase (h, ascites fluid diluted 1:100) visualized with Texas-red-coupled goat anti-mouse  immunoglobulin (Jackson Laboratories; diluted 1:100).
All of the antibodies were diluted in 1% BSA, 100mM L-lysine in Tris-buffered saline containing 0.04% sodium azide, and incubations with primary antibodies were for 2h and with secondary antibodies and SA for 1h, all at room temperature.
In c-f,the anti-Bcl-2 antibody was used simultaneously with the anti-ER or anti-mitochondrial protein antibodies.
Under these conditions there was no significant crossreaction of the conjugates to the inappropriate antibodies.
Moreover, no staining was seen when the primary antibodies were omitted or when the anti-Bcl-2 antibody was replaced with an IgG1 monoclonal antibody against bromodeoxyuridine (culture supernatant, diluted 1:1).
Similar results were obtained when a rabbit anti-ribophorin I antiserum or immunoadsorbant-purified rat IgG2a monoclonal antibodies against the KDEL tetra- peptide were used to label the ER in double-labelling experiments with anti-Bcl-2 antibody (not shown).
The cells were mounted in Citifluor with added 1.5% (w/v)N- propylgallate to help overcome the fading of Texas red on the confocal microscope.
Cells were examined using a Biorad MRC 600 scanning confocal microscope equipped with an argon-xenon laser and printed from the computer using a Mitsubishi colour video copy processor.
The 1908 Tunguska explosion: atmospheric disruption of a stony asteroid
Christopher F. Chyba, Paul J. Thomas & Kevin J. Zahnle
The explosion over Tunguska, Central Siberia, in 1908 released 10 to 20 megatons (high explosive equivalent) of energy at an altitude of about 10km.
This event represents a typical fate for stony asteroids tens of metres in radius entering the Earth's atmosphere at common hypersonic velocities.
Comets and carbonaceous asteroids of the appropriate energy disrupt too high, whereas typical iron objects reach and crater the terrestrial surface.
THE explosion on 30 June 1908 over Tunguska has inspired many exotic explanations.
Antimatter, a small black hole and, inevitably, an exploding flying saucer, have all been proposed as means of liberating tens of megatons of energy in the atmosphere without cratering the Earth's surface.
Quantitative explanations in terms of a less exotic object have often suggested that it must have been extremely underdense (with an effective density  m 10 -3 –1 0 -2 gcm -3 ) to have exploded before reaching the ground.
Contrary to that claim, we show that the Tunguska explosion is a typical fate for stony asteroids with radii 30m entering the Earth's atmosphere at common hypersonic velocities.
Short-period and long-period comets with appropriate energies explode far too high in the atmosphere to account for the observations, whereas iron objects (with rare exceptions) explode too low, or not at all.
Our model is also consistent with the fate of the Revelstoke object, observed to have catastrophically exploded in the atmosphere with an energy of tens of kilotons.
These results affect assessments of the hazard posed by impacts of small comets and asteroids.
Characteristics of the Tunguska event
The Tunguska event has been variously estimated as liberating between 4x10 23 (ref. 14) and 4x10 25 erg,(ref. 12) or 10–10 3 megatons (Mton).
The best energy estimates are based on air and seismic wave records, compared with nuclear airbursts of comparable yield.
Hunt et al.
thereby find an explosive energy of 105Mton; a more recent analysis by Ben-Menahem finds 12.5  2.5Mton.
Similar estimates derive from observed forest destruction, scaled from the uprooting of trees in nuclear weapons tests.
Seismic waves were excited by a vertical point impulse of 7 x10 18 dyns (ref. 15).
The impulse has been interpreted as the initial vertical momentum of the impactor, which implies a bolide kinetic energy of 4 x10 25 erg.
This interpretation is problematic, as the impulse striking the ground is largely from the blast wave generated by the explosion, and not due to the detached ballistic shock from the decelerated impactor.
Turco et al.
distinguish between the Tunguska terminal explosion and energy released by ablation and deceleration during atmospheric entry, with the explosion representing just the last 1% of the bolide's energy.
This requires the bolide to be extremely underdense (m 0.01gcm -3 ) by the time it enters the upper atmosphere.
A reported iridium spike coincident with Tunguska in Antarctic ice corresponds to an impactor with energy 10 2 erg.
New analyses on Antarctic samples, however, have found no detectable iridium imprint above background due to cosmic dust, contradicting the earlier result.
No evidence for predicted elevated nitrate production has been found in a Greenland ice core.
Contrary to interpretations of the Tunguska object as a friable, underdense comet, Sekanina favours a bolide with a very high strength, arguing that the object would explode instantly on disruption.
Levin and Bronshten reach similar conclusions, by analogy with typical terminal-flare meteors.
Shoemaker asserts that Tunguska-like explosions should be a common fate of small bolides entering the terrestrial atmosphere, provided only that they are less strong than iron objects.
The terminal explosion over Tunguska is typically estimated to have occurred at roughly an atmospheric scale height H  8.4km.
Ben-Menahem has compared differing arrival times for Rayleigh and SH body waves recorded at Irkutsk; he finds an explosion height of 8.5km.
This agrees with simulations of the treefall pattern, which suggests explosion altitudes of 5–10km.
The inclination angle  (measured from the horizontal) of the Tunguska object's trajectory has been controversial.
Attempts r3,20,21 to determine  from eyewitness reports typically give shallow trajectories, in the range 5–17°.
Such low inclinations are inconsistent with attempts to simulate the treefall pattern at the Tunguska site.
Zotkin and Tsikulin measured the azimuths of 40,000 felled tree trunks over 2,200km 2 at the Tunguska site, and reproduced the observed ‘butterfly’ pattern in the laboratory by superimposing a terminal point charge and an inclined line charge.
Their investigations require 10°   60°, with a preferred value of 30°.
Korobeinikov et al.
simulated the treefall pattern using a numerical shock model, finding that observations can be matched only for 30°   45°,with a preferred value of 40°.
They further assert that this value is consistent with eyewitness accounts.
Evidently it is difficult to determine the true inclination of the Tunguska bolide, and eyewitness reports gathered 20 years after the event are particularly suspect.
In this investigation, we usually take  to be the most probable entry angle for an incident object, 45°, but consider a range of other possible values.
Atmospheric entry of the bolide
A cosmic object entering the atmosphere loses its kinetic energy through deceleration and ablation.
Deceleration can be described by the equation  where r is the bolide's radius,A its cross-sectional area, a atmospheric density,g gravitational acceleration (a function of height),t time, and C D drag coefficient.
The object's surface is heated by radiation from the atmospheric shock front.
This heat is shed efficiently by ablation.
The resulting change in mass is given by  where Q is the heat of ablation and C H is the heat transfer coefficient.
Q is a function of material type and the specific process of ablation.
To derive the values of Q used here, we begin with the heat of vaporization appropriate to iron and stony meteorites, 8x10 10 erg g -1 .
We then use observed ablation coefficients for cometary, carbonaceous and stony meteors to calculate Q for comets and carbonaceous asteroids, following Chyba et al.
(see Table 1).
Observation indicates that C H is effectively constant at C H 0.1 above 30km.
This altitude range includes most visible meteors.
But as a bolide descends to lower altitudes,C H declines inversely with atmospheric density, so that  which had been increasing, becomes effectively constant.
This upper limit on  occurs because large objects ablate mainly by absorbing thermal radiation emitted by the hot, shocked gases concentrated in front of the impactor.
The temperature attained by the shocked gas is strongly regulated by thermal ionization to 25,000–30,000K, with weak dependence on the velocity, size and composition of the impactor.
The maximum ablation rate is therefore .
These considerations suggest rewriting equation (2) as  Here  is the Earth's radius,h the bolide's height above the terrestrial surface, and C L the lift coefficient.
Passey and Melosh suggest taking  on the basis of their investigations of crater fields.
We set .
Even for trajectories as low as  varying C L over the range 10 -3 –1 changes the altitude at which a Tunguska-sized stony asteroid airbursts by only 1%.
Equations (1) and (2) can be solved analytically for spherical impactors in an isothermal atmosphere if  and C H are held constant.
The analytical solution does not, however, allow for objects breaking up in response to aerodynamic forces.
We therefore apply a finite-difference approach to solving the required equations.
Catastrophic fragmentation
Catastrophic fragmentation is a likely means of producing an atmospheric explosion of a bolide.
By spreading the impactor's mass over a wide area, fragmentation increases the amount of atmosphere intercepted and so enhances ablation and aerobraking; hence a fragmenting object stops more abruptly, surrendering its kinetic energy more explosively, than does a non-fragmenting object.
Objects much greater than 1km in diameter do not fragment while traversing the Earth's atmosphere, as an atmospherically induced pressure wave has insufficient time to cross the object before impact.
In effect, large objects moving at hypersonic velocities do not have time to ‘see’ the atmosphere before cratering the surface.
(This is consistent with the existence of the 14-km-wide Lappajârvi crater in Finland, apparently the result of an impactor of carbonaceous chondritic composition; this crater would have been excavated by a carbonaceous asteroid 1km in diameter.)
Sufficiently small objects will either be entirely ablated, or be aerobraked to free-fall speeds.
Atmospheric entry of objects in the size range 10–100m, however, is dominated by fragmentation, although the precise size range depends strongly on object type and velocity.
Deformation and fragmentation occur because of differential atmospheric pressure across the object.
The leading face of the impactor is subjected to an average pressure p s C D  a v 2  /2,whereas the pressure on the trailing face is much smaller.
Integrated over the surface of the impactor, this difference produces the drag force of equation (1).
Pressures on the side of the objects are also much smaller than p s , so that the object is essentially not laterally confined.
Impactors fragment as the result of this aerodynamic stress.
Fragmentation occurs when p s exceeds a characteristic strength of the material.
Because the details of bolide failure are poorly understood, we select characteristic strengths for various bolides using the following considerations.
Fragmentation of ‘Sun-grazing’ and ‘Jupiter-grazing’comets, presumably due to tidal stresses, suggests that at least some comets may have extremely low tensile strengths of 10 3 –10 5 dyncm -2 .
Objects have fragmented in the terrestrial atmosphere with strengths as low as 6x10 5 dyncm -2 .
A typical strength of a chondritic impactor is 1x10 7 to 5x10 7 dyn cm -2 , although stronger stony objects can have strengths as high as 2x10 7 –5 x10 8 dyncm -2 .
By contrast iron bodies are strong and usually do not fragment until they penetrate to 10km of the ground.
The effective strength for an iron impactor is 4x10 8 –2x10 9 dyncm -2 .
For an object entering the atmosphere at 20kms -1 , aerodynamic stresses reach 6x10 8 dyncm -2 two scale heights up, exceeding most of the strengths cited above.
A model for bolide deformation
A right circular cylinder moving along its axis of symmetry makes a highly idealized but straightforward model of a deforming impactor.
To represent a roughly equidimensional bolide, we choose a ‘cubical’ cylinder, taking its height h and diameter 2r to be initially equal.
We now consider the forces on the cylinder as it passes through the atmosphere.
The front face sees a pressure .
For a cylinder,C D 1.7.
Provided that the sound travel time h/c (c is the sound speed in the object) is short compared with the time  for the impactor to fall through a scale height, stresses parallel to the axis should roughly be in hydrostatic equilibrium, with the axial stress at any point within the object being that required to decelerate the trailing mass.
Thus the axial stress decreases linearly from its peak value p s at the front face to some low value  p s at the rear face.
The air pressure against the side walls is generally much less than p s and except near the back of the cylinder is small compared with the axial stress.
As the cylinder descends into deeper air, axial stress increases until elastic failure occurs.
The cylinder flows outward, transversely to the direction of motion.
Because the driving pressure p s rises exponentially as the bolide descends through the atmosphere, its effective cross-section increases exponentially with time.
A real disrupting cylinder would fail first at its leading edge, where pressures are highest.
The locus of failure thereafter moves backwards into the cylinder.
Because the pressures are always highest at the front the expansion is always fastest there, although the most rapidly expanding elements may be swept away by the flow.
As a first approximation, we assume that the cylinder deforms globally to become a squatter version of itself.
The average interior pressure is p s /2.
Neglecting the confining air pressure against the side walls, and assuming that the material strength of the cylinder has been exceeded, a global approximation to the force balance on the side walls is  where the inertial mass is identified with the mass m of the cylinder.
Assuming that the density  m of the disrupted cylinder remains constant,h and m can be eliminated from equation (5), to give  This equation is functionally identical (differing by only a factor of order unity) to the analogous equation derived by Zahnle using a wholly different argument.
Our finite-difference scheme solves equations (1) -(4) numerically, beginning at an altitude of 100km, and calculating the decrease in altitude d h over a time interval d t according to.
The atmospheric density  a is determined at each timestep by exponential interpolation from standard atmosphere tables.
Once the central pressure  exceeds the object's strength, equation (6) is used to calculate the changing radius r and effective cross-section .
Numerical results
Eight ‘Tunguska bolides’ are listed in Table 1.
All cases correspond to an initial kinetic energy at h=100 km of 15Mton.
(Objects lose different fractions of their kinetic energy before catastrophic disruption; for example, the 29-m stony asteroid entering at 45° has had its kinetic energy reduced by ablation and deceleration to 10Mton by the time it reaches 10km altitude.)
We compare five object types (iron, stony and carbonaceous asteroids; and short- and long-period comets), and, for stony asteroids, four incidence angles (15°, 30°, 45° and 90°).
All other objects are incident at  =45°.
The three asteroids have initial velocities of 15kms -1 , the median impact velocity for Earth-crossing asteroids.
Incident comet velocities are 25kms -1 and 50kms -1 for the short-period and long-period cases, respectively; again these are approximate median values.
Both comets are assumed to have strengths of 10 6 dyncm -2 , one-tenth that of the  carbonaceous body.
Figure 1 compares energy release curves for the five kinds of object at  =45°.
Figure 1 a shows the altitude profile of energy release in units of Mton high explosive equivalent per kilometre.
The two comets are entirely ablated, whereas the stony objects lose most of their kinetic energy to deceleration, not ablation.
Figure 1 b shows cumulative energy loss (Mton) along the object's path above the indicated altitude.
Where the curves in Fig. 1 a peak, objects have typically spread to 5–10 times their initial linear dimensions.
This greatly enhances both ablation and deceleration, but it is misleading, because equation (2) ceases to be valid before an object has spread to this extent.
Equation (2) assumes that the fragments of the disrupted object may continue to be treated with a single, collective bow shock.
At some point the object spreads sufficiently for this approximation to break down, and the collective bow shock dissolves into separate bow shocks as the fragments accelerate away from one another.
This effect is presumably what produces crater-strewn fields.
It is not clear at what (spreading) radius greater than a bolide's initial radius the collective bow-shock approximation breaks down.
This ambiguity does not greatly alter our conclusions regarding airburst altitude: once an object has spread to, say, twice its initial radius, its further spreading happens so quickly that an ‘explosion altitude’ is defined to within a few kilometres, regardless of whether the explosion is taken to occur then or when the object has spread to 5–10 times its initial radius.
The weak, fast-moving, easily ablated comets do not penetrate the atmosphere very deeply.
Neither approaches the altitude of the Tunguska explosion.
Even if the comets had strengths comparable to that of stony asteroids, they still could not fit the Tunguska observations.
For example, giving the short-period comet a strength of 1x10 8 dyncm -2 leads to complete ablation by an altitude of 16km.
Nor does assigning a 15-Mton incident comet an anomalously low asteroid-like velocity of 15kms -1 allow it to penetrate below 16km before it is completely ablated.
Moreover, comets may be less dense than the 1gcm -3 value chosen here; values as low as  m 0.3gcm -3 may be possible.
Such lower-density objects would airburst even higher.
The carbonaceous object, stronger and slower than the comets, penetrates more deeply, but also explodes at too high an altitude.
If this carbonaceous bolide were to enter the atmosphere at  =60°,however, it would airburst at an altitude of 11–12km.
These parameters are at the limits of those allowed by treefall simulations.
Similarly, granting a carbonaceous object the strength of a stony asteroid would allow it to penetrate to comparable altitudes.
Therefore a carbonaceous asteroid, although unlikely, cannot be ruled out as an explanation of the Tunguska event.
The stronger, denser, stony object in Table 1 penetrates to 9km above the ground, consistent with the Tunguska airburst altitude.
Figure 2 shows the effect of impact angle on the explosion of stony asteroids.
Results for four initial values of ,15°, 30°, 45° and 90° are given.
The more nearly vertical an object's trajectory, the deeper it penetrates into the atmosphere before catastrophic disruption.
Values of  much less than 30° seem to be inconsistent with an explanation of the Tunguska object as a stony asteroid.
The most probable fate for a 15-Mton iron object is impact with the ground.
Its high density (small cross-section) and high strength favour its survival.
However, 15-Mton iron objects with speeds much in excess of the median value of 15kms -1 will airburst before impact.
Our simulations indicate that, although it is possible for such an iron object to reproduce the Tunguska event, an encounter speed in the range 30–40kms -1 is required.
This excludes 90% of known Earth-crossing asteroid orbits.
These results are only weakly dependent on 
In summary, Tunguska was probably a fairly strong, dense, asteroid-like object, but probably not as strong or dense as iron.
Carbonaceous asteroids and especially comets are unlikely candidates for the Tunguska object.
‘Light nights’ over Eurasia
Widespread ‘light nights’ were observed over Eurasia for the first few nights after the Tunguska event.
Turco et al.
suggest three possible explanations: nightglow from NO x  -O x reactions; dust; and noctilucent water clouds.
The latter require injection or deposition at altitudes 50km to take advantage of the strong easterly winds needed to account for the observed geographical range of the phenomenon.
The effect has also been attributed to the putative comet's tail, a less plausible explanation.
Tunguska was a 15-Mton airburst at an altitude of roughly a scale height.
The effects of explosion blast waves scale as the ratio of blast energy to atmospheric density.
We therefore expect the Tunguska fireball to have reached a height above its airburst altitude appropriate to a  nuclear surface burst.
The fireball for a 40-Mton surface burst rises to an altitude of 40km.
A rough estimate of the amount of water that could have been entrained by this fireball is , where R is the radius of the fireball when its pressure has dropped to the ambient value (several kilometres for a 10-Mton nuclear blast), and  the density of atmospheric water vapour (several times ).
The result, 10 35 molecules H 2 O injected to 50km altitude, seems sufficient for noctilucent clouds to be produced.
The Tunguska explosion may have lofted enough material high enough to account for the European ‘light nights’.
Other impacts and recent airbursts
The model developed here for the Tunguska explosion may be tested for consistency with Meteor Crater in Arizona, and with the Tunguska-like explosions of the Revelstoke, Kincardine and other bolides.
We consider these in turn.
Meteor Crater.
Meteor Crater in Arizona was excavated 10 4 yr ago by an iron object with a kinetic energy of 15Mton.
Our model predicts that such an object disrupts so close to the surface that its fragments crater the surface as if from a coherent object, consistent with the appearance of Meteor Crater.
Revelstoke.
In March 1965 a small bolide travelling at  15° exploded 30km above Revelstoke, Canada, with an energy in the tens of kiloton range.
Examination of recovered material shows it to have been a type I carbonaceous chondrite.
(Largely unprocessed 1mm sized fragments were recovered from the Revelstoke site; only spherules of vaporized and recondensed material were recovered in the case of Tunguska.
Siderophile abundances in these spherules are consistent with extraterrestrial origin from a single object, but are insufficient to determine the type of the Tunguska object.
No scientific expeditions reached the Tunguska site until almost 20 years after the event; it is not surprising that no other remnants of the object were found.)
Microbarograph estimates of the explosive energy of the Revelstoke object range from 20kton (ref. 4) to 70kton (ref. 45).
We model Revelstoke as a carbonaceous chondrite (as in Table 1), moving at 15kms -1 with an initial kinetic energy of 20kton (corresponding to a cylinder of initial radius r=3.8 m) and  =15°.
Our simulation shows that such an object's strength is exceeded at an altitude of 33km, giving maximum kinetic energy deposition to the atmosphere at 32km.
Kincardine and other bolides.
The Kincardine and College objects exploded over Ontario in 1966 and Alaska in 1969, respectively, each at altitudes just over 60km.
Explosive energies in the kiloton to megaton range are possible.
These objects therefore provide only weak constraints on our model.
Our model does predict that long-period comets with kinetic energies in the tens of kiloton range should catastrophically disrupt and deposit the bulk of their energy just above 60km altitude, so the fates of these objects are consistent with cometary airbursts.
The fates of bolides
The simple model for bolide deformation and catastrophic disruption presented here is consistent with the fates and explosive energies of the Meteor Crater, Tunguska and Revelstoke objects, provided that these objects were iron, stony and carbonaceous asteroids, respectively.
The Meteor Crater and Revelstoke bolides are in fact known from recovered material to have had these identities.
Within broad uncertainties, the explosions of the Kincardine and College objects are consistent with the fates of long-period comets with kinetic energies of tens of kilotons.
The fate of bolides in the Tunguska size range is strongly dependent on the nature of the object.
Had the Tunguska object been a 15-Mton comet, far less surface destruction would have resulted, because of the much higher altitude of the airburst.
Comets incident with tens of kilotons of energy explode so high in the atmosphere that they are scarcely noticed at the surface.
Denser objects with higher material strengths are therefore necessarily more dangerous to surface life.
FIG. 1 Airburst altitudes for five 15-Mton candidate Tunguska bolides incident at 45°.
Comets and carbonaceous asteroids deposit their energy too high in the atmosphere to account for the Tunguska explosion, whereas iron objects reach and crater the surface.
Typical stony asteroids, however, deliver the bulk of their energy near an altitude of 9km, and this is consistent with observations.
FIG. 2 Airburst altitudes for four 15-Mton stony asteroids with different incidence angles.
The more nearly vertical an object's trajectory, the deeper it penetrates into the atmosphere before catastrophic disruption.
Unusual clustering of carboxyl side chains in the core of iron-free ribonucleotide reductase
Anders Aberg, Pâr Nordlund & Hans Eklund
THE principal driving forces of protein folding are the burial of hydrophobic residues in the interior of proteins and the exposure of charged residues at the surface.
Charged residues are only occasionally found in the interior, where they form hydrogen bonds to oppositely charged residues or main-chain atoms.
Ribonucleotide reductase, a key enzyme in DNA synthesis, catalyses the de novo production of deoxyribonucleotide precursors.
It is composed of two different dimeric proteins R1 and R2 (refs 3–5).
R2 subunits contain buried iron-centres with each centre formed by two ferric ions coordinated by four carboxylates and two histidine ligands.
Iron-free R2, apoR2, is a precursor of active R2 and folds into a stable protein which is transformed into active R2 by ferrous ions and molecular oxygen.
Here we show that the iron-free protein does not undergo any major structural changes compared with the iron-containing R2.
The effect of this is a clustering of four carboxyl side chains in the interior of the subunit, in contrast to the normal distribution of charged residues in proteins.
ApoR2 was obtained by treating native protein with strong chelators under slightly denaturing conditions.
During purification and crystallization this protein shows stability similar to that of the iron-containing form.
ApoR2 can also be directly obtained from overproduction of the protein in bacteria under limited-iron conditions.
ApoR2 and the active R2 protein can be crystallized under similar conditions at pH6.0 (ref. 7).
Diffraction data on apoR2 crystals were collected to 2.5Å and the structure was refined to a crystallographic R- value of 18.7% (Table 1; Fig. 1).
A comparison with the iron-containing protein shows no large global differences (Fig. 2).
The observed differences are local and mainly restricted to the former metal sites and their environment.
In iron-containing R2 the positive charge of +6 from the two ferric ions is compensated by the two negative charges of the bridging O 2- and by the liganding Asp84, Glu115, Glu204 and Glu238 (ref. 6).
In apoR2 the charges of the four acidic residues forming the metal site can be partly compensated for by protonation of the two former ligands His118 and His241.
If all four carboxyl groups are deprotonated, the net charge at the former metal site inside the protein should be -2, but there is an additional buried carboxyl acid, Asp237 hydrogen-bonded to His118, so the buried net charge in this region of the protein would be -3.
However, the distances between Asp84, Glu 115, Glu204 and Glu238 are short, indicating that some of them might be uncharged (Fig. 3 a).
Glutamic acid at position 115 and Glu238 are central in this group and form hydrogen bonds to each other and to His 241.
Glu115 also forms hydrogen bonds to His118 and to Asp84, and Glu238 hydrogen-bonds to Glu204.
This cluster of side chains shows a pseudo-twofold symmetry, and the protonation pattern of the side chains is consistent with this symmetry.
There are a few examples in other structures of pairs of carboxyl acids within hydrogen bond distance of each other but no other example of a cluster of four carboxyl groups as in R2.
In the aspartyl proteinases, where two charged residues of the same type are close to each other at the active sites, the p K a of the residues is perturbed and one of the residues is protonated.
All carboxyl side chains of the metal-binding site of apoR2 change their conformation somewhat and fill the hole created by the removal of the iron ions (Fig. 2).
The dihedral angle of the side chain of Glu238 changes rotamers for both  1  and  2 .
Particularly significant changes are found for residues located on the long E helix (Glu 204 and Phe 208).
The distortion found on this helix, due to the presence of one extra residue in a helix turn, is also present in apoR2.
This distortion may be important in providing the flexibility needed for binding of the binuclear iron cofactor.
Most water molecules found in the iron-containing structure are also visible in the apoR2 maps.
Some of the buried water molecules close to the iron centre are not present in the apoR2 structure, such as the two iron-bound water molecules.
One water molecule hydrogen-bonded to Glu204 is lost because of steric hindrance after  rearrangement of this side chain.
The three-dimensional structure of other metal-depleted metalloenzymes that show only small structural changes when the active site metal atom is removed have been reported.
Removal of metals in concanavalin A results in notable conformational changes in the metal-binding region.
Removal of calcium from proteinase K gives rise to small but long-range structural changes affecting the active site, which is 17Å away from the metal site.
In all of these proteins, however, the metal is bound at or close to the surface.
In the structure of lactoferrin, the iron ion is buried inside the protein.
When iron is released the protein goes through a large conformational change involving domain rotation and exposure of the empty metal-binding site to the solvent.
In the R2 protein the iron centre is located about 10Å from the protein surface.
Thus, one might expect a similar kind of opening of the iron-free structure to expose charged ligands and to allow entrance of ferrous ions.
However, no large differences are found between the structures of apoR2 and iron-containing R2.
A reason for this may be that R2 does not contain separate domains as lactoferrin but instead has a compact helix bundle structure.
The metal centre of R2 can be reconstituted in crystals of apoR2 without disturbance of the crystal lattice (ref. 16, and P.N., unpublished results), demonstrating that the metal centre can be formed without major conformational changes.
If the preservation of the protein structure in metal-free forms is a preferred feature in biological systems, it imposes constraints on the evolution of these proteins and may explain why evolution seems to have disfavoured highly charged metal clusters and why the more hydrophobic porphyrin systems dominate in higher organisms.
The observed structure of apoR2 raises the question of how a polypeptide can fold into a globular protein with an interior of several carboxyl residues (Fig. 3 b),a situation that may be analogous to carboxyl group clustering in, for example, some ion channels.
The folding of a protein is a highly cooperative process; in the case of R2 the energy cost of the clustering of carboxyl side chains in the interior of the protein must have been accounted for by other means.
Hydrogen-bonding to polar side chains in the vicinity of the carboxyl residues partly reduces the effect of the charges (Fig. 3 a).
Most importantly, the folded state of the subunit is stabilized by extensive van der Waals interactions and hydrogen bonds between the unusually long helices of R2.
These interactions must then stabilize the structure sufficiently for the energically unfavourable clustering of internal carboxyl residues to be tolerated.
Structure determination: ApoR2 protein was prepared from iron-containing R2 by dialysis at 4°C against a freshly prepared solution containing 50mM lithium 8-hydroxyquinoline-5-sulphonate, 1M imidazole-HCl, pH7.0, and 30mM NH 2 OH.HCl (ref. 21).
Crystals from apoR2 were made using the hanging-drop method.
A 5-μl drop of protein solution (20mgml -1 ) was mixed with 5μl of buffered precipitation mixture.
Crystals were grown from 20% polyethylene glycol (PEG 4000; Merck), 0.2M NaCl in 0.05MMES buffer (Sigma) at pH6.0 in small hanging-drop chambers.
The crystals used in this investigation were initiated by microseeding with normal iron-containing crystals using a standard dilution protocol, but identical crystals of similar quality can be obtained without seeding.
Crystals of the iron-depleted apo-protein are almost isomorphous to native crystals.
A data set to 2.5Å was collected on a Nicolet multiwire area detector mounted on a Rigaku rotating anode and evaluated using the Buddha program.
The CCP4 program suite (Daresbury, UK) was used for crystallographic computing.
Data were first scaled and merged using Agrovata and Rotavata.
The apoR2 reflections had isomorphous differences of 13% when compared to the native data set (calculated on F -values).
The refined R2 structure (P.N. and H.E.
submitted) was used as a start model for simulated annealing refinement using the program X-plor (ref. 23); the initial R- factor for 6.5–2.8Å reflections was 0.28).
This was followed by positional and B- value refinement through energy minimization.
Model-building during refinement was done using Frodo and O (ref. 25).
Structure comparisons were made using Program O. Coordinates of apoR2 will be deposited at the Brookhaven Data Bank.
FIG. 1 An ‘omit’ γ F γ-γF c γ map of the metal coordination site in iron-free protein R2.
The residues coordinating the iron ions in iron-containing R2 (Asp 84, Glu 115, His 118, Glu 204, Glu 238 and His 241) were removed from the structure, and 40 cycles of refinement were performed to relax the structure.
The γF γ-γF c γ map, contoured at 3,shows no density to indicate binding of other ions or water molecules in this region of the structure.
FIG. 2 Superposition of the refined structures of native R2 (green) and apoR2 (multicolours) using the Program O (ref. 25).
The r.m.s. difference between C α atoms is 0.37Å.
All metal ligand side chains rearrange, especially Glu 238, which is about 2Å closer to the iron-centre position in apoR2 than in the ferric R2 structure.
Glu 204 is about 1Å further away from the metal position in apoR2.
Of non-liganding residues, Phe 208 at the proposed oxygen-binding site changes its conformation because the α E helix relaxes when Glu 204 does not bind a metal.
FIG. 3
a,
A plausible hydrogen-bond system of the four carboxyl groups and the protonated histidines at the former iron-centre.
Distances between hydrogen-bonding acceptor and donor atoms are given in A. Five carboxyl groups in this cluster are buried inside the protein.
The positions of the protons in the hydrogen-bond system are not unambiguous and may have other positions.
There are no main-chain hydrogen bonds to the metal ligand side chains.
The net charge of the residues in the cluster in the figure is -1, the same as for ferric R2 (ref. 6).
b,
A hydrophilic core between four central helices (yellow ribbon) in the R2 subunit after the removal of iron from ribonucleotide reductase.
The C α chain of the apoR2 subunit is shown in blue.
The amino-acid side chains shown are ligands at the metal centre in the native protein.
Origin of modal and rhythmic igneous layering by sedimentation in a convecting magma chamber
R. Stephen Sparks, Herbert E. Huppert, Takehiro Koyaguchi & Mark A. Hallworth
EXPERIMENTAL investigations of convecting, particle-laden fluids show two regimes for convection driven by cooling from above.
In very dilute suspensions, convection will maintain a homogeneous distribution of particles throughout the convecting layer provided that particle fall velocities are small compared with turbulent fluid velocities.
Above a critical concentration, convection is unable to keep the particles suspended, so the particles settle, leaving behind a layer of convecting fluid virtually free of particles.
Here we apply these results to cooling magma chambers, in which crystallization leads to an increase in suspended crystal content with time.
Discrete sedimentation events are predicted each time the concentration exceeds the critical value.
For common igneous minerals, critical concentrations are very small (typically 0.002–0.03wt%) and layers of the order of centimetres to a few metres thick will result.
Because minerals of different density and size have different critical concentrations and settling velocities, complex fluctuations in sedimentation rate and mineral proportions can occur in a multi-component melt.
This may lead to either regular repetitive cycles or more complex fluctuations.
The process is confined to low-viscosity magmas, such as basalts, in which the crystals are able to separate from the active thermal boundary layer during convection.
The concepts of crystal settling and convection in magma chambers have a long history r2–6 .
Wager and co-workers were struck by the strong resemblance of layered igneous rocks in the Skaergaard intrusion to clastic sedimentary rocks.
Observations of graded bedding, trough structures and cross-layering suggested sedimentation from magmatic currents induced either by convection or by gravity currents.
There have been doubts as to whether crystal settling can explain layering.
Other mechanisms for layering have been recognized; these include in situ crystallization, kinetic effects of crystal nucleation and growth, and double-diffusive layered convection.
Experimental and theoretical studies of convecting suspensions heated from below show, however, that settling can occur at the base of a suspension even if the convection maintains a uniform concentration.
Petrological observations show excess feldspar in many basaltic lavas which is most easily explained by crystal settling.
The alternative layering models do not provide entirely convincing explanations of the basic ‘cumulus’ textures of layered rocks which are most simply interpreted as a framework of settled individual grains.
The oriented and dendritic morphologies due to growth in situ are less commonly observed than the apparent packstone texture.
The more strikingly ‘sedimentary’ structures such as layers graded by grain size or density, and cross-layering, are also simply explained by sedimentation.
Here we extend the results of experiments on convection in a suspension cooled from above.
We propose a powerful mechanism for inducing the fluctuations in sedimentation rate and mineral proportions needed to cause much of the observed complexity in mesoscale modal and rhythmically layered rocks formed on the floors of magma chambers.
For our experiments we used a cubical tank of water seeded with silicon carbide grit of fairly uniform size, which was cooled uniformly from the top.
This resulted in convection at high Rayleigh number (Ra10 8 –10 9 ) with turbulent velocities at least two orders of magnitude greater than the settling velocities of the particles.
For very dilute concentrations, the convection distributed the particles uniformly throughout the tank.
Simultaneously, sedimentation occurred at the base, as in previous experiments, so the mean concentration decreased with time.
However, above a critical concentration a sharp descending interface was observed between a convecting upper clear region and a non-convecting lower region in which there was unimpeded sedimentation by Stokes law.
Warmer fluid escaped through the interfacial region above the sedimenting layer and enhanced the convection driven by cooling at the roof.
The lower-layer temperature remained uniform during sedimentation, confirming that it was stagnant.
The two-layer structure will be stable only if the density of the cool, clear upper layer is less than the bulk density of the sedimenting lower layer.
Expressing this concept quantitatively and analytically solving the differential equations for the heat budget of the two layers, we showed rigorously that the two regimes are separated by a critical concentration  where  is the density of the fluid at  the constant temperature of the lower fluid layer, is the particle density,α is the coefficient of thermal expansion of the fluid and T u is the temperature of the upper fluid.
The experimental observations agree well with this criterion, especially when allowance is made for the transfer of small amounts of fine particles which are swept up into the upper convecting layer across the interface.
We now extend these concepts to combine the process of crystallization with the phenomena observed in the experiments, using inert particles to provide a general mechanism of layering (Fig.1).
We envisage a convecting magma chamber of height H,cooled from above.
In addition there will be compositional convection from crystals at the floor.
Temperature decreases in the convecting interior.
Suspended crystals form and are kept uniformly distributed within the interior.
Concentration of crystals increases with time while some sedimentation from the suspension occurs on the floor.
The concentration of crystals reaches the critical value, as given by equation (1), and a discrete sedimentation event follows.
As the lower layer sediments, the upper layer continues to cool and crystallization begins again.
The timescale for sedimentation is H/v S where v S is the Stokes free-fall velocity; the timescale for cooling is H 2  /,where  is the thermal diffusivity.
If the ratio of these timescales, /Hv S , is small, as is typically the case, these processes can be considered to occur sequentially.
In the simplest case of one phase, a repetitive sequence of layers should form on the floor of the chamber.
If the sedimenting layer had a range of crystal sizes a graded bed could form, thereby providing an alternative mechanism to magmatic density currents.
The thicknesses of the layers can be deduced from equation (1).
Earlier studies, which equated the convective heat flux in the magma to the conductive heat flux through the solid overlying roof, indicate that the typical temperature differences driving convection in a magma chamber are 0.1–10°C.
Although these differences seem small, the resulting convective motions are sufficient to maintain crystals in suspension, except at the floor where sedimentation can occur.
Typical values of the relevant parameters are  for olivine and  for plagioclase.
For , the critical concentration is 0.0025wt% for olivine and 0.027 wt% for plagioclase.
For a chamber 1km deep, the thickness of the sediment layer formed from such a sedimentation pulse would be 4cm for olivine and 50cm for plagioclase, assuming a packing fraction of 50%.
For larger values of T -T u the layer thicknesses will increase in proportion.
Clearly there are other choices for the parameters, but for all realistic values the critical concentrations will be small, and the length scale of the individual layers will be a small fraction of the chamber depth in the range of a few centimetres to several metres.
The mechanism allows for great variation and complexity in magma chamber sedimentation.
Each mineral phase will have a different critical concentration.
Substantial fluctuations in sedimentation rate and proportions of each phase would be expected.
We now discuss examples seen in the field which illustrate these concepts.
In the Rhum intrusion, centimetre-to-metre-scale layering occurs in troctolites.
Detailed stratigraphic logging reveals that the layering is largely caused by fluctuation in the size, shape and proportions of olivine surrounded by plagioclase.
Average proportions of minerals are cotectic (70% plagioclase and 30% olivine), but these proportions fluctuate substantially from layer to layer.
Although Rhum was an open-system chamber, systematic changes in the mineral compositions in layered troctolites imply that the small-scale layering developed during periods of closed-system evolution.
As olivine has a much lower critical concentration than plagioclase (see equation (1)), the scale of olivine layering should be smaller than for plagioclase, as is observed.
We envisage a convecting magma chamber precipitating olivine and plagioclase in cotectic proportions.
When the concentration of crystals reaches a critical value, a sedimentating layer forms with the crystals settling at their Stokes fall velocities (Fig.1).
Olivine typically settles faster than plagioclase because of its greater density contrast with basaltic magma, so a layer of plagioclase is left behind (Fig.1).
If the plagioclase concentration is still less than critical for plagioclase alone, then the plagioclase would be mixed up into the ‘clear layer’ in the same way that in the experiments fine particles were swept up from the interfacial zone into the clear layer.
Olivine and plagioclase continue to crystallize in the upper layer until critical concentrations are again reached and another pulse of sedimentation occurs.
Eventually the critical concentration for plagioclase is achieved and the excess plagioclase is sedimented in a pulse generating anorthosite layers poor in olivine.
In the Skaergaard intrusion, one sees irregular modal layering, regular repetitions of graded beds (gravity stratification) and alternations of homogeneous gabbro cumulates and strongly density graded layers.
We postulate that the alternation of homogeneous gabbro and graded layers is produced by a magma chamber that remains below the critical concentration for substantial periods of time and generates a steady accumulation of crystals on the floor in the cotectic proportions.
A graded bed represents a pulse of sedimentation whenever the critical concentration is attained.
In this case the crystals in the chamber settle out according to size and density.
Many complex interactions can take place with the co-precipitation of two or more minerals of different density.
For example, as a plagioclase-rich layer sediments, fast-settling olivine formed in the overlying layer can fall through the interfacial zone and the excess density flux can overturn the layer.
Nonlinear crystal growth and nucleation rates and the sedimentation velocities are coupled together with the cooling rate imposed by convection, magma viscosity and phase relationships.
Complex fluctuations in the sedimentation rates and modal proportions are possible.
It is not surprising that a wide range of patterns can develop, from the complex layering of Rhum troctolites to the regularity in parts of the Skaergaard intrusion.
The proposed mechanism requires that crystals formed in the thermal boundary layer at the roof of the chamber can escape by settling before the boundary layer becomes unstable locally.
This will occur if the viscosity of the magma is low enough for crystals to escape from the boundary layer on the convective timescale rather than remaining to contribute to the density evolution of the boundary layer.
If, instead, the viscosity is high and crystals are maintained in the boundary layer, the crystal content and density of the thermal boundary layer will always exceed the density of the underlying warmer suspension and equation (1) is not valid.
We can estimate when equation (1) will be applicable when crystals are growing in the boundary layer by an approximate analysis of local conditions.
The mean thickness,,of the thermal boundary layer is given by  where R c is the critical value of the Rayleigh number (10 3 ), μ is the magma viscosity, is the thermal diffusivity,α is the coefficient of thermal expansion, T is the temperature difference driving convection,g is gravity and  is the magma density.
The timescale,,for the instability of the boundary layer to occur is given by the time taken for conduction to thicken the local boundary layer to this mean thickness  The two different regimes can be separated by equating the settling time, /v S to the convective boundary-layer timescale,.
Using Stokes law for a crystal of diameter d and density contrast   and equating (2) and (3), we find that the critical viscosity,μ c , below which equation (1) is valid is 
Figure 2 a shows calculations of μ c as a function of temperature differences in the range 0.1–10°C for crystals of diameter 5mm and density contrasts of 50 and 500kgm r-3 .
The temperature range covers typical values expected in magma chambers.
Figure 2 b shows the crystal size that must be exceeded for crystals to escape from the thermal boundary layer for a magma with viscosity of 30Pas, this being typical for basalt.
We conclude that the mechanism will be effective in low-viscosity basic and intermediate magmas and can occur in basaltic magmas for crystals of diameter 1mm.
The absence of layering in rocks formed from viscous magmas is consistent with the rheological control implied by our analysis.
Appropriate conditions for layering by the mechanism proposed here only occur when crystals escape from the unstable boundary layer or crystal nucleation occurs in the interior.
FIG. 1 Sequence of events in a magma chamber precipitating two phases of different size and density.
a,
Crystals are uniformly distributed through the chamber by convection.
The interior cools, resulting in crystallization.
Some sedimentation occurs at the chamber floor but crystal concentration increases with time.
b,
Critical concentration (equation (1)) is reached and the suspended crystals sediment in a stagnant layer in which convection is dampened.
c,
Clear, crystal-free convection layer forms above the sedimenting layer which forms a density-graded layer.
d,
Cycle begins again with formation of new crystals in the convecting chamber.
Some of the lower-density crystals are shown swept up into the convecting layer.
FIG. 2
a,
Critical viscosity separating thermal boundary layers that retain crystals from those from which the crystals can escape is shown as a function of temperature difference driving convection.
The lines show calculations for 5-mm-diameter crystals with density contrasts of 500 and 50kgm r-3 with the magma.
Crystals can escape from sufficiently low-viscosity magmas before the thermal boundary layer destabilizes locally.
b,
Maximum crystal size that can be retained in the thermal boundary layer for a magma with viscosity 30 Pa s as a function of temperature difference driving convection.
Calculations are shown for density differences between crystal and magma of 50 and 500kgm r-3 .
The calculations indicate that crystals larger than 1mm can usually escape from thermal boundary layers before they become unstable locally.
Ionospheric signatures of pulsed reconnection at the Earth's magnetopause
M. Lockwood, W. F. Denig, A. D. Farmer, V. N. Davda, S. W. H. Cowley & H. Lûhr 
THE plasma precipitating into the Earth's dayside auroral atmosphere has characteristics which show that it originates from the shocked solar-wind plasma of the magnetosheath.
The particles of the magnetosheath plasma precipitate down a funnel-shaped region (cusp) of open field lines resulting from reconnection of the geomagnetic field with the interplanetary magnetic field.
Although the cusp has long been considered a well defined spatial structure maintained by continuous reconnection, it has recently been suggested r4–6 that reconnection instead may take place in a series of discontinuous events; this is the ‘pulsating cusp model’.
Here we present coordinated radar and satellite observations of a series of discrete, poleward-moving plasma structures that are consistent with the pulsating-cusp model.
Figure 1 shows schematically a noon-midnight cross-section of the Earth's magnetosphere, showing the cusps (C).
The dashed line is the magnetopause, the current-carrying boundary between the magnetosphere and the shocked solar wind plasma in the magnetosheath (MS).
The interplanetary magnetic field (IMF) is shown pointing southward, allowing it to reconnect with the northward-pointing ‘closed’ geomagnetic field lines(c) at a neutral line (X) in the subsolar magnetopause.
This generates ‘open’ field lines (o) which thread the boundary and connect the magnetosphere with interplanetary space.
The open field lines convect polewards under the joint action of magnetic ‘tension’ and the solar wind flow.
If the rate at which field lines are reconnected exceeds the rate at which they convect polewards, the open/closed boundary migrates toward the Equator.
Magnetosheath plasma can enter the magnetosphere along the open field lines.
The large time-of-flight of the ions disperses them according to their energy: highest-energy ions arrive first in the atmosphere and are seen at the lowest latitudes.
This is because more recently reconnected field lines are always closer to the open/closed field line boundary which lies at the equatorward edge of the cusp.
If the reconnection were to take place at a steady rate, the ion energy would show a continuous latitudinal dispersion.
However, the pulsating cusp model predicts that the dispersion signature will show discontinuities if the reconnection is pulsed, rather than steady.
The ions appearing at the foot of the most recently reconnected field lines would be more energetic than the corresponding ions on field lines that were opened by a previous pulse of reconnection.
Between these two regions, a step in the ion energy will be observed, corresponding to the period of little or no reconnection between the pulses.
The steps will drift polewards with the convecting field lines.
Such ‘staircase’ signatures are common in cusp ion precipitation and have been used to calculate the reconnection rate as a function of time.
Hence the pulsating cusp model provides a powerful tool for studying how reconnection proceeds at the dayside magnetopause.
However, there has been debate as to the validity of the model r11–13 with some scientists favouring the original explanation in terms of steady-state spatial structure, dividing the precipitating plasma into ‘cleft’, ‘cusp’ and ‘mantle’regions.
Ambiguity between spatial and temporal variations is a common problem in interpreting any sequence of data from an orbiting satellite.
Ground-based observations, on the other hand, offer an opportunity for remote sensing of the plasma in a given region over a prolonged period.
Such measurements distinguish temporal events from spatial structure, but suffer from lower resolution.
In the case of the cusp, we can detect transient features from the ground, but cannot unambiguously define them as being due to the cusp precipitation.
Here we report combined observations by the EISCAT radars and the DMSP-F10 satellite which tell us about the spatial and temporal behaviour of the cusp.
A map of the observations, made on 28 March 1992, is given in Fig.2.
Figure 3 shows the energy-time spectrograms of the ions and electrons observed by the F10 satellite; magnetosheath-like plasma was observed between 10:09:15 and 10:11:30UT.
The most striking feature of these data is the ion-energy dispersion which showed discrete steps in the ion spectrum at 10:10:28, 10:10:54 and 10:11:15UT.
The electron fluxes were irregular, with peaks in the precipitating energy flux at the second and third of the steps which bound the ‘cusp’ precipitation: the regions polewards and equatorwards would usually be termed ‘mantle’and ‘cleft’, respectively.
Figure 4 shows the electron temperature observed by the EISCAT ultra-high-frequency (UHF) radar as a function of invariant latitude,(see Fig.2), and time.
The black line shows the  of the satellite for 10:09–10:12UT, the arrows corresponding to those in Fig.3.
The large arrows mark the locations of two steps bounding the cusp, which were observed very near the UHF beam.
The radar reveals a number of poleward-moving regions in which the electron temperature is elevated by a factor of 1.5.
The size, amplitude and repeat period of these events vary and those during the satellite pass are weaker than those seen just a few minutes earlier.
These features are reminiscent of those observed in 630-nm dayside auroral emissions at winter solstice.
We expect heating of the ambient ionospheric electron gas in response to the precipitation of solar wind plasma, and the plasma density data (not shown) reveal that weak density increases emerge within the events late in their lifetime, at the highest latitudes.
This indicates that the events are caused by the low-energy particle precipitation and suggests that they may be involved in the production of polar cap density ‘patches’.
The radar data alone cannot tell us that these features are indeed the cusp.
However, Fig. 4 b shows the data during the satellite overpass at higher time resolution and it can be seen that the southernmost event was coincident with the cusp (between the large arrows).
A poleward-moving event is also seen in the mantle region.
No temperature event is seen under the cleft precipitation in Fig.4 b,but 4a shows that this emerges as a third poleward-moving event after 10:14UT.
Using the theory outlined in Fig.1 (ref.10), the time interval  t (5.3min) between the events seen by EISCAT and the step in the lower cut-off of the ion energy seen by F10 (from E 1  1.2 keV to E 2  200eV) yield a distance from the satellite to the neutral line (X in Fig.1) of d10 5  km (16 Earth radii R E ).
This places the reconnection close to the subsolar magnetopause, consistent with previous studies of both ‘steady’ reconnection and ‘flux transfer events’(FTEs).
By combining the data from the two radars, convection vectors of 10-s resolution can be derived, with the assumption that the flow does not vary between the two beams.
The results are also shown in Fig.4 b.
At all times the poleward convection speed was 500ms r-1 , the same as the speed of poleward drift of each of the heated regions as predicted by the pulsating cusp model.
The flow rotates from uniformly northwestwards to northwards close to the poleward edge of the cusp.
Hence the cusp was on field lines which were convecting with similar velocity to the closed field lines equatorward of the cusp.
This feature is predicted by the pulsating cusp model: a pulse of reconnection is envisaged as initially producing an equatorward motion of the open/closed boundary, rather than causing a burst of poleward flow (with the boundary static).
This can excite continuous, even steady, poleward flow as the boundary subsequently relaxes poleward.
If the y -component of the interplanetary magnetic field  B y were large, the tension force would yield a strong zonal flow burst on the most recently opened flux: the moderate northwestward flow observed here in the cusp/cleft region implies that B y is weakly positive; we cannot confirm this inference because no simultaneous measurements were made of the interplanetary magnetic field.
These results show that the magnetosheath-like plasma precipitation was, in fact, made up of three poleward-moving events from an extended sequence of such features.
The satellite intersections with these three events would have been termed ‘mantle’, ‘cusp’ and ‘cleft’in a spatial interpretation, but the radar shows them to be similar events seen at different phases of their evolution.
This finding is supported by the steps in the dispersion signature of the ions.
Hence the cusp was not, at this time at least, a steady-state spatial feature, but was one of a sequence of poleward-moving events.
This is direct evidence for the pulsating cusp model and that reconnection was taking place in a series of bursts (FTEs) at the subsolar magnetopause.
The period between the events which can be resolved in Fig. 4a varies between about 2 and 15min.
This is consistent with the range for the magnetopause signatures which are also widely believed to result from FTEs.
FIG.1 Schematic of the dayside magnetosphere for southward interplanetary magnetic field (IMF).
The super-Alfvénic solar wind (SW) forms a bow shock (BS), behind which lies the shocked plasma of the magnetosheath (MS).
Reconnection takes place at X,converting closed field lines, c, into open field lines, o, which form a rotational field discontinuity where they cross the magnetopause (dashed line).
This results in the open field lines convecting polewards under the magnetic ‘tension’ force, and in doing so they accelerate the magnetosheath ions that flow along them and cross the magnetopause.
As they straighten, open field lines continue to convect polewards because they are embedded in the solar wind flow, but the ion acceleration decreases (and turns to a deceleration poleward of the magnetic cusp).
If the IMF has a significant dawn/duskward  component (out of the plane of the diagram), magnetic tension also causes east/west motion on the most recently reconnected field lines.
The injected magnetosheath plasma precipitates down the convecting open field lines, into the ionosphere in the cusps (C).
The ‘pulsating cusp’ model uses the fact that the spectra of particles arriving at the ionosphere on a given field line depend upon the time elapsed since that field line was reconnected.
Ions with the lowest energy (E)observed on any one field line have the longest time-of-flight,t,and were therefore the first injected: they crossed the magnetopause at X, a distance d from the satellite (where  is the ion mass).
That minimum energy falls with time elapsed since reconnection.
Hence two pulses of reconnection, with an interval  t between them, cause a step in the minimum energy from E 1  to E 2  where )
FIG. 2 Map (geographic coordinates) of the EISCAT UHF and VHF radar beams for the SP-UK-CONV experiment, used to study the ionized upper atmosphere in the F-region ionosphere on 28 March 1992: the points show centres of the radar range gates.
The altitude of the UHF radar beam varies from 197km for gate 1 to 595km for gate 25.
Also shown is the path of the DMSP-F10 satellite between 10:09 and 10:12UT.
The satellite passed at 800km altitude over the EISCAT field-of-view, observing the same field line as the UHF radar at 10:11UT.
In magnetic coordinates, both were then at 12:55 magnetic local time (MLT) and an invariant (magnetic) latitude of  =74°.
Invariant latitude is a way of defining a magnetic field line by the motion of energetic charged particles along it and is the magnetic latitude of the point where the field line intersects the Earth.
MLT is defined in terms of the point where the field line would cut the ecliptic plane and the angle that point subtends with the Sun at the Earth's centre.
That angle is zero at MLT=12hr and cusp precipitation is generally found at MLT between 10:30 and 13:30 (ref.12).
Magnetic coordinates of both the radar range gates and the satellite position were determined using the IGRF (International Geomagnetic Reference Field) model of the Earth's magnetic field.
FIG. 3 Spectrograms showing the differential number flux (in cm r-2 s r-1 sr -1 eV r-1 ) of precipitating electrons (top) and ions (bottom) as a function of energy and time, as observed by DMSP-F10 during the pass described in Fig.2.
The decrease of ion energies with latitude at all times (and the observed convection away from the Sun) indicates that the IMF points southward; inverse-slope, V-shaped or dispersionless signatures are expected for northward IMF.
The arrows mark the boundaries of the ‘cusp’(between larger arrows), ‘cleft’ and ‘mantle’precipitations (equatorward and poleward of the cusp, respectively).
The cusp-cleft boundary is defined to be where the mean ion energy falls below 3keV (refs 1, 12), and the cusp-mantle boundary where the ion energy flux falls below 10eVcm r-2 s r-1 sr r-1 .
The electron energy flux in the cusp averages 3x10eVcm r-2 s r-1 sr r-1 , which is a factor of two lower than some definitions, under which this region would be classed as ‘probably cusp’.
However, this category shows the same statistical occurrence as ‘cusp’(with electron energy flux exceeding 6x10eVcm r-2 s r-1 sr r-1 )(ref. 12).
In the ‘cleft’, ions of energy up to a maximum of 5.5keV (i.e. velocity of 1,000kms r-1 ) are observed, revealing acceleration to above magnetosheath energies.
This is the same as the peak field-aligned velocity of the D-shaped distributions of the accelerated magnetosheath ions at the magnetopause, as both predicted theoretically and, recently, observed r24–26 .
This similarity indicates that the ‘cleft’ is, for this case at least, on the most-recently opened field lines: this is the only place where these highest-energy ions will be observed because of their low time-of-flight.
The gene involved in X-linked agammaglobulinaemia is a member of the src family of protein-tyrosine kinases
David Vetrie, Igor Vorechovský, Paschalis Sideras, Jill Holland, Angela Davies, Lennart Hammarstrôm, Christine Kinnon, Roland Levinsky, Martin Bobrow, C. I. Edvard Smith & David R. Bentley
X-linked agammaglobulinaemia (XLA) is a human immunodeficiency caused by failure of pre-B cells in the bone marrow to develop into circulating mature B cells.
A novel gene has been isolated which maps to the XLA locus, is expressed in B cells, and shows mutations in families with the disorder.
The gene is a member of the src family of proto-oncogenes which encode protein-tyrosine kinases.
This is, to our knowledge, the first evidence that mutations in a src- related gene are involved in human genetic disease.
X-LINKED agammaglobulinaemia (XLA; Bruton type; MIM 30030; gene symbol AGMX1) was the first described immunoglobulin deficiency.
Affected males lack circulating mature B cells and serum immunoglobulins of all isotypes, and suffer recurrent bacterial infections.
The infections, particularly bacterial meningitis and pneumonia, are life-threatening at an early age and require the use of antibiotic and immunoglobulin replacement therapy.
Affected males have a normal number of pre-B cells in their bone marrow, suggesting that the XLA defect resides in the pathway of B-cell development.
This defect is specific to the B-cell lineage because other lymphocyte populations appear to be normal.
Heterozygous females appear immunologically normal, as a result of selection against B cells having the mutant X chromosome active.
Such ‘skewing’ of X chromosome activity in the B-cell population reliably identifies the carrier status.
The isolation of the XLA gene would aid in understanding the disorder, its role in B-cell development, and allow accurate carrier and prenatal diagnosis directly by mutation analysis.
Because the disorder is specific to B cells, it may be a candidate for somatic gene therapy.
As with XLA, most human genetic disorders arise from mutations in genes that encode currently unknown proteins.
The identification of such genes may be achieved by positional cloning (for review, see ref.6).
Once extensive mapping information becomes available, candidate genes can be isolated in the region surrounding the disease locus and used to identify mutations in patients, demonstrating a direct relationship between a gene and a disease phenotype.
This task is being made increasingly efficient through the isolation of large tracts of the human genome in cloned form, the development of novel strategies to detect genes, and by using efficient methods of mutation detection.
We report the isolation of a gene defective in XLA.
A yeast artificial chromosome (YAC) clone was used for direct selection of candidate genes as complementary DNAs.
One candidate was found to be a novel member of the src family of genes, encoding a protein-tyrosine kinase expressed in B cells.
Deletions and point mutations of this gene were detected in eight unrelated XLA patients, strongly suggesting that it is directly involved in the disease and, therefore, in the process of B-cell development.
Cloning strategy
The XLA locus has been mapped to the region Xq21.3-Xq22 (refs 17–21 and R. Lovering et al.,manuscript in preparation).
The consensus order of loci in the region was established as cen-DXS3- (XLA, DXS178) -DXS94-DXS17-tel, with the polymorphic marker DXS178 showing no recombination with the disease (refs 20, 21 and R. Lovering et al.,manuscript in preparation), and DXS3 and DXS94 lying approximately 10 centimorgans (cM) apart (Fig. 1 a ).
Recently, the identification of recombinants between XLA and the flanking markers DXS442 and DXS101 resulted in the further localization of XLA to within a 2cM interval (R. Lovering et al.,manuscript in preparation).
Long-range restriction maps have been constructed in Xq21.3-Xq22 (refs 22, 23 and D.V. et al.,manuscript in preparation).
The order of 12 markers flanking the XLA locus was established, and DXS178 was shown to lie 70–140 kilobases (kb) distal to GLA (the α- galactosidase A gene) and about 500kb proximal to DXS101 (ref. 22 and D.V. et al.,manuscript in preparation; Fig. 1 a).
These studies also identified a number of putative CpG islands in the region around DXS178 (ref. 22, D.V. et al.,manuscript in preparation), indicative of the presence of genes.
The entire region extending from DXS442 to beyond DXS17 was isolated in a contiguous set of 68 overlapping YAC clones (that is, a contig) spanning 6.5 megabases (Mb)(D.V., manuscript in preparation).
These studies formed the basis for a systematic search for the gene involved in XLA.
A 640kb YAC clone y178–3 containing the GLA and DXS178 loci was chosen from the contig.
The artificial chromosome was gel-purified and used as a hybridization probe to identify 48 cosmid clones in a library constructed using DNA from cells of karyotype 49, XX (ref. 25).
Positive cosmids were mapped into intervals by hybridization to other YACs and isolated ends of YAC clones from the contig, and to the GLA and DXS178 probes (ref. 26 and I.V.
et al.,manuscript in preparation).
To identify transcribed sequences within y178–3, we modified the technique of cDNA selection (see Fig. 1 legend for details) which results in the enrichment of region-specific cDNAs in a cDNA population in the order of 10 2 -to 10 4 -fold.
DNA from YAC y178–3 was gel-purified, immobilized on nylon filters, and the filters were hybridized to inserts amplified from a total cDNA library.
Previous reports on B-cell differentiation in XLA (refs 2, 28) suggested to us that the disease gene may be expressed throughout B lymphocyte development.
Therefore, a single round of selection was done using the cDNA library BL-29 (ref. 29) derived from an Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) -positive Burkitt's lymphoma cell line.
The bound material was recovered by denaturation, reamplified and either used as a probe (see below) or subcloned and gridded in high-density arrays.
Screening of the enriched and original BL-29 cDNA libraries with a probe for GLA indicated enrichment by a factor of 300 (data not shown).
The pool of enriched BL-29 polymerase chain reaction (PCR) products was used as a probe to hybridize to filters of the cosmid clones that had previously been isolated with YAC clone y178–3.
Thirteen of the 48 cosmids gave a strong positive signal (Fig. 1 b).
Of the 1,536 sub-cloned cDNAs, 104 were detected by hybridization to restriction fragments of these cosmids, and arranged into 12 mapping groups (ref. 26 and I.V., manuscript in preparation).
Representative cDNAs from each group were used to screen Southern blots from XLA patients.
cDNAs from two of these groups (cDNAs 7C11 and 6G11; Fig. 1 a ) detected DNA rearrangements in XLA families (see below).
Three cosmids spanning these two cDNA groups (1B2, 2F10 and 1G5, highlighted in Fig. 1 a and b)hybridized to a total of 25 subcloned cDNAs, all of which were localized to a 20kb region about 50–70kb centromeric of the α- galactosidase A gene.
The cDNAs 7C11 and 6G11 were used to screen the original BL-29 cDNA library to isolate longer, possibly full-length clones.
Clones isolated from the original cDNA library, the longest of which was the 2.6kb cDNA 14–6 (Fig. 1 a),hybridized under high stringency to all 25 of the subcloned cDNAs originating from the 20-kb genomic region of cosmids 1B2, 2F10 and 1G5.
Therefore, these 25 subcloned cDNAs were derived from a single transcript.
On the basis of the abundance of this sequence in the original BL-29 cDNA library (3 in 100,000 clones), about 500-fold enrichment of this particular transcript was achieved.
This sequence was localized to both the YAC contig and the long-range restriction map of the region.
In addition,in situ hybridization of cosmid 2F10 to metaphase human chromosome spreads demonstrated a unique signal at the Xq21.3-Xq22 boundary (Fig.1 c).
DNA rearrangements in XLA families
Southern analysis of XLA patients from 33 unrelated families and 150 normal X chromosomes was done with Taq I and Msp I using cDNA probes 7C11 and 6G11 and a 10-kb Sma I genomic restriction fragment from cosmid 2F10.
Restriction pattern abnormalities were detected in eight XLA families, as summarized in Fig. 2.
No variation was observed in the hybridization patterns of the normals.
Restriction fragment alterations in the DNA of patients A and B were found using Taq I, but not Msp I, and were consistent with the loss and gain of a Taq I site, respectively (later confirmed by sequence analysis as described below).
These alterations were shown to segregate with all family members known to have the mutant XLA locus in their respective pedigrees (see Fig. 2 a for pedigree analysis of patient B).
Figure 2 b shows an example of the abnormal restriction fragment patterns observed in patients C, E and G. The abnormality in patient C was detected only with Msp I Southern blots.
Patients D-H were shown to have deletions of genomic DNA containing 7C11 and 6G11 coding regions, as depicted in Fig. 2 c.
Further analysis of the deletions using additional sections of the 5' half of the cDNA clone 14–6 (see legend to Fig. 2 c for details) confirmed that patients D and E both contain normal restriction fragments derived from the 5' end of the gene in addition to those detected near the 3' end with probe 7C11.
The deletions in these two patients are therefore entirely intragenic, confirming the involvement of this gene in XLA.
A novel protein-tyrosine kinase gene
The complete nucleotide sequence of the longest cDNA clone 14–6, isolated from the original BL-29 library, was determined and is shown in Fig. 3 a.
The cDNA comprises 2,560 nucleotides and has an open reading frame encoding a 659-amino-acid polypeptide beginning with the initiation codon at nucleotide position 133.
The reading frame is closed 15 codons upstream of this start site.
Two alternative initiation codons are located at nucleotide positions 397 and 619 within the same open reading frame as the first; initiation of translation from these two start signals would result in peptide chains of 571 and 497 amino acids, respectively.
All three of these start positions agree well with Kozak's consensus sequence.
In the absence of the protein product encoded by this transcript, it is not yet possible to predict which start signal is most favoured.
The consensus polyadenylation signal AATAAA is present at position 2,524, 20 nucleotides upstream from the poly(A) + tail.
The sequence of cDNA 14–6 is most similar to that of the src family of proto- (that is, cellular) oncogenes.
Members of the src gene family, characterized by extensive homology to the kinase domain of the transforming gene of the Rous sarcoma virus (v-src),encode intracellular (non-receptor) protein-tyrosine kinases.
These proteins are usually bound to the plasma membrane by myristylation and/or direct attachment to membrane proteins.
It is thought that members of the src family play important roles in the cellular signalling pathways that regulate cell proliferation and differentiation.
Protein-tyrosine kinases function as central switching mechanisms in these pathways by catalysing the phosphorylation of tyrosine residues in specific target proteins (for review, see ref. 34).
Because of the nature of their role in cellular development, genes encoding proteins with tyrosine kinase activity form a large proportion of known proto-oncogenes.
Across a stretch of about 1,200bp of its open reading frame, the DNA sequence of cDNA 14–6 shows a high degree of similarity with two members of this gene family: the murine tec gene (64% DNA sequence identity) and the Drosophila src28C gene (58%).
On the basis of this extensive similarity and our data presented below, we have called the gene represented by cDNA 14–6,atk (for agammaglobulinaemia tyrosine kinase).
At the amino-acid level,atk shows highest similarity to the murine tec,and to the human src and yes gene products (Fig. 3 b).
It possesses a putative kinase domain of 252 residues (amino-acid positions 408 to 659) which shows 64% amino-acid identity with the tec protein.
This domain contains the ATP-binding site at positions 408 to 430, and includes Lys430, the residue equivalent to the highly conserved Lys295 of v-src.
This residue, present in all functional protein-tyrosine kinases, is essential for catalytic activity.
Also within the predicted kinase domain of atk is a substrate-specific domain (amino acids 519–567) that determines the specific phosphorylation of tyrosine residues.
Within this region, Tyr551 of atk is presumed to be an important auto-regulatory site by analogy with the role of the corresponding Tyr416 of v-src (ref. 38).
The putative kinase domain of atk does not, however, have the equivalent residue corresponding to a second auto-regulatory site at Tyr527 found in many cellular src proteins.
The absence of this residue, as well as the presence of Leu516 (found in the atk amino-acid sequence possibly as Leu652) are features of src proteins that are capable of inducing cellular transformation.
atk also possesses two src regulatory domains corresponding to SH2 and SH3 at positions 281–377 and 219–269, respectively (for a review, see refs 41 and 42).
The SH2 domain is thought to bind phosphorylated tyrosines in protein substrates, as well as providing a mechanism for auto-regulating the catalytic activity of src proteins; the SH3 domain may bind cytoskeletal components.
As is typical of protein-tyrosine kinases, the putative amino-terminus of atk shows little homology with its most closely related src counterparts.
Therefore, this region may confer some degree of specialization to the protein, in terms of cellular location and/or tissue specificity.
Three putative myristylation sites can be recognized at positions 50, 150 and at 164 of atk.
The third of these alternatives might indicate the initiation of translation is at Met163 (nucleotide position 619), because glycine at position 2 is a myristylation site found in src proteins.
Tissue specificity of the atk transcript
To investigate the expression pattern of this transcript, we did northern blot analysis of RNA from various tissues using the cDNA clones 6G11 and 14–6 as hybridization probes.
A 2.6-kb transcript was detected in B cells, adult lung and pancreas (Fig. 4), indicating that the 2.6kb cDNA 14–6 represents a virtually full-length transcript.
Longer exposures revealed a weakly hybridizing transcript of similar size in adult heart, brain, liver, kidney and skeletal muscle, as well as a 6-kb transcript in lung and pancreas (Fig. 4 a).
The larger transcript may correspond to either an unprocessed version of the 2.6-kb species or a distinct RNA species that bears some homology to the atk cDNA.
Northern analysis of RNAs derived from lymphoid lineages showed that the 2.6kb atk messenger RNA was expressed in the B-cell line NAD, and also in B cells of two patients with chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (B-CLL1, B-CLL2), but not in T cells (T-CLL) or a T-cell line (Jurkat)(Fig. 4 b).
These results further support the involvement of atk in XLA.
Point mutations in the atk kinase domain
Reverse-transcriptase (RT) -based PCR of total lymphocyte RNA has been shown to amplify specific coding sequences regardless of their primary tissue of expression.
Using this approach, we amplified sections of the atk cDNA sequence from patients A and B. Taq I restriction site changes co-segregate with the disease in the families of both these patients (see above).
A Taq I restriction site was found to be absent from the DNA of patient A, whereas patient B had gained a site for this restriction enzyme.
A 225-bp PCR product amplified from cDNA of patient A using oligonucleotide primers B5 and A3 (Fig. 5 a)was digested with Taq I. This amplification product did not cleave into the expected 107bp and 118bp fragments in the patient, indicating that the loss of the Taq I site was in the coding sequence (at cDNA position 1,704).
The alteration was also seen in the 225-bp amplification product derived from lymphocyte RNA of the obligate carrier mother (Fig. 5 b ).
A similar approach was used to determine that the location of the new Taq I site in patient B was in the cDNA sequence, as digestion of a 518-bp PCR product (generated with oligonucleotide primers A5i and A3; Fig. 5 a)with Taq I resulted in the appearance of three Taq I fragments of 107bp, 125bp and 286bp, instead of the expected normal pattern of 107bp and 411bp fragments only (Fig. 5 b).
The aberrant pattern was also observed in patient B's maternal grandmother (an obligate XLA carrier).
Direct DNA sequencing of the relevant amplification products in both patients was used to characterize each mutation.
Patient A had a G  A transition at position 1,706, whereas patient B had an A  G transition at position 1,420 (Fig. 5 c).
On the basis of the proposed amino-acid sequence encoded by atk,these single base changes would result in an Arg  Gln change at amino-acid position 525 in patient A, and a Lys  Glu change at residue 430 in patient B (Fig. 5 c).
Both of these non-conserved amino-acid substitutions would have highly detrimental effects on the catalytic function of the putative protein-tyrosine kinase.
The loss of the conserved Arg525 in patient A could prevent substrate recognition because this residue is thought to be important in the substrate-specific domain.
Substitution of Lys430 in patient B (equivalent to Lys295 of v-src)within the ATP-binding site would completely abolish kinase activity.
Thus, both of the point mutations characterized here would be expected to eliminate kinase activity of the proposed atk protein product.
Discussion
Recent advances in methods aimed at mapping chromosomal regions and isolating novel genes, have made it possible to develop comprehensive strategies for the positional cloning of human disease genes.
We have shown here how a novel gene,atk,which is defective in individuals with X-linked agammaglobulinaemia, was isolated by cDNA direct selection using a YAC.
The rapid identification of this gene depended on the availability of extensive genetic and physical mapping information, a YAC contig of the region, cosmid and cDNA resources, and material from a group of well characterized patients.
A number of lines of evidence strongly suggest that this gene is the primary genetic locus involved in XLA.
First, it maps to the Xq21.3-Xq22 region known to contain the gene involved in XLA.
Second, we have demonstrated that the atk cDNA identifies abnormalities in eight different XLA families.
Third, this gene encodes a putative protein-tyrosine kinase that seems to be expressed in the B-cell, but not the T-cell, lineage.
Therefore, the failure of pre-B cells in the bone marrow of XLA individuals to develop into mature, circulating B cells could be the result of this gene product failing to fulfill its roles in B-cell signalling.
In heterozygous females, pre-B cells whose active X chromosome expresses the mutant gene would not terminally differentiate and proliferate.
This latter point may explain why XLA carrier females show completely skewed X-chromosome activity in their B-cell lineage.
Finally, we have also shown that two XLA individuals have missense point mutations resulting in amino-acid substitutions at important residues in the putative protein-tyrosine kinase domain.
These two mutations are highly suggestive that the normal protein product of atk is functioning as a protein-tyrosine kinase.
Therefore, naming this gene atk aptly describes its predicted protein product and involvement in XLA.
Although the number of genes that encode intracellular protein tyrosine-kinases in the human genome may be quite large, relatively few have been isolated, and the protein products of even fewer have been analysed.
But what is known about these genes, based mainly on biochemical evidence, is that their catalytic protein products are likely to play critical roles in the transducing pathways that stimulate cells to grow and adopt specific phenotypes of functional importance.
To our knowledge,atk is the first member of the human src family of oncogenes, which encode intracellular protein tyrosine kinases, to be directly implicated in causing a human genetic disease.
Therefore, the study of atk,in the context of its normal function and in the XLA phenotype, will provide important new information about the roles src protein tyrosine kinases play in cellular signalling.
Analysis of a wide range of naturally occurring atk mutations in XLA patients will reveal additional amino-acid residues that are important in protein-tyrosine kinases and form the basis for future experimental studies.
In this context, note that three members of the src family of tyrosine kinases,src, fyn and lck,have been inactivated by homologous recombination in mice, the lck mutation resulting in a thymocyte differentiation defect.
Analysis of the atk protein product will shed light on the role it plays in B-cell pathways, particularly in view of the fact that src -related protein-tyrosine kinases such as blk, fyn, lyn and lck,and others have already been implicated in B-cell activation.
Furthermore, studies of the features of atk which resemble those of transforming src genes may aid in the understanding of oncogene regulation and the events leading to cell transformation.
Indeed, it will be interesting to determine whether atk is involved in any human neoplastic diseases that are specific to the B-cell lineage.
For these reasons, it will be necessary to have a much clearer understanding of the function of atk,and src genes in general, before somatic gene therapy could be proposed as a means of correcting the XLA defect in pre-B cells of the bone marrow.
FIG. 1
a,
Positional cloning of the atk gene involved in X-linked agammaglobulinaemia (XLA).
The gene defective in XLA was localized to a 2-cM interval in Xq21.3-Xq22 (R. Lovering et al.,manuscript in preparation) which is shown on the genetic map.
A long-range restriction map around the DXS178 locus is shown (D.V. et al.,manuscript in preparation and ref. 22).
The location of the GLA, DXS178 and DXS101 loci are shown as the shaded rectangles.
The 640-kb YAC clone y178–3 contains both the GLA and DXS178 loci.
Among the 48 cosmid clones isolated with this YAC, five are shown that form a contig flanking the GLA locus.
Two of these cosmids (1D4 and 2H2) contain at least part of the α- galactosidase A gene and the remaining three (1G5, 2F10 and 1B2) contain the ATK locus.
The ATK locus encompasses a 20-kb genomic region located 50–70kb centromeric of GLA.
YAC clone y178–3 was used in cDNA direct selection experiments with the BL-29 cDNA library.
Two of the resultant subcloned cDNAs, 7C11 and 6G11, mapped, along with 23 other subcloned products, to the ATK locus.
The full-length cDNA represented by clone 14–6 was subsequently isolated from the original BL-29 cDNA library.
Coding regions found in cDNAs 14–6, 7C11 and 6G11 are shown as dark shaded regions.
The arrow below the shaded rectangle representing the ATK locus shows the direction of transcription is toward the centromere, although the 14–6 cDNA is shown 5'3' from left to right (by convention).
The restriction sites shown on the long-range restriction map and the cDNA map are sites for Bss HII (B),Cla I (C),Eco RI (E),Hin dIII (H),Mlu I (L),Msp I (M),Not I (Nt),Nru I (Nr),Pst I (P),Sal I (S),Sfi I (F),Taq I (T) and Xho I (X).
b,
Results of hybridizing the pool of enriched BL-29 PCR products to a high-density array of cosmids isolated with y178–3.
The arrows 1–3 show the positions of cosmids 1B2, 2F10 and 1G5, respectively.
c,
Assignment of cosmid 2F10 to the border of Xq21.3-Xq22 by fluorescence in situ hybridization.
The 2F10 signal is shown relative to the X-chromosome centromere (indicated by the pSV2X5 alphoid repeat marker).
METHODS.YAC clone y178–3 was isolated from the ICRF YAC library by hybridization.
This YAC was gel-purified, and used as a hybridization probe to screen the cosmid library constructed from cells with karyotype 49, XX as previously described.
Positive cosmids were ordered in intervals and subsequently into contigs.
PCR amplification of cDNA inserts of the BL-29 library was with M13 forward and reverse primers 5'-GTAAAACGACGGCCAGT-3' and 5'-AACAGCTATGACCATG-3 ‘, respectively.
About 10–50ng of purified YAC DNA was immobilized onto 6mm nylon filters.
These filters were prehybridized in a volume of 80μl containing 5xSSC, 5xDenhardt's, 0.5% SDS, 1mgml -1 sheared human placental DNA (Sigma), and 0.025mgml -1 total yeast DNA (strain AB1380).
Filters were then briefly rinsed in 5xSSC, 0.1% SDS at room temperature and transferred to fresh hybridization solution containing amplified cDNA (pre-annealed with human placental DNA for 90min) at a final concentration of 10μgml -1 .
Hybridization was done at 65°C for 24h under mineral oil.
Filters were washed twice in 2xSSC, 0.1% SDS at room temperature, three times at 65°C, 0.2xSSC, 0.1% SDS, and four times at 65°C, 0.1xSSC, 0.1% SDS.
Filters were added directly to a PCR reaction and amplification was with the M13 primers (forward and reverse), and then with the nested set of primers T3 (5'-ATTAACCCTCACTAAAG-3’) and T7 (5'-AATACGACTCACTATAG-3').
Only a single round of selection was done.
The enriched cDNA PCR products were subcloned into a T-tailed version of pBluescript SK (+/-) and gridded as high-density arrays.
Cosmids containing transcripts were identified by hybridization of the pooled, enriched cDNA PCR products to cosmids positive for y178–3.
The cDNA PCR products and gel-purified cosmid fragments were pre-annealed with human placental DNA before their use in hybridization experiments.
Subcloned cDNA inserts were amplified with either the M13 primers or with T3 and T7. cDNA clones were isolated from the original BL-29 library by hybridizing 7C11 and 6G11 to plaque lifts as previously described.
Inserts from purified plaques were also PCR-amplified using T3 and T7 primers.
In situ hybridization was done as follows: biotin-labelled cosmid 2F10 and pSV2X5 were pre-annealed with Cot-1 DNA and then hybridized to metaphase spreads of cultured lymphocytes from a normal male.
Signal detection was by alternate layers of avidin-FITC and biotinylated anti-avidin.
Chromosomal banding was by late BrdU incorporation, photolysis in the presence of Hoescht 33258 and staining with propidium iodide.
FIG. 2 Identification of restriction fragment alterations in XLA patients.
a,
The 10kb Sma I restriction fragment from cosmid 2F10 detected novel 1.0kb and 1.3kb Taq I restriction fragments, instead of the normal 2.3kb fragment, in patient B (lane 4).
This alteration was observed in the patient's mother and maternal grandmother (lanes 5 and 1, respectively), who are obligate carriers as both of them have had affected sons.
The abnormal hybridization pattern was also seen in one of patient B's sisters (lane 6), for whom carrier status had not previously been determined.
Lanes 2, 3 and C (unrelated normal control) show the normal restriction patterns.
Size markers are shown in kilobases.
b,
Abnormal Msp I fragment patterns were detected in patients E, C and G (lanes 4, 5 and 9, respectively) and also in patient D (not shown) using the partial cDNA 6G11.
Abnormal Taq I fragments were also detected in DNA from patients D, E and G using 6G11 (not shown), suggesting that these patients had DNA rearrangements.
Size markers are shown in kilobases.
c,
Schematic representation of the DNA alterations found in eight XLA patients.
The lightly shaded region is the genomic region of DNA encompassing the atk gene.
Dashed lines show the regions of genomic DNA that are deleted in five XLA patients.
The approximate regions of genomic DNA containing coding sequence found in 6G11 and 7C11 are indicated.
The cDNA probes corresponding to sections D and C (nucleotides 1–652, and 653–1,453, respectively in Fig. 3 a)are also shown.
No signal was observed when DNA from patients F, G and H was hybridized to cDNA 7C11 (results not shown) indicative of DNA deletions.
We confirmed that this result was not due to any differences in the amounts of DNA used in each lane of the Southern blot, because a second Xq22 marker detected restriction fragments in all samples.
Southern analysis of selected samples using cDNA sections D and C showed that the deletions in patients D and E are entirely intragenic.
Section D (which represents the 5' end of the atk cDNA sequence) detected 0.3, 1.0, 1.1, 1.5 and 4.3kb Msp I fragments in normal genomic DNA; in patient E no 4.3 or 1.5kb Msp I fragments were observed, while a novel 5kb band was seen.
cDNA 6G11 (which does not extend to the 5' terminus of the atk gene) hybridized to 0.3, 0.5, 1.7, 2.5 and 4.3kb Msp I fragments in normal individuals and also detected the abnormality in patient E. Section C detected no Msp I abnormalities in patient E. Section C detected 0.5, 0.8, 1.7 and 2.5kb Msp I fragments in normal DNA; the 1.7kb fragment was absent in patient D, but a novel 0.6kb band was observed.
Section D did not detect any abnormalities in patient D.
FIG. 3
a,
The DNA sequence of atk found in the 2,560bp cDNA clone 14–6.
The three-letter abbreviations for the 659 amino acids encoded in the open reading frame beginning at nucleotide position 133 are also shown.
The three potential start sites and the polyadenylation signal are underlined (see text for further description).
b,
Comparisons of the predicted amino-acid sequence of atk with that of closely related proteins of the src family.
Residues found in atk that are identical to those found in murine
tec,
human src or yes are shaded.
The putative SH2 and SH3 domains, the ATP-binding site, and the substrate-specific domain described in the text are boxed.
Lys430 and Tyr551 (=Lys295 and Tyr416 of v- src)are also highlighted.
Tyr527 found in src and yes , but not in atk and tec , is shown in brackets.
METHODS.
cDNA 14–6 was sequenced using the dideoxy chain termination method.
Complete sequence for both strands was accomplished by primer-walking.
Initial searches for homology between atk and other known gene sequences was through the EMBL nucleotide sequence database.
Protein alignment was by visual inspection.
FIG. 4 Expression studies of the atk transcript.
a,
Expression of the atk transcript in a variety of human tissues.
The cDNA 14–6 was used to detect a 2.6-kb message which was most abundant in poly(A) + RNA isolated from lung and pancreas.
No conclusions could be drawn from the expression of atk in placenta due to the absence of signal in this lane using β- actin as a control.
RNA size markers are in kilobases.
b,
Expression of atk in the lymphoid lineages.
A 2.6-kb transcript was detected by cDNA 6G11 in primary tumour cells of patients with chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (B-CLL1 and B-CLL2) and in the B cell line NAD (ref. 61).
There was no detectable message in T cells from patients with chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (T-CLL) or in the Jurkat T cell line.
The 28S and 18S ribosomal RNAs were used as size markers.
METHODS.
A multiple tissue northern blot of poly(A) + RNAs was pur- chased from Clonetech Laboratories for the analysis in a.
Total RNA was isolated from the lymphoid lineages using the guanidinium thiocyanate method.
FIG. 5 Detection of point mutations in XLA patients A and B.
a,
Diagram of part of the cDNA encompassing the segments of atk that were amplified in both patients.
The location and direction of oligonucleotide primers used in the analysis are shown as arrowheads.
Product sizes discussed in the text are also shown.
The asterisk indicates the termination codon of the coding region.
b,
Restriction digests of atk coding segments in patients A and B. The normal Taq I digest products, in each case, are shown in lanes 1 and 8, respectively, and uncleaved normal products are shown in lanes 4 and 5, respectively.
Taq I does not cleave the 225bp amplification product found in patient A (lane 3), but cleaves about half of the product in his carrier mother (lane 2).
Patient B (lane 6) shows the aberrant Taq I fragments resulting from Taq I cleavage of his 518-bp fragment.
This pattern is also present in his maternal grandmother (lane 7) who carries the XLA defect.
c,
DNA and encoded amino-acid sequence of the atk defects in patients A and B.
METHODS.
RT-based PCR was done as previously described.
Primer B3 was used for reverse transcription, and then used in combination with either B5 or A5i in the primary PCR region.
A second round of PCR was then used to generate the PCR products shown in Fig. 5 a and discussed in the text.
Primer sequences were A5i:5'-GCAGGCCTGGGATACGGATC-3', A3:5'-GGAAATTTGGAGCCTACTGAG-3', B5:5'-CCTGAGGGAGATGCGCCAC-3', B3:5'-ATTGGCGAGCTCAGGATTCTTC-3'.
Direct DNA sequencing was done using primers A3 and B5 for patient A, and primers A5i and A3i:5'-CAGACGCCATACAACTGCAC-3' for patient B. Point mutations were confirmed on both DNA strands.
Landmark stability is a prerequisite for spatial but not discrimination learning
R. Biegler & R. G. M. Morris
NEURONS sensitive to both place and direction from distinct regions of the hippocampal formation, allometric relationships between spatial learning and hippocampal structure and pronounced impairments in spatial learning after lesions in this area, indicate that the hippocampal formation subserves allocentric spatial learning.
To learn more about the process of spatial representation, we have developed a task that provides independent control of both landmark and directional cues.
On the basis of physiological and behavioural work, this task also makes it possible to investigate the relevance of associative learning principles, such as predictability, to the spatial domain.
We report here that although rats learn to discriminate between landmarks on the basis of their proximity to a reliably predicted food reward, they will only learn to use them to represent its location if they maintain stable locations within a geometric frame of reference.
We trained 14 male Lister-hooded rats to find food reward in a large directionally polarized arena (Fig. 1 a ).
Two landmarks (L+, L-) were arranged to predict the spatial location of hidden food nearby that was either accessible (F+) or inaccessible (F-).
The single parameter that we manipulated was whether the landmarks and feeders occupied fixed locations across trials (group fixed) or were moved randomly from trial to trial (group varied).
Importantly, when the landmarks were moved between locations, the feeders were also moved such that the spatial relationship between L+ and F+, and between L- and F-, was always maintained; that is, if F+ was 40cm to the ‘south’ of L+ for a given rat, it remained so on all trials.
Spatial theories predict that, because only group fixed has the potential of forming a stable geometric representation of the landmarks (that is, ‘map’), only they will learn to search at the F+ location.
Conversely, application of the associative learning principle of predictability to the spatial domain suggests that both groups should be able to learn to search at F+, but the association between L+ and F+ should be greater in group varied because L+ is the sole predictor of the food's location.
In the fixed group, in contrast, the additional cues provided by the directionally polarizing curtains would share or even overshadow any spatial learning associated with L+.
Learning to approach F+ was characterized by more direct paths in group fixed than in group varied (Fig. 1 b, c).
The crucial data of interest were obtained during a series of post-training transfer tests.
With the landmark and directional cues present (but feeders removed), the paths taken by all rats in each group (Fig. 2 a, b ) showed a striking dissociation: search was concentrated at the former location of F+ in group fixed but around L+ in group varied.
This suggests that learning where the food was hidden was restricted to group fixed.
But this test examines control of search location by both sets of cues and the result would be trivial if the context cues are of primary importance.
A second transfer test was therefore done with the white curtains present but L+ and L- absent.
No localized search behaviour at F+ was observed in either group (Fig. 2 c, d).
We calculated the degree of control by cues other than the context cues by subtracting the pixel matrices of Fig. 2 d from those of Fig. 2 b , concentrating on time spent searching at F+ or F- and around L+ or L-.
True spatial learning was restricted to group fixed (Fig. 3 a ).
Group varied discriminated effectively between L+ and L-, but they directed their search at L+ itself and not to the F+ place nearby (Fig. 3 b ).
Definitive evidence that group fixed was not guided to F+ by a local olfactory cue was provided by a final ‘two-identical landmark’ test (Fig. 4).
Our finding that geometric stability is a prerequisite for a landmark being used to represent the position of hidden food and that the mere scheduling of a predictable spatial relationship between a moving landmark and hidden food is insufficient is an intriguing dissociation.
The lack of spatial learning with moving landmarks suggests that spatial learning processes may have evolved to extract geometric invariance from the environment in a manner analogous to that in which conventional associative learning principles are held to extract the ‘causal structure’ of the environment.
As the rats moved around the arena, the relative perceived positions of the landmarks in egocentric space would have been likely to change as much in the fixed as in the varied condition with, for example, L+ being seen as often to the left or right of L- both within and across trials.
Constructing a stable representation of the environment from this ever-changing view is the function of spatial learning and it is therefore likely that the inclusion of objects into an animal's representation of allocentric space will depend on their geometric stability.
Our findings suggest that this inclusion is the primary determinant of whether a landmark will be used to predict where something else is located.
The rule-of-thumb that ‘if it moves, don't use it as a landmark’ does not prevent a moving object from acquiring associative strength (as a century of maze studies with randomly placed discriminative cues has long established).
Instead, associative strength becomes attached to the object and can, in the present case, only trigger approach or avoidance of the landmarks themselves (the phenomenon of autoshaping).
The dissociation further implies that rats can detect relative spatial proximity even under circumstances in which they do not represent it in memory.
Parametric manipulation of landmark stability offers an intriguing way of enabling or disabling the process of spatial representation and, thus, a principled basis for exploring further whether the hippocampal formation or hippocampal long-term potentiation plays a role in the flexible encoding of spatial relationships.
Whether the principle of stability can be extended beyond the spatial domain in relation to the structure of memory within mental models remains to be established.
FIG. 1 a,Perspective view of training arena.
The animals were trained to find food reward in a large square arena (10.89m 2 ) containing sawdust (5cm depth) and surrounded by a set of 1 white and 3 black curtains (not shown) and set within a perfectly square room with walls painted black.
The set of curtains were rotated 90° daily so that directional polarization was under experimental control.
Feeders (5cm vertical tubes on a movable base) were placed at various locations within the inner 49 pixel grid (20cmx20cm each, shaded grey) and analyses of time spent per pixel were conducted throughout the outer 121 pixel grid (white).
The F+ feeder contained accessible food (in this case a breakfast cereal) on top of a 4.2-cm-high  dowelling insert; the same quantity of reward was  inaccessible at the bottom of the F- feeder.
Each feeder was placed 40 cm to the ‘south’ or ‘north’of either of two prominent landmarks:(1) an irregular tetrahedron (25 cm high by 30cm long), covered in sandpaper and marked daily with 1ml strawberry odour; and (2) an L-shaped wall (20cm high by 30cm long), covered in carpet material and marked daily with coffee essence.
There were two identical copies of each object that were interchanged regularly between trials.
Each object served, for some rats, as L+ (always to the ‘north’ of F+), or, for others, as L- (always to the ‘south’of F-).
The L+F+ pair and the L-F- pair were in fixed locations relative to the white curtains for group fixed (as shown), but in any of 49 locations around the inner pixel grid for group varied.
For any placement of the feeders, the closest wall was at a distance of at least 1.05m and the closest corner 1.48m. b And c,representative paths on training trials.
There were four rewarded trials and one non-rewarded trial per day.
A rewarded training trial consisted of transporting a rat in a slowly rotating opaque box from an adjoining room and putting it into the arena at and facing the centre of the N, S, E or W side-wall (shown as an unfilled circle) from which it could move around freely until it found the F+ feeder; a non-rewarded trial lasted 60s and was conducted without either landmarks or feeders.
The animals' paths were tracked automatically using a hidden overhead videocamera connected to an image-analysis system and an Archimedes computer.
The paths shown are those of the 7 rats in group fixed (b ) and the 7 in group varied (c ) on trial 85 when the landmark positions in the arena happened to be identical for the two groups.
Note that the paths are less direct in group varied.
FIG. 2
a,
Paths during the transfer test with landmarks.
All rats (paths superimposed) searched for the now absent feeder in the central region.
Group fixed (above) concentrated its search at the correct feeder location (intersection of uninterrupted lines in the lower left region), while group varied searched randomly around the L+ landmark (intersection of uninterrupted and dotted lines).
b,
Pixel time plots for transfer test with landmarks.
The plots (cumulative time per pixel) are normalized such that all pixels are scaled in relation to the pixel with the maximum cumulative time (the F+ pixel of group fixed); the square dotted line represents the extent of the 121 pixel grid.
c And d , paths and pixel plots during the transfer test without landmarks.
L+ and L- were removed, but the directional curtain cues remained.
Both groups patrolled around the side-walls, spending less time in the central region than when the landmarks were present (time in central region with landmarks present versus with landmarks absent:).
Mechanisms of magma eruption and emplacement at Mt Etna between 1989 and 1992
Hazel Rymer, John B. Murray, Geoff C. Brown, Fabrizio Ferrucci & William J. McGuire
THE present eruption sequence of Mt Etna began during September 1989 with extensive fracturing, and culminated in 1991–93 with the largest lava eruption this century.
Here we present measurements of gravity and ground deformation which, in conjunction with seismic data, provide a detailed record of the processes occurring before and during eruption.
These reflect a complex interplay between magma injection into the paths of lowest compressive stress through the volcano flanks, forcing elastic deformation, and fracture growth in response to gravitational stresses.
We find that after the end of the eruptive activity in 1989, fractures in the south-southeast flank of the volcano remained unfilled until some months before the 1991–93 eruption.
These results indicate the utility of microgravity monitoring, as the precursory processes that we identify were largely undetected by seismic and ground deformation monitoring.
At a late stage during the explosive activity from the southeast crater (10 September-6 October 1989), two prominent fissures developed, one erupting to the northeast and the second, a non-erupting fissure, extending 7km towards the south-southeast.
Seismic, soil gas emanations, thermal imaging, gravity and our own deformation and gravity data indicate that magma was not emplaced within the latter fissure south of station TDF (Fig. 1).
After a 2-year period of quiescence, explosive activity near the summit along the same SSE fissure on 14 December 1991 heralded the start of the present eruption, which has continued to produce basaltic magma to the present day from further down the fissure at an elevation of 2,400m above sea level (a.s.l.).
The main 1991–93 eruptive vent is located where the intrusion intersects the topography, 3km from the summit, in a region where the theoretical free surface of magma is higher than the topography.
The 1989–90 period was marked by initial gravity increase (up to 100μGal) at stations near the summit (June-November 1989) followed by decreases of similar magnitude (November 1989-June 1990).
At the same time, elevation data indicate progressive deflation of the summit region (Table 1).
There is no obvious correlation between these data sets, and the changes in height are much smaller than required to explain the variations in gravity.
Subsurface mass increases of 10 9 –10 10 kg followed by decreases must have occurred, and these bracketed the January 1990 summit pyroclastic eruption which ejected 10 9 kg of material.
We suggest that magma was emplaced above station TDF before January 1990 and that this summit eruption reduced magma levels.
Between June 1990 and June 1991, there was no eruptive activity although, as usual, the summit craters were degassing freely.
Gravity data indicate 400-μGal increases at summit stations and a zone trending south-southeast in which gravity was increased by 100μGal (Table 1 and Fig. 2 a ).
Again, height changes over this period (Table 1 and Fig. 2 b ) are small, so a linear zone of subsurface mass increases connected to a central feeder conduit is inferred.
The south-southeast-trending increase is most probably the result of a shallow magma intrusion.
From the relative positions of the 1989 fracture and the gravity high (Figs 1 and 2), it appears that the intrusion is either vertical and about 100m west of the fracture, or inclined downwards west away from the fracture.
Magma intrusion was essentially aseismic; several earthquake sequences occurred between February and May 1991, but the sources were deep (7–20km).
Surface deformation was small and not of the form expected (inflation flanking the intrusion) when magma is emplaced elastically.
We therefore propose that magma migrated passively into a pre-existing subsurface fracture some time between June 1990 and June 1991.
By October 1991 gravity had fallen again (Table 1) at summit stations, but values were still higher than in June 1990.
A smaller gravity decrease broadly following the south-southeast fissure was accompanied by minor inflation (Table 1).
EDM network (Fig. 1) line length increases also indicate tumescence in the region above the future eruption site.
Deep (4–5km) low-energy microseismicity was observed continuously in this area between July and August 1991.
The combination of seismic, gravity and ground deformation evidence suggests vesiculation and expansion of frothy magma and/or downwards fracture propagation and magma seepage.
Pre-eruption vesiculation has been inferred previously using microgravity at andesitic stratocones (Poas and Pacaya) where only 1–2% change in the degree of vesiculation accounts for the observed changes (of 100μGal).
At Etna, highly vesiculated basaltic magma is usually erupted, so magma vesiculation before eruption is a plausible explanation of the gravity decrease.
On 14 December 1991, the south-southeast-trending fracture widened (maximum extension by April 1992, 1.5m), lava was erupted close to the summit, and by 15 December activity had moved down to a site 2,400m a.s.l. where the fracture intersects the western cliff wall of the Valle del Bove.
The onset of the eruption was accompanied by intense seismic activity 1–3km beneath the fracture between the eruptive boccas and the summit.
After a stronger sequence, observed on 15 December and related to the elastic response of the edifice to the intrusive body, seismicity returned to background levels, then virtually vanished.
Gravity increases occurred during the eruption and, by June 1992, gravity at stations on the south flank was similar to but higher than in June 1991 (Table 1).
However, substantial elevation decreases occurred (Table 1) at stations along the fracture.
After allowing for this subsidence there are no significant residual gravity changes between June 1991 and June 1992, except at the summit crater where there was a decrease of 80μGal.
At the same time, up to 37cm of inflation occurred 1km east of the fracture and 7cm of inflation 0.5km west of it, suggesting that elastic deformation occurred at the onset of the eruption, in response to increased magma pressure.
Dynamic equilibrium within the fracture system was apparently maintained until 14 December 1991, when the magma pressure exceeded the lithostatic stresses and the eruption began briefly at the summit end of the fracture, then continued at a bocca further down.
At this time, the more common elastic deformation and further dyke intrusion occurred.
The profile marked on Fig. 1 follows the largest June 1990-June 1991 gravity changes and the south-southeast fracture trend.
Modelling indicates an increase in magma level within the summit feeder conduit, and within an open fracture trending south-southeast (Fig. 3).
The latter was not a forceful intrusion, because local elevation changes were far too small and the lack of seismicity implies that magma did not force the surrounding rock apart.
We propose instead that magma exploited the 1989 fracture system which remained partly void until new magma filled it between June 1990 and June 1991.
Buried fractures of this type are believed to occur as a natural consequence of within-edifice strain at intraplate volcanoes, and void regions have been postulated within the Kilauean rift zone.
Here, with several closely spaced data we are able to model a previously void region (Fig. 3) and find that it extends at least 3km laterally and 1km vertically.
The model is most sensitive to the lateral extent of the dyke and to its upper surface.
Because no seismic sources have been detected above sea level in the whole period of observation, we conclude that the fractured region and possibly the intrusion also extend down below sea level.
The suggestion that Etnean fissures may store magma before eruption was originally made to explain small gravity changes accompanying drainage of a dyke in March 1981.
In the 1989 case, magma was forced into two arms of an underground fissure network (northeast and south-southeast of the southeast crater) but may have been stopped by a structural boundary (the caldera del Piano) seen on the surface as a break in slope and encompassing the southeast crater and stations Belvedere and TDF (Fig. 1).
The most likely reason for continued propagation of the 1989 fissure, although in a slightly different direction beyond the postulated boundary, is gravitational slope failure on the western wall of the Valle del Bove.
The minimum volume of the fissure, derived from the model of the intrusion, is 10 7 m 3 .
Although the 1991 intrusion was emplaced aseismically, low-energy microseismicity between June and December 1991 suggests that vigorous degassing continued after emplacement.
Strombolian activity in the summit craters was vigorous, with spatter and bombs thrown 200m into the air.
We infer that the intrusion was actively degassing, the frothy material remaining mobile and hot.
Because much of the erupted magma was gas-poor, we propose that a subsurface connection exists between the intrusion and the summit feeder conduit (Fig. 3) allowing gas to escape at the summit craters.
A single deep connection to the magma supply maintains the heat input by convection.
The increase in gravity once the eruption had begun indicates less degassing and that the fractured region contained a high level of slow-moving volatile-poor magma.
Summit gravity increases were smaller, suggesting either that frothy magma resided in the main feeder conduit or that the magma level was much lower than before the eruption.
We have shown that fissure networks within a volcanic edifice can remain open between eruptions.
Although such fractures may not reach the surface, their effect is to reduce the pressure of incoming magma from magmastatic towards atmospheric.
Thus vigorous magmatic degassing within the edifice is facilitated and the probability of explosive eruption is decreased.
Fractures on Etna occur in well defined zones related to the asymmetric topography (and hence gravitational instability) and the regional tectonic regime.
Once formed, these fractures may remain open for months or years providing low stress paths where magma may intrude passively with little seismic or ground deformation; only gravity changes can detect the mass increase.
If the intrusion does not have time to freeze before subsequent or continued injection, then the ‘lubricated’ region may channel magma towards the eventual eruption site.
A test for this model will be to observe the relationship between horizontal extension (fracture formation), gravity changes (mass changes) and subsequent eruption at dyke-forming volcanoes.
Summary of key gravity ( g ) and height ( h ) data for the period June 1989 to June 1992.
Gravity data (in mGal) are expressed relative to the reference station at the Rifugio Sapienza 5km from the summit of Etna.
The reference point for the height data (m) is Rifugio Piccolo (between Cisternazza and Montagnola) and values for November 1989 are set to zero, after the SSE-trending fractures had formed and Strombolian activity had ceased.
The standard deviation on the gravity data is less than 30μGal and on the elevation data it is less than 1cm.
FIG. 1 Location map for summit ground deformation and gravity surveys.
The trend of the fracture or graben left after the 1989 eruption is shown.
The eruptive vent for the 1991–93 activity lies just below the intersection of the 1989 fracture and the cliff wall of the Valle del Bove.
Principal levelling stations are indicated by black circles, triangulation stations are black triangles, slope distances only are measured at stations marked by open triangles and gravity stations are indicated by large open circles.
The profile marked is used in cross-section in Fig. 3.
FIG. 2 Contour maps showing (a)gravity changes (μGal) and (b ) height changes (cm) observed between June 1990 and June 1991 (data from Table 1).
Gravity data are expressed relative to a base 5km from the summit which has proved to be gravitationally invariant with respect to other stations further down the volcano flanks and off the volcano.
The deformation data reference is at station Piccolo Rifugio (the gravity station between Cisternazza and Montagnola).
For June 1990 to June 1991, gravity increases occur at all stations but are largest at the summit.
A south-southeast-trending gravity high follows the trend of the 1989 fracture system and is displaced 100m west.
Height changes indicate subsidence of the southeast crater and a small deflation along the strike of the south-southeast trending fracture.
FIG. 3 Computed gravitational effect from a 2.5D model of the 1990–91 changes in magma level within the summit feeder and the proposed fissured region beneath the upper southern flank (located on Fig. 1).
The density of the intrusions is assumed to be 2,800kgm -3 , the same as the surrounding material.
Note that the total strike width of the feeder pipe is 50m and the width of the dyke 4m.
The model does not suggest that these are the limits of the bodies, simply that these are the sort of changes between June 1990 and June 1991 which would fit the observed gravity data.
Indeed the feeder pipe almost certainly extends down to a large magma reservoir well below sea level.
Seismic data indicate sources at 2km depth, which roughly coincides with the modelled base here.
The approximate location of the main eruptive vent for the 1991–92 activity is also shown, although in fact it is slightly to the east of this profile (into the page).
Reduction of Fe(III) in sediments by sulphate-reducing bacteria
Max L. Coleman, David B. Hedrick, Derek R. Lovley, David C. White  & Kenneth Pye
REDUCTION of ferric iron (Fe(III)) to ferrous iron (Fe(II)) is one of the most important geochemical reactions in anaerobic aquatic sediments because of its many consequences for the organic and inorganic chemistry of these environments.
In marine environments, sulphate-reducing bacteria produce H 2 S, which can reduce iron oxyhydroxides to form iron sulphides.
The presence of siderite (FeCO 3 ) in marine sediments is anomalous, however, as it is unstable in the presence of H 2 S. Previous work has suggested a bacterial origin of siderite.
Here we describe geochemical and microbiological studies which suggest that contemporary formation of siderite concretions in a salt-marsh sediment results from the activity of sulphate-reducing bacteria.
We find that, instead of reducing Fe(III) indirectly through the production of sulphide, some of these bacteria can reduce Fe(III) directly through an enzymatic mechanism, producing siderite rather than iron sulphides.
Sulphate-reducing bacteria may thus be an important and previously unrecognized agent for Fe(III) reduction in aquatic sediments and ground waters.
Nodular concretions of intimately mixed siderite and FeS are growing within sulphide-rich, Recent, salt-marsh sediments on the coast of Norfolk, UK.
The host mud around the concretions contain FeS but little siderite.
Although modelled growth rates for carbonate concretions imply that formation may take 10 5 years, these concretions are found in sediments that have been deposited in the last 50 years.
This makes them uniquely suitable for investigations into the actual mechanisms of siderite concretion formation.
The formation of siderite in organic-rich marine mudrocks has previously been associated with the degradation of organic matter by anaerobic, methanogenic bacteria.
Carbonate resulting from this process has a characteristic positive isotope signature (PDB).
However, the siderite concretions in the marsh have  C values averaging -5.9  PDB, suggesting that the siderite is not formed under methanogenic conditions.
An alternative microbial process that could favour siderite formation is microbial reduction of Fe(III).
Most of the microbial Fe(III) reduction in aquatic sediments is proposed to result from the oxidation of important fermentation products such as acetate and hydrogen.
(The equations below illustrate the overall mass balance and may represent many contributory reactions).
The production of ferrous iron, hydroxyl ions and bicarbonate should all favour siderite formation  To learn whether microbial Fe(III) reduction played a role in siderite formation, we analysed the microbial populations in a concretion and in two host-sediment samples from the marsh.
The concretion was subspherical, 7cm in diameter and dark grey to black, its host an anoxic, black clayey-silt.
As we cannot yet do all analyses on one sample, we have assumed that the mineralogy was similar to that of visually identical samples, which were indistinguishable from those reported previously from the same location (finely intergrown siderite, Mg-calcite and iron sulphide).
Lipid biomarker analyses provides in situ measures of sedimentary microbial community structure and nutritional status without the requirement for isolation and growth of the microbiota.
Polar lipid fatty acids (PLFA) are maintained metabolically and are an accurate measure of viable sedimentary microbial biomass.
Viable eubacterial biomass in the host-mud, measured as the PLFA per g dry weight of sediment, was similar to that found in an active subtropical estuary mud flat (Table 1).
The concretions had slightly lower viable biomass.
Polar lipid diether (PLDE) and polar lipid tetraether (PLTE) lipids are characteristic of the archaebacterial methanogens.
In the host mud, there was only a trace of PLTE at the minimum detectable limit and there was roughly a thousand times less PLDE than PLFA (Table 1).
When compared to PLTE and PLDE analyses of several strains of methanogenic bacteria, these results suggest that the mud contained 10 6 methanogenic bacteria per gram.
No PLTE or PLDE were detected in the concretion.
These results further indicate that the formation of the siderite concretions is not associated with the activity of methanogenic bacteria.
Menaquinones (MK) are found in Gram negative anaerobes using Fe(III) or sulphate as a terminal electron acceptor as well as in Gram positive organisms, whereas ubiquinones are only found in microorganisms that can use oxygen as an electron acceptor.
Fermentative eubacteria contain no respiratory quinones.
The MK/PLFA level in the concretion was two to three times higher than in the mud (Table 1).
No ubiquinones were found in either the mud or the concretion.
These results suggest that a high proportion of the microorganisms living in the concretion survive by anaerobic respiration such as Fe(III) or sulphate reduction.
Detailed analysis of the individual fatty acids gives more information on the types of microbial populations in the samples (Fig. 1).
Some define specific components of the population, whereas others indicate nutritional status.
Cluster analysis of the PLFA data (Pearson's r correlation coefficient or euclidian metric) indicated the presence of two genera of sulphate-reducing bacterial (SRB),Desulfobacter and Desulfovibrio .
The 10-methyl-palmitic PLFA (10Me16:0) is characteristic of Desulfobacter and the iso-17-carbon-monoenic PLFA (i17:7 c) is characteristic of the Desulfovibrio.
The concentrations of these biomarker PLFA (Table 1) imply more Desulfovibrio and less Desulfobacter within the concretion than in the mud.
Geobacter metallireducens (formerly, strain GS-15) and Shewanella putrefaciens are the only well characterized organisms known to couple the oxidation of fermentation acids and/or hydrogen to the reduction of Fe(III).
The characteristic PFLA data gave no indication that either of these organisms was present in the mud or the concretion.
This, together with the Desulfovibrio enrichment, led us to investigate the possibility that SRB might be involved in Fe(III) reduction.
In aquatic sediments, H 2 is likely to be the most important electron donor for Desulfovibrio A pure culture of Desulfovibrio desulfuricans readily reduced Fe(III), whereas Desulfobacter postgatei and Desulfobacter curvatus did not (Fig. 2).
The reduction of Fe(III) in the presence of D. desulfuricans could not be the result of indirect reduction of Fe(III) by sulphide because the initial sulphate concentration of only 320μM could provide enough sulphide to reduce less than 5% of the Fe(III) that was reduced.
Furthermore, all of the sulphate was reduced within the first day of the experiment whereas most of the Fe(III) reduction was after the first day.
Several other species of Desulfovibrio also reduce Fe(III) oxide, and the Fe(III)-reducing enzyme has now been purified from D. vulgaris (D.R.L., E. J. P. Phillips, J. C. Woodward and E.E.
Roden, unpublished data).
To gain insight into the possible metabolism of Fe(III) and sulphate by D. desulfuricans,we investigated Fe(III) and sulphate reduction under limiting and nonlimiting H 2 concentrations (Fig. 3).
Under nonlimiting conditions, sulphate and Fe(III) were reduced simultaneously (Fig. 3 a).
With sulphate as the electron acceptor, however,D. desulfuricans could not metabolize H 2 below 10 -5 atm (in accordance with previous results) whereas with Fe(III), H 2 was metabolized below 3x10 -6 atm (Fig. 3 b).
This suggests that at the low concentrations of H 2 found in aquatic sediments, Fe(III) may be the preferred electron acceptor.
These findings suggest that the enrichment of Desulfovibrio within the siderite concretion may be an important feature, controlling growth of the concretion.
Oxidation of H 2 coupled to reduction of Fe(III) (reaction 1 b)favours the precipitation of siderite through the formation of Fe 2+ and OH -.
The reaction does not produce bicarbonate.
This is consistent with concretion formation in the marsh.
Comparing the isotopic signature of concretion carbonate (-5.9 ) with that from organic matter oxidation (-25 ) and carbonate in sea water (0 ) suggests that most (75%) of the carbonate comes from sea water.
The additional bicarbonate (15%), derived from organic matter oxidation, could be due to the metabolism of as yet unknown Fe(III)-reducing microorganisms, or, given that the concretions contain some FeS, to the activity of SRB like Desulfobacter.
We are currently investigating the reasons for the apparent localized, enhanced Fe(III) reduction by Desulfovibrio in the zone of the concretions.
SRB may be important catalysts for Fe(III) reduction in other sedimentary environments.
They are abundant in the Fe(III) reduction zones of deep aquifers in the Atlantic Coastal Plain of the USA.
As there is no apparent sulphate reduction in these zones and the SRB cannot have been recently introduced to these deeply isolated environments, we speculate that the SRB must survive by reducing Fe(III)-reducing environments is needed.
The concretion was packed in host anaerobic mud for transport to the laboratory.
Despite this precaution it was found to have developed a brownish-orange rim as a result of atmospheric exposure.
It was fractured with a solvent-cleaned chisel, and the outer orange layer discarded.
The hard core of the concretion was pulverized with a mortar and pestle, and sieved through a 1-mm screen.
Two samples of the host mud and the core were lyophilized.
Lipid was extracted with a one-phase chloroform:methanol extractant, and fractionated into neutral lipid, glycolipid and polar lipid fractions with silicic acid.
After derivatization, the eubacterial PLFA were analysed by capillary gas-chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS), and the archaebacterial PLDE and PLTE by supercritical fluid chromatography.
Ubiquinones and menaquinones were recovered from the neutral lipid fraction of the lipid extracts, separated on thin layer plates, recovered, and analysed by supercritical fluid chromatography.
Bacteria grow in the water in pore space, and precipitation of concretionary cement in pore space in the mud reduces the volume of fluid available.
Mineral and chemical analyses suggest that porosity in the mud is 2–10 times greater than in the concretion, so we have multiplied the PLFA values measured in the latter by those factors (all other measures are relative) to allow comparison of microbial activities.
Details of species identification are given in Fig.1.
FIG. 1 Polar lipid fatty acid analyses (% of total).
The significant (2%) components measured in our samples are shown, together with analyses of two SRB cultures, typical of their genera (precision, 0.3%).
In addition to Desulfobacter and Desulfovibrio , we have included data for the dissimilatory Fe(III) reducers Geobacter and Shewanella.
The characteristic fatty acids for the two SRB examples are 10-methyl-palmitic PLFA (10Me16:0) and iso-17-carbon-monoenoic PLFA (i17:1  7c), respectively.
Some PLFA are not generically characteristic; with starvation, some bacteria increase the proportions of the specific monoenoic PLFA with the trans configuration.
Some of our samples show an increased ratio of the 16-and 18-carbon trans vaccenic acid to the cis isomer.
Therefore certain of the data shown (16:1  7c, 16:1 7 t, 18:1 7 c, 18:1 9 c) cannot be used to identify particular components of the microbial population.
FIG. 2 Laboratory reduction of poorly crystalline Fe(III) oxide by Desulfovibrio desulfuricans,but not by Desulfobacter postgatei nor Desulfobacter curvatus .
The inocula for all organisms were grown in a medium with sulphate as the electron acceptor and either H 2 (D. desulfuricans)or acetate (D.postgatei and D. curvatus ) as the electron donor.
Sulphate-grown cultures were used to inoculate (10% inoculum) similar medium in which the sulphate was replaced by a synthetic, poorly crystalline Fe(III) oxide (100mmoll -1 ) and the production of Fe(III) was measured over time.
The means of duplicate determinations on a representative of triplicate cultures are shown (precision, 1mmoll -1 ).
In the Fe(III)-containing media, the initial sulphate concentrations were 320, 740 and 440μM for D. desulfuricans, D. postgatei and D. curvatus,respectively.
FIG. 3 H 2 oxidation coupled to Fe(III) reduction in Desulfovibrio desulfuricans .
Under conditions of nonlimiting H 2 concentrations (a),D. desulfuricans reduced Fe(III) and sulphate simultaneously at rates comparable to Fe(III) and sulphate reduction when only one of the electron acceptors was provided.
However, H 2 was metabolized at lower concentrations with Fe(III) than with sulphate (b).
METHODS.
D. desulfuricans grown on H 2 -sulphate medium were anaerobically collected by centrifugation and washed and re-suspended in 10ml of anaerobic bicarbonate buffer (NaHCO 3 , 25mg; cysteine-HCl, 2.5mg; pH6.7) under N 2 -CO 2 (80:20) in sealed 25-ml serum bottles.
Cell protein concentrations were (a)0.4 and (b)0.2mgml -1 .
H 2 was added to provide (a)0.67 or (b)10 -4 atm.
Where noted, sulphate and/or Fe(III) complexed with nitrilotriacetic acid were added from anaerobic stocks to provide initial concentrations of 1 and 5mM.
Fe(II) and sulphate concentrations in aliquots were measured with ferrozine and ion chromatography (precision 1mmoll -1 ).
H 2 was measured with a reduction gas analyser (precision, 5x10 -7 atm.).
Inositol trisphosphate and calcium signalling
Michael J. Berridge
Inositol trisphosphate is a second messenger that controls many cellular processes by generating internal calcium signals.
It operates through receptors whose molecular and physiological properties closely resemble the calcium-mobilizing ryanodine receptors of muscle.
This family of intracellular calcium channels displays the regenerative process of calcium-induced calcium release responsible for the complex spatiotemporal patterns of calcium waves and oscillations.
Such a dynamic signalling pathway controls many cellular processes, including fertilization, cell growth, transformation, secretion, smooth muscle contraction, sensory perception and neuronal signalling.
A DECADE has passed since the first report of a second messenger function for inositol(1,4,5)-trisphosphate (InsP 3 ).
In that time we have found out how it is produced, how it is metabolized and, now that its receptor has been cloned, we are beginning to understand how it acts to release calcium.
The recent disclosure that Lowe's oculocerebrorenal syndrome is caused by a defect in a gene that encodes one of the enzymes that metabolizes InsP 3 (ref. 7) will ensure a continuing interest in this messenger pathway well into the next decade.
It is through its regulation of intracellular calcium that InsP 3 functions to regulate so many cellular processes.
In response to many stimuli (such as neurotransmitters, hormones and growth factors) both InsP 3 and diacylglycerol (DAG) are formed by the hydrolysis of an inositol lipid precursor stored in the plasma membrane.
The InsP 3 released into the cytoplasm mobilizes calcium from internal stores, whereas DAG activates protein kinase C (ref. 8).
This bifurcating messenger system operates throughout the life of a typical cell, beginning with gametogenesis, fertilization, cell proliferation and early development and continuing through differentiation to perform very precise control functions in a whole variety of specialized cells in both animals and plants.
Before describing its role in some specific cellular processes, I shall summarize how InsP 3 is released from the membrane and how it acts to generate calcium signals.
Signalling pathways and molecular heterogeneity
External signals arriving at the cell engage surface receptors to initiate signalling pathways whereby information flows from one component to the next until the final effector system is activated.
The formation of InsP 3 is the focal point for two major pathways, one initiated by a family of G protein-linked receptors and the other by receptors linked by tyrosine kinases either directly or indirectly (Fig. 1).
These separate receptor mechanisms are coupled to energy-requiring (GTP or ATP) transducing mechanisms which activate phospholipase C (PLC) to hydrolyse the lipid precursor phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PtdIns(4,5)P 2 ) to give both DAG and InsP 3 .
The latter then binds to an InsP 3 receptor (IP 3 R) to mobilize stored calcium and to promote an influx of external calcium, perhaps working in conjunction with InsP 4 (refs 9, 10).
What is not apparent from Fig. 1 is the rich diversity of the individual components within these signalling pathways.
Classical pharmacology prepared us for receptor diversity in that each of the stimuli listed in Fig. 1 acts through a separate receptor.
What came as a surprise, however, was the extensive heterogeneity of the downstream elements, such as the G proteins (Box 1), PLC (Box 2), IP 3 R (Box 3) and PKC (ref. 8).
The full extent of this diversity is apparent in Drosophila photoreceptors where the transducing elements rhodopsin, DG q and norpA (Box 1) are present primarily in the eye.
Why did this diversity arise?
We can only surmise that a few basic signalling systems emerged early in evolution and were then modified in subtle ways to meet the unique signalling requirements of different cells.
In order to detect brief flashes of light, photoreceptors face very different problems from liver cells responding to slower changes in circulating hormone levels.
As cells differentiate to perform separate functions, they select out specific components from a diverse signalling repertoire to construct personalized messenger pathways precisely adapted to suit their particular requirements.
Despite all this molecular heterogeneity, the common theme running through all these variations is that external signals use the InsP 3 /calcium and DAG/PKC pathways to regulate a wide range of cellular activities.
G protein-linked receptors
The membrane-transducing unit controlled by G protein-linked receptors has three main components—the activated receptor communicates through a G protein to stimulate PLC (Fig. 1 and Box 1).
Most of the G protein-linked receptors identified so far are characterized by having seven membrane-spanning domains connected by extracellular and intracellular loops (Box 1).
The transmembrane columns interact with each other to form a pocket where the agonist binds to induce the conformation responsible for activating the G protein, that is, the next component of the signalling pathway.
This G protein family can be divided into two, depending on whether or not they are sensitive to pertussis toxin.
The second and third cytoplasmic loops of the receptor (see Box 1 for details) has an essential role in activating a member of the heterotrimeric G-protein family responsible for stimulating separate members of the PLC family (Box 1).
Tyrosine kinase-linked receptors
The other pathway responsible for stimulating the release of InsP 3 begins with tyrosine kinase receptors, which relay information through a direct interaction between the receptor and the γ- form of PLC (Fig. 1 and Box 2).
As for the G protein-linked receptors, signal transduction through tyrosine kinase receptors is an energy-requiring process because ATP is consumed not only as the two receptors interact (autophosphorylation), but also during the subsequent phosphorylation of PLC- γ 1  (Box 2).
Growth factors such as platelet-derived (PDGF) and epidermal (EGF) growth factors act by bringing two receptors together, which enables their cytoplasmic kinase domains to phosphorylate each other on tyrosine residues to create docking sites to bind PLC- γ 1  .
In unstimulated cells, PLC- γ 1  is largely cytosolic but translocates to the membrane as its SH2 domain binds to the activated receptor (Box 2).
This association has two important consequences for the activation of PLC- γ 1 ,it is phosphorylated by the receptor on specific tyrosine residues and its membrane translocation brings it into contact with its substrate PtdIns(4,5)P 2 .
A similar activation process is responsible for stimulating PLC- γ 1  following crosslinking of IgM receptors in B lymphocytes or activation of the T-cell antigen receptor (TCR) -CD3 receptor complex of T cells.
These lymphocyte receptors lack tyrosine kinase activity but they recruit members of the src family such as fyn and lck (Fig. 1).
The dynamics of different transducing mechanisms have been compared in NIH 3T3 cells, which carry both a G protein-linked receptor (bradykinin) and a tyrosine kinase-linked receptor (PDGF).
When compared to bradykinin, the PDGF-induced formation of InsP 3 was much slower, and the resulting calcium response was not only smaller but had a much longer latency.
Following transfection with a complementary DNA for PLC- γ 1 ,the effects of bradykinin were unchanged, whereas the PDGF-induced responses were markedly enhanced; the rate of InsP 3 formation was increased, resulting in a larger calcium signal with a reduced latency.
InsP 3 and ryanodine receptors
InsP 3 and ryanodine receptors (RYRs) represent the two principal intracellular calcium channels responsible for mobilizing stored calcium.
These two receptors will be considered together because they share considerable structural and functional homologies.
A family of IP 3 Rs has now been identified (see Box 3) with molecular diversity arising from both alternative splicing and the existence of separate genes.
The IP 3 R contains typical membrane-spanning domains in the C-terminal region which anchor the protein in the membrane with four of the subunits combining to form the functional InsP 3 -sensitive calcium channel (Fig. 2 c).
The large N-terminal domain lies free in the cytoplasm with the InsP 3 binding site located at its end, a long way away from the channel-forming C-terminal region.
Upon binding InsP 3 , the receptor undergoes a large conformational change which is perhaps related to the coupling process leading to channel opening.
The other major intracellular calcium channel, the RYR, has three family members (Box 3).
The RYRs identified in neurons and sea urchin eggs seem to resemble the cardiac RYR2.
Some cells respond to transforming growth factor (TGF)-β by expressing a much smaller RYR3 (ref. 34).
Cells carrying RYR3 were insensitive to caffeine and ryanodine but the latter did abolish the effects of bradykinin, suggesting that RYR3 and IP 3 R are co-localized.
Like the IP 3 R, RYRs exist as tetramers, with the C-terminal regions co-operating to form the calcium channel, and the large N-terminal regions forming bulbous heads that project into the cytosol (Fig. 2a and b).
The two ways in which these RYRs respond to membrane depolarization is illustrated in Fig. 2.
The plant alkaloid ryanodine opens the channels at low (nanomolar) concentrations but closes them at higher doses (micromolar).
Caffeine can also open the RYR channel.
These RYRs contribute to calcium signalling in many different cell types (skeletal muscle, cardiac muscle, neurons, chromaffin cells, smooth muscle, pituitary cells and sea urchin eggs).
The remarkable structural similarity that exists between IP 3 Rs and RYRs probably reflects a common evolutionary origin which is supported by the very close sequence homology identified primarily in the two membrane-spanning domains and in the free C-terminal region, which includes two cysteines within a TXCFICG motif that is absolutely invariant for all the intracellular calcium channels examined so far (Box 3).
This free C-terminal tail may play some part in channel opening because monoclonal antibodies that bind to this region (see Box 3) can either inhibit or enhance InsP 3 -induced calcium release.
The conserved cysteine residues located in this region may also represent the target sites of thiol reagents which enhance the calcium-mobilizing activity of both receptor families (see later).
This structural and molecular homology may account for many of the functional similarities that exist between IP 3 Rs and RYRs.
Intracellular calcium stores
The membrane stores from which calcium is released contain three major components—pumps to sequester calcium, binding proteins (such as calsequestrin and calreticulin) to store calcium and the specific IP 3 R or RYR channels to release calcium back into the cytosol (Fig. 2).
These receptors are normally located on modified portions of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER).
One such structure, the calciosome, was originally thought to be the InsP 3 -sensitive store, but recent studies on Purkinje neurons suggest that these organelles may be heterogeneous as some may be sensitive to ryanodine.
The distribution of such InsP 3 -or ryanodine-sensitive calcium stores varies considerably from cell to cell.
Some cells either have ryanodine-sensitive stores (skeletal muscle) or InsP 3 -sensitive stores, as in Xenopus oocytes, whereas there are others that contain both (atrial cells, vascular smooth muscle, neurons, chromaffin cells and sea urchin eggs).
Cerebellar Purkinje cells have both RY and IP 3 Rs distributed throughout the cytosol on elements of the smooth endoplasmic reticulum (ER) in both the soma and along the dendrites.
Unlike the RYR, however, the IP 3 R is also found in the spines.
In double-labelling experiments, some elements of the endoplasmic reticulum had both receptors.
Although there is some physiological evidence to support such a co-localization in some cell types such as PC12 cells, most studies indicate that these two receptors operate separate stores, as in sea urchin eggs.
However, these two stores may interact with each other to generate calcium signals.
InsP 3 -induced calcium release
Calcium contained within intracellular stores is released to the cytosol when InsP 3 binds to its receptor (Fig. 2c ).
This action of InsP 3 has been studied either at the single receptor level, in single cells or in cell populations.
When embedded in a lipid membrane, the IP 3 R responds like a conventional channel, displaying an increase in open frequency in response to InsP 3 (refs 49, 50).
The mean open time was less than 10ms and there was evidence of four conductance states, each of 20pS (ref. 50).
On the basis of finding evidence of co-operativity (Hill coefficients (n H ) 3), Meyer et al.
proposed that channel opening depends upon InsP 3 binding sequentially to the four putative binding sites of the tetrameric receptor (Fig. 2c).
Each binding step could cause a partial opening of the channel in order to account for the different conducting states observed in patch recordings of purified IP 3 Rs (ref. 49).
However, others have not found any evidence of co-operativity (n H =1) suggesting that binding of a single molecule of InsP 3 is sufficient to account for channel opening.
Clearly we still have a long way to go to understand just how InsP 3 acts to open individual channels.
At the next level of organization, the action of InsP 3 has been studied on populations of receptors prepared either in membrane vesicles or in their normal location within permeabilized cells.
The response is extremely fast, reaching a maximum within 140ms of adding InsP 3 to synaptosomes.
All these studies have revealed considerable variability in the sensitivity of InsP 3 -induced release, which gives rise to the phenomenon of ‘quantal calcium release’.
As the level of InsP 3 rises, a fixed proportion of the stored calcium is released, with the remainder becoming accessible at higher doses.
This variability is evident when studying purified receptors in artificial membranes, calcium release in single cells or in cell populations.
A spatial analysis of calcium release triggered by applying increasing doses of InsP 3 to Xenopus oocytes revealed the existence of hot spots, confirming that the InsP 3 -sensitive stores were not uniformly sensitive.
There are two main ways in which the sensitivity of InsP 3 -induced calcium release might vary.
First, IP 3 R sensitivity may change depending on the calcium content of the endoplasmic reticulum.
The available evidence suggests that its sensitivity increases as the store charges up with calcium.
As there are no obvious calcium-binding domains within those parts of the IP 3 R that face the ER lumen, the calcium-sensing might be mediated by a separate protein with calsequestrin or calreticulin (Fig. 2) being obvious candidates.
However, such a mechanism cannot explain the apparent quantal release of calcium by purified IP 3 Rs reconstituted into liposomes.
The second proposal, therefore, is that variations in sensitivity may depend upon receptor heterogeneity (Box 2) arising from the presence of different gene products, from alternative splicing or from post-translational modifications such as phosphorylation or autophosphorylation (because the IP 3 R can function as a protein kinase).
Phosphorylation of the unspliced neural version results in a decrease in sensitivity, whereas the opposite occurs for the spliced version found in the periphery.
As individual cells can express different IP 3 Rs, variations in sensitivity might arise by varying the contribution of different subunits to the tetrameric receptor complex.
At the heart of the current debate, therefore, is the question of what determines the different sensitivities of IP 3 Rs.
Is it a difference in receptor structure or is the variability imposed upon the receptor by the calcium content of the endoplasmic reticulum?
It is essential that we resolve this question because it is relevant not only to the process of calcium entry but also to the mechanism of calcium spiking in intact cells (see later).
Calcium-induced calcium release
The considerable structural and molecular homology shared by RYR and IP 3 R is mirrored in many functional similarities, the most striking of which is a common sensitivity to calcium.
Each heartbeat is driven by a regenerative process of calcium-induced calcium release (CICR), when a small influx of calcium through voltage-operated calcium channels triggers an explosive release of stored calcium from the sarcoplasmic reticulum (Fig. 2b ).
This positive feedback process whereby calcium triggers its own release is a property of RYRs and it may also occur in those non-muscle cells expressing these receptors.
As in the heart, calcium entering neurons through voltage-operated channels can be amplified by CICR from internal pools and this can lead to the generation of repetitive calcium spikes.
RYRs may also generate calcium spiking in mouse eggs and pancreatic acinar cells.
This calcium-sensitive regenerative property of RYRs is also displayed by IP 3 Rs.
Perhaps the most interesting property of InsP 3 -induced calcium mobilization is its all-or-none property manifested as a sudden and near-maximal release of calcium if the level of InsP 3 is gradually increased through injection or by flash photolysis of caged InsP 3 (ref. 57).
When visualized by confocal microscopy, the response in Xenopus oocytes had two phases.
Initially there were small hot spots resulting from the localized release of calcium, which is probably related to the phenomenon of quantal calcium release described earlier.
Above a certain threshold, these hot spots suddenly transformed into the all-or-none response that appeared as expanding circular or spiral waves.
This all-or-none response seems to arise through a positive feedback effect whereby calcium stimulates its own release.
The IP 3 R displays a bell-shaped response to calcium which thus functions as a coagonist with InsP 3 to release stored calcium.
In the absence of calcium, InsP 3 has little effect, but becomes increasingly active as the concentration of calcium rises, reaching a maximum at about 300nM, after which it begins to be inhibitory.
Using flash photolysis of caged InsP 3 and caged calcium, Iino and Endo demonstrated that these positive and negative effects of calcium operated sequentially during the rising phase of a calcium spike.
Positive feedback enhances the initial release, but this is soon curtailed as the accumulation of calcium activates the negative feedback component.
The latter may depend upon the receptor switching from a low-affinity (R L ) state, which can gate calcium, to an inactive high-affinity (R H ) state.
Once the concentration of calcium returns to its resting level, the inactive R H state converts back to the sensitive R L state in about one second, thus setting the stage for another spike.
This calcium-dependent interconversion of the IP 3 R may contribute to the mechanism of repetitive calcium spiking (see later).
Like the RYR, therefore, the IP 3 R also seems to have a CICR mechanism which is of fundamental importance for understanding of how cells generate calcium oscillations and waves.
Inositol phosphates and calcium influx
Calcium entry into cells can be regulated by a number of mechanisms, for example through channels operated by voltage, by receptors or by second messengers.
With regard to the latter, most attention has focused on the inositol phosphates, InsP 3 and InsP 4 (refs. 9, 10).
In some cells, there are suggestions that these inositol phosphates may directly activate specific channels in the plasma membrane.
For example, the InsP 3 -induced entry of calcium in lymphocytes may be mediated by a new IP 3 R which contains sialic acid and is localized in the plasma membrane.
Similarly, the plasma membrane of olfactory cells seems to have an  InsP 3 -sensitive calcium channel.
When compared with the IP 3 Rs on the ER, putative plasma membrane receptors are less specific with regard to InsP 4 (refs 75, 76).
In olfactory cells, for example, the binding protein was equally sensitive to InsP 3 and InsP 4 (ref. 76).
By contrast, the InsP 4 -sensitive calcium channel in the plasma membrane of endothelial cells was insensitive to InsP 3 (ref. 78).
There is growing evidence, therefore, that inositol phosphates may have direct effects on calcium channels within the plasma membrane.
In addition to these direct effects, InsP 3 may stimulate calcium entry indirectly through a more complex mechanism involving the ER.
Putney coined the term ‘capacitative entry’ to introduce the idea that the influx of external calcium seemed to be regulated by the calcium content of a portion of the ER lying close to the plasma membrane.
In some cells, calcium entry is stimulated when the ER stores are artificially emptied by applying the calcium pump inhibitors thapsigargin or 2,5-di- tert- butylhydroquinone, or the calcium ionophore ionomycin.
When the ER is fully charged, entry is prevented, but as soon as InsP 3 drains calcium out of these stores, the influx of calcium switches on automatically.
Such a mechanism is thought to account for the entry of calcium into lacrimal or mast cells following cell perfusion with InsP 3 .
Others, also using lacrimal cells, failed to see such an InsP 3 -dependent entry unless they added InsP 4 (ref. 83).
Irvine has presented a detailed analysis of the controversy regarding the role of these two inositol phosphates in regulating calcium entry.
The most difficult aspect to explain concerning this capacitative mechanism is how the calcium content of the ER determines the rate of calcium entry across the plasma membrane.
An interesting possibility is that the IP 3 R might function to communicate information between the ER and the plasma membrane.
By analogy with excitation-contraction coupling, in which the large cytoplasmic head of the RYR links the T-tubule to the internal calcium store (Fig. 2a ), the large head of the IP 3 R may also convey information between the ER and the plasma membrane.
The idea is that this cytoplasmic head communicates with two calcium channels, one in the ER and the other in the plasma membrane.
InsP 3 binding will induce a conformational state that opens the ER channel, and as the pool loses its calcium, the receptor may change its conformation, leading to an opening of the plasma membrane channel.
Irvine has argued that the opening of this entry channel may also require InsP 4 and that such an action would explain those instances where both inositol phosphates are required.
As yet there is no information on whether stores regulated by RYRs can induce capacitative entry if their calcium is drained by agents such as caffeine.
In summary, the conformational coupling hypothesis considers that the IP 3 R controls the mobilization of both internal and external calcium.
Although the mechanism of calcium entry remains a matter for debate, what is not in doubt is that elevated levels of InsP 3 , perhaps acting together with InsP 4 , can maintain a constant influx of calcium.
In cells that are oscillating, the magnitude of this influx component through second messenger-operated channels is often rather small and has little effect on the intracellular level of calcium during the interval between spikes, mainly because it is rapidly sequestered by the internal stores.
But by charging up these stores, the influx mechanism transforms the cytoplasm into an ‘excitable medium’, thus setting the stage for the generation of the repetitive calcium spikes and waves described below.
In effect, these internal stores integrate this small influx over time before periodically releasing the accumulated signal as a regenerative calcium spike.
Spatiotemporal aspects of Ca 2+ signalling
Now that we are beginning to understand the basic mechanisms of calcium release and entry, the next challenge is to describe the complex spatiotemporal patterns of calcium signalling revealed to us by single-cell imaging techniques.
Many of the cells that respond to calcium-mobilizing agonists display a repetitive pattern of calcium spikes whose frequency is sensitive to both agonist concentration and the level of external calcium.
In addition to this temporal patterning, each spike often displays a recurring spatial organization.
There is a specific initiation locus from which the calcium spreads as a regenerative wave.
Secretagogue-induced waves in pancreatic acinar cells initiate in the apical region before propagating towards the basal pole.
Waves propagate through the cytosol using either ryanodine or IP 3 Rs.
In sea urchin eggs, the fertilization-induced wave spreads around the periphery (Fig. 3), which corresponds to the cortical location of the RYRs.
RYRs are also thought to contribute to wave propagation in pancreatic acinar cells and in mouse eggs, whereas IP 3 Rs seem to operate in Xenopus oocytes,Xenopus eggs and in hamster eggs.
In Xenopus oocytes that lack RYRs, there are numerous initiation foci (hot spots) and the waves migrate outwards as expanding spheres or spirals which annihilate as they crash into each other.
Such spiral waves could be induced by injecting the non-metabolizable analogue InsPS 3 (ref. 70), whereas the injection of calcium had no effect even though it caused a localized elevation of calcium.
In the presence of InsPS 3 , however, the injection of calcium was able to initiate waves.
Heparin, which is a specific inhibitor of the IP 3 R, was found to stop the waves in both Xenopus and mouse oocytes.
The calcium waves in hamster eggs induced by fertilization or a local injection of InsP 3 were inhibited by prior injection with the antibody that binds to the C-terminal region of the IP 3 R (Box 3).
Although all this evidence suggests a central role for the IP 3 R, at least in certain cells, there is controversy concerning the way in which it contributes to the initiation and propagation of calcium waves.
Many ingenious models have been proposed to explain these spatiotemporal aspects of calcium signalling.
The emerging consensus is that the basic mechanism requires an element of positive feedback whereby calcium amplifies its own release.
One view is that calcium exerts a positive feedback effect on PLC, thereby generating periodic surges of InsP 3 during each spike.
In this cross-coupling model, the wave propagates by InsP 3 diffusing from one store to the next, with calcium-induced InsP 3 formation acting to maintain a steep diffusion gradient for InsP 3 .
The alternative view is that calcium is the diffusible messenger that enhances its own release through the process of CICR (Fig. 4).
This generalized CICR model has two main components (Fig. 4).
An entry mechanism at the plasma membrane, which regulates the supply of calcium to the second component, the oscillator itself, which consists of the calcium stores that have either the RYRs or IP 3 Rs responsible for CICR.
The nature of the entry mechanism can also vary: in neural cells it is through voltage-operated channels, whereas in other cells it is usually mediated by the InsP 3 -dependent entry mechanisms described earlier.
In the latter case, where entry depends upon a capacitative mechanism based on an InsP 3 -sensitive pool, the model shown in Fig. 4 transforms into the two-pool model described in detail elsewhere.
The crux of this model, which can be divided into four distinct phases (Fig. 4 a-d),is that repetitive spiking depends upon the cyclic release of calcium from internal stores through the regenerative process of CICR.
A critical factor appears to be the enhanced influx of external calcium which is taken up by the stores with two consequences.
First, the build up of calcium may serve to sensitize the receptor as discussed earlier.
A beautiful demonstration of the importance of calcium loading in priming RYRs was described in sympathetic ganglion neurons, where the rapid removal of external calcium could prevent the caffeine-induced spikes right up to the onset of the all-or-none phase (Fig. 4c ).
Second, as the stores fill up, their buffering capacity will be reduced, thus leading to a pacemaker elevation of cytosolic calcium (Fig. 4 b),which often appears at a specific initiation site where it provides the trigger to detonate the process of CICR (Fig. 4, step c).
These two components were clearly demonstrated in Xenopus oocytes, in which the response to gradually increasing doses of InsP 3 began with localized elevations of calcium (hot spots) which then transformed into regenerative waves.
Dissociation of initiation from propagation probably accounts for abortive spikes such as those observed in HeLa cells responding to low doses of histamine.
These initiation sites may represent areas containing calcium stores that are particularly sensitive to activators such as InsP 3 .
Finally, the spike terminates through a combination of events.
The build up of cytosolic calcium inhibits further release through its inhibitory effect on the release channel and the cytosolic calcium is removed by being pumped back into the stores or out of the cell (Fig. 4 d ).
By measuring the efflux of calcium into a microdroplet surrounding single pancreatic cells, Tepikin et al.
have found that 15–70% of the calcium spike is extruded from the cell during the recovery phase.
A critical part of this model concerns the change in receptor sensitivity which sets the stage for the initiation of the spike by CICR.
Variations in receptor sensitivity could also account for variations in both spike amplitude and rates of wave propagation (M.D. Bootman, personal communication).
For example, wave propagation rates in pancreatic acinar cells increased from 57 to 95μms -1 when the concentration of acetylcholine was raised from 0.1 to 1.0μM.
Lower stimulus intensities will engender fewer sensitized stores and the greater diffusional distances will slow down the wave speeds.
Both RYR and IP 3 R display variations in sensitivity.
For example, caffeine-induced spiking in neurons results from a lowering of the threshold for CICR.
The CICR mechanism evident in eggs at fertilization may be sensitized by a sperm factor.
A possible candidate is the cyclic ADP ribose (cADPR) which is formed from NAD + (ref. 92).
When added to sea urchin egg homogenates, cADPR released calcium from the same stores operated by RYRs.
A subthreshold dose of cADPR also sensitized homogenates to the action of ryanodine and caffeine.
Just how cADPR acts to sensitize the RYR remains to be shown.
A similar change in sensitivity has been described for the InsP 3 -sensitive calcium channels in permeabilized liver cells, which spontaneously released their calcium when the stores were overloaded.
During the loading period, the responsiveness of the IP 3 Rs gradually increased until they were able to respond to the ambient level of InsP 3 .
IP 3 R sensitivity can also be enhanced by specific thiol reagents, such as oxidized glutathione or thimerosal, which probably explains how these agents induce calcium spiking in intact hepatocytes, mammalian eggs and HeLa cells.
The thimerosal-induced calcium spiking in hamster eggs was blocked by the antibody 18A10 (Box 3), confirming the notion that these thiol reagents are acting through the IP 3 R (ref. 97).
InsP 3 -sensitive calcium stores can thus operate in two separate modes.
They can either respond to a rise in the level of InsP 3 , or they can release their calcium in the presence of a constant level of InsP 3 through a process of CICR.
In summary, when cells are activated, the cytoplasm becomes an excitable matrix which allows a calcium signal to initiate periodically at a specific point before spreading throughout the cell as a regenerative calcium wave.
This spatiotemporal organization of calcium signalling seems to depend upon two key processes — influx of calcium across the plasma membrane and a regenerative release of calcium from internal stores controlled by either RYR or IP 3 R.
Intercellular calcium waves
Waves are not confined to single cells but can travel from cell to cell through two separate mechanisms.
In cells lacking gap junctions (clusters of leukaemia cells, for example), waves spread by means of a secreted intermediate (ATP).
The alternative mode of transmission is through gap junctions as described in ciliated epithelial cells of the lung or in glial cell populations both in vitro and in situ .
Just how the wave crosses the gap junction is unknown, but it could depend upon the diffusion of either calcium itself or InsP 3 .
As the wave reaches the cell periphery, enough calcium may diffuse across to activate the neighbouring cell.
Alternatively, the cross-coupling model described earlier would predict a localized calcium-activated elevation of InsP 3 , which could then diffuse across the gap junction.
In the case of Xenopus oocytes, there is indirect evidence that InsP 3 generated in the surrounding follicle cells in response to angiotensin II diffuses across gap junctions to stimulate calcium release in the oocyte.
The calcium waves spreading through glial cells may constitute a long-range signalling network acting in concert with conventional neuronal networks.
On a more speculative note, an interaction between glial and neuronal oscillators may contribute to the circadian time-keeping mechanism located within the suprachiasmatic nucleus.
Fertilization and development
The phosphoinositide signalling system is fully established in the gametes and is called upon to regulate major events throughout the life history of a typical cell.
InsP 3 does not appear to play any part in the maturation of invertebrate and amphibian eggs, but it may contribute to the spontaneous maturation of bovine oocytes.
The ability of cyclic AMP to inhibit maturation can be overcome by injecting InsP 3 .
During spontaneous maturation, mouse oocytes display InsP 3 -dependent repetitive calcium spikes for at least two hours, often extending beyond the point of germinal vesicle breakdown.
Although the available evidence argues against a role in germinal vesicle breakdown, these calcium spikes might control associated events such as cytoplasmic maturation.
Once eggs have matured they remain in suspended animation, awaiting fertilization when the sperm triggers the wave-like surge of calcium (Fig. 3) responsible for stimulating maturation-promoting factor to activate the developmental programme.
Just how the sperm triggers the explosive release of calcium in the egg is still something of a mystery.
At the time of fertilization there is an increase in InsP 3 , and injection of this second messenger can induce some of the early events of fertilization, including the repetitive spiking patterns recorded in mammalian eggs.
The arguments supporting a role for the IP 3 R in propagating calcium waves through Xenopus oocytes and hamster eggs were summarized earlier.
Arguments against a role for a G protein-linked mechanism for generating InsP 3 have come from experiments in which phorbol esters failed to block fertilization but could inhibit the events activated by injecting GTP- γ S into hamster eggs.
An alternative possibility is that the sperm may activate PLC- γ 1 through a tyrosine kinase-linked mechanism similar to that used by growth factors (Fig. 1).
Studies on sea urchin eggs seem to argue against a role for InsP 3 in fertilization.
When injected with heparin there was a normal fertilization-induced calcium transient, whereas the response to either GTP- γ S or InsP 3 was inhibited.
Alternative candidates for a calcium-mobilizing messenger at fertilization include cyclic ADP ribose or cyclic GMP.
Once development begins, the embryo divides rapidly and each mitosis seems to be associated with an increase in calcium.
In Xenopus embryos, the intracellular level of calcium oscillates during the cell cycle, reaching a peak at mitosis, when it seems to be responsible for triggering nuclear envelope  breakdown at prophase.
Injection of InsP 3 can trigger breakdown of the nuclear envelope in sea urchin embryos.
A role for this messenger in controlling mitosis has been supported by experiments on Xenopus embryos in which injection of heparin or a monoclonal antibody against PtdIns(4,5)P 2 was found to arrest the cell cycle.
What remains to be deter- mined, however, is how this messenger pathway interacts with maturation-promoting factor to orchestrate an orderly entry into mitosis.
As the embryo grows, the form of the final organism begins to emerge as each cell expresses its specific developmental programme including the establishment of polarity.
Both InsP 3 and DAG have been implicated in setting up the dorso-ventral axis in Xenopus embryos.
The level of InsP 3 suddenly increases 2-to 4-fold at the 32–64 cell stage which marks the onset of mesoderm induction when the embryo is most sensitive to the teratogenic effects of Li + (ref. 113).
An inositol depletion hypothesis attempts to explain this effect of Li + on the basis that it inhibits inositol phosphate metabolism, so preventing the regeneration of free inositol.
The basic premise is that this depletion of inositol will desensitize phosphoinositide signalling by slowing down the resynthesis of the PtdIns(4,5)P 2 precursor used to release InsP 3 .
In keeping with this hypothesis, the spontaneous increase in InsP 3 at the time of mesoderm induction was completely suppressed by Li + treatment.
Furthermore, Li + treatment caused the expected fall in the level of inositol, and the injection of the latter was able to rescue embryos against the teratogenic effect of Li + (ref. 112).
All this evidence strongly implicates a role for the phosphoinositides in early embryonic induction.
Finally, it is of interest to note that expression of the wnt-1 proto-oncogene can reproduce all the effects of Li + , including the duplication of the dorsal axis, the increase in gap junctional communication between ventral cells, and the restoration of an axis when wnt-1 was expressed on one side of an ultraviolet-irradiated embryo.
All these similarities suggest that, like Li + ,wnt-1 might modulate the way cells respond to inducing agents by suppressing the level of phosphoinositide signalling.
In the case of mammals, there is indirect evidence to suggest a role for the phosphoinositides in early development.
A genetic predisposition for neural tube defects in the curly tail (ct/ct)mouse can be overcome by culturing embryos in media containing inositol.
Also, there is a hint that the development of normal body asymmetry, namely left-right sidedness, may depend upon this signalling pathway.
The iv (situs inversus viscerum)mutation in mice interferes with this left-right decision-making process so that half of the mutants display situs inversus (the normal asymmetry is reversed).
This mutant phenotype is reproduced if rat embryos are cultured with the α 1 -adrenergic agonist noradrenaline.
As the α 1 -adrenergic receptor is invariably coupled to PLC (Box 1), InsP 3 or DAG are likely candidates to determine left-right handedness during embryonic development.
Cell growth
Within a fully developed multicellular organism, most cells are non-dividing (G0 phase of the cell cycle), but they retain the option of returning to the cell cycle usually when activated by growth factors.
We are entering an exciting phase in which links are being forged between transduction events at the plasma membrane and the cell cycle proteins such as the cyclins and cyclin-dependent kinases which contribute to the DNA-synthesis and maturation-promoting factors which operate at G1/S and G2/M respectively.
The role of calcium in stimulating maturation promoting factor at fertilization was described earlier and here I shall concentrate on the G1 events that culminate in activation of DNA synthesis-promoting factor.
Other components of this factor are the tumour suppressors (like p53 and the retinoblastoma gene product) and transcription factors such as E2F and DRTF1.
During the activation of the DNA synthesis-promoting factor, the inhibitory effect of the suppressors is removed once they become phosphorylated and leave the nucleus (Fig. 5).
The problem of cell cycle control can thus be re-phrased in more precise terms: how do growth factors acting at the cell surface bring about the onset of DNA synthesis by stimulating its promoting factor in the nucleus?
Cell cycle control is complicated by the profusion of growth factors acting on different messenger pathways (Figs 1 and 5).
Both G protein-linked receptors (for example, bombesin, bradykinin, endothelin) and tyrosine kinase-linked receptors (for example , PDGF, EGF and insulin-like growth factor (IGF)) can stimulate proliferation.
The phosphoinositide-derived signals InsP 3 and DAG are common to both pathways (Fig. 1), but there is conflicting evidence concerning their role in promoting cell proliferation.
In certain cells an increase in phosphoinositide turnover is not in itself a sufficient stimulus to induce mitogenesis.
Chinese hamster lung fibroblasts transfected with M1 muscarinic receptors responded to carbachol with an increase in inositol phosphate release and fos and myc induction, but there was no DNA synthesis.
By contrast, the same M1 receptor was mitogenic in CHO cells.
The proliferation of glial cells during development of the mammalian brain may depend upon the stimulation of PtdIns(4,5)P 2 hydrolysis by such muscarinic receptors.
Proliferation of fibroblasts is inhibited by antibodies directed against PtdIns(4,5)P 2 (ref. 121) or PLC, whereas the injection of either PLC- β or PLC- γ stimulated DNA synthesis.
Furthermore, a toxin extracted from Pasteurella multocida is a very effective stimulus of the phosphoinositide system and is a potent mitogen.
Another way of trying to determine whether InsP 3 and DAG have a mitogenic function is to mimic their action with appropriate pharmacological agents.
Lymphocytes can be activated using a combination of a phorbol ester or a permeant DAG analogue to activate PKC and an ionophore to mimic the calcium-mobilizing action of InsP 3 .
These agents must be present for prolonged periods, consistent with the observation that growth factors are required throughout G1.
In hepatectomized rats, DNA synthesis begins at 14h but can be inhibited by an α 1 -adrenergic inhibitor applied as late as 11h after partial hepatectomy.
Such inhibitors also prevent the increase in calmodulin within the nucleus of liver cells following hepatectomy.
Others have shown that calmodulin is required during G1 and may have a role in stimulating DNA synthesis-promoting factor.
If calcium influx is reduced during mitogenic stimulation either by lowering the level of external calcium or by using a calcium channel inhibitor, there is a marked inhibition of cell growth.
Measurements of calcium in fertilized eggs or lymphocytes following mitogenic stimulation revealed the existence of repetitive calcium spikes which persisted for as long as several hours.
As described earlier, InsP 3 plays a central role in driving this oscillatory activity and the wave-like spread of each spike may facilitate the transfer of a calcium signal to the nucleus.
Indeed, there are indications that the calcium concentration within the nucleus increases rapidly after antigen stimulation of lymphocytes or fertilization of sea urchin eggs (Fig. 3).
In lymphocytes, antigen activates the InsP 3 /calcium signalling pathway (Fig. 1) that contributes to gene transcription early in G1 (Fig. 5).
One of the actions of calcium is to stimulate the translocation of transcriptional factors (NF-AT and NF-IL2A for example) from the cytoplasm into the nucleus.
Calcium stimulates the calmodulin-dependent protein phosphatase calcineurin, which is one of the targets for the immunosuppressant drugs cyclosporin A (Fig. 5) and FK-506 (ref. 132).
Overexpression of calcineurin makes T cells more resistant to cyclosporin A and FK-506 (ref. 133).
Furthermore, this enhanced presence of calcineurin can act in synergy with a phorbol ester to stimulate T cells, thus by-passing the normal calcium requirement.
All this evidence suggests that the InsP 3 /calcium signalling pathway is activated by mitogenic stimuli and may contribute to the changes culminating in DNA synthesis.
Activation of transcription factors which then translocate into the nucleus indicates that some of the actions of calcium occur in the cytoplasm.
But there is also evidence that the level of nuclear calcium increases dramatically following mitogenic stimulation, suggesting that calcium may also act within the nucleus.
One of the functions of calcium is to activate MAP II kinase, which is part of the phosphorylation cascade that culminates in the activation of DNA synthesis-promoting factor (Fig. 5).
Autonomous nuclear signalling
The nucleus contains an autonomous phosphoinositide signalling system every bit as complex as that present at the plasma membrane.
It contains the lipid kinases necessary to phosphorylate PtdIns to both PtdIns(4)P and PtdIns(4,5)P 2 , which are present both in the nuclear membrane and within the nuclear matrix, which also contains PLC- β .
What is particularly interesting is that this nuclear PLC- β is activated when Swiss 3T3 cells are stimulated by IGF-1, whereas bombesin has no effect even though it is a potent activator of phosphoinositide hydrolysis at the plasma membrane.
As a result of this hydrolysis, InsP 3 and DAG will be formed in the nucleus where they might perform their familiar second messenger functions.
Isolated nuclei display an ATP-dependent uptake of calcium, of which 20% was subsequently released by InsP 3 (ref. 138).
The most likely explanation is that calcium stored within the space between the nuclear membranes was released to the cytosol when InsP 3 bound to receptors on the outer nuclear membrane.
But such a mechanism would not explain the increase in nuclear calcium that occurs following activation of lymphocytes or sea urchin eggs.
At present there is no evidence for IP 3 Rs on the inner nuclear membrane, so the function of any InsP 3 that might be generated in the nucleus remains a problem.
Cell transformation
Cancer cells become tumorigenic as a result of multiple independent steps which subvert the normal growth control mechanisms described earlier.
Some of these steps have been linked with mutations that either activate proto-oncogenes such as ras and myc , or remove the inhibitory action of tumour-suppressor genes such as Rb and p53 (Fig. 5).
Such tumorigenesis has been induced in cultured cells following transfection with some of the 7-membrane-spanning receptors that are coupled to PLC (Fig. 1 and Box 1) such as 5-HT 1c (ref. 139), M1, M2 and M5 140 , and α 1B -receptors.
Similarly, expression of a mutated α q subunit, which enhanced basal PLC activity, was found to transform NIH 3T3 cells but not Rat-1 cells.
These receptors and G proteins may be considered as new classes of proto-oncogenes that might transform cells by enhancing the phosphoinositide-derived signals InsP 3 and DAG.
For example, the phorbol ester TPA (12- O- tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate), which mimics the action of DAG, can co-operate with the oncogene ras to transform primary rat embryo fibroblasts.
With regard to calcium, cell transformation leads to a much reduced calcium requirement for growth.
Neuromodulation and synaptic plasticity
The brain is the richest source of the components of the phosphoinositide signalling pathway.
For example, cerebellar Purkinje cells have a very high density of IP 3 Rs and have thus featured significantly in the purification, cloning and fine-structural localization of this receptor.
The brain has also been important for studying the organization of the PKC family which is colocalized with the IP 3 R system.
The IP 3 R is particularly plentiful in the cerebellum, hippocampus, cerebral cortex, corpus striatum and olfactory tubercule.
It is unlikely that the InsP 3 /calcium pathway has any role to play in the rapid signal transfer mediated by ionotropic receptors, but there is growing evidence that many metabotropic receptors employ phosphoinositide-derived signals to modulate both neural activity and the neural plasticity responsible for memory.
The recent report that presynaptic mGlu receptors employ phosphoinositide-derived signals as a positive feedback mechanism to enhance glutamate release is particularly interesting.
We still do not know why the large cerebellar Purkinje neurons and CA1 hippocampal neurons have such large numbers of IP 3 Rs.
The staggerer mutant mouse has a genetic lesion that prevents the expression of IP 3 Rs specifically in the Purkinje neurons, which are poorly developed.
Perhaps IP 3 Rs are required for the development of the extensive arborization of the dendritic tree.
Another possibility is that the IP 3 R functions to integrate information from the multiple inputs received by this dendritic tree.
The co-existence of IP 3 Rs and RYRs may somehow help to integrate information coming in from the outside and to relay it throughout the neuron through the process of CICR already described.
Indeed, there is a striking increase in nuclear calcium when neurons are depolarized.
Purkinje and hippocampal neurons are noted for their plasticity because they show long-term changes in neural transmission following certain stimulus regimes.
Paired activation of the parallel and climbing fibre inputs results in long-term depression of the parallel fibre-Purkinje cell synapse, which is thought to be mediated through the mGlu receptor that is coupled to InsP 3 formation (Box 1).
The synaptic spines on the Purkinje cells, which receive the input from the parallel fibres, contains an ER system rich in IP 3 Rs.
Within the hippocampus, long-term potentiation (LTP) of synaptic transmission can be induced by the large calcium signal resulting from a brief tetanic stimulation of NMDA (N- methyl-D-aspartate) receptors.
The phosphoinositide signalling pathway may have a role to play because this tetanus-induced onset of LTP was enhanced by activation of the mGlu receptor.
Indeed, activation of the mGlu receptor alone can bring about LTP in both the hippocampus and in the dorsolateral septal nucleus.
As this mGlu receptor is coupled through a pertussis toxin-sensitive G protein (see Box 1), it is significant that LTP is suppressed by pretreatment with pertussis toxin.
The hippocampus receives a large cholinergic innervation which may also play a role because LTP can be enhanced by the cholinesterase inhibitor physostigmine but is reduced by the anticholinergic agent scopolamine.
The memory loss we all begin to experience with age may result from a similar impairment of the cholinergic system, which may also be altered in Alzheimer's disease.
This apparent role of the cholinergic system in enhancing synaptic activity seems to be mediated by the phosphoinositide system.
The marked potentiation of NMDA responses by acetylcholine in CA1 neurons was reproduced by the flash photolysis of caged InsP 3 (ref. 153) but was blocked by the IP 3 R antagonist heparin.
Furthermore, this potentiation was lost in slices prepared from Li + -treated rats but could be restored following addition of free inositol, which is entirely consistent with the inositol depletion hypothesis.
Most attention has been focused on the ionotropic receptors (like NMDA and kainic acid receptors), but it is clear that metabotropic receptors operating through the InsP 3 and DAG messenger systems have a profound effect on neural behaviour, including memory.
Sensory perception
The phosphoinositide signalling pathway has been adapted for detecting external cues by invertebrate photoreceptors, olfactory sense organs in insects, lobsters and fish, and in certain mammalian taste cells.
As for hormonal pathways, these sensory transducing mechanisms use conventional G protein-linked receptors to generate InsP 3 , for example the rhodopsin-DG a q -norpA pathway (Box 1) in Drosophila photoreceptors.
The ER cisternae lying immediately below the photoreceptive microvillar membrane respond to InsP 3 by releasing calcium, which then opens sodium channels in the surface membrane to give the receptor potential.
During prolonged illumination of Drosophila photoreceptors, this receptor potential is maintained but decays in transient receptor potential (trp)mutants in which the calcium influx component necessary for a maintained response is missing.
The trp gene encodes a plasma membrane channel with close homology to the dihydropyridine receptor.
Minke and Selinger have speculated that the trp gene codes for a plasma membrane channel that interacts with an IP 3 R to gate calcium through the capacitative mechanism described earlier.
Olfactory and taste organs closely resemble conventional hormonal systems in that they respond to chemical signals by membrane-bound receptors coupled to various second messengers.
A role for cyclic AMP in olfactory and taste organs is well-established, but InsP 3 has also been implicated for detecting certain chemical modalities.
Our ability to enjoy sweet substances depends upon the activation of adenylyl cyclase, whereas bitter tastes are detected through InsP 3 (refs 77, 159).
A subpopulation of taste cells in the circumvallate papillae have IP 3 Rs highly concentrated near the pore where most of the taste receptors are located.
Rapid increases in InsP 3 levels occur in olfactory epithelia in response to pyrazine and in taste cells responding to the intensely bitter substance denatonium.
Both electrophysiological and biochemical evidence suggests that InsP 3 acts on a calcium channel of M r 107K which is located in the plasma membrane of catfish olfactory cells.
The temporal responsiveness of insect olfactory organs is truly remarkable.
Within 50ms of applying a specific sex pheromone, the InsP 3 level in cockroach antennae increases from 60 to 2,540pmolmg -1 protein.
This rapid production of InsP 3 is fast enough to account for the odorant-induced generator potentials which appear after a latency of 100–200ms.
All this evidence indicates a central role for InsP 3 in certain forms of sensory perception.
It has been suggested that the cyclic AMP and InsP 3 messenger pathways may interact with each other to enhance odorant discrimination.
Conclusion
Over the past decade there has been enormous progress in our understanding of how cells use calcium to regulate their activity.
The second messenger InsP 3 has a key role in controlling both the mobilization of internal stores and the entry of external calcium.
Cells generate InsP 3 through two major signalling pathways.
In one pathway, receptors are coupled through G proteins to stimulate PLC- β,whereas the other pathway depends upon tyrosine kinase-linked receptors which are specifically coupled to PLC- γ .
When activated, these receptors undergo autophosphorylation on specific tyrosine residues, providing docking sites that bind to PLC- γ and result in its activation.
Once InsP 3 is released to the cytosol it mobilizes calcium by binding to receptors.
Molecular studies have revealed a family of IP 3 Rs that have many structural and physiological similarities to RYRs, another major family of intracellular calcium channels.
In particular, both families display an autocatalytic process of calcium-induced calcium release which is responsible for both the temporal and spatial patterns of calcium signalling.
When cells are stimulated they invariably display regular calcium spikes which often appear as waves.
The IP 3 R contributes to these complex patterns in two ways.
It controls the influx of calcium, which maintains this activity, and it is responsible for the regenerative release of calcium during each spike.
Now that the major aspects of the InsP 3 -calcium signalling pathway have been mapped out, attention is beginning to focus on its role in specific cellular responses.
This pathway is fully operational in germ cells, where it has been implicated in both fertilization and early development.
There is continuing support for the hypothesis that Li + re-specifies the dorso-ventral axis in amphibians by repressing the spontaneous surge of InsP 3 in the early blastula.
Once cells differentiate, the InsP 3 -calcium pathway is adapted to control many responses such as smooth muscle contraction, liver metabolism and stimulus-response coupling in many secretory cells.
Many differentiated cells retain the ability to return to the cell cycle when confronted with the appropriate mitogenic stimulus.
Many growth factors are capable of stimulating the phosphoinositide signalling pathway but there are conflicting opinions as to its role in regulating cell growth.
It seems that the InsP 3 -calcium and DAG-PKC pathways can contribute to the sequence of events that culminates in DNA synthesis, particularly in primary cells such as lymphocytes, liver and glial cells.
In addition, there are also indications that this signalling pathway can induce cells to become tumorigenic.
The nervous system is a rich source of all the components of the phosphoinositide signalling pathway but the function of InsP 3 and DAG has been difficult to establish.
There is evidence that InsP 3 functions in sensory perception (taste, olfaction and invertebrate photoreception).
Perhaps the greatest challenge for the future is to understand how this signalling pathway operates in the CNS.
There is already substantial evidence for a role in modulating synaptic plasticity and we can anticipate that both InsP 3 and DAG will regulate many other neuronal processes.
TYROSINE kinase receptors (such as PDGF, EGF) generate InsP 3 and DAG by interacting directly with PLC- γ1,one of the PLC family members (see below).
The sequence of events is illustrated using the PDGF receptor as an example.
a,
The receptor consists of a single transmembrane protein containing a cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase which is separated into two (boxes).
b,
PDGF induces dimerization allowing the two kinase domains to phosphorylate each other on specific tyrosine residues (Y) which provide docking sites responsible for interacting with different members of the SH2 family.
c,
An SH2 domain on PLC- γ1 (filled boxes) recognizes and binds to a specific phosphotyrosine residue.
Once the PLC- γ1 is phosphorylated on specific residues (see below) it begins to hydrolyse PtdIns(4,5)P 2 (labelled here as PIP 2 ) to give DAG and InsP 3 .
There are three major PLC family members (β, γ,).
An earlier report of a cDNA coding for a PLC- α (ref.20), which showed no sequence identity to the other PLC enzymes, may not be a PLC but is probably thiol-protein disulphide oxidoreductase.
There is no sequence data on a new PLC-  family.
Two sites (P and G) on PLC- β1 are responsible for interacting with G aq .
There is little sequence homology between PLC- β,PLC- γ and PLC- ,except for domains X (170 amino acids) and Y (260 amino acids).
PLC- β and norpA are coupled to G proteins (Box 1), whereas PLC- γ1 interacts with tyrosine kinase-linked receptors (see above) which phosphorylate the enzyme on at least 3 tyrosines (771, 783 and 1,254) that are important for activating the enzyme.
Phosphorylation of the serine (S) at 1,248 by PKC or PKA may be responsible for inhibiting signal transduction.
The mode of activation of PLC-  is unknown.
It may represent a calcium-sensitive form of the enzyme as it contains one canonical EF-hand motif.
The activity of PLC-  1  is specifically increased in the aortas of spontaneously hypertensive rats.
The src proto-oncogene contains two domains, called src homology 2 and 3 (SH2 and SH3), which are found within the structure of many other proteins, particularly those concerned with signal transduction.
PLC- γ is also a member of this family as it contains two SH2 domains (filled boxes) and one SH3 domain (hatched box).
A new family member is a phosphotyrosine phosphatase (SH-PTP-1) containing two SH2 domains.
The SH2 domains function as adaptors that bind to specific tyrosine residues (see above).
Located near each phosphorylated tyrosine there is a short sequence motif which determines the specificity of binding to various members of the SH2 family.
BOX3 Intracellular calcium channels
THE ryanodine receptor (RYR) is almost twice as large as the inositol trisphosphate receptor (IP 3 R).
The skeletal RYR1 (refs 31, 32) and cardiac RYR2 (ref. 33) display a 66% identity.
A much shorter RYR3 has been identified in some non-muscle cells.
The IP 3 R 1 (refs 26,27) is 70% homologous to IP 3 R 2 (refs 28, 29).
There are partial sequences for the C-terminal domains of two other receptors IP 3 R 3 and IP 3 R 4 (refs 28, 29).
The primary sequences of members of the two families have regions of homology, particularly in their C-terminal domains which have the membrane-spanning regions.
The inset shows the last two membrane-spanning regions and the C-terminal cytoplasmic tail of the skeletal RYR.
Filled circles represent amino-acid identities with the IP 3 R 1a .
Dashed line represents the binding site of the monoclonal antibody 18A10, which can inhibit the calcium-mobilizing action of InsP 3 (ref.35).
Conversely, another antibody directed against this C-terminal region enhances the effects of InsP 3 (ref. 36).
S1 and S2 splice sites: asterisks, cAMP- and calmodulin-dependent phosphorylation sites: arrows, cAMP-dependent phosphorylation sites; arrowhead, highly conserved TXCFICG motif in the free C-terminal domain.
Modulation of IP 3 R activity
Various pharmacological agents can modulate the IP 3 R but their actions are not particularly specific.
For example, heparin can act as a competitive inhibitor but its usefulness for studies on intact cells is lessened because it may also inhibit the generation of InsP 3 .
The use of caffeine to activate RYRs is complicated by the observation that it is a potent inhibitor of the IP 3 R (refs 37, 38).
Caffeine abolishes the apparent cooperativity of InsP 3 -induced calcium release, suggesting that it interferes with the event that couples the binding of InsP 3 to subsequent channel opening.
Finally, ethanol is a potent inhibitor of the IP 3 R, which might account for the ataxia associated with ethanol intoxication.
FIG. 1 Summary of the two major receptor-mediated pathways for stimulating the formation of inositol trisphosphate (InsP 3 ) and diacylglycerol (DAG).
Many agonists bind to 7-membrane-spanning receptors (R), which use a GTP-binding protein (G) to activate phospholipase C- β1 (PLC- β1),whereas PLC- γ1 is stimulated by the tyrosine kinase-linked receptors (see Box 2).
The latter activate other effectors such as the phosphatidylinositol 3-OH kinase (PI-3K), which generates the putative lipid messenger phosphatidylinositol (3,4,5) -trisphosphate (PIP 3 ) and the GTPase-activating protein (GAP) that regulates ras.
InsP 3 R, InsP 3 receptor; PKC, protein kinase C; NA, noradrenaline; 5-HT, 5-hydroxytryptamine; PAF, platelet-activating factor; TXA 2 , thromboxane A 2 ; TRH, thyrotropin-releasing hormone; GnRH, gonadotrophin-releasing hormone; PTH, parathyroid hormone.
FIG. 2 Control of calcium release by intracellular tetrameric calcium channels.
a,
RYRs located in the sarcoplasmic reticulum of skeletal muscle contribute to the T-tubule foot structure responsible for excitation-contraction coupling.
The dihydropyridine receptor in the surface membrane senses a change in voltage (V)and undergoes a conformational change which is transmitted through the bulbous head of the RYR to open the calcium channel in the sarcoplasmic reticulum.
b,
Calcium-induced calcium release in cardiac muscle and perhaps also in neurons.
A voltage-operated channel (VOC) responds to  V by gating a small amount of trigger calcium, which then activates the RYR to release stored calcium.
c,
Agonist-induced calcium release.
Signal transduction at the cell surface generates InsP 3 which diffuses into the cell to release calcium by binding to IP 3 Rs (see Box 3).
FIG. 3 Fertilization calcium wave in a sea urchin egg observed by confocal microscopy using the fluorescent-indicator fluo-3.
The arrow (b ) illustrates the initiation point of the calcium wave, which then sweeps around the periphery of the cell (frames c-f).
The wave propagated at a rate of 3–10μms r-1 .
Note the large increase in nuclear calcium (arrowheads in d).
(Reproduced with permission from Stricker et al.)
FIG. 4 Calcium-induced calcium release (CICR) model of calcium spiking.
The trace on the left represents a typical baseline spiking pattern very similar to that described in cells such as mammalian eggs or sympathetic neurons.
The model has two main components, calcium entry (I) and the internal stores (II) carrying IP 3 Rs or RYRs, depending on the cell type.
a,
One of the functions of the external stimulus is to promote an entry of external calcium, often mediated by InsP 3 , to give the primer calcium (Ca 2+ ) which charges up the internal stores.
b,
Once these stores are loaded, a process of CICR begins to activate either the IP 3 Rs or RYRs to release calcium.
c,
Calcium functions as a messenger to release calcium from neighbouring stores to propagate a wave.
d,
When release ceases, probably owing to a negative feedback effect of calcium, recovery occurs as calcium is pumped out of the cytoplasm (by pumps on the plasma membrane and internal stores) and the cell is ready to begin another cycle.
FIG. 5 Summary of signalling pathways operating during G 1 .
Growth factors generate a number of putative mitogenic messengers which then feed into various pathways to control both early events at the G0/G1 boundary (for example,fos and myc transcription) and later events which culminate in the onset of DNA synthesis.
One important signalling cascade involves ras,raf 1 and MAP2 kinase, which can then activate both S6 kinase and DNA synthesis-promoting factor (SPF).
SPF contains cyclin, p107, the transcription factor E2F and tumour suppressors such as the retinoblastoma gene product (Rb) and p53.
GAP, GTPase-activating protein; CAM, calmodulin; CN, calcineurin; DAG, diacylglycerol; PKC, protein kinase C.
MHC class II-positive epithelium and mesenchyme cells are both required for T-cell development in the thymus
Graham Anderson, Eric J. Jenkinson, Nel C. Moore & John J. T. Owen
T LYMPHOCYTES are produced in the thymus from precursors originating in the haemopoietic tissues.
On entering the thymus, they undergo a programme of proliferation, T-cell receptor (TCR) gene rearrangement, differentiation and repertoire selection.
Although the thymus provides a unique environment for these events, the role of the thymic stroma in regulating specific developmental stages is not well understood.
We therefore devised an in vitro system to study the role of individual thymic stromal components in T-cell development.
We report here that the development of TCR -CD4 -CD8 -T-cell precursors into TCR + cells expressing CD4 and/or CD8 requires the presence of both major histocompatibility complex class II + epithelial cells and fetal mesenchyme.
The requirement for mesenchymal support can be mapped to the initial stages of intrathymic development because the later stages of maturation, from double-positive CD4 + CD8 + thymocytes into single-positive CD4 + or CD8 + cells, can be supported by epithelial cells alone.
We also show that the requirement for mesenchymal cells can be met by cells of the fibroblast line 3T3 (but not by supernatants from these cells).
To our knowledge, these findings provide the first direct evidence that mesenchymal as well as epithelial cells are involved in T-cell development, and suggest that their involvement is stage-specific and likely to be dependent on short-range or contact-mediated interactions.
Previous in vitro attempts to investigate the role of thymic stromal cells in T-cell development have been hampered by the limited ability of monolayer cultures to support a full programme of T-cell maturation and by the difficulty of obtaining cultures of thymic epithelial cells that maintain their in vivo phenotype.
We devised a technique (Fig.1) to reaggregate defined thymocyte and stromal cell populations under organ culture conditions that provide optimal support for T-cell development in vitro.
Stromal cells were prepared by immunomagnetic selection from disaggregated 14-day fetal thymus lobes rendered free of lymphoid and major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II + dendritic cells by culture in deoxyguanosine.
These lobes, after depletion of remaining CD45 + haemopoietic elements, provide a source of MHC class II + cortical epithelial cells, medullary epithelial cells and mesenchymal components.
Day-14 fetal thymocytes (CD45 + ,αβ TCR -, 97% CD4 -CD8 -) were used as a source of T-cell precursors, and purified CD4 + CD8 + TCR -cells provided an intermediate stage of thymocyte development.
Mixtures of thymocytes and stromal cells rapidly reform (within 12 hours) into intact thymus lobes and were analysed for T-cell development in terms of lymphoid content and TCR, CD4 and CD8 expression after 9 days in culture (Fig.2).
The results of associating various combinations of thymocytes and stromal cells are summarized in Table 1.
In contrast to reaggregates using whole stromal cell preparations, lymphocytes were not recovered from reaggregate cultures of 14-day precursors and stromal preparations previously depleted of class II + epithelial cells.
Purified class II + epithelial cells also failed to support precursor development, even though the epithelial cells reaggregated successfully (Fig. 2a,left) and retained a cortical epithelial phenotype including MHC class II expression (Fig.2 b).
Such lobes remained small and were alymphoid on collection.
But when fetal mesenchyme was also incorporated, the reaggregates increased in size (Fig.2 a,right) and lymphoid content, and supported the development of αβ TCR + T cells expressing CD4 and CD8 (Fig.3 a, b).
Taken together, these results provide direct evidence that MHC class II + epithelial cells are necessary but not sufficient for T-cell development and show that, in addition to any non-lymphoid cells in the CD45 + input, mesenchymal elements are also required.
But when double-positive CD4 + CD8 + TCR -, rather than CD4 -CD8 -TCR -cells were reaggregated with purified epithelium, further development did occur, resulting in the appearance of double-positive TCR + and single-positive CD4 + and CD8 + cells with upregulated levels of TCR expression (Fig.3 e-h).
This pattern of differentiation in vitro parallels that seen as a result of TCR-mediated positive selection in vivo,and is accompanied by the development of functionally competent cells.
Thus the requirement for mesenchyme seems to be associated with the early stages of thymopoiesis, whereas epithelial cells alone can support the later developmental stages, including those dependent on TCR-mediated interactions with MHC antigens in the thymic stroma.
In addition, the failure of class II-depleted thymic stromal cells to support the development of CD4 + CD8 + TCR -cells (Table 1) indicates that class II + epithelial cells are essential, as well as being sufficient for these later stages of thymocyte maturation.
Because fetal mesenchyme is likely to consist of a heterogeneous mixture of cells, we investigated the mesenchymal components required for the initial stages of thymopoiesis.
Therefore we examined the ability of 3T3 cells (a murine fibroblast cell line) to substitute for fetal mesenchyme.
A combination of purified class II + epithelial cells and 3T3 cells (Fig. 3c, d)was able to support the maturation of 14-day precursors, but supernatants from confluent 3T3 cultures were not.
These observations provide the first direct evidence that the early stages of T-cell development depend on fibroblast products and suggest that this effect is unlikely to be mediated solely by soluble factors.
The provision of these requirements by a cell line should aid their identification and analysis of their functional role in T-cell development.
We have shown that the initial stages of T-cell development require the support both of MHC class II + epithelial cells and of fibroblasts in the thymic stroma.
Our results are consistent with previous studies in T-cell-deficient nude mice suggesting that class II + epithelial cells play a crucial role in T-cell development and with an earlier report showing that fetal day-12 thymic anlage stripped of their mesenchymal capsule fail to support lymphocyte development.
They may also partly explain the limited success of attempts to induce a full programme of T-cell development using either monolayer cultures of a single thymic stromal cell type, or cocktails of cytokines.
Having identified two key cell types required for T-cell development, our studies also provide a basis for an analysis of the cellular products regulating specific developmental stages.
Epithelial cells and fibroblasts differ in their pattern of cytokine gene expression, but it seems likely that fibroblasts may also influence T-cell maturation by contact mediated mechanisms.
This might involve a direct effect on T-cell precursors, perhaps reflecting a continuation of the dependence of stem cells in the bone marrow on contact with fibroblasts or their matrix products.
Alternatively, indirect effects involving the regulation of epithelial cell function by mesenchyme are also possible.
After 9 days, individual reaggregate cultures were gently teased apart to liberate any lymphoid cells.
T-cell development was assessed on lymphoid content, and by CD4, CD8 and TCR expression, determined by three-colour flow cytometry (see legend to Fig.3 for details).
dGuO, deoxyguanosine.
Cell yields in successful reaggregate cultures showed a 2–5-fold increase over the lymphoid cell number added at the start of the culture.
This probably represents an underestimate of the proliferative capacity of 14-day precursors because it is likely that not all cells are successfully incorporated into the reaggregates.
Cultures recorded as unsuccessful contained less than 10% of the original input number.
Cell yields from 4-day cultures of CD4 + CD8 + TCR -cells and purified epithelium were 20–30% of the input number, reflecting the limited life span of these cells unless rescued by positive selection.
FIG. 1 Techniques for preparing reaggregate organ cultures from selected thymocyte and thymic stromal cell populations.
Thymic stromal cells were prepared by disaggregating deoxyguanosine (dGuO) -treated BALB/c fetal thymus lobes using 0.25% trypsin, 0.02% EDTA in Ca r2+ and Mg r2+ -free PBS.
Residual cells of haemopoietic origin were removed from the suspension by three rounds of depletion using anti-CD45 (clone M1–9, ATCC) -coated anti-rat immunoglobulin magnetic beads (Dynal).
The ability of anti-CD45-coated beads to bind to CD45 + cells is not prevented by prior trypsinization (our unpublished observations).
To promote interaction, cells and beads were spun together in round-bottomed freezing vials (Sterilin) as described previously.
Stromal preparations lacking MHC class II + epithelial cells were obtained by immunomagnetically depleting suspensions using three rounds of anti-IAd (clone MK-D6, Becton-Dickinson) coated onto anti-mouse immunoglobulin beads.
To prepare purified class II + epithelial cells, suspensions of CD45-depleted dGuO stroma were first immunomagnetically depleted of cells expressing the medullary marker A2B5 using anti-rat immunoglobulin beads coated sequentially with rat anti-mouse IgM (Pharmingen) and A2B5 hybridoma supernatant (a gift from M. Raff).
Successful rosetting of A2B5 + cells with antibody-coated beads was monitored by microscopy, confirming that A2B5 (a GQ ganglioside) is protease-resistant.
To obtain maximum depletion, beads and cells were spun together at a ratio of 5:1 in two successive rounds.
Within each round, cells and beads were spun and resuspended twice.
Rosetted cells and free beads were removed on a magnet after each round.
MHC class II + epithelial cells were then positively selected from the remaining suspension using anti-IAd-coated beads at a bead:cell ratio of 2:1.
Rosetted cells were collected on a magnet and washed four times to remove any unbound cells.
After a final wash in PBS, rosettes were resuspended in 200μl pronase (10mgml r-1 in PBS; Sigma) at 37°C for 2min to remove the beads from the cells.
The reaction was stopped by adding 800μl ice-cold medium containing 10% fetal calf serum (FCS) and the released beads plus any residual rosettes removed on a magnet.
Free cells were collected by centrifugation and subjected to a further depletion with A2B5-coated beads as above.
Reanalysis by flow cytometry showed these preparations to be free of A2B5 + cells (data not shown).
Fetal mesenchyme cells were prepared from the capsule of the fetal lung rudiment to avoid the possibility of contamination with non-mesenchymal thymic stroma.
Isolated 14-day rudiments were incubated in 0.25% trypsin, 0.02% EDTA for 5min, or until the outer mesenchymal capsule was just beginning to dissociate.
Gentle pipetting then released these cells leaving the remainder of the rudiment largely intact.
3T3 cells were grown as monolayers in flasks, collected by trypsinization and allowed to stand at 4°C for 2h before incorporation into reaggregates.
TCR -CD4 -CD8 -T-cell precursors were obtained by gently teasing apart freshly isolated 14-day fetal thymus lobes.
The resultant suspensions were then positively selected using anti-CD45-coated beads as described above, except that beads were removed from rosetted cells using Detachabead (Dynal) according to manufacturer's instructions.
This selection removes the possibility of contamination by fixed thymic stromal elements, although some cells or precursors of other haemopoietic lineage may be included in the selected population.
Reaggregates were formed by mixing together the desired stromal and lymphoid components (usually at a ratio of 1:2 for epithelium and lymphocytes, and 2:4:1 for epithelium, lymphocytes and fibroblasts) and pelleting by centrifugation.
After removal of the supernatant, the pellet was dispersed into a slurry, drawn into a fine glass pipette and placed as a standing drop on the surface of a nucleopore filter in organ culture.
Within 12h, intact thymic lobes reform from these mixtures (see Fig.2).
FIG. 2 Reaggregate cultures only support the development of 14-day CD4 -CD8 -TCR -thymic precursors when both epithelial and mesenchymal cells are present.
a,Two age-matched reaggregate cultures, prepared as in Fig.1.
The lobe on the right was prepared by reaggregating 14-day thymocytes, purified class II + epithelial cells and fetal mesenchyme cells, whereas the other was prepared using 14-day thymocytes and purified epithelial cells alone.
During the 9-day culture period, the lobe receiving mesenchyme cells increased in size and when collected showed a fourfold increase over the number of precursors added at the initiation of culture.
Cells collected from such lobes show evidence of T-cell maturation comparable to that seen in unmanipulated cultures (Fig.3).
In contrast, the culture of precursors and purified epithelium alone remained small and was alymphoid, even though the epithelial cells had successfully formed an intact structure and still expressed a cortical epithelial cell phenotype, including MHC class II antigen expression (b)and ERTR4 (ref.16) and 4F11E (ref.17) expression (not shown).
In addition, such lobes were found to be negative for the macrophage markers 5C6 and F4/80 (ref.18) and the reticular fibroblast marker ERTR7 (ref.16).
METHODS.
Reaggregate cultures were prepared as described for Fig. 1.
For immunohistological analysis, cultures were embedded in OCT compound (Raymond Lamb, London) and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen.
Frozen sections were incubated sequentially in anti-mouse I-Ad (Becton-Dickinson) and alkaline phosphatase-conjugated anti-mouse immunoglobulin (Dako) with intervening washes.
Slides were developed using a Fast Red TR substrate (Sigma) and viewed under fluorescence conditions as described previously.
FIG. 3 Development of TCR, CD4 and CD8 expression in reaggregate thymus lobe cultures.
T-cell development in two different types of reaggregate culture is illustrated.
a-d,Development of CD4 -CD8 -TCR -14-day precursors in 9-day reaggregates with purified class II + epithelium and either fetal mesenchyme (a, b)or 3T3 cells (c, d).
In both cases, TCR + cells have been generated (a, c)and show differentiation into double-positive CD4 + CD8 + and single-positive CD4 + or CD8 + cells (b, d).
(Note,γ  TCR + thymocytes also develop in the reaggregate cultures described above; data not shown.)e, f,Maturation of CD4 + CD8 + TCR -cells in 4-day reaggregate cultures with purified MHC class II + epithelium as the only type of stromal cell present.
Most cells recovered from reaggregates (25% of the input number in this experiment) express αβ TCR (f)and by comparison with adult thymocytes (e)can be seen to include both TCR rlo cells which are predominantly double-positive (g),and TCR rhi cells, the majority of which have undergone maturation into single-positive CD4 + or CD8 + cells (h).
METHODS.
Purified MHC class II + epithelial cells were isolated as described in Fig.1.
Methods used to purify CD4 + CD8 + TCR -thymocytes have been described in detail elsewhere.
Briefly, newborn thymocytes were depleted of mature CD3 + cells using multiple rounds of anti-CD3 (clone C363.29B; a gift from S. Carding) -coated beads, then selected using anti-CD8 (clone YTS169.4; SeraLab) -coated beads.
Bead removal was achieved using Detachabead (Dynal) according to the manufacturer's instructions.
TCR -cells isolated in this way are 99.7% CD4 + CD8 + and do not express detectable levels of TCR (ref.7, and data not shown).
Using this approach, any CD4 + single-positive receptor-bearing cells generated in these reaggregate cultures must be derived from precursors expressing CD8, that is, CD4 + CD8 + TCR -cells or their CD4 -CD8 + TCR -precursors.
Cell suspensions were labelled by sequential incubations in anti- αβ TCR (clone H.57–597; a gift from R. Kubo), followed by anti-hamster immunoglobulin biotin (Caltag) and then a cocktail of streptavidin APC, CD4-PE and CD8-FITC (Becton-Dickinson).
Staining controls involved omission of first-step antibodies.
Flow cytometric (Coulter Electronics, FL) analysis was done on an Elite Dual laser machine with forward- and side-scatter gates set to exclude non-viable cells.
Preferential representation of the fovea in the primary visual cortex
P. Azzopardi & A. Cowey
THE retinal fovea, which corresponds to the central degree or so of vision, is spatially over-represented in the visual cortex.
It is about 0.01% of retina area, but at least 8% of the striate cortex.
Does this simply reflect an equivalently uneven distribution of ganglion cells in the retina, or is the cortical representation of the fovea preferentially expanded r8–13 ?
The answer hinges on the resolution of long-standing discrepancies between the retinal and cortical magnification factors.
We approached the problem in a different way, using a retrograde transneuronal tracer from cortex to retina to relate directly the number of ganglion cells projecting to marked areas of striate cortex.
We report here that ganglion cells near the fovea were allocated 3.3 to 5.9 times more cortical tissue than more peripheral ones, and conclude that the cortical representation of the most central retina is much greater than expected from the density of its ganglion cells.
We labelled retinal ganglion cells retrogradely and transneuronally from the striate cortex with wheat germ agglutinin-horseradish peroxidase (WGA-HRP).
Four microinjections of WGA-HRP were made in the left occipital operculum of two rhesus monkeys (Macaca multatta)to mark and surround the foveal and perifoveal representation, and the sectioned brains and flat-mounted retinae were processed to reveal the injection sites and the loci of labelled retinal ganglion cells that projected topographically to those sites (Fig. 1).
This enabled us to calculate the ratio of cortex to ganglion cells for the region enclosed within the labelled sites and to compare it with the same ratio obtained for the rest of the retina.
The number of ganglion cells was estimated by representing their distribution as mathematical functions and integrating numerically over the polygonal region demarcated by the four labelled sites, and over the remaining area of the retina.
The functions were derived from standard maps of our own previous ganglion cell counts in retinae of M. multatta (Fig. 2).
Our estimates take into account the distribution of P γ ganglion cells, which do not contribute to the retino-cortical projection.
Ganglion cells representing the fovea itself are laterally displaced in the retina, but the displacement is negligible beyond 5 degrees.
Because the eccentric labelled spots in the retinae were situated at least 6.5 degrees away from the fovea, all ganglion cells projecting to the enclosed cortical region were included.
The polygonal region of cortical layer IVc demarcated by the WGA-HRP injections was estimated from two-dimensional computer reconstructions of digitized serial sections.
The enclosed cortical areas represented 27.8% (R54) and 34.1% (R151) of the entire area of layer IVc of the visual cortex.
We confirmed these estimates by comparing the demarcated area of the lateral surface of the striate cortex encompassed by the injections, calculated from precise measurements of the distances between injection sites made during surgery, with the total area of visual cortex in the rhesus macaque.
The demarcated areas represented 26% (R54) and 34.6% (R151) of the total surface area of the visual cortex, which is in close agreement with the values obtained after histological processing.
The average area of layer IVc of visual cortex receiving a projection from a single ganglion cell in any part of the retina provides an index of cortical allocation.
Our measurements give values of 1.83x10 -3 mm 2 per ganglion cell (rhesus R54) and 2.78x10 -3 mm 2 per ganglion cell (rhesus R151) in the central few degrees of retina, and 5.57x10 -4 mm 2 per ganglion cell (R54) and 4.69x10 -4 mm 2 per ganglion cell (R151) in the remaining region (Table 1).
If cortical allocation exactly mirrored the ganglion cell distribution across the retina, the ratio of perifoveal to peripheral cortical allocation should be 1.0.
But we find cortical allocation ratios of 3.29 (R54) and 5.93 (R151) in favour of the foveal-central retinal projection.
For these ratios to depart erroneously from 1.0 would require us to have overestimated the area of the enclosed cortex, or underestimated the number of enclosed retinal ganglion cells, by factors of 2.7 (R54) and 4.2 (R151).
The likeliest sources of error would be to underestimate ganglion cell density in the central retina, or overestimate it in the peripheral retina, in the standard distribution function.
We are confident of the reliability of these data for the following reasons.
First, the estimated total number of ganglion cells in the standard retina (1.52x10 6 ), based on data obtained from flat-mounted retinae sampled at 500μm intervals, is similar to the number of optic axons in the optic nerve (1.50x10 6 ).
Second, the peak density in the central retina (39.2x10 3 ganglion cells mm -2 ) was similar to earlier estimates obtained from sections (40.0x10 3 ganglion cells mm -2 ).
Third, the number of contaminating displaced amacrine cells in the ganglion cell layer, found in substantial numbers in the peripheral retina, and accounted for in the original counts, was similar to the number of displaced amacrine cells estimated by us in a hemiretina of a monkey in which all ganglion cells had been destroyed by severing the optic tract 2 years earlier.
But more recent data obtained from M. fascicularis,in which the foveal ganglion cells densities were estimated from sections and displaced amacrine cells were explicitly identified using immunocytochemistry, suggest that the peak density near the fovea might be somewhat higher, and the average density in the peripheral retina lower, than the earlier estimates of M. mulatta r  11,18 .
Could the differences reported account for the apparent discrepancy between retinal and cortical magnification factors which, as we have just shown, are reflected by the cortical allocation ratios?
We tested this by calculating cortical to ganglion cell ratios using distribution functions derived from the more recent data, and obtained cortical allocation ratios of 2.48 (R54) and 4.18 (R151).
These are only slightly smaller than the values we obtained from our own data.
Preferential allocation of cortical area to more central retinal projections is consistent with the results of some previous anatomical and electrophysiological experiments.
Because the striate cortex is homogeneous in terms of thickness, layering and cell density r21–24 , it implies that more cortical volume is allocated on average to the more central retinal outputs.
There is evidence that many psychophysical measurements, including measurements of hyperacuity, stereoacuity, colour, form and motion r25–29 , cannot be normalized across the visual field on the basis of retinal magnification factors alone, indicating cortical specialization of visual processing in the central visual field.
Perhaps expansion of the foveal representation accommodates additional neural circuitry needed for the implementation of these processes.
It might also be asked whether the preferential magnification of the foveal inputs that we have just demonstrated is determined ontogenetically or whether, as in the intact somatosensory system, it could be influenced by patterns of sensory experience.
FIG. 1 Retrograde transneuronal labelling of retinal ganglion cells from the striate cortex.
a,
Drawing of the left cortical hemisphere showing the locations of four 0.5-μl injections of 12–15% WGA-HRP in 0.07% kainic acid into the lateral straite cortex.
Injection A was aimed at the representation of the fovea.
The peripheral injections B-D were delivered 34mm dorso-medially.
b,
Left (temporal) and right (nasal) hemiretinae of rhesus R151 showing the HRP-labelled sites.
The central sites, corresponding to injection site A, were on the lip of the foveal pit.
The sites corresponding to injections B-D, were located between 6.5 and 9.0 degrees away from the fovea, beyond the zone in which ganglion cells are laterally diaplaced.
c,
The perifoveal region of the right retina of rhesus R151 showing the labelled sites (A'-D') corresponding to the injection sites in the cortex.
F, Fovea; OD, optic disc.
FIG. 2 Mathematical representation of the distribution of ganglion cells in the retina of M. mulatta,derived from standard data.
a,
Ganglion cell density as a function of eccentricity along the nasal axis.
The dots represent the original data; the smooth line represents a function of the form  (where x is eccentricity;a 1  -a 3 , l 1  -l 3  are constants) fitted to the data using a least-squares method.
b-d,
Ganglion cell density as function of eccentricity along the temporal, dorsal and ventral axes.
The dots represent the original data; the lines represent the same function (equation (1)) transformed by using known anisotropy to scale x.
e,
Ganglion cell density over the whole retina.
Densities at points off the principal axes were interpolated using the elliptical function
represent the nasotemporal and dorsoventral coordinates centred on the fovea;a and b represent the anisotropy with respect to the nasal axis), and substituting r for x in equation (1).
From this function, the number of ganglion cells found in any specified patch of the retina may be evaluated numerically.
In the lower part of this figure the dots indicate the two-dimensional locations of the labelled spots in the right retina of R151.
These are projected onto the surface of the ganglion cell density function in the upper part of the figure.
In this case only the projections of the eccentric spots are visible.
The projection of the near-foveal spot, which is located inside the lip of the foveal pit, is occluded.
The centre of the Milky Way
Leo Blitz, James Binney, K. Y. Lo, John Bally & Paul T. P. Ho
Direct photometric evidence has established that the central bulge of our Galaxy (the Milky Way) is actually a stellar bar.
The dynamics of the bar will drive material into the Galaxy's centre but recent X-ray observations suggest that much of the inflowing gas is driven out again in a high-pressure galactic wind.
A small portion of the remainder appears to be falling onto an extraordinarily dense cluster of stars at the Galaxy's nucleus, which may contain a massive black hole.
FROM the birth of radio astronomy in 1932, when Jansky discovered cosmic radio waves and established that they come from the Galactic Centre, it has been clear that something very remarkable is taking place at the core of the Milky Way.
At the long wavelengths he observed, the Galactic Centre turned out to be the brightest object in the sky, brighter even than the Sun.
Subsequently, the Galactic Centre has been shown to be astonishingly bright at many wavelengths, although it cannot be seen optically because it is obscured by intervening dust.
Observations at wavelengths to which the Milky Way is transparent have shown that the central regions are unlike other parts of the Galaxy, and that  bizarre features seem to be the rule rather than the exception.
Some astronomers have suggested that the energetic activity results from matter accreting onto a black hole at the very centre with a mass as much as several million times that of the Sun.
Others suggest that it is due to an extraordinary recent burst of star formation.
Confirmation of either hypothesis would conceptually link the Galactic Centre with the centres of active galaxies, which release prodigious amounts of energy from their nuclear regions, and which seem to require either very massive black holes or huge bursts of star formation to account for what is observed.
The centre of the Milky Way appears in many respects to be a quieter version of an active galactic nucleus.
What then is the nature of the extraordinary mass and luminosity concentration at the Galactic Centre?
How does matter get to the centre to form whatever is there?
Why is there such a plethora of exotic phenomena at the centre, and how can they be explained?
Here we can only paint answers with a broad brush, but a coherent picture is beginning to emerge.
The current observational evidence suggests that the luminosity of the Galactic Centre is generated by a cluster of luminous stars rather than by a black hole.
The best evidence for the existence of a black hole is the presence within the cluster of a unique radio source, Sgr A, but it is not compelling.
The gas that feeds the star formation at the centre is brought inwards by the dynamical effects of a newly identified massive stellar bar.
Most of the gas brought to the Centre is apparently later expelled in a galactic wind, but some with low angular momentum finds its way to the nucleus, where the gas is at a pressure at least three orders of magnitude higher than in the disk.
There is good evidence that the infall occurs right down into the central parsec, but at a much smaller rate than the overall mass inflow rate, suggesting that any accretion onto a central black hole is episodic.
Our discussion proceeds from large to smaller scales, ultimately reaching the very nucleus of the Galaxy.
The Milky Way: a barred spiral galaxy
Figure 1 shows the most striking image of the Milky Way, which was produced by the DIRBE  experiment on the COBE satellite.
At the centre one can clearly see the bulge of the Milky Way extending above and below the flat disk of the Milky Way, which is reddened by galactic dust in the same way that sunsets are reddened by dust in the atmosphere.
The bulge, by contrast, contains little dust.
Until recently it was assumed to be a flattened axisymmetric spheroid (that is, one which is round in the plane of the Galaxy).
There is now evidence that the bulge is elongated in a direction that lies in the plane; the Milky Way is a barred spiral galaxy.
Roughly half of all disk galaxies contain a bar, an elongated distribution of stars whose longest axis lies in the plane of the disk (Fig. 2).
Barred galaxies have been recognized as a separate class of galaxies since the 1920s, and in 1964 de Vaucouleurs suggested that the Milky Way contains a bar to explain the observed noncircular motions of the atomic gas at the centre.
Subsequent detailed analyses of the motions of the atomic hydrogen gas in the plane supported this proposal.
Within the past year, new photometric and dynamical evidence has become available that clearly places the Milky Way in the class of barred rather than normal galaxies.
The photometric evidence results from an analysis of the near-infrared emission obtained from a Japanese balloon-borne telescope launched nearly a decade ago.
In the infrared, extinction by dust is an order of magnitude smaller than in the visible portion of the spectrum.
By analysing the emission above and below the plane (the whitish regions in Fig. 1), it is possible to make a quantitative assessment of the shape of the bulge.
If the bulge is axisymmetric, lines of sight that make the same angle on either side of the centre will appear equally bright.
On the other hand, if the bulge is elongated and its long axis is at some angle oblique to the line of sight (see Fig. 3), perspective effects cause equivalent lines of sight on either side of the centre to have systematically different surface brightnesses.
For most lines of sight, the near side of the bar will appear to be brighter than the far side because lines of sight on the near side traverse paths with a higher volume density of stars.
The near side will also appear to be thicker than the far side.
Close to the centre however, lines of sight on the far side are actually brighter because the stellar densities sampled are almost the same, but the lines of sight on the far side traverse a longer path of stars.
This counterintuitive result requires the differential surface brightness of the two halves of an obliquely oriented bar to show a sign reversal near the centre, and the photometrically determined near side to have a larger angular thickness.
An axisymmetric bulge, as would be found in a normal (non-barred) galaxy, would show no such effects.
Both the Japanese data and newer data from the COBE satellite show all of the expected features.
The orientation of the bar, which is currently poorly constrained by the photometry, is in the sense shown in Fig. 3.
Analyses of the distributions of individual stars in the bulge have all shown an asymmetry consistent with the bar found in the infrared continuum and all are in the same sense as indicated by the analysis of the balloon photometry; the figure of the bar emerges clearly through the dusty murk of the galactic plane.
Kinematics of the gas in the bulge
A recent attempt to find a dynamical explanation for the observed motions of atomic and molecular gas in the central regions has provided independent evidence of a stellar bar forcing noncircular motions in the central regions.
Let us first describe the gas and its motions.
Atomic and molecular gas comprises more than 90% of the mass of the interstellar material, and are detected primarily through their emission at radio wavelengths.
Atomic hydrogen (HI) is observed directly through its 21-cm hyperfine line, whereas H 2 is not directly observable and is traced primarily through the 2.6-mm rotational transition of the CO molecule.
Measurements of the HI and CO lines enable one to infer for each point on the sky the column density of HI and H 2 moving with a given velocity, but the inferred H 2 column densities are cruder because of the extra interpretive step required.
The interpretation of the measurements is further complicated by the indeterminacy of the distance to the element of gas that is responsible for the emission.
Because the neutral gas is strongly confined to the plane, in a first analysis it is convenient to concentrate on a thin slice around b =0°, where b is galactic latitude; this two-dimensional slice through the data cube contains all available information about gas in the plane.
It can be displayed in plots such as those of Fig. 4 of line-of-sight velocity against galactic longitude l .
In broad outline, these plots can be understood if most of the gas moves about the centre on circular orbits.
Within 20° of the centre (3kpc), plots for both HI and CO similar to Fig. 4 show a decline in the maximum velocities with decreasing longitude; this would arise naturally if gas were largely excluded from the central 3kpc.
However, the peak HI and CO velocities start to rise about 12° and 2° from the centre, respectively.
The natural explanation of these upturns is that disks of HI and CO with radii of 1,500pc and 300pc, respectively, sit within the central 3kpc hole.
We refer to everything in the plane exterior to 1.5kpc as the ‘disk’, and consider all material inside 1.5kpc, whether or not it lies in the plane, to be part of the bulge.
Also shown in Fig. 4 is a longitude-velocity plot of the emission from the  transition of the CS molecule.
The CO molecule typically traces H 2 at densities of 10 2 –10 3 cm -3 , whereas CS traces the H 2 at densities of at least 10 4 cm -3 .
The detailed differences between the CO and CS maps imply that the pressure of interstellar gas in the bulge is much higher than it is in the disk.
This point is discussed in more detail below.
In Fig. 4, there is emission by both HI and CO at ‘forbidden velocities’, that is, at velocities which do not occur in a model in which all material circulates in the same sense on circular orbits.
Specifically, there is material at positive longitudes and negative velocities, and at negative longitudes and positive velocities.
Such velocities would occur if gas moved on elliptical streamlines.
Dynamics of the bar
The key to understanding the distributions of Fig. 4 turns out to be closed ballistic orbits, which provide the framework for comprehending the general orbital structure of any potential; most orbits can be interpreted as epicyclic excursions (’ librations') around an underlying stable closed orbit.
At any energy there will be at least one closed orbit, and this orbit is said to parent the family of non-closed orbits that librate around it.
If a cloud of gas is released into a potential, the cloud will shear and then settle onto closed orbits, because collisions between parcels of gas tend to dissipate energy of libration around these orbits.
Once the gas has settled onto closed orbits, dissipative processes will cause it to drift slowly along a sequence of such orbits to ever lower energies.
Consequently, although pressure forces are important in collimating gas onto closed orbits, they are unimportant during the long periods in which the gas drifts from one closed orbit to the next.
If the galactic potential were oblate and axisymmetric, the relevant closed orbits would be circular orbits in the equatorial plane of the potential, and a disk of gas that had settled to such orbits would conform to the conventional picture of the galactic disk.
If the potential is nonspherical, the picture is complicated in two respects.
First, the stable closed orbits may at some energy become self-intersecting and second, at a given energy these orbits may form more than one sequence.
These phenomena are illustrated in Fig. 5 a , which shows three of the key orbit families in the potential of a rotating bar.
On all the orbits shown, stars circulate in the same sense as the pattern of the potential.
On orbits of the outermost family, stars circulate more slowly than the potential, and conversely for the inner two families.
The radius at which the outer orbits develop loops and become self-intersecting is called the ‘outer Lindblad resonance’(OLR), and the mean radius of the smallest orbit of the middle family to be self-intersecting is called the ‘inner Lindblad resonance’(ILR).
Imagine that gas is being fed onto the outermost orbit in Fig. 5 a .
As dissipative processes within the gas radiate energy, each cloudlet gradually drifts inwards until it approaches the OLR.
There the rates of collisions and shocks within the gas increase markedly as the structure of the closed orbits to which collisions drive the gas becomes more elaborate.
But the inward drift slows slightly as the extra dissipative losses are more than compensated for by the energy and angular momentum which the bar pumps in at this point—recall that the bar is here going around faster than the gas, so it has a tendency to spin the gas up as well as a tendency to cause it to radiate vigorously.
One of the important open questions is whether radiative losses overwhelm the work done by the bar when the gas reaches the outermost self-intersecting orbit.
If so, the gas will plunge rapidly inwards and settle on the middle set of closed elliptical orbits, called the ‘x 1 family’.
But even if not, mass lost from evolved bulge stars, expected to be of the order of 0.2 solar masses M  and;per year, will find itself on self-intersecting orbits, and will fall toward the centre.
Ultimately, quiescent inward streaming will resume until the ILR is reached, at which point radiative losses again stimulate an abrupt switch to a new orbit family of smaller radius, the innermost set in Fig. 5a, known as the ‘x 2 family’.
In this way, gas is continually being fed ever closer to the centre from larger radii.
To compare models such as those shown in Fig. 5a with the observations shown in Fig. 4, it is necessary to make a transformation from what one would observe looking down on the plane to the (l, v)plot observed from our position in the plane.
Figure 5 b shows how the system of Fig. 5 a would appear to an observer located at the Sun if the line-of-sight makes an angle of 16° with the major axis of the bar: this is the configuration that gives the best agreement with the data.
In particular, the envelope of velocities observed in the HI and CO are well matched to different classes of x 1 orbits, and the giant Galactic Centre molecular clouds Sgr A and Sgr B2 lie, as expected, on x 2 orbits.
Furthermore, the region between the inner and outer Lindblad resonances is observed to be fairly clear of gas, and the accumulation of shocked gas outside the OLR can be identified with the well known ‘molecular-ring’ in the galactic disk.
We see that there is both good photometric and dynamical evidence for a bar at the Galactic Centre, that the orientation of the bar is fairly tightly constrained by the HI and CO observations, and that the dynamics of the bar explain the large-scale kinematics of both the atomic and molecular gas at the centre.
The region of the Galaxy commonly referred to as the bulge is thus synonymous with the bar.
Any gas flowing inward across the OLR will naturally be driven by the bar into the region within a few hundred parsecs of the nucleus, the region of the molecular disk.
In any event, the bar will feed gas ejected by its stars to the nucleus.
Let us now look at the molecular disk in detail and try to understand why the gas seems to be so different there.
The inner 300 pc: high gas pressure
The molecular gas shown in Fig. 4 b and c lies within 300pc of the nucleus and has a mass of 10 8 M  and;.
This is 5% of the total molecular mass of the Galaxy, concentrated in 0.04% of its surface area; the surface density of molecular gas in the centre is extraordinary.
The individual clouds, identifiable as discrete features in Fig. 4 b and c , are very different from the clouds observed in the disk; they are, on average, much denser and their velocity widths are much larger.
In the CO map of Fig. 4 b , several narrow bands of foreground clouds can be seen to cross in front of the broad emission from the centre.
The bands in the disk are narrow because individual clouds have both smaller linewidths and smaller random velocities than clouds in the bulge.
Because the CS map shows a striking absence of these narrow bands owing to intervening disk gas, we infer that CS is confined to the bulge.
Given that the CS molecule requires higher densities for its excitation than CO, it follows that the gas density  in the bulge is about an order of magnitude greater than in the disk.
Moreover, the CO and CS lines from individual features in the bulge are broad; the corresponding Doppler velocities are of order .
It is not adequately understood how molecular clouds in both the disk and the bulge manage to sustain internal motions in excess of the sound speed (), but we suspect that strong magnetic fields within the clouds ensure that the Alfvén speed is at least comparable to  v  .
(A field of order 130μG is required; by comparison, the local diffuse gas has a field 5μG (refs 24, 25).
If the Alfvén speed is of order , it follows that the pressure of the molecular gas in the bulge,, is about three orders of magnitude higher than that of the diskgas.
Why should this be so?
An answer comes from X-ray  observations by the Ginga satellite of iron atoms in the bulge that are so highly ionized that they retain only two electrons.
These suggest that the bulge is permeated by very hot gas with temperatures near 10 8 K (hotter than the centre of the Sun) and densities 0.03–0.06 hydrogen nuclei per cubic centimetre, corresponding to a pressure nearly 1,000 times higher than that measured in the solar vicinity.
Because the hot gas is pervasive, cooler gas embedded in it must be under the same high pressure.
The X-ray-emitting gas is so hot that it must be rushing out of the bulge as a galactic ‘wind’, unless it is somehow confined by magnetic fields.
But even if magnetic fields could confine the wind, the hot gas pressure would be expected to build until it was episodically released as in a pressure cooker.
The mass loss rate from the bulge wind depends on the radius r s of the sonic point for the bulge, and is equal to 0.25 (r s /200pc)2 .
This large mass loss rate is probably enough to compensate for the inflow driven by the bar.
In fact, little of the gas driven inward need ultimately fall into the nucleus of the Galaxy.
The wind is also likely to be important in carrying off much of the angular momentum of the gas that falls in from more distant regions of the Galaxy.
To get within 1pc of the nucleus from a distance of 1kpc, an average parcel of gas must have reduced its angular momentum by a factor of at least 10 3 .
One might expect that with such a large concentration of high-density, highly pressured molecules, the star formation rate at the centre would be significantly higher than that in the disk.
What is particularly striking about the molecular gas at the centre, however, is the relative paucity of present-day star formation.
This could be a direct consequence of the high internal velocity dispersion in the molecular clouds.
On account of it, the Jeans mass of the clouds exceeds 10 6 M and;; to be gravitationally bound, clouds have to be extremely massive.
The most spectacular star-forming clouds such as Sgr A and Sgr B2 have masses of this order.
Furthermore, the large magnetic fields likely in the Galactic Centre clouds would have to diffuse out before the clouds could collapse.
Ambipolar diffusion times may be as high as 10 8 yr for these clouds.
Moreover, to be gravitationally bound a cloud must be dense as well as massive or it will not be able to withstand the strong galactic tidal field near the centre.
Unless the circular speed of the Galaxy's potential declines markedly towards the centre, only clouds dense enough to be strong CS emitters could survive shredding by the tidal field.
The central 30pc
The bar does not greatly affect the orbits of stars and clouds that are confined by the Galaxy's potential to r30 pc; the smallest orbits in Fig. 5 a form a neatly nested sequence of only slightly eccentric ellipses.
Hence one might expect the orbiting gas to become more and more quiescent the farther it recedes from the stimulus of the ILR.
Observations, however, decisively confound this expectation.
Far from settling to orderly streaming around the nucleus, the region r30 pc abounds in exotic phenomena.
It is not yet clear why the activity becomes so much more pronounced as the nucleus is approached, although there are several possible explanations.
(1) A smaller, more rapidly tumbling bar may sit at the core of the kiloparsec-scale bar discussed above.
(2) As one approaches the nucleus, the energy input from an explosive event required significantly to perturb the flow of gas dwindles.
Hence the disorder observed within 30pc may simply reflect the increasing importance of individual supernova explosions.
(3) The magnetic field in the disk and its coupling to the coronal gas above and below the plane may grow in strength to the point at which it destabilizes the planar flow.
Support for this last conjecture is provided by radio continuum observations of filaments which form an arc-like structure near l=0.1° (14pc)(Fig. 6 b ).
This structure extends over 0.3° (45pc) but is part of an even more extensive 1° (140pc) -shaped lobe that appears to be perpendicular to the plane and is reminiscent of the prominences and flares that protrude from the surface of the Sun (Fig. 6 a ).
The intricate and narrow (5 ; 0.2pc) filaments of Fig. 6 b are strikingly linear and mostly run parallel to one another.
Their steep radio spectra and polarization properties suggest that they emit synchrotron radiation, and their morphology suggests a poloidal component of the galactic magnetic field.
This field component would connect gas in the plane to the hotter gas above and below and is likely both to generate instabilities and to bleed angular momentum from the disk, possibly leading to the formation of a jet.
Such a jet may have been detected, but more work needs to be done to confirm such an interpretation.
Further support for the suggestion that the magnetic field has a substantial poloidal component is provided by observations of γ -rays.
The presence of cosmic rays can be inferred from high-energy γ -rays because these are produced when cosmic rays pass through interstellar gas.
The strong nonthermal radio continuum emission from the centre shows that there is a large flux of synchrotron electrons at the centre, and if these are accompanied by relativistic protons, the inner 300pc of the Galaxy should be a powerful γ -ray source on account of the large column density of molecular gas there.
But the COS-B satellite detected no γ -rays from the centre above the background from the disk.
A plausible explanation is that a poloidal magnetic field draws cosmic-ray protons out of the plane before many have interacted with molecular gas, which is confined to a very thin layer (40pc thick).
Sagittarius A
The central 10pc is dominated by the radio continuum source known as Sgr A (Fig. 6b ), and a dense star cluster observed in the infrared.
Sgr A comprises two components, Sgr A East and Sgr A West (Fig. 6 c ), and a 10 5 M  and;cloud of molecular gas.
Sgr A East has an extent of 3' (8pc).
Its nonthermal spectrum indicates that it is probably powered by supernovae.
Sgr A West is smaller (2pc), its radiation is largely thermal, and it sits within a highly turbulent circumnuclear disk of molecules that extends out to a distance of 7pc from the nucleus.
The inner edge of the disk is delineated by a ring of emission observed through its emission of HCN (see Fig. 6d ).
Within the molecular gas disk is a cavity 2pc in radius with a mean gas density about an order of magnitude lower than its surroundings; Sgr A West sits in this cavity.
What makes Sgr A West particularly striking is the spiral-like pattern of emission, with Sgr A near its centroid.
Sgr A is a point-like radio continuum source that many suspect is the nucleus of the Milky Way, and which signals the presence of a black hole.
Within 1  of Sgr A is the centroid of a dense cluster of stars, much denser than anything observed in the galactic disk.
The density of stars within 1pc of the centre of the cluster is  10 6 M  and;pc -3 (ref. 44); for comparison, the density of stars in the solar vicinity is 0.1 M  and;pc -3 .
The central question in the study of the nucleus is whether the mass distribution and energetics are dominated by stars, or by a central black hole.
We describe the observations of Sgr A with a view to answering these questions.
Sgr A West contains 60 M  and;of ionized gas and may be associated with atomic gas having a mass perhaps five times greater.
The motion of the ionized spiral arms has been studied spectroscopically at both radio and infrared wavelengths and found to be highly organized.
From the smoothness of the velocity field within the filaments and the way in which it matches up with the velocities of neighbouring clouds, one infers that the arms are probably gas streams tidally stretched out as they fall towards the bottom of the galactic potential.
Polarization measurements of these streams in the mid-infrared, and milligauss field strengths obtained from Zeeman measurements in the circumnuclear molecular material that envelops the streams, suggest that the magnetic field may play a role in their dynamics.
Figure 6 d shows how neatly Sgr A West fits inside the cavity of the circumnuclear molecular material.
This fit and the overall similarity of the velocities in the ionized and molecular gas suggest that the circumnuclear molecular gas is the reservoir of the gas that feeds into the nucleus at a rate of 0.03 M and; yr -1 (ref. 43).
How is the circumnuclear molecular disk related to the molecular clouds farther from Sgr A?
Recent interferometric observations of NH 3 emission from the molecular cloud to the south of Sgr A show that some of the neutral gas in the south may be flowing toward the Galactic Centre in the form of a thin streamer and may settle into the circumnuclear molecular disk.
There is now ample evidence that Sgr A East, most probably driven by stellar winds and supernovae, is blasting into the molecular material eastwards of it, compressing and pushing the cooler gas outwards.
Similarly, another supernova remnant 3' (7pc) southwest of Sgr A seems to be blasting into the Sgr A molecular cloud.
By distorting them, supernova explosions may lead to the shredding of otherwise stable clouds by the tidal field of the nucleus.
Also, the turbulence to which explosions give rise allows angular momentum to diffuse outwards, and gas to drift inwards, deeper into the gravitational potential.
Thus, there may be a feedback cycle causing gas to fall towards the centre.
The mass inflow rate into the central cavity is small compared to what is lost by the bulge wind.
If the bulge wind is in a steady state and is fed by inflow driven by the bar, the mass flowing into the central parsec is small compared with what is brought in from the disk.
The central parsec
Outside the central parsec, stars (other than supernovae) primarily influence nuclear activity through their collectively generated, barred gravitational potential.
Within the central parsec, stars play a more direct role because they are so tightly packed that collisions between them, including tidal disruption, may be sufficiently common to inject significant quantities of gas into the interstellar medium.
The central star cluster is dominated by a number of discrete sources; one of them, IRS16, has traditionally been considered the core of the cluster.
IRS 16 is 1  (0.04pc) east of Sgr A and has itself been resolved into about 2 dozen compact components.
These are intrinsically rather blue, suggesting that the cluster is composed of fairly young stars.
Moreover, using near-infrared imaging spectroscopy, the central star cluster was found to contain about a dozen HeI emission-line stars within 12  (0.5pc) of Sgr A. These stars have been suggested to be either blue supergiants or Wolf-Rayet-like stars with heavy mass loss (10 -5 –10 -4 M and; yr -1 ), and outflow velocities 1,000kms -1 ; their presence has been taken as evidence for recent star formation.
The HeI stars are known to be at the Galactic Centre because many are coincident with temperature peaks in the dust associated with the spiral of ionized gas flowing into the centre.
The discovery of these HeI emission-line stars suggests that a black hole is not needed to explain the luminosity of the Galactic Centre.
These stars are both luminous enough and hot enough to account for the total luminosity within 5pc of the nucleus, estimated to be 0.5–2.0x10 7 ,L and;(refs 67, 68).
But the nature of the HeI stars is a bit of a mystery, as they have rather unusual spectra.
They may be remnants of severe tidal encounters or even mergers between normal stars.
Consequently, one cannot securely argue that these stars demonstrate that massive star formation has taken place in the nucleus within the past few million years, and that massive star formation continues there.
Moreover, star formation within the central parsec requires gas densities higher than 3x10 7 cm -3 to avoid tidal disruption, a value much higher than what is observed at present.
Thus, although the HeI stars obviate the need for a black hole to account for the energetics of the galactic nucleus, the questions remain, what powers the enigmatic source Sgr A and does the latter mark the presence of a black hole?
It is widely believed that the vast luminosity (up to 10 45 ergs -1 ) arising from a very compact volume (a light-year or less) in quasars and Seyfert galaxies are powered by black holes with masses of the order of 10 9 M and;, and that such black holes should reside in the nuclei of many, perhaps most galaxies as luminous as the Milky Way.
Although it seems that the luminosity of the centre can be provided by the central star cluster, there remain compelling reasons for searching for a possibly dormant massive black hole.
Lynden-Bell and Rees suggested that such an object would be marked by a compact nonthermal radio source.
In 1974 Balick and Brown unambiguously detected such a source, Sgr A.
Sgr A is a unique radio source in the Milky Way and shares several properties with compact extragalactic radio sources.
Although its structure is still not known, it is very compact, with a linear size 10ÅU. (1ÅU is the radius of the Earth's orbit: 1.5x10 13 cm).
This small size strongly constrains the nature of its energy source.
It rules out a star cluster and requires an object of stellar dimensions or less.
A reasonable model for Sgr A is the corona of a black hole that is accreting very subcritically, with synchrotron radiation extending to the mid-infrared.
Submillimetre observations of Sgr A suggest the possibility that a circumnuclear accretion disk with a diameter of 0.1pc may have been detected, although the interpretation is not unique.
Another model of Sgr A takes into account the latest observational evidence: the radio emission from Sgr A results from a supermassive black hole accreting from the winds of HeI emission-line stars in the central few arcseconds.
Unlike quasars and active galactic nuclei, which seem to require black holes to explain the enormous energies coming from very compact regions, the energy generated by Sgr A is rather feeble.
From the vantage point of an external galaxy, such as M31, the nucleus of the Galaxy would not be considered active; the radio luminosity of Sgr A, 10 35 ergs -1 , is small enough to be provided by a star.
It has been suggested, for example, that Sgr A is just a neutron star moving through a dense gas cloud.
The compactness of Sgr A requires that the emitting material be confined by ambient pressure nT 10 12 Kcm -3 .
The most plausible source of such an extreme pressure is ram pressure generated by the motion of Sgr A through the surrounding gas, but the current upper limit to its proper motion (see below) makes this interpretation unlikely.
Moreover, if Sgr A is merely a luminous neutron star, the uniqueness of Sgr A is surprising given that there should be many neutron stars in the nucleus.
There is considerable circumstantial evidence that the Galactic Centre contains a point mass of 10 6 M and;.
The evidence comes primarily from modelling the observed velocity distributions of the stars, and modelling the measured velocities of the ionized streamers with the assumption that the ionized gas is responding only to gravity.
Models with an extended stellar distribution together with a point mass of  seem to fit the data best.
The point mass would presumably be coincident with Sgr A. Star clusters with very sharply peaked mass distributions (, where ) or with small core radii could also fit most of the data.
Such sharp density distributions are not observed in other clusters, however, and require extraordinary stellar densities.
On the other hand, if Sgr A marks the presence of  black hole, the 1  offset from the IRS16 cluster is an improbable configuration.
One would expect the centroids of both sources to be coincident unless Sgr A marked a black hole of much more moderate mass.
If Sgr A were a massive black hole, it would settle at the bottom of the galactic potential well and exhibit negligible proper motion.
A neutron star, on the other hand, would show a transverse velocity comparable to the velocity dispersion measured for the stars of 100kms -1 .
The existing radio interferometric data are consistent with Sgr A being stationary in the Galaxy to better than 27kms -1 (ref. 77).
There is less than a 5% probability that an object belonging to a population with velocity dispersion 120kms -1 moves so slowly; alternatively, a 20 M and; object in equipartition with solar-mass stars having 120kms -1 dispersion, has about even chance of moving more slowly than 25kms -1 .
To have 99% confidence that the mass of the object is greater than 100 M and;, which exceeds the mass of any stable star, one must show that 1.7 kms -1 .
The current limits are tantalizing, but inconclusive.
As time goes on, the limits should get tighter.
In the mid-1970s an argument for the existence of a black hole at the Galactic Centre came from the discovery of a γ -ray line at 511keV (ref. 78) attributed to the annihilation of electrons and positrons from the general direction of the nucleus.
The angular resolution of the observations was inadequate to show that the source was definitely located at the nucleus, but the strength and variability of the line suggested that it arose from a compact source.
Consideration of the γγ production of positrons requires the source to be very compact, 5,000km, consistent with the observations of Sgr A. One possible source of the positrons is pair production in intense bremsstrahlung emission from 10 7 K gas around an accreting black hole with mass 10 3 M and;(ref. 81).
More recent imaging results from the SIGMA telescope aboard the GRANAT satellite show, however, that the variable component of the 511keV line emission originates from a source that lies 0.75° (105pc) from Sgr A. The dynamical centre of the Galaxy cannot lie so far from Sgr A, so the γ -ray line source cannot mark the nucleus.
The search for a black hole at the Galactic Centre remains inconclusive at present.
Despite the uncertainties, the unique, compact nature of the Sgr A radio source, and the high velocities of the ionized gas and stars close to the nucleus provide the best evidence for a concentrated mass of up to 3x10 6 M and;.
Furthermore, if there is a massive black hole in the nucleus, the low transverse velocity suggests that Sgr A is it.
One prediction of the black-hole model is a large outburst of luminosity after an increase of accretion onto the black hole.
Given the amount of matter in the vicinity of Sgr A, an outburst is not an unreasonable expectation, although since its discovery in 1974, the luminosity has not changed by more than a factor of two.
If the luminosity increases beyond 10 38 ergs -1 , 1,000 times the present luminosity, the combination of small scale size and energetics would make the black hole model much more compelling.
Nevertheless, many astrophysicists remain unconvinced by the current evidence, and perhaps the only point of general agreement is that the nucleus does not contain a black hole as massive as those expected to reside in extinct quasars.
FIG. 1 The central 4kpc of the Milky Way as seen in the near infrared by the DIRBE experiment aboard the COBE satellite.
(The entire picture runs from l=96° to l=-96° .)
The picture is a false-colour representation of the near-infrared emission at wavelengths of 1.2, 2.2 and 3.4μm.
The reddish colour of the disk is caused by dust and the whitish region in the centre is the bulge.
FIG. 2 From outside, the Milky Way probably looks rather like this typical barred spiral galaxy, NGC4535.
The bar is the broad feature across the  centre that connects the two bright spiral arms.
FIG. 3 A schematic bar viewed from the galactic pole showing the orientation implied by the infrared data of Matsumoto et al..
The Sun is at (0,8).
Lines of sight that make equal angles with the direction to the Centre intersect different volumes of the bar.
FIG. 4 a , Contours of 21-cm line emission of atomic hydrogen within 6° of the longitude-velocity (l, v)plane.
Velocity is relative to the local standard of rest (LSR).
The envelope of maximum velocity rises smoothly to a peak near 3° (450pc).
These peaks are believed to be a consequence of the inner Lindblad resonance (ILR) of the galactic bar.
The dark band across the middle of the figure is due primarily to atomic hydrogen in the disk between the Sun and the bar.
The contours begin at 0.125K and increase logarithmically, each step being a factor of 2 larger than the previous one.
b , Contours of line emission from molecules of CO in the (l, v ) plane; the longitude extent is the inner  degrees of panel a.
The  narrow bands running across the middle are from foreground gas in the disk.
A similar map of the CS emission (c ), that traces the densest gas, does not show these bands.
The emission at high velocities is associated with a dense molecular disk within 300pc of the centre.
Individual features in this emission are much broader in velocity than any seen in the emission from the disk.
The contours in the CO and CS maps are in 10 linear steps from 1K to 28K and from 0.2K to 1.8K respectively.
FIG. 5 a , Closed orbits in a barred model of the galactic potential.
The long axis of the bar is vertical and the dotted lines indicate our line of sight to the Galactic Centre.
The nearly circular orbits on the outside of the left panel are outside the OLR.
The orbits with pronounced loops lie in the corotation region.
The enlargement at right shows orbits of the x 1 family (vertical ellipses) and of the x 2 family (horizontal ellipses).
b , Each curve shows the trace in the longitude-velocity diagram of one of the closed orbits of a , when the orbit is viewed along the dotted lines.
The wildly snaking curves in the left panel are the traces of orbits that lie in the corotation region.
In Fig. 4 this region contains little gas.
The right panel shows the innermost orbits on an enlarged scale.
It demonstrates that the trace of the cusped orbit in the (l, v)plane resembles a parallelogram, similar to the densest gas in Fig. 4 b and c .
FIG. 6 a , An  -shaped plume extending about 140pc (1°) above the plane seen in 11-GHz continuum emission.
The nucleus lies below the bottom of the picture.
b , A square 70pc (0.5°) on a side mapped at 1.4GHz shows a bright knot of emission at lower right known as Sgr A. The yellow dot in the red region is Sgr A, the compact nonthermal source that is believed to mark the nucleus.
At upper left is a network of lace-like filaments, which is believed to be organized by magnetic fields.
The plane runs roughly diagonally from top left to bottom right.
East and positive values of longitude l are to the left, west to the right.
c , Sgr A, 10pc across, is resolved into Sgr A East, a nonthermal radio source presumably powered by supernovae (in blue), and Sgr, A West, a spiral-like pattern of thermal ionized gas that appears to be falling into the very centre of the Galaxy.
d , A 2pc (1') radius rotating ring-like distribution of molecular gas mapped in HCN line emission.
Superimposed on this figure is the spiral pattern of Sga A West showing how the two are spatially related.
The plane again runs roughly from top left to bottom right.
Aerodynamics and the evolution of long tails in birds
Andrew Balmford, Adrian L. R. Thomas & Ian L. Jones
TWO problems limit the interpretation of recent experiments supporting Darwin's suggestion that female choice for ornate males may account for the evolution of long tails in birds.
First, in some species tail elongation may have been favoured by natural rather than sexual selection.
Second, it is unclear how female preferences for elaborate males have evolved, because current tests of competing models are often inconclusive.
We have integrated aerodynamics theory with comparative data on sexual dimorphism in tail length to evaluate the flight costs of different forms of tail elongation.
We report here that long tails with shallow forks are aerodynamically optimal, exhibit correspondingly low sexual dimorphism and may therefore have evolved under natural selection.
Other long-tail types impair flight and show greater sexual dimorphism, but variation in their initial evolutionary cost suggests differences in how female preferences for them may have evolved.
Although evidence is accumulating that in a number of birds females prefer long-tailed mates, the role of natural selection in tail elaboration has been largely ignored.
Evidence that long tails impose viability costs is very limited, yet without this it remains possible that tail elongation has sometimes been driven by natural selection, perhaps because it improves aerodynamic efficiency, manoeuvrability or stability.
Moreover, even where it has been demonstrated that long tails are costly but are preferred by choosy females, resolving how such preferences have evolved is difficult, particularly if females gain no direct benefits from their choice of mating partners.
For example, evidence that preferred traits are costly, that they reveal heritable variation in male quality and that discriminating females thereby produce high viability offspring, would be consistent with ‘good genes’ models of sexual selection.
But such results could also be accommodated entirely by Fisherian models, in which initially arbitrary male traits become increasingly elaborate and costly as a result of coevolution with female preferences for them.
An unexplored way to distinguish these competing models may be to switch from examining the contemporary costs of male traits and the benefits of female preferences for them, and to consider instead the costliness of traits during the initial stages of their evolution.
Modern Fisherian models make no firm predictions because runaway evolution can occur whether preferred traits are initially costly, beneficial or neutral with respect to natural selection.
In contrast, good genes models require that if their evolution is gradual, preferred characters must incur substantial costs even in their simplest form to evolve as reliable indicators of male viability.
We have used a combination of aerodynamic models and comparative data from more than 600 museum skins to examine the costs of tail elongation in birds.
Our analysis is based on a new lifting surface model which applies the classical aerodynamic solution of the forces acting on a low aspect ratio delta wing to assess the lift and drag associated with a bird's tail.
Tails generate lift in proportion to the square of their maximum continuous span.
Any area distal to the point of maximum width contributes only drag, which is proportional to total tail area.
The aerodynamically optimal tail is therefore triangular when spread, and forked when closed.
We examined the aerodynamic implications of different types of tail elongation by modelling progressive elaboration from a short, simple tail in which all feathers are of equal length (see Fig. 1).
Long, graduated tails, in which all but the outermost feathers are elongated, generate the same lift as normal tails (because maximum span is set by the outermost feathers and so does not change) but substantially more drag, as elongation adds considerably to tail area.
The aerodynamic cost of the tail (measured here as drag/lift at a constant angle of attack, though other indices give qualitatively similar results) therefore rises sharply with increased length (Fig. 1).
In pintails only the central tail feathers are elongated, so that although lift again fails to increase with length, tail area and thus drag rise only slowly.
The marginal aerodynamic costs of tail elongation (that is costs per unit length) are therefore relatively slight for pintails.
Lastly, if tails become forked (when closed) through elongation of their outer feathers, lift initially increases more rapidly than drag (as the spread tail tends toward the optimum triangular shape), so that aerodynamic costs are lower for long shallow forks than for simple tails.
Costs remain essentially unchanged if these forks continue to elongate isometrically, but if elongation instead proceeds by further deepening of the fork through lengthening its outer but not its central feathers, these outer feathers eventually project beyond the point of maximum continuous width even when spread.
Drag (but not lift) then increases with length, so that aerodynamic costs rise, albeit at the same low rate as for pintails.
Note that use of a more detailed analytical method such as curved lifting line theory generates qualitatively similar conclusions to those of our simple general lifting surface approach.
This analysis yields a number of testable results.
It suggests that, depending on their depth (longest:shortest tail feather length) and how widely they are spread during use, long forked tails may be aerodynamically beneficial and so (unlike other long tails) may have evolved through natural rather than sexual selection.
Given that sexual selection in birds usually acts more strongly on males than females, we predict that the reduced role of sexual selection in the evolution of long forked tails should mean that these generally exhibit lower sexual dimorphism in length than do long graduated tails or pintails.
We tested this by measuring museum skins to compare tail dimorphism (male:female tail length, standardized to body length) in pairs of closely related, long-tailed species, which differed in the shape of their long tails but in few other potentially confounding variables.
The results of this pairwise comparative approach confirm our prediction (Table 1a):across nine species pairs, forked tails do indeed show less sexual dimorphism in length than do other long tails (Wilcoxon signed ranks test:z corr =2.10, 1-tailed P=0.017 ).
Our model also suggests that as long forked tails deepen, it becomes more likely that they are aerodynamically costly (compared with shallow forked tails; see Fig. 1), and therefore increasingly probable that sexual rather than natural selection explains their evolution.
If this is so, then among species with long forked tails, sexual dimorphism in tail length should increase with fork depth.
Pairwise comparisons of closely related species support this prediction (Table 1 b).
Even where differences in fork depth are slight, these are consistently associated with greater sexual dimorphism in the tails of more deeply forked species (Wilcoxon test across N=8 family pairs:z corr =2.52, 1-tailed P=0.006).
Among those elongated tails that are apparently sexually selected, the marginal costs of graduated tails greatly exceed those of streamer-shaped tails (that is pintails and deep forks; Fig. 1).
This generates several predictions.
Within families, the lower costs per unit length of streamer tails should mean that they have evolved to a greater maximum length than more expensive, graduated tails.
This is indeed the case (Fig. 2a ): in all seven families with both long-tail types, the maximum length of streamer tails (relative to body length) exceeds that of graduated tails (Wilcoxon test:z=2.37,1-tailed P= 0.009).
The last two predictions deal with differences between bird families in their reliance on flight, and therefore in the likely fitness consequences of increased aerodynamic costs.
Comparing long-tailed families, as birds spend more time flying and rely more on aerial agility when feeding, we should expect graduated tails to become less common than streamers.
Similarly, costlier graduated tails should be less prevalent in families that migrate than in other families.
Both of these predictions are confirmed across 50 long-tailed families, categorized according to‘flight importance’ and tendency to migrate by three independent ornithologists (Fig. 2b, c).
Families that spend a substantial proportion of time flying and/or feed aerially (flight importance categories 3 and 4) are far less likely to exhibit graduated tails than are more terrestrial families (categories 1 and 2; Fig. 2b ).
Likewise, where long-tailed birds migrate, they are more likely to possess streamer-shaped tails than are non-migrant birds (Fig. 2c).
Each of the predictions of our aerodynamic analysis is therefore supported by the comparative data, enabling us to make two suggestions about the selective pressures driving tail elongation in birds.
First, the theoretical and morphological evidence indicates that while most other types of long tails have probably evolved through sexual selection, natural selection for aerodynamic efficiency may be a sufficient explanation for the evolution of many elongated forked tails.
Second, the marginal costs associated with pintails and deep forks are far lower than those of graduated tails.
Clearly, even short-tail streamers might represent considerable handicaps in families where the fitness consequences of impaired flight are extremely high.
But in other families where flight is less important and both streamers and graduated tails have evolved, our analysis suggests that during their initial evolution, streamers would have been relatively poor indicators of male quality.
Thus Fisherian models could account for their initial elaboration, but good genes models probably could not.
In contrast, graduated tails would have constituted uncheatable handicaps even in their simplest form, and so are more likely to have evolved as reliable indicators of the viability of potential mates.
All pairs are from the same family or superfamily and are roughly matched for size and relative tail length of males, but have otherwise been selected at random.
Body length and the lengths of the longest and shortest tail feathers were measured on 10 male and 10 female skins in breeding plumage (except=only 5 males and 6 females; =only 8 females).
To account for overall size differences between specimens, relative tail length (mean length of left and right longest tail feathers/body length) was calculated, and the ratio of the mean relative tail length of males to that of females then used as an index of sexual dimorphism in tail length.
For forked tails, depth is the ratio of the mean lengths of their longest and shortest feathers.
In these and all other analyses, we have excluded all species whose long tails may have mechanical functions other than flight (such as acting as a brace when climbing).
FIG. 1 Aerodynamic costs associated with the progressive elongation of different types of long tails from a simple tail with all feathers 5cm long.
Lift and drag have been calculated for tails spread to an apical angle of 120°.
The tail shapes considered are shown in the right-hand panel, together with the corresponding geometric polygons used in the model; stippling indicates what part of each tail generates lift.
The marginal costs of elongation of pintails and deep forks will depend only on the width of their streamers, but will always be substantially lower than those of graduated tails, in which nearly all tail feathers are elongated.
Tails are assumed to act as stiff flat plates with continuous surfaces.
Aerodynamic costs are expressed as the ratio of drag/lift at 5° angle of attack and 5ms -1 freestream velocity.
The airflow over the tail is assumed to be a steady uniform flow comprising the vector sum of the bird's velocity and the induced velocity generated by the wings.
Flight is assumed to be either normal forward flapping flight, or gliding.
Conclusions are nevertheless robust across a broad array of flight speeds and flow conditions and are unaffected by the precise details of the tail shapes considered.
FIG. 2
a
, Mean relative tail lengths of the species with the longest streamer tail (pintail or deep fork) and graduated tail in each of the seven families that contain both long tail types (Psittacidae, Caprimulgidae, Trochilidae, Tyrannidae, Monarchidae, Ploceidae and Paradisaeidae).
The plot gives median values and interquartile ranges across all families.
Relative tail lengths are based on three specimens per species of the sex with the longest tail (males in 13 species; females in one hummingbird showing reversed sexual dimorphism).
b,
The number of long-tailed families with streamers or graduated tails in relation to the importance of flight in the family.
Each family was categorized by its commonest long tail type and its median score for flight importance, assessed by three ornithologists blind to the tail length data.
Flight importance categories are:(1) almost entirely terrestrial;(2) largely terrestrial and feed while clambering, but fly between food patches;(3) often rest but rely on aerial manoeuvrability to obtain food;(4) largely aerial and feed on wing.
c,
The number of long-tailed families with streamers or graduated tails compared with whether or not they migrate.
Tendency to migrate was again assessed by three independent ornithologists.
The neural correlates of the verbal component of working memory
E. Paulesu, C. D. Frith & R. S. J. Frackowiak
BY repeating words ‘in our head’, verbal material (such as telephone numbers) can be kept in working memory almost indefinitely.
This ‘articulatory loop’ includes a subvocal rehearsal system and a phonological store.
Little is known about neural correlates of this model of verbal short-term memory.
We therefore measured regional cerebral blood flow, an index of neuronal activity, in volunteers performing a task engaging both components of the articulatory loop (short-term memory for letters) and a task which engages only the subvocal rehearsal system (rhyming judgement for letters).
Stimuli were presented visually and the subjects did not speak.
We report here that comparisons of distribution of cerebral blood flow in these conditions localized the phonological store to the left supramarginal gyrus whereas the subvocal rehearsal system was associated with Broca's area.
This is, to our knowledge, the first demonstration of the normal anatomy of the components of the ‘articulatory loop’.
Our paradigm capitalizes on the observation that visually presented letters are transformed into a phonological code and access the articulatory loop, through the subvocal rehearsal system, even when there is no direct auditory stimulation.
In our experimental tasks, English letters were presented on a monitor, while in the control tasks, which were formally identical, we displayed Korean letters, which could not be transcoded phonologically.
The ‘Korean’ versions included visual but not phonological components of the experimental tasks, and therefore provided a baseline for comparison (see Fig. 1 for details).
In the first experimental task a string of letters was remembered, engaging all components of the articulatory loop, including the phonological store.
In the second experimental task, rhyming judgements were made.
When letters are presented visually, rhyming decisions engage the subvocal rehearsal system, but not the phonological store.
Six European male right-handed normal volunteers underwent 12 consecutive regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF) measurements (three for each experimental and control condition) with positron emission tomography (PET).
We adopted a fully factorial design to compare the distributions of rCBF using statistical parametric mapping (SPM).
Initially, we examined the main effect of phonological processing by combining the results from the two experimental tasks and comparing them with the control tasks.
This analysis resulted in a map of cerebral areas in which differences in rCBF occurred.
Significant changes were identified by applying a statistical threshold of 0.05 corrected for multiple comparisons (see Fig. 2 legend for methods).
Table 1 reports stereotactic coordinates of significant rCBF increases due to phonological processing (statistical maps and cortical renderings are shown in Fig. 2).
Significant activation foci were detected bilaterally in Brodmann's area (BA) 44, superior temporal gyri (BA 22/42), supramarginal gyri (BA 40) and insulae.
We propose that this assembly of areas constitutes the functional anatomy of the ‘articulatory loop’.
Cerebral areas thought to be devoted to motor aspects of speech planning and execution (for example supplementary motor area (SMA), cerebellum and possibly primary sensorimotor areas of mouth and larynx (BA 4, 3, 2, 1) and BA 6) were activated by our experimental tasks even though there was no overt speech.
A further activation focus was found in the left BA 18 (lingual gyrus).
This structure is frequently damaged in pure alexia and we therefore speculate that it is associated with visual processing of letters.
We then attempted to separate the functional anatomy of the subvocal rehearsal system from the phonological store.
We compared the magnitude of activation due to the phonological short-term memory task (remembering letters) with that of the rhyming task because experimental evidence suggests that the phonological store has a fundamental role in phonological short-term memory, but not in rhyming (see Fig. 3 legend for details).
This analysis demonstrated that activation detected in the left BA 40 was associated with the phonological short-term memory task but not with the rhyming task, and hence, following the psychological model summarized in Fig. 1, we believe that left BA 40 is the primary location of the phonological store.
The interpretation of our experiment is also corroborated by results of other studies of the functional anatomy of phonological processing.
Passive perception of phonemes activated BA 22/42 bilaterally, whereas a rhyming task and a similar phonological judgement task, all performed silently, also activated Broca's area (left BA 44) but not the left supramarginal gyrus (left BA 40).
BA 22/42 is therefore probably involved in phonological processing independent from memory and our data demonstrate that it can be activated even in the absence of external auditory phonological stimulation.
Our results indicate that Broca's area is crucial to the subvocal rehearsal system because both our experimental tasks involved this system and both strongly activated BA 44 particularly in the left hemisphere (Fig. 3).
The activation of SMA, cerebellum and possibly of sensory-motor areas suggests that these structures were automatically engaged as part of a more general neuronal network devoted to language planning and execution.
Although it cannot be ruled out that some unconscious oro-pharyngeal muscle movement was occurring during the experimental tasks, ‘inner speech’ is probably not dependent on such movements.
Indeed, anarthric patients, whose most common lesional correlate is a bilateral Rolandic operculum lesion including BAs 6, 4, 3, 2, 1, have a normally functioning articulatory loop despite being unable to produce overt speech.
The novel attribution of left BA 40 to the phonological store on the basis of changes in cerebral blood flow supports previous anatomo-clinical correlation studies in brain-damaged patients.
These studies, although not conclusive because of the variability in lesion site and size and the limited number of patients studied, suggested the left inferior parietal lobule, of which left BA 40 is part, as the location of the phonological store.
To our knowledge, this is the first account of the normal anatomy of the articulatory loop which also indicates the cerebral organization of the discrete processing and storage components.
Our data support a multicomponent model for the articulatory loop, in which the subvocal rehearsal system and the phonological store are anatomically distinct.
Stereotactic coordinates refer to the maximal activation indicated by the highest Z score in a particular cerebral structure.
Distances refer to the stereotactic space defined by Talairach and Tournoux.
Z scores in bold indicate structures in which activity was asymmetric.
SMA, supplementary motor area; BA, Brodmann's area.
The site of maximally changed local blood flow was found to be in area 44.
The extent as seen on the rendered cortical surface (Fig. 2) appears to include BA 6, 4, 3, 2, 1 bilaterally and BA 45 on the left.
But in the absence of a separate discrete focus of change, no formal functional attribution to these cortical regions is valid.
FIG. 1 Schematic layout illustrating the cognitive components involved in each task (dark squares).
In a prior experiment, we demonstrated that phonological coding did not occur with Korean letters.
Six subjects did 60 trials of the short-term memory tasks for visually presented letters with or without concurrent articulatory suppression.
Articulatory suppression disrupted performance (expressed as percentage of correct answers) in the English version of the task (mean difference: 13%; paired t test:t =8.9; d.f.
=5;P= 0.0003) but not in the Korean version (mean difference: 0.005%;t=0.28;d.f.
=5; n.s.).
Experiment 1: Phonological short-term memory (experimental) task.
Randomized sequences of six phonologically dissimilar consonants were presented on a computer screen at the rate of 1 per second.
Subjects were instructed to rehearse the stimuli silently and to remember them.
Two seconds after each sequence, a probe consonant appeared and subjects judged if it was present in the previous sequence.
Subjects responded pointing with a joy-stick to yes/no symbols.
Visual short-term memory (control) task.
This task was identical to the previous one with the exception that Korean letters (not phonologically codeable) were used.
Subjects were asked to remember the stimuli using a visual code.
Experiment 2: Phonological-similarity (rhyming)(experimental) task.
Subjects were asked to make rhyme judgments about consonants appearing at a rate of one per second.
They moved a joy-stick towards a ‘yes’ symbol every time a letter appeared that rhymed with the letter ‘B’which was always present on the screen.
Rhyming letters occurred at a frequency of 1 in 6.
Shape-similarity (control) task.
Subjects were asked to judge whether a Korean letter looked similar to a Korean target letter always present on the screen.
FIG. 2 Cerebral regions associated with phonological processing.
The top row illustrates average blood flow maps from all subjects for all tasks in transaxial slices in the stereotactic anatomical space.
The location of rCBF increases associated with phonological processing is shown as t-maps in the second row.
Numbers refer to the distance of the transaxial images from the intercommissural (AC-PC) level.
The exact coordinates of the activated areas and their significance levels are given in Table 1.
These areas of activation have been rendered onto the lateral surface of the cortex of the brain used by Tailarach and Tournoux to illustrate the distribution of the major sites of activation (left hemisphere on the left).
METHODS.
rCBF was measured by recording the distribution of radioactivity following the intravenous injection of 15 O-labelled water (H 2 15 O) with the CTI 953B PET scanner (CTI Inc., Knoxville, TN, USA).
Data were acquired by scanning in three-dimensional mode.
H 2 15 O was infused (10ml min -1 ; 55 MBq ml -1 ) as a tracer of blood flow while scans were acquired.
After attenuation correction (measured by a transmission scan), the data were reconstructed as 31 transaxial planes by three-dimensional filtered back projection with a Hanning filter of cutoff frequency 0.5 cycles per pixel.
The resolution of the resulting images was 8.5x8.5x4.3mm at full width at half-maximum.
The integrated counts accumulated were used as an index of rCBF.
The original brain images were transformed into a standard stereotactic anatomical space.
By using appropriate statistical contrasts the main effect of phonological processing was estimated on a pixel by pixel basis using statistical parametric mapping (SPM).
Global differences in CBF were first covaried out, and comparisons of the means were made using the t statistic.
The resulting set of t values constituted a statistical parametric map [SPM  t ].
FIG. 3 Comparisons of experimental tasks.
Mean increases (rCBF equivalents: ml per 100 g per min) in Broca's area (left BA44) and in the left supramarginal gyrus (left BA 40) observed for the phonological short-term memory task (M) and the rhyming task (R) compared with their control tasks.
Integrated count images were first converted into rCBF equivalents and normalized to a mean CBF of 50ml per 100g per min.
The horizontal dashed line represents the 95% confidence limit for rCBF changes.
The stereotactic locations are those reported in Table 1 for left BA44 and BA40.
Broca's area was strongly activated in both the phonological short-term memory task and the rhyming task, while left BA 40 was activated by the phonological short-term memory task only.
This was the only area where there was a significant interaction between the two experimental conditions (Z score, 4.2).
We treated our two experiments as a fully factorial design with two treatments:(1) the nature of the stimuli and (2) the nature of the task.
Each treatment had two levels: phonological and non-phonological stimuli for 1, the presence or the absence of loading in short-term memory for 2.
The relative rCBF increase in the phonological short-term memory task compared with the rhyming task was assessed in terms of the interaction between treatments using linear contrasts.
A supernova remnant associated with the young gamma-ray pulsar PSR1706–44
W. B. McAdam, J. L. Osborne & M. L. Parkinson
THE Energetic Gamma Ray Experiment Telescope (EGRET) on the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory satellite recently detected pulsed γ -radiation from the radio pulsar PSR1706–44; this is only the fourth radio pulsar to be identified as a γ -ray source.
The other three (Vela, the Crab and PSR1509–58) are all associated with supernova remnants (SNRs), whereas very few—perhaps four—of the remaining 500 or so galactic radio pulsars have convincing associations with SNRs.
We have mapped the field around PSR1706–44 at 843MHz with a resolution of 44 arcsec using the Molonglo Observatory Synthesis Telescope, and have identified a shell-type SNR at a distance of about 3kpc—consistent with the distance deduced for the pulsar.
The pulsar is seen as a slightly variable point source, located in an enhanced knot on the arc of the SNR shell.
PSR1706–44 lies within the 1° radius error circle of the COS-B source 2CG342–02 at  (epoch 1950 coordinates are used throughout) and accounts for most, if not all, of the γ -ray flux from the area.
Between August 1975 and December 1978 the COS-B satellite observed 2CG342–02 on five occasions and catalogued it as the tenth-strongest γ -ray source.
The position of the centre of the error circle was given as ,().
In June 1984 we searched a 70'x100' field centred on 17h04min30s, -44°20' with the Molonglo Observatory Synthesis Telescope (MOST) array and in May 1986 observed two adjacent fields to complete a search within the error circle of the COS-B γ -source.
This revealed the shell of a faint SNR seen over the western half of an ellipse having major and minor axes 44' and 32' respectively.
Near the centre is the strongest source in the field at 17h04min51.79s, =-44°14'29.2, slightly extended with peak flux of 276mJy and integrated flux 305mJy.
This may be a star-formation region and site of the supernova or just a positional coincidence.
Several other point sources in the field range from 100 to 10mJy.
Most of these are presumably extragalactic but they include the pulsar PSR1706–44, although this was not recognized at the time.
Following the publication of the survey containing details of the radio pulsar and the announcement that it emits γ -rays, we observed the region on a further three epochs in May, June and July 1992.
Comparing these, the point sources have relative calibration errors of 0.06s in RA, 0.5  in declination and 0.6mJy in flux density.
Figure 1 shows the MOST image of July 1992.
The SNR shell shows clearly on all images in the west but is too faint to follow to the eastern half.
The arc is brightest to the NW at 17h03min22s, -44°06'30, away from the pulsar but closest to the galactic plane.
The pulsar lies at the southeast end of the SNR shell and is seen as a point source with a mean continuum flux of 20.7mJy.
It is significantly variable with its peak flux at the four epochs 22 June 1984, 25 May 1986, 8 May 1992 and 11 July 1992 being 23.2, 18.4, 19.8 and 21.5, mJy respectively.
It may be confused by parts of the shell, for the mean position 17h06min05.27s, -44°25'20.2  is displaced 5.51.1  at PA 160° from the pulsar timing position.
The integrated flux density for the shell in Fig. 1 is 3.280.24Jy.
Even when the contribution of 1200mJy from all small-diameter sources in the field is included, the total seen by MOST at 843MHz is only 4.5Jy, much less than observed by filled-aperture telescopes.
Most Southern Hemisphere SNRs discovered so far have been identified using several Molonglo Cross (408MHz) surveys, yet the galactic plane map for γbγ3° shows only faint emission from the region of 2CG342–02.
The published maps of the 5-GHz galactic plane survey do not cover the SNR, but an unpublished part (R. F. Haynes, personal communication) extends to a declination of -44°10' and shows the northern edge of the shell.
The 1960s radio surveys made with telescopes of beamwidth 50' detected strong radio emission at four frequencies from an unresolved source within the 1° radius COS-B error circle.
The source designation and detected fluxes are: MSH17–41 (85MHz) 254Jy, KOM43 (408MHz) 45Jy, CTB36 (960MHz) 30Jy, MHR59 (1,440MHz) 157Jy.
All sources lie within a beamwidth of each other, although the quoted positions are discrepant.
None of the four surveys detected two separate sources from this region, so it seems that all the sources are the same extended object, and that this lies close to 17h03min, -44°20'.
The most recent observation of the region with a filled-aperture telescope is the 20' resolution survey made at 2.3GHz: the map shown in Fig. 2 illustrates the relationship of the source to the SNR in the MOST map and the galactic ridge.
The extended (40′x25′) source has a flux of 247Jy (J. L. Jonas, personal communication) and hence is nonthermal.
The peak coincides with the brightest part of the SNR shell.
It seems that there is considerable broadscale emission missing from the MOST map.
We now consider the estimates of distance to the SNR and the pulsar.
One may use the surface-brightness-diameter ( -D)relation to estimate the physical diameter of the SNR and hence its distance.
Although the use of such a relation has been queried, the mean diameter for faint remnants, such as this, becomes insensitive to brightness.
It is also fortunate that the uncertainty in the flux density for the SNR does not affect the brightness estimate significantly.
MOST observes a hollow shell with a rim brightness typically 9mJy per beam giving .
If we assume that there is an additional broadscale SNR emission filling the 44'x32' shell and take the 45Jy of source KOM43 as the flux at 408MHz, we have .
These are equivalent for a typical SNR spectral index of -0.5.
There are a number of  relations to choose from.
The relationship of Clark and Caswell gives D =38pc.
Caswell and Lerche modified this relationship to include a z -dependence, which gives D= 43pc, whereas D=34 pc is obtained from the expression of Allakhverdiyev et al.
which is restricted to classic shell-type remnants.
The corresponding distances are 3.5, 4.0 and 3.2kpc.
The quoted distance of 1.5kpc to the pulsar based on its dispersion measure of 75.68pccm -3 assumes that the mean interstellar electron density along the line of sight is n e =0.05cm -3 .
This is larger than the frequently used value of , which would put the pulsar at 2.5kpc.
A new model for the galactic electron density distribution (J. H. Taylor and J. M. Cordes, preprint) gives 1.8kpc, placing the pulsar on the far side of the Sagittarius arm of the Galaxy.
In the model this arm contributes more than half of the dispersion measure whereas most of the line of sight has a much lower electron density,.
Because of the inhomogeneity of the interstellar medium there must be wide variations in the actual mean n e across an arm along the line of sight to specific pulsars.
For nearby ones such as this the uncertainty in the distance can be large.
We believe that a distance of 3kpc as indicated for the SNR is consistent with the pulsar's dispersion measure.
We do not have 21-cm observations of this region with a sufficiently high resolution to look for evidence of a concentric outer neutral gas shell, but one can make use of an assumed uniform dust-gas ratio and examine the IRAS 100μm sky plate covering this region.
This shows no detailed correlation with the radio features, evidence that this is indeed a nonthermal rather than thermal source.
There is, however, clear evidence of a small ridge of higher 100-μm intensity protruding from below the galactic plane and curving around the southern side of the remnant.
The length of the ridge is of the same order as the size of the remnant.
The intensity towards the centre of the remnant is slightly below that of its surroundings and this may represent a cavity with an outer perimeter shell of higher-density gas.
If the 100-μm ridge is associated with the remnant, the latter's distance could perhaps be better determined by the observation of the ridge at 21cm.
The Durham-Parkes survey has a resolution of 15' and covers this area.
At the nearest sample points to the ridge (l=342.5°, 343.0°, 343.5 °;b =2°), there is a velocity component at -32kms -1 which is much less evident at adjacent sampled positions.
The corresponding distances for this velocity from the galactic rotation curve are 3 and 14kpc.
A distance of 3kpc would agree with the  -D estimates and place the remnant satisfactorily in the Norma spiral arm.
This distance would also increase the estimate of the required energy in γ -rays from 1.8% to 7% of the spin-down energy loss.
Caswell and Lerche give an age-diameter relation based on the Sedov model.
For a diameter of 34pc this gives the SNR an age of 5,600yr but the deduced age is dependent upon the assumed density of the medium into which the SNR is expanding.
The pulsar has a period of 102ms and slows with a characteristic age of 17,300yr.
For the pulsar to move 18' from the apparent centre of the SNR in this time its proper motion would have to be 0.06  yr -1 .
Such motion should be detectable either from timing measurements, or from relative astrometry with the Parkes-Tidbinbilla Interferometer or with Parkes-Hobart very-long-baseline interferometry.
There are two suitable reference sources southeast of the pulsar at ,;(88mJy) and ,.
If the distance is 3kpc, the pulsar has moved 16pc at a transverse velocity of 900kms -1 .
This approaches the highest transverse velocity so far directly measured (PSR2224+65) but is less than velocities of 1,700 and 2,300kms -1 inferred for the two young pulsars PSR1800–21 (W30; G8.7–0.1), and PSR1757–24 (G5.4–1.2), respectively.
These are accepted already as associated with SNRs.
These both have a characteristic age of 16,000yr and have already reached or passed through the shell of their SNR: in so doing PSR1757–24 has apparently brightened the nearby shell by an injection of particles and magnetic field.
PSR1706–44, which has just reached the shell, seems not to have done this yet.
These young SNRs will be in their adiabatic stage of development.
The high transverse velocities inferred for the three pulsars may be avoided by assuming that the pulsar and SNR are much older (by 10 times) than the characteristic spin-down time, so that the remnant is in the older radiative phase for which Shull et al.
have discussed possible interactions.
X-ray emission from the pulsar has been detected by the Rosat satellite, but we are not aware of any extended component detected from the SNR.
Soft X-ray data obtained during an Exosat observation of the nearby galactic bulge source 2S1705–440 (J. Heise, personal communication) included a 9,000-s exposure with the imaging camera using a thin polypropylene filter.
The 2.2° diameter field of view included the entire SNR.
Two areas are of particular interest: the SNR shell, especially its brightest part, and the 305mJy source near its geometric centre.
There was no evidence of more than 2  emission from the shell and no more than 1  from the central source.
We interpret this as giving an upper flux limit of 0.15mCrab for these regions.
Nevertheless it is likely that there is some extended emission associated with the young SNR which should be detectable by Rosat.
FIG. 1 MOST image at 843MHz of the pulsar and supernova remnant 1706–44 observed 11 July 1992.
The contour levels are: -5, -2, 1.5, 2, 3, 5, 10, 15, 20, 30, 40, 60, 100, 200, 250mJy per beam of .
The peak flux density in the field is 276mJy for the extended source near the centre of the 44'x32' SNR half-ellipse arc.
Each epoch has a relative gain calibration with r.m.s. error 0.9%; the 843-MHz flux density scale has a further absolute error of 8%.
The r.m.s. noise at full resolution is 1.1 mJy per beam, and 0.5mJy is smoothed to 2'x2' for the faintest features.
The position of PSR1706–44 is marked by arrows.
FIG. 2 Filled-aperture observation at 2,300MHz (A. Greybe, personal communication) from the 20' resolution survey of Jonas et al.
using the 26-m telescope at Hartebeesthoek, RSA.
The COS-B error circle, the field of view of Fig. 1 and the outline of the SNR are superimposed.
A new component of the transcription factor DRTF1/E2F
Rowena Girling, Janet F. Partridge, Lasantha R. Bandara, Neil Burden, Nicholas F. Totty, J. Justin Hsuan & Nicholas B. La Thangue
TRANSCRIPTION factor DRTF1/E2F coordinates events in the cell cycle with transcription by its cyclical interactions with important regulators of cellular proliferation like the retinoblastoma tumour-suppressor gene product (Rb) and the Rb-related protein, p107 (refs 1–8).
DRTF1/E2F binding sites occur in the control regions of genes involved in proliferation, and both Rb and p107 repress the capacity of DRTF1/E2F to activate transcription (refs 11, 12; M. Zamanian and N.B.L.T., manuscript submitted).
Mutant Rb proteins isolated from tumour cells are unable to bind DRTF1/E2F (refs 11–13), and certain viral oncoproteins, such as adenovirus E1A, sequester Rb and p107 in order to free active DRTF1/E2F (refs 5, 11, 12, 14, 15).
Here we report the isolation of a complementary DNA encoding DRTF1-polypeptide-1 (DP-1), a major sequence-specific binding protein that is present in DRTF1/E2F, including Rb- and p107-associated DRTF1/E2F.
The DNA-binding domain of DP-1 contains a region that resembles that of E2F-1 (refs 16, 17), and recognizes the same sequence.
DRTF1/E2F thus appears to contain at least two sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins.
E2F was defined as an activity induced in HeLa cells after adenovirus infection, whereas DRTF1 was defined as a transcription factor downregulated during the differentiation of F9 embryonal carcinoma (EC) cells.
As they bind to similar DNA sequences and associate with the same proteins, they are likely to be closely related.
Here we refer to the DNA binding activity in whole cell extracts which recognizes the E2F site as DRTF1/E2F.
DRTF1 was purified from F9 EC whole cell extracts by sequential applications to a DNA-binding-site affinity matrix containing either a wild-type or mutant binding site.
The DNA-binding site was taken from a region of the adenovirus E2A promoter (-71 to -50) that contains a high-affinity E2F binding site.
We routinely purified a group of polypeptides (Fig. 1 a , track 2) that could activate transcription in vitro in a binding site-dependent fashion.
Several polypeptides in the affinity-purified material specifically bound to the wild-type site (Fig. 1 a , compare tracks 5 to 6; ref. 25).
One polypeptide (M r 46,000 (46K); Fig. 1 a , track 2, indicated as p46) was excised and digested with a lysylendopeptidase; ten of the resulting fragments were purified and sequenced (Fig. 1 b ; peptides boxed).
We predicted the DNA sequences that encode two of the peptides (Fig. 1 b , legend) and then used these as primers to amplify a cDNA fragment derived from F9 EC RNA.
Clones representing the complete coding sequence of p46 (referred to as DP-1) were finally isolated from an F9 EC cDNA library.
The complete DP-1 coding sequence contains an open reading frame encoding 429 in-frame amino acids that includes eight of the peptides from the p46 sequence (Fig. 1 b ).
The cDNA probably includes the initiating methionine as there is an in-frame termination codon immediately upstream and because the sequence flanking and including this methionine codon would be an efficient translation initiation signal.
By northern analysis of poly(A) + F9 EC RNA, the DP-1 transcript was estimated as 2.8 kilobases (kb)(data not shown); it is expressed in many different cell types and in a wide range of tissues during murine embryogenesis (J.F.P., P. Tassios and N.B.L.T, manuscript in preparation).
Homology searches of the Leeds and Swiss protein data bases failed to detect any significant similarity with any other protein.
But a small region within the DNA-binding domain of DP-1 has significant similarity to an analogous region in the DNA-binding domain of E2F-1.
To confirm that DP-1 is a component of DRTF1/E2F, peptide antisera were raised against DP-1 (Fig. 2 e ).
Immunoblotting affinity-purified DRTF1/E2F with anti-peptide 15 revealed two polypeptides with apparent M r s 46K and 55K (Fig. 2 a , track 2) that were recognized by the antiserum (Fig. 2 a ; compare tracks 5 and 6).
We confirmed that DP-1 was part of the DRTF1/E2F DNA-binding complex in F9 EC cell extracts from which DRTF1 resolves as complexes DRTF1a, b and c (ref. 25).
Addition of anti-peptide A, but not the preimmune serum, causes either a supershift and concomitant reduction in DRTF1a, b and c (Fig. 2 b , antiserum 3; compare tracks 1 and 2) or abolishes all DRTF1 complexes (Fig. 2 b , antiserum 4; compare tracks 5 and 6).
The effects of both antisera 3 and 4 could be competed by peptide A but not the unrelated peptide 1 (Fig. 2 b ; compare tracks 3, 4 and 7, 8).
Extracts from other cell types, including HeLa, 293, PCC3, PCC4, SAOS-2, and several SV40-transformed mouse-cell lines gave similar results (data not shown).
We conclude that DP-1 is a component of DRTF1/E2F and that it is present in all DRTF1/E2F DNA-binding complexes in F9 EC cell extracts.
When anti-peptide A was incubated with affinity-purified DRTF1/E2F, a supershift was apparent (Fig. 2 c ; compare tracks 1, 2 and 5, 6; clearest for antiserum 3).
The effect was not as marked as in F9 EC cell extracts, probably because some of the DP-1 polypeptide loses its N-terminal region during purification (data not shown).
Therefore we used anti-peptide 18 (Fig. 2 e ; antiserum 11), representing sequence from the DNA-binding domain of DP-1, which specifically inhibits the DNA-binding activity of affinity-purified DRTF1/E2F (Fig. 2 c ; compare tracks 11, 12).
We assessed whether DP-1 was present in DRTF1/E2F complexes that form on different E2F binding sites using the class 1 and class 2 consensus E2F binding sites which were defined by binding site selection and occur in the transcriptional control regions of certain cellular genes.
Anti-peptide A abolishes DRTF1/E2F complexes formed on both class 1 and class 2 binding sites (Fig. 2 d;compare tracks 3, 4 and 7, 8).
To determine whether DP-1 is present in complexes containing Rb, we immunoprecipitated them with an anti-Rb monoclonal antibody from extracts of the human leukaemic cell line JM, which contain high levels of the DRTF1/E2F-Rb complex.
DRTF1/E2F DNA-binding activity was released from Rb by detergent, but not from the immunoprecipitate with the control monoclonal antibody A7 (Fig. 3 a ; compare tracks 2 and 3, and respective depleted extracts, tracks 4 and 5).
The presence of DP-1 in Rb-associated DRTF1/E2F was tested with anti-peptide A (antiserum 3) and anti-peptide 18 (antiserum 11).
Anti-peptide A caused a supershift (Fig. 3 a , compare tracks 6 and 7; shift indicated by ‘s’), whereas anti-peptide 18 caused a reduction in DRTF1/E2F DNA-binding activity (Fig. 3 a ; compare tracks 8 and 9).
We conclude that DP-1 co-immunoprecipitates with Rb from JM cell extracts and is therefore likely to associate with Rb in vivo.
In F9 EC cell extracts, an anti-p107 antibody disrupted DRTF1a (Fig. 3 b ; compare tracks 2 and 3), which, together with our result that the anti-DP-1 peptide antibodies interfered with DRTF1a (Fig. 2 b ), suggested that p107 and DP-1 exist in the same DRTF1/E2F complex.
Furthermore, DRTF1/E2F DNA binding activity released from an anti-p107 immunoprecipitation was specifically reduced by anti-peptide 18 (Fig. 3 b ; compare track 4 and 5).
We conclude therefore that DP-1 can exist in DRTF1/E2F complexes that contain either Rb or p107.
To determine whether DP-1 could bind to the E2F site in a sequence-specific way, regions were expressed as glutathione- S- transferase (GST) fusion proteins (Fig. 4 a ), affinity-purified and tested for DNA-binding activity.
The smallest region defined that retains sequence-specific DNA-binding activity contains DP-1 protein sequence from amino-acid residue 84 to 204 (DP-1 84-204 ; Fig. 4 b , compare tracks 4 and 5); in the same conditions, an unrelated sequence-specific transcription factor, GATA-1 (ref. 30), failed to bind to the wild-type E2F site (Fig. 4 b ; compare tracks 8, 9 and 10, 11).
Smaller regions of DP-1 (DP-1 146-249 and DP-1 84-166 ) failed to bind to the E2F site, whereas DP-1 84-249 retained sequence-specific DNA binding (Fig. 4 a and b ; compare track 6 and 7).
Thus DP-1 has DNA-binding specificity which is similar to DRTF1/E2F.
We noticed a region (DP-1 residues 160–200) with significant similarity to a sequence in the DNA-binding domain of E2F-1 (Fig. 1 c ), in which 42% is identical and 70% similar (Fig. 1 d ).
These regions could include two α -helixes, one of which would be amphipathic (helical wheel in Fig. 1 e ).
As DP-1 and E2F-1 bind to the same sequence (this work, and refs 16, 17), this region of similarity may be involved in recognizing an E2F binding site.
This idea is supported by the potential similarity of two other DNA-binding proteins that regulate transcription during the yeast cell cycle.
These proteins, encoded by SW14 and cdc10 , bind to a DNA sequence that resembles the E2F site, and contain a region within their DNA-binding domains with features in common with the DP-1/E2F-1 α -helical region already discussed (Fig. 1 e , and ref. 32).
Another region of similarity between DP-1 and E2F-1 is apparent outside the DNA-binding domain (DP-1 amino acids 210–240, 41% identity; Fig. 1 d ) which, like the earlier region, could form an amphipathic α -helix.
It is possible that DP-1 and E2F-1 interact because DP-1 is present in all DRTF1/E2F complexes, some of which contain E2F-1, rather as in the transcription factor AP-1, in which different proteins interact through related domains.
The region of similarity between DP-1 and E2F-1 is likely to be an important part of their DNA-binding domains, but we cannot distinguish whether it is involved in recognizing the E2F sequence per se or if it provides a dimerization domain which then allows sequence-specific recognition.
We believe, however, that it includes the DNA-recognition domain because of its distant, but significant, similarity with the DNA-binding domains of the yeast cell cycle-regulating proteins SWI4 and cdc10 (ref. 32).
FIG. 1 a , Affinity purification of DRTF1/E2F from F9 EC cells.
Polypeptides in affinity-purified DRTF1/E2F (about 5μg from about 5x10 10 F9 EC cells) were separated by SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and stained with Coomassie blue (track 2); track 1 shows M r standards.
DNA-binding polypeptides in affinity-purified DRTF1/E2F were assayed by crosslinking to the adenovirus E2A promoter distal E2A site (binding site details indicated at bottom right) either in the absence (track 4) or presence of competing wild-type (track 5) or mutant (track 6) E2F binding sites;M r standards shown in track 3.
The p46 polypeptide is indicated; upper bracket shows another group of polypeptides which also specifically bind to the E2F site (M r 55,000).
b , Nucleotide sequence of cDNA encoding murine DP-1 and predicted amino-acid sequence.
Boxed sequences are peptides obtained from microsequencing of DP-1.
Two peptide sequences could not be accounted for from the cDNA sequence.
c , Comparison of DP-1 and E2F-1.
DNA-binding domains in DP-1 and E2F-1 (amino acid 84–204 in DP-1, and 89–191 in E2F-1; ref. 16).
A region of significant similarity (amino acid 163–236 in DP-1, 162–226 in E2F-1) includes sequences outside the DNA-binding domain.
d , Alignment of amino-acid sequences of DP-1 and E2F-1 in regions of highest similarity.
Heavy bars indicate identical and light bars similar amino-acid residues. e , Similar regions of DP-1 and E2F-1 form an amphipathic α -helix.
DP-1 (amino acids 167–183) and E2F-1 (amino acids 166–182) regions of similarity are shown as a helical wheel.
Amino acids are represented in one-letter notation.
METHODS.
DRTF1/E2F was affinity-purified from extracts from whole F9 EC cells using affinity matrices containing the wild-type E2F site from the adenovirus E2A promoter (-71 to -50); the binding activity was also applied to a matrix containing an E2F binding site mutated in nucleotides -62 to -60.
About 5.0μg protein was purified from 10 10 F9 EC cells.
For UV crosslinking of DRTF1/E2F to the E2F site, we used 50ng of affinity-purified protein.
A 100-fold molar excess of either wild-type (-71 to -50) or mutant oligonucleotides was used in competition assays.
Affinity-purified DRTF1 was precipitated with TCA, electrophoresed through SDS-polyacrylamide, and p46 electroeluted; p46 was confirmed as pure by electrophoresis and silver staining of eluted material.
p46 was digested with a lysylendopeptidase, and peptides purified by HPLC using Aquapore AX-300 and RP-300 in series in 0.1% TFA with a 1% per min acetonitrile gradient.
Peak fractions were sequenced by automated Edman degradation in a 477A/120A gas-liquid pulse sequencer (Applied Biosystems).
A set of degenerate oligonucleotide primers were synthesized on the basis of amino-acid sequence in peptides 6 (75–91) and 5 (235–249) as follows: C-terminal regions of peptide 6 (PNTHFV), 5'-CGCGGATCCCC(ACGT)AA(CT)AC(ACGT)CA(CT)TT(CT)GT-3'; and peptide 5 (AQESQN), antisense strand 5'-CGCGGATCCA(AG) (AG) TT(CT)TG(ACGT) (CG)(AT)(CT) TC(CT)TG(ACGT)GC- 3'; both oligonucleotides included a linker sequence at the 5' end.
Peptide 5 antisense oligonucleotide was used to synthesize cDNA from F9 EC cell RNA which was then used in a PCR with both peptide 6 and 5 primers.
Products were subcloned, sequenced and cDNAs derived from DP-1 RNA identified by the presence of peptides 21 and 3, two further peptides obtained by microsequencing peptides derived from p46, which are located between peptides 6 and 5.
This cDNA fragment was used to screen several murine cDNA libraries.
DP-1 cDNA clones were frequently rearranged and the nucleotide sequence shown is from cDNAs from an F9 EC cell library.
FIG. 2 DP-1 is a DNA binding polypeptide in DRTF1/E2F. a , DP-1 is present in affinity-pure DRTF1/E2F.
Immunoblot with affinity-purified DRTF1/E2F and anti-peptide 15 (amino acids 235–249).
Reactivity with p46 and p55 was only present in the immune (I, track 2) but not preimmune (PI, track 3) serum.
This was specific because it was competitively inhibited by peptide 15 but not by an unrelated peptide, peptide 1 (compare tracks 6 and 5).
p46 is likely to be a derivative of p55 because anti-peptide A (see below, derived from the N-terminal region of DP-1) only detected p55 (data not shown).
M r standards are shown in track 1, asterisk indicates a nonspecific reaction.
b , DP-1 is in DRTF1/E2F DNA-binding complexes formed in F9 EC cell extracts.
Gel retardation was done in F9 EC whole cell extracts (in which DRTF1/E2F resolves as complexes a, b and c) with an E2F binding site (E2A promoter sequences -71 to -50) in the presence of either preimmune or immune anti-peptide A serum with the addition of either unrelated peptide 1 (tracks 3 and 7) or peptide A (tracks 4 and 8); 3 and 4 represent two different rabbit antisera. c , DP-1 is in the affinity-pure DRTF1/E2F DNA-binding complex.
Gel retardation was done with affinity-purified DRTF1/E2F together with an E2F binding site (E2A promoter sequences -71 to -50) in the presence of preimmune or immune anti-peptide A (tracks 1–8) or anti-peptide 18 (antiserum 11, tracks 9–12) together with either unrelated peptide 1 (tracks 3, 7 and 11) or the homologous A peptide (tracks 4 and 8) or 18 (track 12).
d , DP-1 is in DRTF1/E2F DNA binding complexes that form on divergent E2F binding sites.
Gel retardation was done in F9 EC whole cell extracts with either a class 1 (tracks 1–4) or class 2 (tracks 5–8) binding site in the presence of either preimmune or immune anti-peptide A (antiserum 4), together with either unrelated peptide 1 (tracks 3 and 7) or peptide A (tracks 4 and 8).
e , Location of peptides A, 18 and 15 in DP-1.
METHODS.
Peptides 15, A or 18 were coupled to keyhole limpet haemocyanin and used to immunize rabbits.
Generation of antibodies and immunoblotting followed standard procedures.
In gel retardation assays 5.0ng affinity-purified DRTF1/E2F or 5.0μg of F9 EC crude cell extract were assayed with an oligonucleotide containing E2A promoter sequences -71 to -50 in the presence of 100-fold molar excess of -62/-60 (E2A sequences -71 to -50 mutated in positions -62, -61 and -60 (ref. 20)).
In d , class 1 (TTTTGGCGGGAAT) or class 2 (ATTTGCGCGGGAAT) binding sites were used.
Antisera were added during the preincubation period.
FIG. 3 DP-1 in pRb and p107-DRTF1/E2F complexes.
a , DP-1 associates with Rb.
Immunoprecipitation was from JM cell extracts with either anti-Rb monoclonal antibody IF8 (ref. 29) or a control monoclonal antibody A7.
Immunoprecipitates were treated with 1.0% deoxycholate and the released material assayed for DRTF1/E2F activity in gel retardation.
DRTF1/E2F binding activity was only detected in the anti-Rb immunoprecipitates (compare tracks 2 to 3); the JM cell extract depleted with anti-Rb had reduced levels of the Rb complex (compare tracks 4 to 5, depleted complex indicated by ‘a’).
Detergent-released DRTF1/E2F was further assayed for reactivity with anti-peptide A (antiserum 3; tracks 6 and 7) and anti-peptide 18 (antiserum 11; tracks 8 and 9) in the presence of either unrelated peptide 1 (tracks 6 and 8) or the homologous peptides (tracks 7 and 9).
Anti-peptide A caused a supershift (indicated by ‘s’ in track 6), whereas anti-peptide 18 interfered with DRTF1/E2F DNA-binding activity (compare tracks 8 and 9).
b , DP-1 associates with p107; DRTF1/E2F was resolved in an F9 EC cell extract in the presence of either the control monoclonal antibody (A7; track 1), anti Rb (IF8; track 2), or anti-p107 (SD9; track 3); note that anti-p107 reduced level of DRTF1a.
In tracks 4 and 5, JM cell extracts were immunoprecipitated with anti-p107 monoclonal antibody.
DRTF1/E2F was released as described in a , and assayed for reactivity with anti-peptide 18 (antiserum 11) in the presence of either unrelated peptide 1 (track 4) or the homologous peptide 18 (tracks 5).
Note that anti-peptide 18 caused a reduction in DRTF1/E2F DNA-binding activity (compare tracks 4 and 5).
FIG. 4 DP-1 is a sequence-specific DNA binding protein.
a , Summary of DNA binding properties of DP-1 fusion proteins.
The indicated regions of DP-1 were expressed as fusion proteins, affinity-purified and assessed for DNA-binding activity in a gel retardation assay.
b , DP-1 84-204 is sufficient for sequence-specific DNA binding to an E2F site.
Affinity-purified GST-DP-1 84-204 was cleaved with thrombin and the released polypeptide assayed (1.0μg) for binding to the E2F site in the presence of 100-fold excess of competing mutant (track 4) or wild-type (track 5) E2F site (the distal E2F site, -71 to -50, from the adenovirus E2A promoter).
Competition with the same binding sites in F9 EC cell extracts is shown in tracks 2 and 3; tracks 1 to 5 were taken from the same experiment.
GST-DP-1 84-249 had similar DNA specificity (compare tracks 6 and 7; about 2.5μg of uncleaved fusion protein in the presence of 100-fold excess of competing mutant or wild-type binding site), whereas DP-1 146-249 and DP-1 84-166 failed to bind in these conditions (data not shown).
Likewise, GST-GATA 1 (1.5μg) failed to bind to the E2F site (tracks 8 and 10) but did to its cognate binding site (tracks 9 and 11) in the presence (tracks 8 and 9) or absence (tracks 10 and 11) of nonspecific salmon sperm DNA (2μg); tracks 6 to 11 are from the same experiment.
METHODS.
Regions of the DP-1 cDNA were amplified in a PCR and subcloned into pGEX-2T (ref. 13).
Oligonucleotide primers used in each PCR were as follows; DP-1 84-249 , 5'-CGCGGATCCCCCAACACGCATTTTGTG-3' and 5'-CGCGGATCCCCTGCGGGCCTGCTG-3'; DP-1 84-204 , 5'-CGCGGATCCCCCAACACGCATTTTGTG and CGCGGATCCGTTCTGGCACTCCTGAGC; DP-1 146-249 ; 5'-CGCGGATCCTTCAGCGCTGCCGACAACCAC and 5'-CGCGGATCCCCTGCGGGCCTGCTG; DP-1 84-166 , 5'-CGCGGATCCCCCAACACGCATTTTGTG and CGCGGATCCCCGGATGTTCTTCTGGTC.
GST fusion proteins were affinity-purified on glutathione-sepharose and their purity assessed by PAGE (ref. 13).
Gel retardation with the distal E2F binding site from the adenovirus E2A promoter (-71 to -50 region) and the DP-1 derivatives was done in the absence of salmon sperm DNA (tracks 4, 5, 6 and 7).
Thrombin digestion of GST-DP-1 84-204 was by resuspending the GST-fusion protein/glutathione-sepharose beads in 50mM Tris, pH 8.0, 150mM NaCl, 2.5mM CaCl 2 , 0.1% β -mercaptoethanol containing human thrombin at 3μgml -1 for 2h.
The presence of cleaved DP-1 84-204 in the supernatant was confirmed by immunoblotting.
GST-GATA-1 contained a full-length murine GATA-1 coding sequence and was incubated with a synthetic GATA-1 binding site.
Mutual sexual selection in a monogamous seabird
Ian L. Jones & Fiona M. Hunter
DARWIN believed that elaborate ornamental traits expressed in both sexes might be favoured by mutual sexual selection driven by both female and male mate choice.
Experimental studies on birds and fish have shown that male ornaments can be favoured by female mating preferences.
But the concept of mutual mate choice has remained untested experimentally, although it has been supported by recent modelling.
Here we report the results of a study of mate preferences of the crested auklet Aethia cristatella,a monogamous seabird in which both sexes are ornamented.
In two experiments we recorded the sexual response of male and female auklets to realistic opposite-sex models with crest ornaments experimentally shortened and lengthened within the range of natural variation.
Males responded to accentuated female models with more frequent sexual displays, as did females to accentuated male models, confirming the idea that ornaments expressed in both sexes could be favoured by mutual mating preferences.
The crested auklet is a socially monogamous, sexually monomorphic seabird in which both sexes contribute parental care.
During the breeding season, adults of both sexes have a spectacular forehead crest consisting of 2–23 (mean, 12) narrow forward-curving feathers, 8.1–58.5mm in length (Fig. 1).
The crest is displayed during courtship encounters at breeding colonies.
Courtship occurs throughout the breeding season, as individuals pair before laying for breeding in the same year, or pair later in the season for breeding in the following year.
Mate fidelity between breeding seasons is relatively low, so a high proportion of the population re-pair each year.
But many individuals fail to pair early enough in the season to breed, and others fail to obtain mates.
The resulting variation in mating success in both sexes provides an opportunity for sexual selection to favour ornaments that are displayed during courtship.
To test whether crest size could be favoured by male and female mating preferences, we performed two manipulation experiments using realistic models made from mounted skins of three male and three female crested auklets of average appearance.
By manipulating ornaments on models we were able to eliminate two factors that can confound mate choice experiments involving manipulation of living birds:(1) intrasexual competition, and (2) behavioural changes in a live bird resulting directly from manipulation of its ornament.
We tested for a mating preference for large crests by comparing the attractiveness of models with short crests to the same models with crest feathers lengthened (Fig. 1), using three models of each sex to ensure that responses were not biased by unique characteristics of any one specimen.
To lengthen the crest, we used cyanoacrylate ‘superglue’ to attach crest shafts collected from other birds to existing crest feathers on models.
Manipulations involved changing the length of 10–12 shafts on each model to alter overall crest length and size while maintaining a natural appearance.
Presentations were made on more than 30 different large display rocks (boulders with 2–12m flat upper surfaces, where auklets congregate to engage in courtship) throughout a colony of about 200,000 crested auklets at Buldir Island, Alaska (52°2'N 175°5'E).
For each auklet that responded to a model, we identified its sex by bill shape, and recorded the occurrence of sexual displays, closest approach (0cm, 1–10cm, 11–20cm, 21–30cm, or 30cm), and response duration (1–5s, 6–10s, 11–15s, or 15s).
Response scoring was identical between two observers because these displays and measurements were simple and unambiguous.
Because models were moved frequently from rock to rock throughout an immense colony, we believe no individual's response was scored more than once.
This was supported by observations of approaches to models at a study plot where more than 400 colour-marked birds were present; no marked individual approached more than once.
To control for intrasexual competition and interference among responding birds, we did not score approaches when more than one auklet was present near the model.
Sham-manipulations were not performed because ornament manipulation could not have affected model ‘behaviour’, and there were no visible artefacts of manipulation.
Crested auklets did not respond to natural looking least auklet Aethia pusilla models.
Crested auklets of both sexes approached the models as in natural courtship encounters, performing four types of stereotyped courtship display (arch, hunch, ruff-sniff and touch) to opposite sex models.
In nature, these displays are performed only in courtship, increase in intensity with sexual attraction between courting auklets, and lead to the formation of mated pairs.
In our model experiments, 29% of approaching females and 20% of approaching males performed a sexual display, other individuals merely looked at the model before departing.
Models with enlarged crests were extremely attractive to approaching auklets of the opposite sex, compared with the same models with small crests.
Females responded to male models with significantly more frequent arch, hunch and touch sexual displays when the models were presented with accentuated crests; males responded to female models with significantly more frequent ruff-sniff and touch displays (Table 1).
The models were also approached more closely and for a longer duration when presented with large crests (female responses: for closest approach, log-likelihood ratio G =63.8, d.f.
=4,P0.0001;for duration G= 127.3, d.f.
=3,P0.0001;male responses: for closest approach G=28.9,d.f.
=4,P= 0.0001; for duration G =36.0, d.f.
=3,P0.0001).
Overall, these results indicate a strong relationship between sexual attractiveness and crest size in both sexes.
Because larger crests are preferred, auklets bearing them are more likely to obtain mates or form pair bonds earlier, a suggestion supported by observations of the marked auklet population.
In our experiment, male responses to accentuated female models were less strong than female responses to male models (although both were significant; Table 1).
This initially suggests that female preferences are more important, and raises the question of why female crested auklets have a similar sized crest ornament to males.
One possibility is that the sexes have an equal role in mate choice, but our experiment underestimated the expression of male preference because the sexes differ in the way they initiate courtship.
Male and female responses to the static models could have differed because crested auklet males tend to wait for females to approach, then aggressively reject unwanted partners, whereas females are more active in seeking out and approaching males (although both sexes show either type of behaviour).
At present we cannot quantify the relative strength of the preference; the solution to this question requires more detailed study of natural pair formation.
In our experiment, we controlled for intermale and interfemale competition by excluding responses when more than one bird was near the model, but because crest size is also correlated with dominance in both sexes and aggressive competition for mates is frequent (I.L.J., unpublished data), crest ornament size is likely to be favoured by intrasexual competition as well as by mating preference.
Our experiments indicate that crested auklet ornament size is likely to be favoured by sexual selection involving mutual mate choice by both sexes.
For this species, our data refute the hypothesis that female ornaments are functionless but are expressed merely as a result of a genetic correlation between the sexes.
Our experiments confirm Darwin's suggestion that the evolution of ornaments of monogamous sexually monomorphic animals could be driven by mutual sexual selection.
This has profound implications for our understanding of the evolution of sexually monomorphic ornaments in many other bird species.
Based on responses of 420 females (269 to small-crested male models and 151 to big-crested male models; scored by I.L.J.) and 333 males (209 to small-crested female models and 124 to big-crested female models; scored by F.M.H.) during 165h of observation between 7 June and 14July 1992.
Each model was presented with a small crest, then with accentuated crest, then with small crest again on about 10d each; roughly equal numbers of responses were scored in each phase.
‘Relative frequency, big/small’: relative frequency of display to accentuated versus small crested models (for example, females' arch displays were 24.9 times more frequent to the accentuated model).
Sex was determined by bill shape: males have a larger and more strongly hooked bill than females (refs 18, 22, 23).
There was no significant difference in response among models (for displays and response measures: female models,, male models,), so responses were pooled for all models within each experiment.
Female responses to long-crested models were significantly stronger than males' responses for arch (), hunch (), and touch displays ).
There was a slight seasonal effect of gradually declining response to models, but this could not have biased the results because the response to crest accentuation went in the opposite direction, increasing significantly between early (small crests) presentations and the first accentuated crest presentations.
Median presentation dates were the same for small-crested and accentuated-crested models.
FIG. 1 a , Crested auklet courting pair.
b , Variation in crest length among 253 adult crested auklets measured at Buldir.
Box plot indicates 5th percentile (lower bar), 25th percentile (bottom of box), median (white line through box), 75th percentile (top of box) and 95th percentile (upper bar); outliers are represented by points.
Crest size did not differ significantly between males and females in this population (based on birds sexed by behaviour or dissection: median male crest, 38.6mm,n= 32; median female crest, 37.3mm;n=56;Mann-Whitney U; Z=0.7 ,P=0.5 ; males were about 1.5% larger in measures of body size than females).
The mean crest size of the models used in the experiments are indicated by: Fa accentuated female crests; Fs small female crests; Ma accentuated male crests; Ms small male crests (manipulated crest lengths were within 2mm of the mean for each treatment).
Female model crests were manipulated to a greater extent (24 mm) than males' (14mm) because we suspected a priori that male mating preferences could be more difficult to detect.
Accelerated soil erosion around a Mexican highland lake caused by prehispanic agriculture
Sarah L. O'Hara, F. Alayne Street-Perrott & Timothy P. Burt
THE severely degraded landscape of the volcanic highlands of central Mexico has been the focus of considerable debate.
Although it is widely believed that the Spanish encountered an almost pristine landscape in AD 1521 (refs 1–3), some archival and palaeolimnological studies have suggested that extensive land clearance began before European contact, during the Preclassic to Postclassic periods .
Here we analyse sediment cores from Lake Pátzcuaro, Michoacán (Fig. 1), to derive a quantitative estimate of variations in soil erosion in central Mexico since 4,000yrBP.
We identify three periods of accelerated erosion and conclude that erosion rates during both the late Preclassic/early Classic periods (2,500–1,200yrBP) and the later Postclassic period (850–350yrBP) were at least as high as those after the Spanish conquest.
One implication of these results is that soil erosion caused by the Spanish introduction of plough agriculture was apparently no more severe than that associated with traditional agricultural methods; it is therefore questionable whether a return to traditional methods would have significant environmental benefits.
Lake Pátzcuaro lies in a small (927km 2 ), closed intermontane basin in the volcanic highlands of Michoacán (Fig. 1).
The lake (126km 2 ; 2,036m above sea level (a.s.l.); 1,000mm annual precipitation) is eutrophic to hypereutrophic and can be divided into south, central and north basins, with maximum water depths increasing northwards from 1–2m to 12m; the average depth is 4.6m.
Suspended sediment concentrations also increase northwards, probably because of current drift.
Bordering the lake there are thick deposits of reddish, charcoal-rich colluvium.
The surrounding volcanic cones are gently sloping with few gullies to the south, but increasingly steep and heavily gullied towards the north.
Thorn scrub is widespread on the lower slopes, although the upper slopes still support secondary pine-oak woodlands.
Palaeoclimatic reconstructions for Pátzcuaro and adjacent areas are given in refs 6–8, 13–16.
The archaeology of this region is poorly documented.
Immediately before the Spanish Conquest in AD 1521, the Pátzcuaro basin was the focal point of the Postclassic Purépecha (Tarascan) Empire, with an estimated population of 60,000–105,000 (ref. 17), of whom 35,000 lived in Tzintzuntzan on the northeast shore (Fig. 1).
Judging from the Relación de Michoacán,the Purépecha were obsessed by the need to collect wood, primarily for ceremonial bonfires, but also for the production of beams, boards and other lumber.
Evidence of sedentary agriculture in the basin before the Purépecha arrived 1,000yrBP (ref. 18) is derived largely from the presence of maize (Zea mays)and weedy species in the pollen record from the early Preclassic (3,500yrBP) onwards.
During the late Preclassic/early Classic period the region may have come under the influence of the Chupcuaro, who occupied agricultural and craft centres with small pyramids.
Data on accelerated soil erosion in the tropics is generally derived from small experimental plots, with only a few years of data.
Such studies may yield exaggerated estimates of total soil loss.
Hence it is difficult to derive accurate and spatially-representative predictions of the impact of future land-use change or to examine the long-term stability of lake ecosystems in the face of repeated episodes of accelerated nutrient input.
The analysis of an array of radiocarbon dated lake-sediment cores provides an alternative means of assessing the sustained impact of deforestation on a large catchment scale.
To evaluate long-term variations in soil erosion in the Pátzcuaro basin we collected 20 sediment cores (1.24–2.85m in length) from the lake in 1988 using a simple gravity-percussion corer (Fig. 1).
Sixty-four profiles of colluvium were logged and sampled.
In addition, we took samples from the upper 3.36m of a 14.2-m core (the Mastercore) previously analysed for pollen and diatoms (J. P. Bradbury, unpublished data).
The lake sediments consist of calcareous organic gyttja, ostracode-rich silts and clays.
On the basis of stratigraphy, bulk density, magnetic susceptibility (),loss-on-ignition, carbonate content and sediment chemistry, six main lithological units can be identified (Fig. 2).
The organic gyttja (unit I) and ostracode-rich layers (units III and V) are characterized by high organic and carbonate concentrations but low  values, suggesting relative stability within the catchment.
In marked contrast, the clay units (II, IV and VI) contain little organic matter or carbonate and exhibit large peaks in ,inorganic Si and cations associated with volcanic soils (Fe, Al, Ti and so on).
We infer that they accumulated during periods of accelerated soil erosion.
Clayey deposits are not found below unit I (refs 6, 15) implying that climatic change alone cannot account for these sediments.
The first, short-lived erosional event (unit II) is represented by a small peak in  in the south basin, where the accumulation rate of sediment, averaged over the relevant Thiessen polygons, was 29.213.6gm -2 yr -1 (Table 1a).
It is bracketed by dates of 3,64080 and 2,89080yrBP in the Mastercore (Table 1b).
Its onset coincides with the first appearance of Zea pollen.
The cores from the central and north basins are too short to record this event.
A similar erosional episode at La Piscina de Yuriria (50km northeast of Pátzcuaro) is also associated with the first appearance of maize 3,200yrBP (ref. 16).
A second, more intense period of erosion (unit IV) is bracketed by dates of 2,53060 and 1,19070yrBP (Table 1 b).
Based on the full set of 21 cores, an estimated 13.4Mt of sediment were deposited in the lake at an average rate of 10,300tyr -1 between 2,500 and 1,200yrBP (Table 1 a).
The average sediment accumulation increased from 33.837.5gm -2 yr -1 in the south basin to 120.464.3 and 154.784.2gm -2 yr -1 in the central and north basins, respectively.
This suggests that the main late Preclassic/early Classic occupation sites were in the northern part of the basin and that the thick deposits of colluvium that border this part of the lake have buried their remains.
Early agriculturalists may have preferred to farm the steeper slopes for two reasons: the drainage channels could be dammed for irrigation, and the risk of frost damage to crops would be minimized.
The sediment geochemistry, which will be discussed in full elsewhere, implies that erosion of subsoil (fraction c in Fig. 2), possibly by gullying, was more important than the removal of fine weathered topsoil (fraction a).
A period of catchment stability occurred in the late Classic/early Postclassic between 1,200 and 850yrBP, during which the sediment influx to the lake dropped sharply to less than 4,500tyr -1 (Table 1a).
Sediment accumulation rates decreased in the north (58.024.5gm -2 yr -1 ) and central basins (44.416.6gm -2 yr -1 ), but changed little in the south basin (41.715.1gm -2 yr -1 ).
The region suffered a prolonged drought during this interval when the level of Lake Pátzcuaro fell by 4–5m (ref. 15) and the basin may have been abandoned.
Renewed erosion began in the Postclassic about 850yrBP (unit VI) shortly after the arrival of the Purépecha.
An estimated 24.5Mt of sediment have been deposited in the lake since this date at an average rate of 29,000tyr -1 (Table 1 a).
Accelerated erosion was more widespread than in the second episode, reflecting extensive forest clearance by the Purépecha.
However, average sediment accumulation rates were again higher in the north (329.4164.3gm -2 yr -1 ) than the central (160.061.3gm -2 yr -1 ) and south basins (146.022.4gm -2 yr -1 ), in part because of the concentration of settlement around Tzintzuntzan (Fig. 1) during the late Postclassic.
It is hard to distinguish any specific impact of the introduction of plough agriculture and draught animals by the Spanish after AD 1521.
Comparison of the sediment influx above and below a date of 48060yrBP (AD 1405–1450; ref. 24) at 30cm in core 12 (Fig. 3) indicates that if anything there was a decrease in the erosion rate after the Conquest.
A sharp drop in population coupled with forest regeneration in the Basin of Pátzcuaro may have significantly reduced erosion.
However, a shift in the type of sediment from weathered to unweathered material is noted at this level.
This may have resulted from a number of factors: progressive stripping of the upper soil horizons, gullying or the introduction of plough agriculture.
Spatial and temporal variations in phosphorus accumulation rates were more complex than those of mineral soil, reflecting changes in erosional processes, recycling within the lake and the input of human effluent from specific point sources.
Phosphorus accumulation reached a maximum during the deposition of unit VI (Table 1a)when the per capita output of 0.31–0.54kgyr -1 was similar to that reported for the Classic Maya.
The prevalence of Stephanodiscus sp. in the diatom record is further evidence for cultural eutrophication since 900yrBP (J. P. Bradbury, unpublished data).
This investigation indicates the long-term impact of indigenous farming systems on a tropical lake.
The environmental impact of precolonial agriculture in the subhumid highlands of central México equalled that of the Classic Maya cities in the lowland rainforests of Guatemala, and was even more severe than that of the indigenous cultivators in New Guinea.
There is a move by many environmental agencies both in Mexico and elsewhere for a return to traditional forms of agriculture, as they are considered to be better for the environment.
As our findings indicate that traditional farming techniques cause significant erosion, it is unlikely that a return to prehispanic farming methods would solve the problem of environmental degradation.
a,
Variations in the influx of inorganic sediment and phosphorus to Lake Pátzcuaro and estimated outputs from the catchment, 4,000–0yrBP.
Sediment influx was assessed on an organic-, carbonate- and biogenic opal-free, dry-weight basis.
Results from the array of 21 sediment cores (in gm -2 yr -1 ) were scaled up to the entire lake using Thiessen polygons.
Total sediment influxes for units I, II and II (in parentheses) are estimated on the basis of cores from the south basin only.
Outputs from the catchment only cover sediment accumulation in the lake.
A first-order estimate suggests that 40% of sediment eroded from the slopes reached the lake; the remaining 60% was stored as colluvium in marginal embayments (Fig. 1).
Phosphorus concentrations were measured only at the four sites listed.
Total P influxes for units I, II and III (in parentheses) were estimated from the two south basin cores.
b,
Radiocarbon chronology of erosional episodes in the Basin of Pátzcuaro 4,000–0yrBP.
All 14 C dates are uncalibrated.
OxA dates were measured by accelerator mass spectrometry, other dates are conventional ages.
There are no limestones or volcanic springs in the catchment.
Areas (see Fig. 1).
A, San Jeronimo Purenchécuaro; B, San Francisco Uricho; C. San Pedro Cucuchuchu.
Facies: a, Colluvium; b, Lacustrine; c, Lacustrine/marsh.
FIG. 1 Location of Lake Pátzcuaro and lake sediment cores.
FIG. 2 Magnetic susceptibility (),carbonate content, loss-on-ignition (LOI) and phosphorus (’ a' fraction) for selected cores from Lake Pátzcuaro.
Analyses were made at 5–10cm intervals.
 was measured using a Bartington MS1 susceptibility meter.
LOI was determined by ignition at 550°C for 1h.
Carbonate content was measured manometrically by reaction with dilute HCl.
Samples for sediment chemistry were prepared using a wet-chemical extraction technique.
This separates the sediment into an H 2 O 2 -HCl-soluble ‘a’ fraction, a NaOH-soluble biogenic opal ‘b’fraction and a residual ‘c’fraction.
The ‘a’ fraction includes organic matter, carbonates, and labile oxides and oxyhydroxides derived from topsoil.
The ‘c’ fraction consists largely of unweathered detrital minerals.
Major cations were determined by flame atomic absorption, and P and Si by automated colorimetry.
FIG. 3 Magnetic susceptibility (), carbonate content and loss-on-ignition (LOI) for core LP12, Lake Pátzcuaro.
Longitudinally confined geomagnetic reversal paths from non-dipolar transition fields
David Gubbins & Robert S. Coe
IT has long been thought that conditions at the boundary between the core and mantle influence the Earth's magnetic field, but the supporting evidence is rather indirect.
Recent palaeomagnetic results, suggesting that there are persistent preferred longitudinal paths for the virtual geomagnetic pole (VGP) during reversals, would provide the first direct evidence of the solid mantle's influence on the core, although their statistical significance has been disputed.
The results are potentially exciting because the preferred paths lie close to the Pacific rim, where the present geomagnetic secular variation changes character.
Here we present a simple model, based on an extension of a previous theory, that produces reversals with VGP paths confined within relatively narrow longitude bands despite the transition field having a substantially non-dipolar structure.
Thus, although longitude bias of the VGP paths is definitive evidence for core-mantle interaction, simple VGP paths are not evidence of near-dipolar transition fields.
Many papers discuss the statistical validity of the observational evidence for persistent transition paths.
Here we discuss a different aspect of the problem: their possible underlying cause.
One of us (D.G.) developed the model described below before it was explained to him by the second author (R.S.C.) that VGPs are plotted in an asymmetrical way that appears natural to the palaeomagnetist but is confusing when considering the theory.
We believe that few theoreticians appreciated this point immediately, and therefore discuss it first.
The main use of palaeomagnetic poles is to determine tectonic movement, when it is essential to know whether the rocks have been stamped by a normal or reversed field.
By convention the south magnetic pole, which is now close to the North Geographic Pole, is plotted.
However, in the deep Earth, where there is no permanent magnetization, the convention is inappropriate.
The dynamo equations, including all the boundary conditions regarded so far as plausible, and the equations governing the magnetic field in that part of the mantle that is above the Curie temperature, are invariant under reversal of sign of the magnetic field.
Therefore, if geomagnetic reversal involves the entire field, its sense becomes irrelevant.
Consider a transition from normal to reverse (N  R).
We plot the south magnetic pole from its initial position at the North Geographic Pole through, for example, the Americas, to the South Geographic Pole.
Now consider the next reversal (R  N) which takes the south magnetic pole back to the North Geographic Pole.
If the sense of the magnetic field is irrelevant, but the same physics applies as for the first reversal, the pole that starts at the North Geographic Pole must once again pass through the Americas.
This time, however, the VGP starts from the South Geographic Pole and tracks along the other half of the great circle path, through Asia.
Transition data are therefore more readily interpreted if the magnetic pole lying initially at the North Geographic Pole is plotted regardless of its sign.
This has already been pointed out by Hoffman but his advice has been ignored.
The preponderance of VGP paths lying along the eastern Pacific rim reported by Laj and others is therefore evidence of asymmetry between reversed and normal states in the field.
It cannot be explained by conventional theory, including the mechanisms presented here and that of Runcorn, unless N  R (R  N) paths along the E rim are accompanied by R  N (N  R) paths around the antipodal path.
Valet et al.
test the hypothesis that VGP paths cluster around preferred longitudes but they also mix N  R and R  N transitions, thereby partially randomizing their dataset.
For R  N transitions they should have plotted the north magnetic pole.
There is no theoretical requirement for time symmetry in reversal: it may initiate preferentially in one hemisphere, for example, or may start slowly and finish quickly.
Persistent intermediate directions may also be established; averaging effects of the magnetic recording process may then lead to preferred longitudes for VGP paths, but not to N/R asymmetry.
We show below that time asymmetry can determine whether the VGP tracks along the eastern or western half of the great circle.
To return to the question of how longitude-confined VGP paths can arise from complex behaviour of the dynamo, we propose a simple way to link VGP movements with flux change at the core surface, thereby connecting palaeomagnetic data with intuition gained from secular variation (SV) studies.
Core fields show three basic changes: drifting of flux, change in strength of patches of flux, and growth of pairs of positive and negative flux through expulsion of toroidal field through the surface.
The latter effect is intimately linked with solar magnetic reversals and is therefore worthy of our attention; it will be detectable palaeomagnetically but lost in the usual low-order spherical harmonic analysis.
We simplify field changes at the core surface by shrinking the characteristic flux concentrations to points and writing the vertical field as  where F i  represents the strength of the i th pair of flux patches and  their positions (flux patches come in pairs in the absence of monopoles).
The delta function is defined so that its integral over the unit sphere is unity.
Standard results from potential theory allow the field at the Earth's surface to be written in the form  where  and  is the ratio of core to Earth radius, and μ is the cosine of the angular distance between r and .
VGPs can be found from the vector field.
By moving the flux points around and changing their strengths we can easily assess the effect of a changing core field on VGP path.
As examples, we give two extensions of the reversal model proposed by Gubbins.
The initial pattern of four patches, symmetrically placed about the equator near 65°N, S; 120°E, W, is seen in the present geomagnetic field and is stable on the historical timescale; it has been proposed as a reflection of the underlying convective pattern.
The evolution is based on growth of pairs of flux patches in the Southern Hemisphere, presumed to result from flux expulsion, each about half the strength of the four main lobes, as envisaged previously.
In model ‘E’ one patch is carried west and then south to partially eliminate lobe 3, as is currently occurring beneath South America, and the other patch is carried to the Pacific rim at 0°N; 90°W, where it remains (Fig. 1).
Historical SV shows the development and drift of two such reverse flux patches.
Here the process is repeated until all Southern Hemisphere flux is eliminated and then reversed.
Recent SV gives no guide as to what then happens in the Northern Hemisphere, but we suppose that the flux is first eliminated and then reversed by northward migration of the equatorial patch.
The positions of the flux points at each stage of the reversal are shown schematically in Fig. 2 a .
The corresponding conventional VGP paths, recorded at a number of arbitrarily chosen sites, are shown in Fig. 3 a ; they are confined near longitude 90°E.
It is an ‘Asian path’, but of course it would lie along the other half of the great circle had we used the same model for a R  N transition, giving an ‘Americas path’.
The dipole terms contribute only 34% of the surface energy  BdS at the central configuration, which is surprisingly small considering the small longitude range of the VGP paths.
The non-dipole terms give a site dependence to the VGP paths; they tend to move from east to west if the site is northeast or southwest of the point 0°N; 90°E and from west to east if the site is northwest or southeast of it.
A second sequence (model ‘W’, Fig. 2 b ) was generated by supposing that flux is reversed in the Northern Hemisphere first, which may occur if core flow carries flux across the Equator beneath the Atlantic (for which there is some evidence in core-field maps) and eliminates lobe 1 either by carrying flux directly from 4 to 1, or by carrying one of a pair generated in the south Atlantic northwestwards to lobe 1, leaving the reversed patch on the Pacific rim.
The VGP paths lie close to longitude 90°W (Fig. 2 b ); the VGP path lies in the Americas for a N  R transition, in Asia for a R  N transition.
The intensity of the field is generally weak, falling to 10–20% of the initial strength over most of the Earth's surface, but in places it rises to high values.
The weak intensity is caused by upward continuation through the mantle: the small-scale non-dipolar transition field is attenuated far more than the axial dipole.
The occasional strong fields occur above the large flux patches, or where the effects of two or more patches reinforce.
Transition fields are often thought of as weak but predominantly dipolar, as would occur if the dynamo were inactive and failing to regenerate the field.
A strong, small-scale transition field could, however, correspond to particularly vigorous dynamo action.
These models are presented as examples of what can be done with simple equations.
They show that the field can be strong at the core surface during transition, that longitude-confined VGP paths are consistent with strongly non-dipolar fields, and, most important, that blocking at the Pacific rim (as observed in the SV) can give rise to VGP paths through either of the two longitudes favoured by the data.
The Asian path for N  R transitions results when the reversal initiates in the Southern Hemisphere; the Americas for the Northern Hemisphere.
The model cannot explain N/R asymmetry nor the dominance of one half of the great circle over the other.
Lavas appear to give greater scatter than sediments (M. Prévot & P. Camps, manuscript in preparation), possibly indicating that sedimentary magnetization is smoothed.
If the transition field fluctuates rapidly with a slight preference for the Pacific rim great circle, and there is some evidence from non-transitional fields for this, the sediments may average out in preference for one of the two paths, explaining the extraordinary longitudinal confinement.
FIG. 1 Flux expulsion creates a pair of flux patches of opposite polarity at the core surface; they are then carried by the core flow.
One patch travels southwest to eliminate part of the flux lobe 3 while the other is carried west along the Equator to rest at the Pacific rim, near 90°W.
Similar behaviour is observed in the present SV.
FIG. 2 a , Model E, a sequence of flux movements describing a reversal initiated in the Southern Hemisphere from flux patches originating in the Atlantic region (centre of the circle) and drifting west to accumulate at the Pacific rim and eliminate, then reverse, the initial configuration of four flux lobes.
The flux patches are represented as points and the size of the dots represent their strength from 0.5 to 4 in steps of 0.5; black circles indicate negative flux and open circles positive flux. b , Model W, similar to model E but with flux eliminated from the Northern Hemisphere first.
FIG. 3 a , VGP paths for nine numbered sites (chosen to be representative of real palaeomagnetic sites) for a normal-to-reverse transition.
The paths all lie close to 90°E. b , VGP paths for model W. They all lie close to 90°W, opposite to model E. The difference arises because flux reversal initiates in the Southern Hemisphere in model E but in the Northern Hemisphere in model W. The longitude variation of VGP paths for both models is due in part to differences in the VGPs' starting longitude.
Generation of sodium-rich magmas from newly underplated basaltic crust
Michael P. Atherton & Nick Petford
SODIUM-RICH rocks of trondhjemite-tonalite-dacite (TTD) or -granodiorite (TTG) suites form much of Precambrian continental crust.
They are thought to have formed by partial melting of subducted oceanic crust—a process that would have been much more widespread early in Earth history than at present, owing to the higher thermal gradients prevailing at that time.
Phanerozoic TTD suites do exist, however, and seem also to relate to subduction zones.
Defant and Drummond proposed that these suites form where young (25Myr), hot oceanic lithosphere is subducted and melts, thus locally simulating the conditions that led to widespread crustal growth in the Archaean.
Here we describe plutonic and volcanic rocks from the Cordillera Blanca complex in Peru, which have characteristics of the high-Al TTD suite but which were produced above a subduction zone containing a 60-Myr-old slab.
We present evidence that the complex formed by partial melting of newly underplated basaltic crust, and argue that this mechanism should be considered more generally as an additional way of generating sodium-rich arc magmas.
Where subducting lithosphere is sufficiently hot, it can melt before it dehydrates, leaving a garnet-hornblende residue that produces the low Yb contents and high La/Yb ratios characteristic of high-Al TTD suites.
Slabs being subducted today at the rims of large ocean basins are typically 60Myr old, and are accordingly cold enough to dehydrate before melting.
Magma formation is thus confined to the hydrated mantle wedge above the subducting slab, where residues of mainly olivine and pyroxene give rise to calc-alkaline magmas with higher Yb contents and lower La/Yb ratios than in the high-Al TTD suites.
The change from high-Al TTD to basalt-andesite-dacite-rhyolite generation is thus symptomatic of the secular cooling of the Earth.
The Cordillera Blanca complex, which lies inboard of the Coastal Batholith, marks the culmination of Andean magmatism in northwest Peru (Fig. 1).
It is made up of coeval ignimbrites (K/Ar date 4.65–6.7 Myr, from five dates over a 50-km section) and a large batholith containing a variety of rock types but dominated by granite (SiO 2 70%) with an 40 Ar/ 36 Ar age of 5.180.05Myr.
The ignimbrites were collected in a strike-slip rift valley (100x15km) related to the Cordillera Blanca fault system, an important crustal structure which marks the western boundary of the batholith (Fig. 1) and is thought to extend at depth to the source region of the complex.
The batholith formed during transtensional movements on this strike-slip structure.
The complex overlies the newly thickened, Miocene continental keel of the Andes, here 50–60km thick.
The compositions of the ignimbrites and granites are similar to Archaean and Proterozoic trondhjemites (Table 1), with high Sr and Na 2 O, and low Y and heavy rare-earth element (HREE) contents.
Chemical criteria for typical slab-derived magmas are given in Table 1, where it is evident that the Cordillera Blanca rocks differ from the mantle-wedge-derived granitoids of the Coastal Batholith to the west (Fig. 1) and apparently fit the characteristics of slab melts as defined in refs 3 and 16.
They lie in the Archaean high-Al TTD and adakite field (Fig. 2), consistent with an origin as partial melts of amphibolite with different proportions of garnet.
Various origins have been suggested for trondhjemites of the TTG suite.
Crystal fractionation seems unlikely in many cases, as coexisting basaltic and intermediate rocks are usually lacking.
In the Cordillera Blanca batholith, it is impossible to relate the granites to earlier tonalitic rocks, and there are no coeval basic rocks.
It would in any case be difficult to derive the high Sr/Y, La/Yb ratios and low Y and HREE contents of these magmas by fractional crystallization of the main phases present in the rocks: plagioclase, hornblende and clino- pyroxene.
Nor is it likely that rocks with SiO 2 70% could be derived directly from the mantle.
Alternative derivations are partial melting of subducted oceanic lithosphere, or partial melting of basaltic lower crust; note that partial melting of old Precambrian-type crust is precluded by its absence.
For subducted lithosphere to be melted, the primary requirement is that it be hot—in other words, young.
Some Cenozoic magmas are certainly related to young subducting slab and may be the product of slab melting.
However, we suggest that slab melting was not involved in producing the Cordillera Blanca magmas.
First, there is the age of the slab entering the trench.
Numerical simulation of pressure-temperature-time paths of amphibolitic oceanic crust shows that partial melting can occur only during the early stages of subduction initiated in hot, young (50Myr) oceanic lithosphere.
The Yb-depleted magmas characteristic of slab melting in post-Cretaceous arcs are found only in young subducted crust (25Myr at the trench).
During the period 20–5Myr ago, the Nazca Plate had passed the initial stage of subduction and was 55–65Myr old at the trench; it was therefore too old and cold for melting to occur before dehydration.
Second, models of the thermal structure involving slab-induced convection show slab melting in the corner of the mantle wedge 80km from the trench.
It follows that the TTG arc should be outboard of the main volcanic/plutonic arc, in the arc-trench gap.
In Peru the TTG suite lies 300km inboard of the present trench and volcanic arc, and directly above the thickened keel of the Andes.
Third, lead isotope values lie in a small coherent field () similar to the Dupal group and quite different from the trend for mid-ocean-ridge and ocean-island basalts.
The lead values do not lie on mixing curve between the Nazca plate basalt and Pacific sediments, and we follow Mukasa and Tilton in considering that mid-ocean-ridge basalt from asthenospheric mantle was not involved.
Sr i (initial 87 Sr/ 86 Sr) and Nd i (initial 143 Nd/ 144 Nd) data (ref. 28 and N.P., M.P.A. and A. Halliday, manuscript in preparation) are consistent with, but do not prove, derivation from an enriched continental lithosphere similar to that identified in Chile.
We conclude that rocks of the Cordillera Blanca were not derived directly from the mantle or slab.
Instead they may have formed in a manner similar to many Cordilleran batholiths, from crust that is basaltic (density 3.0Mgm -3 ) and does not include Precambrian basement-type material.
We now consider the thermal state and crustal thickness, to determine the likelihood that the trondhjemites were produced by melting of the lower crust.
The thickening of the crust beneath the Cordillera Blanca was by magmatic accretion since the Miocene.
This is consistent with high heat flow across Western Cordillera and altiplano.
No tectonic shortening occurred, and the whole of the Western Cordillera is now in isostatic equilibrium, supported by its crustal root and possibly hot underlying mantle.
Both the underplating and uplift would heat the crust.
Electrical conductivity surveys indicate a telluric current channelled into a high-conductivity zone which follows the general trend of the mountain range just to the south of the Cordillera Blanca.
The zone lies 50km below the present surface and may be associated with a low-velocity zone below 40km.
Conductivities are similar to those in the Basin and Range province of North America (0.1Sm -1 ), which Bott considered could be due to a melt fraction in highly conducting rock.
A related feature in James's model for the central Andes is the low shear velocity in the upper mantle (4.25–4.30kms -1 ) along the path of the high-conductivity zone.
This suggests a hot upper mantle in the same region.
High-level thermal features include thermal gradients of 40–60°Ckm -1 (ref. 32) and active thermal springs along the line of the Cordillera Blanca fault system.
The data indicate a high geothermal gradient extending from shallow crustal depths down to the mantle, with melt probably present at 50km depth.
This structure relates to the underaccretion and uplift and has existed since the Miocene, when temperatures in the crust must have exceeded those of the shield geotherm.
The lowest temperature gradient estimated from analysis of obducted lower crust is 20°C km -1 ; even for this conservative estimate, temperatures at the bottom of the crust (50km) would have been greater than 1,000°C—sufficient to produce trondhjemitic melts from hydrated basaltic compositions with residues of amphibole, garnet and clinopyroxene and little or no plagioclase.
This is consistent with the views of those who consider high-Al TTD magmas to result from partial melting of amphibolite, with or without garnet.
Such magmas have high Na 2 O and Sr and low HREE contents, and on a Sr/Y versus Y plot (Fig. 3) they lie in the Archaean high-Al TTD adakite field (Fig. 2).
Miocene/Pliocene trondhjemite, tonalite and ignimbrite comprise the final magmatic event (5Myr) in the central Andes of Peru; we consider that they were produced by partial melting of lower crust that had recently been, or was still being, thickened by magma underplating.
We envisage a dynamic model in which compositions of partial melts evolved to reach TTG types as the crust thickened by underplating, and passed through the garnet-in transition about the end of the Miocene.
Other probable examples of melting of thick lower crust include the late Tertiary granitoids of central Chile, trondhjemitic rocks of west central Idaho and north Cascades and the eastern tonalites of the Peninsular Range.
It is not appropriate to use a single model involving slab melting to explain all TTG from the Archaean onwards.
Chemical characteristics of slab melts, Cordillera Blanca (CB) ignimbrites, granites, and mantle-wedge-derived granites of the Coastal Batholith.
FIG. 1 Simplified map of area north of Lima, Peru, showing the Cordillera Blanca Batholith and ignimbrites lying  inbord of the Upper Cretaceous Coastal Batholith, over the deep crustal keel of the Andes.
FIG. 2 Plot of Sr/Y against Y for Cordillera Blanca granitic and ignimbritic rocks with Archean and ADR fields.
Partial melting curves for basalt leaving residues of 10% garnet amphibolite (gar. amph) and eclogite (Ecl) from Drummond and Defant.
Partial melt values shown on curves.
Adakites also plot in TTD field.
Discovery of a very bright, nearby binary millisecond pulsar
Simon Johnston, D. R. Lorimer, P. A. Harrison, M. Bailes, A. G. Lyne, J. F. Bell, V. M. Kaspi, R. N. Manchester, N. D'Amico, L. Nicastrol  & Jin Shengzhen 
DURING a survey of the southern sky for millisecond pulsars, we have discovered one with by far the greatest flux density of any known millisecond pulsar, often exceeding 1Jy at 430MHz.
The dispersion measure (integrated electron density along the line of sight) is the smallest for any known pulsar.
This object, PSR J0437-4715, may be the closest known pulsar, and is several times closer than any other known millisecond pulsar.
Its rotation period is 5.75ms, and it is in a 5.7-day circular orbit with a low-mass companion.
The spin-down energy flux density is the third highest known, after the Crab and Vela pulsars.
These properties make possible studies of the pulsar at radio wavelengths with unprecedented detail, and indicate that it should be possible to detect both the pulsar and its companion at optical and perhaps shorter wavelengths.
The survey, described briefly in ref. 1, has been searching the southern sky for millisecond and other low-luminosity pulsars since July 1991, using the Parkes 64-m radiotelescope at 430MHz.
A very strong signal was seen in data taken on February 13, 1992 and observations taken July 11 1992 confirmed the presence of a 5.75-ms pulsar.
The galactic latitude of -42° for this pulsar continues the trend of recent millisecond pulsar discoveries at high latitudes, confirming that the distribution of low-luminosity millisecond pulsars is largely isotropic.
The dispersion measure, 2.65cm -3 pc, is smaller than that for any other known pulsar, implying a distance from the Sun of only about 150pc.
Subsequent timing observations have shown the pulsar to be in a 5.74-day circular orbit with a low-mass companion.
These measurements have mostly been done at 430MHz using a filterbank of 2x256x0.125MHz channels, and also at 1,520MHz and 2,360MHz using a filterbank of 2x64x5MHz channels.
Further details of the observing systems are given in refs 1, 7.
To obtain accurate arrival times for the pulses, data were sampled at 80μs and folded to produce pulse profiles.
Typical observations were 300s in duration, giving an average signal-to-noise ratio of 500 at all frequencies, although the pulsar flux density varies greatly between observations because of interstellar scintillation.
The observed profiles were cross-correlated with a standard pulse profile appropriate for each radio frequency to obtain accurate pulse arrival times.
A total of 112 pulse arrival times over a 120-day time interval were collected for this pulsar.
As this pulsar, PSR J0437–4715, is so close to the Earth, there is a good chance of optical detection of the pulsar's binary companion or even of optical pulses from the pulsar.
To aid in such a study and to permit a more precise timing solution, an accurate position for the pulsar was obtained using the Australia Telescope Compact Array (ATCA).
A 12-hour radio synthesis map of the field of PSR J0437–4715 was made from observations on 13 August 1992.
Two separate frequency bands each of 128MHz centred at 1,380 and 1,472 MHz were used, and the data later combined.
The synthesized beam has a full width at half maximum of 6, and the r.m.s. background noise of the resultant image was about 200μJy per beam area.
The pulsar was clearly detected with a flux density of 130mJy, consistent with the pulsed observations.
The variation of the pulsar period with time (Fig. 1) is indicative of binary motion.
The pulse arrival times were analysed in detail using the TEMPO timing program, giving the pulsar and binary parameters presented in Table 1.
The quoted position of the pulsar is that obtained from the ATCA observations.
Quoted errors refer to the last significant digit; the r.m.s. phase residual for the least-squares fit was 15μs.
The measured period derivative () is larger than that of most other millisecond pulsars and yields a characteristic age for the pulsar,, of 7.6x10 8 yr.
The remarkable strength of this pulsar is reflected in the mean flux density at the three observing frequencies given in Table 1, indicating a spectral index between 430 and 2,360 MHz of -1.5, typical of most pulsars, but less steep than those of other millisecond pulsars.
Pulse profiles obtained at the three observing frequencies (Fig. 2) show significant emission over about three-quarters of the pulse period.
The pulse profile appears to consist of a narrow central component flanked by lower-level outriding components.
Unlike most other pulsars, the spectrum of the central emission is flatter than that of the rest, with a difference in spectral index of about 1.
It is possible to detect individual pulses from this millisecond pulsar with high signal-to-noise ratio in unbroken trains.
Figure 3 shows a time sequence of pulses from a 430-MHz observation.
The variations from pulse to pulse are similar to those seen in ordinary long-period pulsars, providing further evidence that the emission process in millisecond pulsars is the same as that in ordinary pulsars, despite the fact that the pulsar magnetosphere is smaller in volume by a factor of about 10 6 .
The masses of the pulsar (m p ) and the companion (m c ) are constrained by the mass function  where P b is the binary period,a p is the semi-major axis of the pulsar orbit,M and; is the solar mass and i is the (unknown) inclination angle of the binary system to the plane of the sky.
Assuming a mass of 1.4 M and; for the pulsar and sin i=1,we obtain a lower limit of 0.14 M and; for the mass of the companion.
There is no evidence for any eclipse of the pulsar by the companion star, showing that it is compact.
The pulsar is a member of the slowly growing class of millisecond pulsars with low-mass companions.
In the standard formation model, millisecond pulsars are formed when a neutron star accretes matter from an evolving companion.
During this accretion phase the system may be visible as a low-mass X-ray binary.
The accretion process spins up the neutron star to millisecond periods over a timescale of 10 7 –10 8 yr, and, when mass transfer ceases, the system consists of a millisecond pulsar in a circular orbit with a low-mass companion.
We searched for the optical companion to the pulsar on the relevant UKSTU J-survey plate.
A star close to the limiting magnitude (22) of the Schmidt plate lies roughly 0.7arcsec to the west of the radio position.
Until the proper motion of the pulsar is measured, we cannot be sure that this star is its optical counterpart, but it seems likely.
No other stars are seen close to the radio position.
At a distance of 150pc, the distance modulus is 5.9 magnitudes providing a lower limit to the absolute magnitude of the companion of about 16 whether or not the candidate star is the binary companion.
This is similar to the limit placed on the companion to PSR B1855+09 which is about 5 times more distant.
As PSR J0437–4715 is so close, however, it should be possible to detect a companion about 25 times less luminous than the limit on PSR B1855+09.
The detection of the companion could constrain models of white-dwarf temperature evolution and pulsar magnetic field decay.
There is also a possibility of detecting brightness variations as a function of orbital phase if the sub-pulsar point of the companion star is illuminated by high energy pulsar radiation.
Such an effect is seen in PSR B1957+20, where the companion star varies in brightness with orbital phase by about three magnitudes.
The proximity of the pulsar to the Earth should make it possible to determine its distance directly through the measurement of annual trigonometric parallax, the apparent shift in the pulsar position due to the motion of the Earth about the Sun.
This may be detected either by using pulse timing techniques or by very-long-baseline interferometry.
At present, parallax measurements for pulsars are few and barely significant.
In this case, however, the large flux density at high frequencies means that the expected parallax of 7 mas should be measurable with high precision.
The distance derived from parallax, together with the dispersion measure, could also be used to measure the local interstellar electron density and so enhance our knowledge of the pulsar distance scale based on dispersion measure and the space density of pulsars.
These same astrometric techniques will also allow easy determination of the proper motion of the system and hence its velocity, important in establishing its formation history.
It has been suggested that millisecond pulsars contribute to the galactic γ -ray background, perhaps providing as much as 25% of the γ -ray flux at high galactic latitudes, although no millisecond pulsar has yet been detected at these energies.
PSR J0437–4715 provides an excellent opportunity to detect a millisecond pulsar at γ -ray wavelengths.
The pulsar rate of loss of kinetic energy is  ergs , the third highest after the Crab and Vela pulsars, and several times that of PSR B1706–44, all of which were easily detected with the Gamma-Ray Observatory.
Both the outer-gap and polar-cap γ -ray emission models predict that millisecond pulsars should be more efficient at  producing γ -rays than high-field pulsars.
If observations of PSR J0437–4715 with Gamma-Ray Observatory fail to detect the pulsar, this will pose severe problems for these two γ -ray emission models.
FIG. 1 The barycentric period of PSR J0437–4715 over an interval of 15 days showing the Doppler effect of the 5.7-day orbital period.
FIG. 2 Pulse profiles observed at 430 MHz, 1,520MHz and 2,360MHz.
The whole of the pulsar period is displayed.
FIG. 3 A 230-ms time sequence of data from PSR J0437–4715 at 430MHz showing 40 pulse periods.
Vast Neogene laminated diatom mat deposits from the eastern equatorial Pacific Ocean
Alan E. S. Kemp & Jack G. Baldauf
THE eastern equatorial Pacific upwelling region is responsible for up to 50% of global ‘new’ production and is regarded as a barometer of ocean change.
Here we report evidence, from several sediment cores in the region, for repeated episodes of increased equatorial primary production between 15 and 4.4 million years ago, on a scale that is undocumented in the modern ocean.
Mats of the diatom Thalassiothrix were rapidly deposited as successive laminations at rates exceeding 10cm per thousand years; mat deposits can be correlated for distances of more than 2,000km.
It is surprising that the laminations were preserved at all: conventional models suggest that bioturbation caused by the benthic sediment community will disrupt such laminations unless there is insufficient oxygen in the water to support the biological activity.
In this case, however, the strength of the mats and the scale of their deposition may have overwhelmed the benthos, so that the laminations were preserved by physical means.
These remarkable deposits provide a unique window into the Neogene tropical ocean-climate system, and should enable quantification of ancient deep-sea fluxes and the study of short-term (sub-Milankovitch) variability in the ocean.
As a major zone of primary production, the eastern equatorial Pacific continues to be the focus of studies of modern and geological oceanic and climatic processes.
Leg 138 of the Ocean Drilling Program (ODP) has provided a high resolution record of the last 15 million years depositional history of the low-latitude Pacific between 90° and 110°W.
Intervals of highest biosiliceous phytoplankton abundance are recorded by near monospecific assemblages of the pennate diatom Thalassiothrix present in laminated diatom ooze (LDO) at ODP Sites 844, 847, 849, 850, and 851 (Figs 1 and 2).
Re-examination of core material from Deep Sea Drilling Project Sites 572–574 confirms the occurrence of similar laminated diatom ooze at least as far as 133°W.
Laminated sediment occurs intermittently in the above sites from 15 to 4.4 million years ago (Myr BP) but is concentrated at about 15, 13–12, 10.5–9.5, 6.3–6.1, and 4.4Myr with a more geographically restricted interval at 5.8–5.1Myr.
No laminated sediments occur after 4.4Myr.
Combining these data sets with plate motion backtrack data shows that all laminated intervals were deposited when the sites lay within 2° of the Equator.
Preliminary micropalaeontological studies of laminated intervals show that Thalassiothrix longissima is dominant although minor occurrences of other diatoms of the Thalassiothrix group have been noted.
The presence of Thalassiothrix in Neogene sediments from the eastern equatorial Pacific has been widely used as an indicator of significant upwelling and high primary production.
Thalassiothrix longissima (characterized by long straight to twisted cells, only 1.5–5μm wide but up to 4mm long) is described as a cosmopolitan species with a distribution ranging from the Southern Ocean to the North Pacific, North Atlantic and the Norwegian Sea.
This apparent widespread distribution, however, may result from differences in species definition and the grouping of various forms of Thalassiothrix sp. (such as T. antarctica, T. acuta,or T. heteromorpha)into T. longissima.
In the modern ocean,Thalassiothrix ranges in abundance up to 10 3 –10 6 cells per litre and occurs as single cells, colonies, or arranged in bundles and large tangled masses or mats.
There is no information on the sinking characteristics of Thalassiothrix mats but new data from sediment trap studies have highlighted the significance of mass sinking of mats of rhizosolenid diatoms as agents of rapid flux to the sea floor.
The recently reported masses of Rhizosolenia associated with a major front in the equatorial Pacific in the fall of 1992 (ref. 15) may provide a modern analogue for the origins of the Thalassiothrix mat deposits.
The sub-millimetre (typically 20–300μm thick) lamination is principally due to an interlocking mesh of Thalassiothrix (Fig. 3 a).
The composition of individual laminations, determined by electron microscopy, varies from near monospecific assemblages of intact specimens to mixed assemblages of Thalassiothrix with calcareous nannofossils and/or centric diatoms.
Other laminations comprise fragmented and pelletized diatoms or nannofossil-diatom ooze.
Foraminifers occur abundantly in the more calcareous horizons and rarely (but persistently) within the Thalassiothrix laminations (Fig. 3 b).
Individual laminations are defined by differences in microfossil assemblage (Fig. 3 b)and/or by bed-parallel discontinuities in the Thalassiothrix meshwork.
Some individual laminations may be traced across the cross-section of the core implying an original mat area of more than 30cm 2 .
We interpret the bed-parallel discontinuities in the Thalassiothrix meshwork as representing the contact between successively deposited mats of diatoms, and the laminations (defined by differences in microfossil assemblage) as representing the deposits of different episodes of mat production.
Laminated sediment is typically concentrated in packets 10–20m thick.
Within these packets, there are commonly three scales of alternation between LDO and the regionally dominant sediment type of foraminifer-nannofossil ooze: at the sub-millimetre, the millimetre to centimetre, and the decimetre scale.
The sub-millimetre laminations are discussed above.
The mm- to cm-scale alternation is between paler (nannofossil-bearing) diatom ooze and purer diatom ooze (Fig. 2).
On a decimetre scale there is an alternation between beds of unlaminated nannofossil ooze and subordinate quantities of laminated diatom ooze and/or partly bioturbated diatom ooze, with fragmented mats.
Exceptionally, laminated beds over 0.5m thick are present.
Many LDO beds (for example, 4.4Myr) have a very sharp base marking an abrupt transition from nannofossil ooze to diatom ooze.
This represents the very abrupt onset of a period of sustained high productivity and diatom mat flux.
Within laminated episodes, individual beds may be correlated over great distances.
For example, the distinctive 60cm bed of laminated diatom ooze which occurs at the base of the 4.4Myr interval is present at sites 847, 849, 850 and 572 and so may be correlated over a longitudinal extent of at least 2,000km.
(Correlation is based on biostratigraphy and continuous Gamma Ray Attenuation Porosity Evaluator (GRAPE) data, as well as lithostratigraphy).
The coincidence of the laminated intervals with abrupt changes in sediment density, and hence seismic impedance contrast, will provide the means to correlate depositional events over great distances from seismic records in a critical area of the ocean basins.
The most surprising feature of the laminated sediments of the eastern equatorial Pacific is that they are preserved at all in such widespread oxygenated deep sea environments.
The preservation of laminated biogenic sediments is currently understood to be the result of inhibition of benthos by low concentrations of dissolved oxygen either in anoxic silled basins (such as the Black Sea or California Borderland Basins), or beneath zones of strong upwelling, where an oxygen minimum layer intersects the shelf or slope (such as off Peru or within the Gulf of California).
Studies of benthic foraminifera (sensitive indicators of oxygenation) through the laminated intervals show no evidence for any increase in species characteristic of a low oxygen environment, but rather a decrease in tapered cylindrical and infaunal forms attesting to the impenetrability of the meshwork.
Where limited bioturbation of the mat deposits is observed, burrows parallel to bedding (and mats) occur but vertical burrows penetrating the mats are absent.
Such is the tensile strength of individual laminations that some are seen to have been partially pulled out of the core during piston coring or by the wire during core splitting.
It is therefore possible that the common absence of bioturbation in laminated intervals is best explained by the high tensile strength and impenetrability of the diatom meshwork in the Thalassiothrix laminations, which physically suppress benthic activity.
The physical suppression of bioturbation by diatom mats as the mechanism for preservation of lamination in the Thalassiothrix oozes of the eastern equatorial Pacific has major implications for the origins of other enigmatic, near-monospecific deep sea diatom oozes of Neogene and Quaternary age, some of which are macroscopically laminated and whose origins have previously been ascribed to reduced oxygen conditions.
Sedimentation rates for intervals containing a high proportion of laminated sediment are commonly around 10cm per thousand years (cmkyr -1 )(ref. 5).
Within these intervals, the LDO is interbedded with foraminifer nannofossil ooze, a lithology characterized by sedimentation rates of the order of 2–4cmkyr -1 .
Thus, the 10cmkyr -1 rate for the LDO may be regarded as a minimum.
Calculations using this minimum sedimentation rate, and taking an average lamina thickness of 100 micrometres, suggests at least annual deposition of mats, although more than one mat layer may have been deposited from a single mat forming event (concentrations of up to 4.4m -3 have been reported for Rhizosolenia mats).
Quaternary variation in carbonate and silica abundance in deep sea sediments is thought to be largely determined by the balance between the surface production of calcium carbonate and its dissolution in the undersaturated deep waters.
There is, however, no evidence to support preferential dissolution of carbonate in the Thalassiothrix laminations (Fig. 3 b,and above).
The Thalassiothrix mat deposits, which are the direct result of surface processes, are therefore clear evidence that surface processes, and not dissolution at depth, controlled many of the major changes in the relative abundance of carbonate and silica during the Neogene at least in the equatorial Pacific.
Furthermore, the formation of mats of diatoms and their subsequent sinking distorts the normal carbonate-silica cyclicity observed.
Clearly, the mats are deposited much more rapidly than the surrounding nannofossil ooze so that the assumptions of uniform sedimentation rates between age ‘picks’, upon which most palaeoceanographic techniques rely, are invalid.
Indeed, the signal from the mat flux episodes may have to be filtered out to permit conventional Milankovitch band analysis.
For example, the GRAPE record (giving carbonate-opal variation) generally shows excellent correlation between equatorial sites.
However, this correlation breaks down when comparing intervals where one site has significant LDO and another has none.
At least three sub-Milankovitch band periodicities are present in laminated intervals: individual (sub-millimetre) laminations must represent the fall out from mat-forming episodes and, by consideration of sedimentation rates (above), record events of the order of annual average frequency.
The millimetre to centimetre scale alternations, which record periods of more or less intense upwelling, represent time scales of several years to several tens of years and may represent a response to some internal oscillations of the equatorial Pacific such as El Nino.
The decimetre-scale interbedding between LDO and nannofossil ooze represents timescales from hundreds to a few thousand years.
In addition a coarser time scale of LDO occurrence exists (Fig. 1) which may be related to intervals of major global ocean-atmosphere reorganization.
The period of deposition of the laminated ooze (from at least 15 to 4.4Myr) coincides with episodes of major cooling and ocean reorganization.
Although at present, age controls are tentative and further work will be necessary to substantiate correlations, the following points are worthy of note.
The 10.5–9.5Myr episode is penecontemporaneous with a shift in the main locus of silica production from the Atlantic to the Pacific.
The stopping of laminated sediment deposition after the 4.4Myr event (Fig. 1) coincides with a shift in silica production from the equatorial Pacific to the Antarctic circumpolar ocean.
The absence of the laminated intervals in sediments younger than 4.4Myr further suggests that nutrients, in particular silica, were not supplied in sufficient quantities to fuel these bursts of export production in the eastern equatorial Pacific after this date.
This new evidence for rapid sedimentation of diatom mats throughout large areas of the eastern equatorial Pacific suggests major draw down of carbon, silica and other nutrients.
Assessment of the extent to which the widespread, geologically correlated occurrences of mat deposits (Fig. 1) represent synchronous deposition will depend on continuing refinement of Leg 138 time scales but may have major implications for chemical budgets and the rates of biogeochemical cycling.
FIG. 1 Location map (left) and summary of occurrences of the major intervals of laminated diatom ooze (right) in ODP Leg 138 sites and DSDP sites 572–574.
These intervals comprise alternations of laminated and partly bioturbated laminated diatom ooze with nannofossil ooze or diatom nannofossil ooze.
FIG. 2 Core photo showing a rare, saw-cut surface of the laminated diatom ooze.
A millimetre to centimetre-scale alternation between darker (green) pure diatom ooze and paler (off-white) mixed diatom and calcareous nannofossil ooze is the most obvious feature (core 851B-29X-5, 84–100cm).
Wire core splitting caused considerable deformation of laminated intervals making recognition of laminations difficult but producing a characteristic roughened surface.
Obvious laminations were only revealed when a saw was used for core splitting.
This happened only for the deeper intervals and also had the effect of nearly destroying the core.
FIG. 3 Scanning electron microscope images of diatom mat deposits.
a,
A diatom mat—a secondary electron (topographic) image showing the surface of a peeled T. longissima lamina (mat).
The individual frustules in this example are between 3 and 5μm wide but up to 3mm long.
In addition to the general interlocking meshwork arrangement of the frustules, sheaf-like bundles are present.
Both the bundles and interlocking meshwork are characteristic features of present day net hauls of T. longissima mats (compare Fig. 15 a and b in Ref. 11).
The diatom mat forms an impenetrable meshwork of great tensile strength which physically  suppresses benthic activity.
b,
A back scattered electron image of a polished section (cut perpendicular to bedding) of resin-impregnated sediment showing fine detail of laminations defined by differences in composition.
This image can be most simply regarded as a porosity map, since the impregnating resin has a relatively low atomic number and shows up black.
The darkest (high porosity) laminations are the monospecific concentrations of T. longissima (the diatom mats).
The paler (lowest porosity) laminations comprise mainly coccoliths with a mixture of varied diatom flora and foraminifers.
The small (0.1–0.3mm) black objects, commonly with a white outline, are planktonic and benthic foraminifers.
These are most abundant in the paler, carbonate rich zones but are also present in the darker diatom mat laminations.
Climate-driven variations in geothermal activity in the northern Kenya rift valley
N. C. Sturchio, P. N. Dunkley & M. Smith
HIGH-TEMPERATURE continental geothermal systems are primarily associated with volcanic activity at plate margins.
It has long been known that the activity of these geothermal systems is intermittent, and this is generally attributed to the effect of magmatic intrusions or fault motions.
Recently, however, it has also been recognized that surface-water hydrology and climate variations can influence the evolution of individual silicic caldera-hosted geothermal systems, although it is difficult to judge the general importance of such effects in controlling the long-term behaviour of continental geothermal systems.
Here we report uranium-series ages for the hydrothermal deposits of past geothermal activity from several Quaternary volcanic centres in the northern Kenya rift valley.
We find that the ages correspond well to periods of high lake level within the rift, suggesting that the elevated water table and increased availability of meteoric water associated with more humid climates can promote greater transfer of heat and mass from deep, long-lived heat sources to the surface.
In the northern Kenya rift valley, geothermal activity is associated with a series of Quaternary volcanoes (Fig. 1).
Hot, hydrothermally altered ground and relatively weak fumaroles, but no active hot springs, are found on these volcanoes.
On the intervening rift floor are hot springs representing deeply circulated groundwaters not involved significantly with the high enthalpy systems of the volcanoes.
The lack of hot springs and the weak nature of fumaroles on the volcanoes reflect deep water tables, a consequence of the semi-arid to arid climate of the region.
Former geothermal discharge areas have recently been recognized on the flanks and summits of several of these volcanoes.
These are manifested by hot-spring sinters, silica veins and associated hydrothermal alteration.
This former hot-spring activity at high elevations on the volcanoes could indicate that the region was more geothermally active in the past; the activity may have declined as a result of waning heat sources.
However, gas geothermometry on fumaroles indicates high temperatures (300°C) at depth in some of the geothermal systems.
Emuruangogolak and the Barrier volcanoes have erupted within the past 100 years, suggesting that magmatic heat sources are still available to drive the geothermal systems.
An alternative explanation for the presence of geothermal silica deposits high on the volcanoes is that deposition occurred when water tables were considerably higher during humid climates.
High water tables would have been conducive to hot springs at elevated locations, without requiring changes in the intensity of heat sources.
To understand better the geothermal history of the region, we collected samples of geothermal silica (Fig. 1) for age determination by uranium-series (U-series) methods (Table 1).
A striking result of these age determinations is the correlation between the times of hot-spring activity at elevated locations on volcanoes and high lake levels within the rift during the past 200kyr (200,000 years).
Evidence for high lake levels in the past consists of old shorelines associated with skeletal remains of aquatic organisms and littoral stromatolites, and subaqueous volcanic products (such as pillow-lava/hyaloclastite sequences intercalated with diatomites) on the flanks of several of the volcanoes.
Figure 2 shows a compilation of age determinations indicating times of high lake levels for the Kenya rift valley in comparison with results from the present study.
Three lakes within the study area fluctuated in size and depth during the late Quaternary.
These are Lake Baringo in the south, Lake Turkana in the north, and the former Lake Suguta which occupied the inner trough of the rift between Emuruangogolak and the Barrier volcanoes at various times.
At one stage (12–7kyr ago) Lake Suguta covered an area of 2,000km 2 and reached depths of more than 300m, but it has since desiccated in response to an increasingly arid climate.
Sinter deposits associated with active fumaroles around the western rim of the caldera of the Barrier volcano have U-series ages ranging from 6.90.3kyr to 9.30.5kyr.
These ages correlate with the period when Lakes Turkana and Suguta reached maximum levels on the flanks of the Barrier volcano.
Lake Turkana fluctuated around a maximum level between 9.5kyr and 7.5kyr ago, and the highest shoreline on Lake Suguta has a radiocarbon age of 9.70.2kyr.
Silica veins near active fumaroles along the Nakoporon fault zone on the western flanks of Korosi volcano have U-series ages of 11.90.6kyr and 12.70.6kyr.
Lake Baringo, adjacent to Korosi, reached its highest recorded stand at 985m elevation between about 12kyr and 11kyr, when the nearby silica veins (1,000m elevation) were deposited at Nakoporon.
These deposits on the Barrier and Korosi volcanoes were contemporaneous with very high lake levels that occurred throughout the Kenya rift between about 12kyr and 7kyr ago, and correspond to a humid climate associated with the latest glacial-to-interglacial transition of stages 2 to 1 in the marine 18 O record.
Sinter deposits associated with active fumaroles on the caldera rim of Emuruangogolak volcano have a U-series isochron age of 293kyr.
This falls within the period from about 35kyr to 25kyr when lakes in East Africa were again high.
Extensive silica deposits occur on the upper flanks and summit area of Namarunu.
A massive vein from the upper eastern flank has a U-series age of 13311kyr, contemporaneous with a period of high lake levels.
A U-series age of 12120kyr obtained from littoral stromatolites on a shoreline in the Namarunu area indicates that Lake Suguta reached high levels at this time.
High shorelines also occur in the southern part of the rift around the Magadi-Natron basin, where littoral stromatolites have U-series ages of 13510kyr.
There is also corroborative evidence for high stands in Lake Turkana around 130kyr.
Hillaire-Marcel et al.
suggested that the high lake levels at 13510kyr represent a humid climate during the glacial-interglacial transition of stages 6–5 in the marine 18 O record.
Most of the Namarunu samples analysed are much older, but their high (234 U/ 238 U) values indicate ages 2 Myr.
Silica veins associated with active fumaroles on the Lower Pleistocene volcanic centre of Chepchuk have poorly resolved U-series ages of 35060kyr and 430120kyr.
These may correspond to a period of high lake levels found elsewhere in the rift.
Stromatolites related to former high lake stands in the Lake Magadi-Natron basin have uncorrected U-series ages of about 300kyr, although a corrected age of 25040kyr may be obtained by assuming that 234 U had been preferentially leached.
This could represent a humid climate during the glacial-interglacial transition between stages 8 and 7 of the marine 18 O record.
Minor silica veinlets within faulted trachyte flows on the lower flanks of Paka volcano have U-series ages of 644kyr and 815kyr.
These do not correlate with any known period of high lake levels in East Africa, although in northern Africa there is evidence for lake transgressions at around 90kyr.
This may be evidence for a previously unrecognized phase of humid climate in Kenya.
Only one episode of previous geothermal activity since 200kyr has been dated at each volcano, whereas there are clearly at least three distinct periods of high lake levels.
This is not a result of sampling bias on our part, as all known sites of geothermal silica deposits were sampled.
Several geological factors may explain this apparent discrepancy.
First, evidence of additional periods of hot spring activity on each volcano may have been obscured by a cover of younger volcanic products.
For example, the flanks of Emuruangogolak and the Barrier are virtually covered by lavas post-dating the 120–140-kyr high lake stand, and both volcanoes have extensive cover of subaerial basalts and trachytes that even post-date the 10-kyr high lake stand.
Second, the region is tectonically active, and substantial faulting and erosion have occurred throughout the Pleistocene.
Taking these factors into account, we believe that the correlation of periods of humid climate with the ages of preserved geo-thermal silica deposits in the northern Kenya rift valley is significant.
Errors (1 ,given in parentheses) based on statistics of α -counting method.
Decay constants used for age calculations: Abbreviations used for sample locations as follows.
BAR, Barrier (Kakorinya) volcano.
Sinter float and veins on upper southwest wall and rim of caldera, associated with faults and fractures cutting a small trachyte dome.
Pervasive alteration, brecciation and fumarolic activity (elevation 910m).
NAM, Namarunu volcano.
Silica veins from summit area east of main fault scarp, above area of hydrothermal alteration (elevation 720m).
EMU, Emuruangogolak volcano.
Area of sinter float and layered veins on rim and southwest-facing slope of caldera wall, associated with clay alteration and fumarolic activity (elevation 1,140m).
PAK, Paka volcano.
Silica float blocks from low, north-south ridge on N flank, associated with fault cutting trachyte lavas (elevation 1,200m).
CHEP, Chepchuk volcano.
North-south ridge, east of Nagoreti fault, on northwest corner of former caldera structure, southwest of fumarolic activity.
Massive chalcedonic veins and float blocks (elevation 1,100m).
KOR, Korosi volcano.
Silica vein cutting Nakoporon fault scarp, northwest flank of volcano, associated with fumarolic activity (elevation 1,000m).
FIG. 1 Map showing location of sampled localities within the inner trough of the northern Kenya rift valley.
FIG. 2 Diagram showing U-series ages of geothermal silica deposits (this work) compared to periods of high lake levels in the Kenya rift valley and northern Africa during the past 200kyr.
Numbers in parentheses indicate references cited in text and n is the number of data points portrayed.
Vertical dashed lines enclose periods of contemporaneous high lake levels and elevated geothermal activity on rift volcanoes.
Role of sulphur photochemistry in tropical ozone changes after the eruption of Mount Pinatubo
S. Bekki, R. Toumi & J. A. Pyle
RECENT observations suggest that the eruption of Mount Pinatubo in June 1991 has had a considerable effect on ozone concentrations in the tropical stratosphere (refs 1, 2, and J. W. Waters, personal communication).
Although stratospheric ozone losses following volcanic eruptions are generally attributed to the presence of sulphate aerosol, we present model calculations which demonstrate that gas-phase sulphur chemistry may have played a part in the tropical ozone perturbations that followed the Pinatubo eruption.
We find that in the first month or so after the eruption, the large amount of SO 2 injected into the tropical atmosphere catalyses mid-stratospheric ozone production.
On the other hand, the SO 2 cloud absorbs solar radiation, thereby reducing the rate of O 2 photolysis (and hence of ozone production) below it.
These two effects cancel each other out at an altitude of about 25 kilometres.
After one or two months, most of the SO 2 has been oxidized to sulphate; the efficiency of these two mechanisms then becomes negligible (although ozone remains perturbed in the lower stratosphere because of its long photochemical lifetime in this region).
The model features show good agreement with initial ozone measurements following the eruption, including both the mid-altitude switch from ozone loss to ozone gain, and the increase and subsequent decrease in the total ozone column.
Ozonesonde measurements averaged over August and September 1991 show that the concentration of O 3 had substantially decreased in the tropical lower stratosphere compared with measurements averaged over the quarter preceding the Mount Pinatubo eruption.
The maximum O 3 reduction (18–20%) was observed at an altitude around 24–25km.
Interestingly, the data also suggest that O 3 concentrations had increased by 5–10% above 28km.
Analysis of the Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS) data indicates local increases in the tropical O 3 column of 2% in July, but decreases of 1% in August and 3–4% in September (Table 1).
When zonally averaged, TOMS O 3 changes do not exceed 2–4% (ref. 8).
Ozone measurements obtained by the Microwave Limb Sounder (MLS) experiment in September (three months after the eruption), when compared to climatological values, suggest O 3 reductions in the tropical lower stratosphere, but no significant O 3 increases around 30km (J. W. Waters, personal communication).
Some of these O 3 datasets have been analysed without completely eliminating the dynamical variations related to the  quasi-biennial oscillation.
Therefore the observed O 3 changes cannot be entirely attributed to the Mount Pinatubo eruption.
A number of possible causes have been advanced to explain stratospheric O 3 reductions following large volcanic eruptions (although these may not all apply to the tropics).
The mechanisms currently proposed attribute O 3 losses to perturbations induced by large increases in the stratospheric sulphate aerosol loading: these include enhanced heterogeneous chemistry on aerosols, enhanced scattering from the aerosols and radiative heating by the aerosols causing enhanced upwelling.
Before the volcanic cloud was dispersed and SO 2 converted to sulphate aerosols, O 3 perturbations caused by large concentrations of SO 2 in the volcanic cloud may have occurred.
The eruption of Mount Pinatubo injected between 15 and 30Mt of SO 2 into the stratosphere; SO 2 was oxidized and converted to sulphate aerosols in one or two months.
In the stratosphere, the rate-limiting step in the oxidation chain leading to the conversion of SO 2 to H 2 SO 4 is believed to be the reaction of SO 2 with OH.
The HO x (OH+HO 2 ) lost is subsequently regenerated, so that the net effect of the oxidation sequence on HO x (and hence on O 3 ) is null.
The end oxidation product, H 2 SO 4 , forms new sulphate particles or condenses on pre-existing particles.
Ozone production catalysed by SO 2 is also possible through the following sequence  Sulphur dioxide may also affect O 3 by absorption of radiation.
SO 2 absorbs strongly between 180 and 235nm, weakly between 260 to 340nm and very weakly between 340 to 390 nm.
Therefore SO 2 has the potential to reduce the transmission of the solar flux, reducing the photolysis rates of key species such as O 2 and hence reducing the rate of ozone production.
In order to assess the importance of the two mechanisms mentioned above, we use a zonally averaged chemical-radiative-dynamical model of the middle atmosphere.
The chemical scheme combines what are thought to be the most important O x , NO x  , HO x , ClO x  , BrO x , CHO x  and SO x (ref. 17) reactions with the recommended kinetic data.
The values of SO 2 absorption cross-sections adopted in this work are taken from ref. 19 for the 180–235 nm region and from ref. 14 for the 260–390 nm region.
Model integrations cover the period from June to September 1991.
The volcanic eruption of Mount Pinatubo is simulated by injecting 20 Mt of SO 2 into one model column (9.5° wide, centred at 9.47°N) over the altitude range of 21 to 28km from the 12 to 15 June.
Certain simplifications are made; an instantaneous mixing of the SO 2 emissions into the model grid boxes is assumed, subgrid processes such as plume chemistry are neglected and no heterogeneous chemistry or aerosol radiative heating is included.
We focus our attention on the three months following the eruption, when the SO 2 -induced perturbations are expected to be the most significant.
Figures 1 a and b shows the calculated changes in O 3 concentration in July and September (one and three months after the eruption, respectively) due to the SO 2 injections.
The changes in O 3 concentrations are predominantly confined to the latitude band of injections in July.
Ozone concentrations increase in the mid-stratosphere (the top region of the volcanic cloud), by up to 12% at around 27km.
In the tropical lower stratosphere, however, O 3 is reduced by up to 7%.
By September, the initial SO 2 cloud has spread throughout the tropics.
Ozone increases (2%) in the mid-stratosphere are now much smaller than in July, but O 3 in the tropical lower stratosphere remains low with reductions of up to 8%.
Ozone increases calculated in the mid-stratosphere are caused by the large concentrations of SO 2 (200p.p.b. at 25km in July) present in the initial volcanic cloud, which catalyse O 3 production through cycle I. Production of O 3 by this mechanism becomes comparable to the O 3 production by photolysis of O 2 in the SO 2 cloud in July (Fig. 2 a).
The calculated increases in O 3 are, however, lower than anticipated from the additional SO 2 -catalysed production of O 3 alone.
This can be explained by the decrease in the solar flux (caused by SO 2 absorption) which reduces the rate of O 2 photolysis and hence of O 3 production.
In the lower stratosphere in July (Fig. 3 a)O 2 photolysis is reduced by up to 50%.
This O 3 -reducing mechanism competes with the O 3 -producing cycle I throughout the stratosphere.
Because the rate of cycle I depends on the local concentration of SO 2 , it shows a maximum in the SO 2 cloud.
Conversely, the reduction in O 2 photolysis is a maximum below the cloud because of the large SO 2 column.
The opposite effects on O 3 of the two processes compensate each other around 25km in the model.
The rates of these processes depend on the amount of SO 2 present in the stratosphere.
The model predicts a lifetime of about 45 days for SO 2 , which is consistent with the observed SO 2 decay time (35 days).
As most of the SO 2 cloud is converted to sulphate by September, the perturbations of the photochemical balance of O 3 are substantially reduced at this time compared with July; O 3 production through cycle I now represents less than 10% of the O 3 production in the mid-stratosphere (Fig. 2 b),and oxygen photolysis is reduced only by about 10% in the lower stratosphere (Fig. 3 b).
The recovery of the normal photochemical balance for O 3 is evident in the mid-stratosphere with O 3 increases much lower in September (2%) compared to July (12%).
In the lower stratosphere, however, O 3 is still 8% lower than the control run values because of the long lifetime for O 3 in this region.
The photochemical replacement time for O 3 is of the order of several months in the tropical lower stratosphere compared to only about a week in the mid-stratosphere.
This mechanism explains why measurements made during the quarter following the eruption indicate significant O 3 increases in the mid-stratosphere, whereas observations (J. W. Waters, personal communication) made after this period do not show any significant changes in that region.
The model calculations also capture an important feature, the switching from positive to negative anomaly in the O 3 column shown by the TOMS data (Table 1).
None of the aerosol-induced mechanisms currently proposed can account for this feature.
The modelled O 3 column reductions in August and September are smaller than observed, suggesting that O 3 -destroying mechanisms (probably related to the large increase in sulphate aerosol loading) may be missing in the simulations.
No firm conclusions can be drawn, however, because the analysis of the TOMS data focuses on the largest local changes whereas the model calculations correspond to zonally averaged quantities.
There are other discrepancies between the calculations and observations.
Measurements suggest that the crossing over from production to destruction of O 3 occurs at an altitude of 28km.
Model predictions on the other hand indicate an altitude of about 25 km.
This may be due to the coarse resolution of the model (3.5 km vertically) and a number of uncertainties remaining in the model calculations, such as the initial distribution of the volcanic cloud and the amount of SO 2 injected.
In addition this version of the model does not include the quasi-biennial oscillation, an important feature of the tropical stratospheric circulation.
One consequence of this is that although the observations suggest that the cloud was centred on the Equator, the model simulates a cloud at about 10°N, because it does not allow for rapid transport of the cloud into the tropics and Southern Hemisphere.
Nevertheless we have demonstrated that SO 2 -photochemical perturbations have the potential to explain certain features of the tropical O 3 changes observed after the Mount Pinatubo eruption.
FIG. 1 Modelled percentage changes in the O 3 concentration as a function of latitude and altitude in July (a)and September (b);comparison is between the simulation including SO 2 injection and a control run with no SO 2 injection.
FIG. 2 Modelled ratio of the O 3 production from cycle I to the O 3 production from O 2 photolysis () as a function of latitude and altitude in July (a)and September (b).
FIG. 3 Modelled percentage changes in the O 2 photolysis as a function of latitude and altitude in July (a)and September (b);comparison is between the simulation including SO 2 injection and a control run with no SO 2 injection.
Crystal structure of globular domain of histone H5 and its implications for nucleosome binding
V. Ramakrishnan, J. T. Finch, V. Graziano, P. L. Lee & R. M. Sweet
The structure of GH5, the globular domain of the linker histone H5, has been solved to 2.5Å resolution by multiwavelength anomalous diffraction on crystals of the selenomethionyl protein.
The structure shows a striking similarity to the DNA-binding domain of the catabolite gene activator protein CAP, thereby providing a possible model for the binding of GH5 to DNA.
THE linker histones H1 and H5 are components of chromatin which are essential for the organization of nucleosomes into a higher order structure, the 30nm filament.
In addition, evidence is emerging regarding the role of these histones as repressors of transcription.
H1 and H5 are homologous, and H5, which is the predominant form of linker histone in avian erythrocytes, may be regarded as an extreme variant of H1.
H5 has several lysine-to-arginine substitutions relative to H1, and binds more tightly to chromatin than does H1.
Its synthesis in the cell coincides with the maturation of the erythrocyte.
Induction of the H5 gene in transfected rat sarcoma cells results in the inhibition of DNA replication and the arrest of cells in G1 phase.
In many respects H5 is more similar to histone H1°, which is found in terminally differentiated cells, than it is to H1.
All these data suggest that H5 is associated with chromatin that is inactive in transcription and replication.
Both H1 and H5 consist of a central, trypsin-resistant, globular domain which is flanked by extended, basic amino- and carboxy-terminal arms.
The very basic C-terminal arm comprises almost half the protein, with half the residues in this arm consisting of lysines or arginines.
These basic arms are likely to be involved in interactions with linker DNA.
The highly conserved globular domain is essential for the binding of H1 to the nucleosome.
It confers on the nucleosome the same protection from micrococcal nuclease digestion as full-length H1 (ref. 12), suggesting that the globular domain binds to the nucleosome as an independent module.
In H5 bound to chromatin, many lysines in the globular domain are strongly protected against chemical modification whereas the lysines in the N-terminal and C-terminal tails are only weakly protected.
This implies that the globular domain has a different and possibly more specific mode of interaction with DNA from the rest of the protein.
Although it is generally accepted that the globular domain of H1 or H5 binds to the exit and entry points of nucleosomal DNA, there are currently many conflicting models for the detailed picture of how this is achieved.
In order to understand its binding to the nucleosome, we crystallized GH5, the globular domain of H5 (ref. 18), and report here its structure and implications for nucleosome binding.
Structure determination
The structure was determined by multiwavelength anomalous diffraction (MAD) on crystals of the seleno-methionyl form of the protein.
Details of the data collection are shown in Table 1a.
Two phasing methods were used to obtain electron density maps.
The first used the algebraic formalism developed by Hendrickson and coworkers; the other treats multiwavelength data as arising from a conventional multiple isomorphous replacement experiment, with the inclusion of anomalous scattering, and uses a maximum-likelihood algorithm to refine heavy-atom parameters.
Details of the structure determination are shown in Table 1b and Fig. 1.
In our experience, treatment of the data as a conventional heavy-atom derivative problem, combined with the use of a maximum-likelihood algorithm to estimate heavy-atom parameters, gave somewhat better maps than the algebraic formalism.
Description of the structure
The part of the H5 sequence that was expressed in Escherichia coli consists of Met-Thr-Glu (corresponding to the first three codons of H5), followed by residues 22–105 of H5, followed by Leu-Val introduced in the process of inserting a stop codon.
The whole polypeptide chain is 89 residues long, and encompasses the globular domain generated by tryptic digestion of H5, which spans residues 22–102 (ref. 27).
In the following, all numbering refers to the native H5 sequence.
The asymmetric unit in the crystal consists of two molecules, A and B, shown in Fig. 2 a.
The two molecules are related by a rotation angle  of 165.6 degrees and a translation T x  of 2.8Å .
We have built residues 24–96 into the electron density, although poorly defined density is visible beyond residue 96 of molecule A. Thus of the 89 residues in the polypeptide chain, 5 residues at the N terminus and 11 residues at the C terminus are missing in the current model.
Each molecule consists of a three-helix bundle (helices I-III), with a β -hairpin at the C terminus.
There is also a short three-residue stretch comprising residues 44–46 between helices I and II that is in the β -strand conformation.
Together with the C-terminal β -hairpin, this strand forms the third strand of an antiparallel β -sheet.
Residues 40–43 are disordered in each monomer.
Figure 2 b shows a superposition of the A and B monomers.
In the three-helical bundle, the r.m.s. deviation in the positions of the C α atoms is only 0.35, showing that the two molecules are nearly identical.
However, the β -hairpin is in a completely different conformation in the two monomers.
In the A monomer, the β -hairpin is extended, whereas in the B monomer, it bends in towards the body of the molecule.
The reason for this is that in the A monomer, the turn of the β -hairpin is stabilized by intermolecular crystal contacts, mainly through hydrophobic interactions involving Val87 and Ala89.
This also results in better defined density for the β -hairpin of the A monomer.
The interface between the A and B monomers consists of helices I and II.
In particular, there are solvent-mediated interactions involving Tyr53, Tyr58 and His57 from both molecules; these six residues form a cluster at the interface.
It is noteworthy, therefore, that Tyr53 and His57 are both absent in chicken H1.
This may explain the tendency of GH5 but not GH1 to dimerize in solution.
The area of the interface is about 650  2 , which is at the lower end of the range observed for molecules that exist as dimers.
It remains to be seen whether the interaction between the molecules in the crystallographic dimer is representative of the GH5-GH5 interactions in chromatin.
The structure makes clear why certain residues are highly conserved.
Glycine at position 79, which is present in all H1 molecules, is involved in making a sharp bend in the polypeptide chain, in going from the end of helix III into the β -hairpin.
The highly conserved residues Leu81, Phe93 and Leu95 form a hydrophobic cluster which anchors the base of the β -hairpin to the core of the three-helix bundle.
A number of highly conserved glycines and other small residues at the C terminus of GH5 lie at or close to the turn of the β -hairpin, and presumably are required to form the hairpin without steric hindrance.
Comparison with NMR structure
The overall fold of GH5 has been determined using two-dimensional NMR.
The topology of the three helices in the NMR structure, and the assignment of the residues that make up the helices agree well with the crystal structure.
But the two structures differ completely in detail.
The C α r.m.s. deviation between the crystal structure and the NMR structure is 6  overall, and 5  when only the three helices are considered for the comparison.
The helical axes have significantly different directions in the two structures, and it is not possible to superimpose the helices.
The difference between the crystal and NMR structures is not surprising as GH5 was a very early NMR structure, and corresponds to a ‘first generation’ rather than a ‘fourth generation’structure.
In a protein with a fairly high helix content, there were relatively few nuclear Overhauser effect constraints, and the C α r.m.s. deviation between various NMR solutions was 4.3  (ref. 14).
Thus the NMR structure must be considered as a description of the fold rather than a high-resolution structure.
There are also real differences between the NMR and crystal structures: the NMR structure shows no evidence of any β -sheet.
This may be the result of different sample conditions.
The NMR analysis was done at pH3.7 on GH5 that was made by proteo- lysis of native H5.
The GH5 used in crystallization was obtained by expression in E. coli.
It was purified in pH7–8 and crystallized in phosphate buffer at pH8.0.
So it is possible that the β -sheet that is present near physiological pH is disrupted at low pH.
Comparison with CAP
A possible similarity of GH5 with the DNA-binding domain of the catabolite gene activator protein (CAP) has been suggested.
The DNA-binding domain of CAP consists of residues 135–205 and includes helices D, E and F. But, perhaps because of the irregularity in the second helix of the NMR structure of GH5, it was concluded that there was no correspondence between helix II of GH5 and helix E of CAP and that there was no helix-turn-helix motif in GH5.
In fact, as the present work shows, the three helices in CAP and the GH5 crystal structure can be superimposed extremely well (Fig. 3 a).
If only those residues that are part of helices are considered, the C α r.m.s. deviation between CAP and GH5 is 1.3 .
If one considers all structurally equivalent residues, the C α r.m.s. deviation is 1.7, which is well within the range observed for homologous proteins that have only 10% sequence identity.
This result is reinforced by an overall similarity of the topology, even apart from the three-helical bundle.
As seen in Fig. 3 b,both proteins have a β -hairpin at the C terminus.
In CAP there is a second β -hairpin between helices D and E, which forms a 4-stranded antiparallel β -sheet with the C-terminal hairpin.
In GH5 there appears to be a deletion, so that the hairpin between helices I and II is replaced by a single short stretch of β -strand; this results in a β -sheet with three, rather than four, strands.
The secondary structure assignments for GH5, and the alignment of the structurally equivalent residues in CAP, are shown in Fig. 4.
This alignment differs from those proposed previously.
In the alignment based on the NMR model, the alignment for helix III is the same as the one shown here; however, the alignment for helix I is shifted by one residue whereas the alignment for helix II, for which no structural similarity was observed in the NMR study, is completely different.
Another alignment, based on sequence comparison is also completely different from the one shown here.
DNA binding
The structural similarity between GH5 and the DNA-binding domain of CAP suggests that GH5 and CAP are related proteins.
If so, it also suggests that GH5 recognizes DNA in a manner similar to CAP.
This is not meant to imply that the details of the interaction are the same in both proteins.
The proteins have little sequence identity and obviously diverged a long time ago.
CAP is a prokaryotic sequence-specific protein which is known to bind to DNA as a dimer and to induce a bend in DNA.
On the other hand, GH5 is a eukaryotic protein that binds as a monomer, is not sequence-specific (although it may have sequence preferences), and the structure of the DNA on binding to GH5 is unknown.
Nevertheless, it is likely that the qualitative features of DNA binding are the same.
In particular, helix III of GH5, which corresponds to the recognition helix F of CAP, should bind to DNA by fitting into a groove, and the approximate face that GH5 presents to a duplex of DNA should be the same as the corresponding part of CAP.
To understand the qualitative features of the binding of GH5 to DNA, we have taken the structure of the CAP/DNA complex, and made a least-squares superposition of GH5 onto CAP on the basis of the sequence alignment in Fig. 4.
To avoid any presumptions about the structure of the DNA, we replaced the bent DNA in the actual complex with the phosphate backbone for B-form DNA that was used to model the CAP/DNA complex.
The resulting model of GH5 binding to DNA is shown in Fig. 5.
How well does this model agree with existing data?
First, the highly conserved residues Lys69 and Arg73 are positioned to interact with one strand of DNA, and Lys85 is positioned to interact with the other strand.
These residues have counterparts in CAP (Arg185, Lys188 and His199, respectively; see Fig. 4) which interact with phosphates in the corresponding DNA strands.
Second, Lys69 and Lys85 are protected against chemical modification in chromatin.
Lysine 85 is protected almost three times as well as any other lysine in H5.
Mutation of this lysine to a glutamine or glutamic acid results in the loss of the globular domain's ability to protect 166-base-pair (bp) nucleosomal DNA from nuclease digestion, implying that this residue is involved in DNA binding.
Finally, His25 and His62 can be crosslinked to DNA in chromatin.
As seen in Fig. 5, these residues are in the vicinity of the same duplex of DNA as the recognition helix, although adjustments to the model will have to be made to bring them into proper position to interact with DNA.
This could involve both small changes in the relative orientation of GH5 and DNA, and structural changes in the DNA itself.
Thus our model for binding of GH5 to DNA based on the homology with CAP is in agreement with existing biochemical data, but differs from previously proposed models.
Nucleosome binding
In chromatin, GH5 binds to the nucleosome, probably near the dyad axis.
There is good evidence that in vitro GH5 binds to two duplexes of DNA.
The crystal structure shows the presence of two probable DNA-binding sites: in addition to the residues already discussed, there is a second cluster of highly conserved basic residues in GH5, consisting of Lys40, Arg42, Lys52 and Arg94, which could interact with a second duplex of DNA (Fig. 5).
These residues lie 25–30  away from Lys 69 and Arg73 in the recognition helix.
This second group of residues could interact with an adjacent duplex of nucleosomal DNA.
The residues Lys40 and Arg42 are part of a disordered loop between helices I and II.
Therefore we think that GH5 has a primary DNA-binding site, which is similar to that of CAP, and a secondary binding site that is less structurally defined and may consist of a group of basic residues interacting with phosphates on a second DNA duplex.
Our model predicts that if the basic residues that form part of the ‘secondary’ binding site are replaced by neutral residues, GH5 should no longer bind two duplexes of DNA.
It may also lose a preference for nucleosomal DNA over naked DNA, although this preference may depend on the structure of the nucleosomal DNA as well as the presence of more than one duplex in the GH5 binding site.
Existing data on the location of GH5 in the nucleosome are conflicting.
DNAse I protection experiments show a protection of the DNA at the nucleosomal dyad on GH5 binding, suggesting that GH5 binds directly to the dyad.
It is known that the DNA at the dyad has a minor groove at the exposed surface.
In the model shown in Fig. 5, it is possible that the recognition helix fits into a wide minor groove rather than a major groove as shown, but such a binding of a helix-turn-helix motif would be unprecedented.
Direct binding of the recognition helix at the dyad also raises the question of how GH5 protects both entry and exit points of nucleosomal DNA with only two DNA-binding sites, one of which binds at the dyad.
It is possible that the protection at the dyad is a result of indirect effects such as steric exclusion.
Crosslinking experiments place His25 near the end of the nucleosomal DNA and His62 in linker DNA.
If so, this would place the body of the nucleosome just above the molecule of GH5 in Fig. 5.
Each DNA-binding site on GH5 could interact with a region of linker DNA near the entry and exit points of nucleosomal DNA.
This would explain the protection by GH5 of nucleosomal DNA against micrococcal nuclease digestion; it would also be consistent with the GH5-DNA crosslinks and with the presence of two binding sites.
The details of the interaction of GH5 binding to the nucleosome will become clear only with more data.
The crystal structure presented here suggests that GH5 has a primary mode of binding to DNA based on the similarity with CAP, and the presence of a secondary site that could bind to another duplex of DNA.
This provides a basis for site-directed mutagenesis and co-crystallization experiments aimed at understanding the binding of GH5 to the nucleosome.
a,
Data collection:
The gene for GH5 was cloned into a plasmid that is part of the T7 expression system, and we expressed the gene in the E. coli strain B834(DE3), which is a methionine-requiring auxotroph with an inducible gene for T7 RNA polymerase on the host chromosome.
Fully substituted selenomethionyl protein was produced by growth and induction of these cells in a synthetic medium containing selenomethionine together with the other 19 amino-acids.
Crystals of the selenomethionyl protein were isomorphous with those from the native protein obtained previously.
Data were collected on crystals of selenomethionyl GH5 by rotations about the a and b axes, using an Enraf-Nonius FAST area detector and the computer program MADNES on beam-line X12C at the NSLS at Brookhaven National Laboratory.
The crystals were accurately aligned to allow simultaneous measurement of both reflections in a Bijvoet pair.
The same reflections were measured on each crystal at three wavelengths,λ 1-3 , chosen as previously recommended to maximize the dispersive and anomalous differences from the selenium K-edge.
The position of the absorption edge of selenium was determined before each set of three-wavelength data by the measurement of X-ray fluorescence from the crystal at right angles to and in the plane of polarization of the beam.
These data were used to calculate the values of the  and  the real and imaginary components, respectively, of the anomalous scattering factor of selenium at wavelength .
Each three-wavelength batch of data consisted of a rotation range of 8–10 degrees; batches were overlapped by 1 degree.
Over 30 crystals were used.
To obtain the most accurate data possible, we measured data at two gain settings of the FAST detector: the MADNES parameters to control voltage settings on the camera and image intensifier were SETDET 7,1 at high gain and 3,1 at low gain.
At high gain, about 40% of the reflections were flagged as saturated and were discarded, while at low gain, weak reflections (3 standard deviations) were discarded as unreliable.
Data for all three wavelengths were scaled together using the program FBSCALE; however, the high and low gain data were scaled separately.
Scale factors were determined to bring these to a common and absolute scale, and to generate a merged set of amplitudes, but the high and low gain data were phased separately.
The observed diffraction ratio for the Bijvoet differences at λ 2  (which is where the value of f  is maximal) was 0.111 for acentric reflections, as compared to the expected value of 0.049 at zero scattering angle.
However, the diffraction ratio for centric reflections, which should be zero theoretically, was 0.059.
Thus over half the magnitude of the Bijvoet differences came from noise in the data.
b,
Phasing:
The data were phased by two different procedures.
(1) The first uses the algebraic formalism developed by Hendrickson and coworkers.
In this method, the phase difference  between the phases from the normal and anomalous scattering in the structure is estimated by measuring Bijvoet pairs for a reflection at two or more wavelengths.
The positions and occupancies of the anomalous scatterers are determined separately to yield the phase  A from the anomalous scattering.
This phase is used with the phase difference   to estimate the phase  N from the normal scattering, which is then used to calculate a map of the structure.
The phase difference   was estimated using the program MADLSQ.
Cutoffs of F A 150 and Q7.5 were used in the phasing of scaled but unmerged data.
The values of f' and f  were refined in the program and did not change significantly from the starting values.
The mean value of the residual Q was 3.0; the standard error in the phase difference between the anomalous and normal part of the structure, (),was 21°.
The sites for two selenium atoms, identified from the anomalous Patterson of the λ 2  data, were refined  against Bijvoet differences using the program ANOLSQ, to give an R of 0.36.
Refinement against the F A values using the program ASLSQ was unstable and not used.
The refined heavy-atom parameters were used with the program MADABCD to generate phases and Hendrickson-Lattman phase probability coefficients.
Phases of multiply measured reflections were combined using the phase probability coefficients.
The mean phase difference between multiple measurements was 38°.
About 70% of the reflections were phased by this method; altering the various cutoff criteria in the programs did not noticeably improve the map.
Solvent flattening was used to improve the initial map using the package PHASES.
(2) We also treated the phasing as a conventional heavy-atom derivative problem with the inclusion of anomalous scattering.
Diffraction at one of the wavelengths,λ 1 ,is treated as a ‘native’ data set that has intrinsic anomalous scattering.
Data at the other two wavelengths are treated as ‘derivatives’.
The dispersive term  is the source of isomorphous differences, and the anomalous term  gives rise to Bijvoet differences.
Thus the real and imaginary parts of the atomic scattering factors for the ‘derivative’ at λ i  were set to  and  respectively.
For each ‘derivative’, the real and anomalous occupancies of the selenium atoms were refined separately, using the program MLPHARE in its CCP4 implementation.
This program uses a maximum-likelihood method to estimate heavy-atom parameters.
As in the first method, the phases for the high and low gain data were combined and used with the λ 1  F obs to calculate a map, and solvent flattening was used to improve the map.
To judge objectively the quality of the various maps, we calculated correlations between the various maps and a map generated from the current model.
Details of the structure determination will be presented elsewhere.
FIG. 1 Electron density maps of a region of GH5.
Phases calculated as described (Table 1) were used with amplitudes from the λ 1  data to generate electron density maps using the CCP4 suite of programs.
The region shown includes the helix that contains met-31, which was replaced by seleno-methionine (see text and legend to Table 1) to obtain phases by anomalous dispersion.
The refined position of the selenium atom is shown by a green cross.
a,
Map calculated from phases obtained using the algebraic formalism and the program MADLSQ (see text and Table 1);
b,
same map as in a after solvent flattening was used to improve the phases;
c,
same map as in a after 4 cycles of non-crystallographic symmetry averaging;
d,
map calculated from phases obtained using the conventional multiple  isomorphous replacement approach, and the maximum likelihood algorithm for refinement of heavy atom parameters using the program MLPHARE (see text and Table 1).
e,
Same map as in d after solvent flattening;f, 2F o  -F c  map calculated from current model.
All maps show electron density contoured at 1 standard deviation, with the current model displayed for comparison.
The pictures were generated by the computer program O.
FIG. 2 Structure of GH5.
The solvent flattened electron density map (Fig. 1 b and 1e ) was skeletonized using the program BONES, and the skeletonized map was used with the density to trace the main chain of both monomers in the asymmetric unit using the program O. A monomer mask was generated at this point, and non-crystallographic symmetry averaging using the programs A and O was used to improve the side chain density in parts of the molecule.
The side chains were then built into the molecule.
Residues 24–96 were built into the map using the program O. The initial model was refined by simulated annealing using the program XPLOR, followed by restrained B -factor refinement.
Non-crystallographic symmetry restraints were not applied.
The current R -factor is 25% using all measured data between 6 and 2.5 .
But 16 of the 89 residues in the polypeptide chain are missing from the model, mostly at the C terminus, and poorly defined density is visible in the region containing the missing residues.
The current model consists of 1,110 non-hydrogen atoms, 18 water molecules and 4 phosphate ions.
The deviation from ideality is 0.015  in bond length and 3.1 degrees in bond angles.
The model is currently being refined against a native data set to 2.3, which should eventually allow more residues to be included in the model.
a,
Schematic diagram of the asymmetric unit of GH5, showing the A (left) and B (right) monomers.
b,
Stereo pair showing the C α trace of the A (solid line) and B (open line) monomers in the asymmetric unit of GH5 superimposed on each other.
Every tenth residue beginning with residue 30 is shown by a black sphere.
The figures were generated by the computer program MOLSCRIPT.
FIG. 3 Comparison of the structures of GH5 and the DNA-binding domain of the catabolite gene activator protein .
The superposition was done using the command LSQ -IMPROVE in the program O, which considers pairs of C α atoms within 3.8  of each other in the superposition to be structurally equivalent, and does a least-squares minimization of the difference in the positions of structurally equivalent C α atoms to calculate the transformation.
a,
Superposition of the C α trace of GH5 (solid line) and residues 135–205 of CAP (open line).
b,
Schematic ribbon diagrams of GH5 (left) and the DNA-binding domain of CAP (right), showing the similarity in the topology of the two structures.
The figures were generated by the computer program MOLSCRIPT.
FIG. 4 Secondary structure assignments for the residues of GH5.
The vertical bars show the region of H5 that has been built in the electron density map.
The alignment with structurally equivalent residues of CAP (defined in legend to Fig. 3) is also shown.
In GH5, the circled amino acids in bold face are those that are highly conserved throughout the H1 family.
In CAP, the circled amino-acids are known to interact with DNA in the crystal structure of the CAP/DNA complex, and these have counterparts among the conserved basic residues in GH5.
Those lysines in GH5 with an asterisk above them are protected against chemical modification in chromatin.
Lysine 85, indicated by a double asterisk, was three times as protected as the other lysines.
The two histidines (arrowed) have been crosslinked to DNA in chromatin.
FIG. 5 Model of GH5 binding to DNA, based on the similarity of GH5 with CAP and the known DNA-binding mechanism of CAP.
The coordinates of GH5 were superimposed onto those of CAP, and the actual DNA in CAP, which is bent, was replaced by a phosphate backbone trace of B-form DNA (shown in red) to avoid any presumptions about the nature of the DNA.
The GH5 molecule is shown colour-ramped from red to blue, going from N terminus to C terminus.
Conserved basic residues, as well as the two histidines that have been crosslinked to DNA, are shown in blue.
Lysine 85 is closer to the DNA strand complementary to the one that is close to Lys69 and Arg73, although this is not obvious in the view shown.
The figure was generated by the program O.
Optimality, mutation and the evolution of ageing
L. Partridge & N. H. Barton
Evolutionary explanations of ageing fall into two classes.
Organisms might have evolved the optimal life history, in which survival and fertility late in life are sacrificed for the sake of early reproduction and survival.
Alternatively, the life history might be depressed below this optimal compromise by deleterious mutations: because selection against late-acting mutations is weaker, these will impose a greater load on late life.
Evidence for the importance of both is emerging, and unravelling their relative importance presents experimentalists with a major challenge.
DESPITE all human efforts to the contrary, death is one of life's only two certainties.
It is often preceded by intimations of mortality, in the form of a decline in fertility and most aspects of biological performance, characteristic of ‘senescence’ or ‘ageing’.
Ageing presents not only a medical problem, but also an evolutionary paradox: if organisms can function well in youth, why can they not continue to do so in old age?
Recent theoretical work has clarified two possible causes of ageing.
It could evolve as the necessary cost of processes beneficial to youth, or could instead be purely maladaptive, and evolve because of the pressure of deleterious mutations on populations.
Evidence for the importance of both causes of ageing is emerging, and unravelling their relative importance presents experimentalists with a major challenge.
The view that mutation contributes to the senescence of individuals parallels recent emphasis on its role as an evolutionary force capable both of maintaining sexual reproduction and of producing decline and extinction of evolutionary lineages.
We confine the term ‘ageing’ or ‘senescence’solely to the drop in survival probability and/or fertility later in the life of individuals, to distinguish it from other changes during the life history, such as early development or the onset of reproduction.
Ageing reduces the contribution that older individuals make to future generations.
It is often seen in nature, but becomes much more obvious when natural hazards are removed in captive and human populations.
The rate of ageing is highly variable.
In semelparous forms, which breed only once, there is often a sudden loss of function after reproduction; adult mayflies live for less than a week, and male Pacific salmon show catastrophic senescence after their single breeding attempt.
In iteroparous organisms, which can breed repeatedly, the decline is usually more gradual, as in many beetles and in fish such as haddock and rockfish.
Mechanistic accounts of ageing invoke various forms of damage, to DNA, cells, tissues and organs.
From this perspective, the rate of ageing could be determined solely by level of exposure to damaging influences: the process would be inevitable, and in need of no evolutionary explanation.
But even under optimal conditions in captivity, we see very different potential lifespans in organisms that do not seem to differ in their risk of damage, showing that the degree of ageing has evolved.
For instance, most birds considerably outlive mammals of comparable size.
Among more closely related organisms, bats have very much longer maximum lifespans than do similar-sized rodents, and the flightless emu and ostrich are notably short-lived among birds.
The thick-shelled bivalves have greater lifespans than do other molluscs, and turtles and tortoises outlive other reptiles.
The proximate cause of ageing may well be various kinds of damage; however, these comparisons show that organisms vary in the extent to which they avoid or combat it.
It is this variation that any evolutionary theory of ageing must explain.
Evolutionary theories of ageing
Because ageing reduces the genetic contribution of individuals to future generations, it is opposed by natural selection.
But as Medawar first pointed out, the natural selection that maintains survival and fertility becomes weaker through the life history.
Even without ageing, organisms are at risk of death and impaired fertility from disease, predation and accidents.
If the genes affecting survival and fertility are to some extent age-specific in their effects, then those that influence later life will be subject to weaker selection because, by the time they take effect, more of the original carriers will already have died or become infertile for other reasons.
(Note that what matters is when a gene affects survival and fertility, not when it is expressed; for example, a gene which is expressed early in the development of the heart might increase the chance of heart disease much later in life.)
The sensitivities of fitness to changes in survival and fertility at different ages are explained in Box 1, and illustrated by Fig. 1, which is based on data from lines of Drosophila selected for early or late reproduction.
We shall contrast two kinds of explanation for the evolution of ageing.
First, constraints on the combinations of survival and fertility that the organism can achieve at each age may mean that a single optimal genotype evolves, which shows senescence because fitness is maximized by increasing early performance at the expense of late (the optimality explanation).
Second, senescence might evolve because of a greater mutation load on the later, and less strongly selected, part of the life history (the mutational explanation).
The arguments over the relative importance of optimality versus mutational explanations are relevant to a wide range of evolutionary questions, and the problem of senescence is one instance of a general question: to what extent does the degree of adaptation reflect the strength of selection?
For example, does the precision of mimetic patterns in butterflies reflect the degree of protection they confer.
Can very weak selection maintain adaptations?
Perhaps the best example of an adaptation maintained by weak selection (s  10 -5 ) is the bias towards use of the most efficiently translated triplet codon, seen for some loci in Escherichia coli,yeast and Drosophila .
Yet, we are still ignorant of the general magnitude of the selection that produces and maintains adaptations.
Optimality theories of ageing
Optimality theory has been successful in explaining diversity in life-history traits such as age of first breeding, number of breeding attempts and number of offspring produced at each.
Optimality models do not contain specific genetic parameters, and instead specify the life history that gives the greatest fitness, within the intrinsic constraints of physiology and the extrinsic constraints imposed by the environment.
Optimality arguments are consistent at least with simple genetic models: the optimal life history is an evolutionarily stable strategy, which cannot be displaced by any feasible genotype.
Ageing could evolve as part of an optimal life history.
On this view, senescence arises from the deleterious side-effects late in life of processes that are favourable early on (see Fig. 2).
An antagonism between early performance and resistance to ageing can occur if prolonged growth during the pre-adult period elevates juvenile mortality but yields a longer-lived adult.
Similarly, early reproduction may impair survival or future fertility, by consuming resources, causing somatic damage or exposing the organism to environmental injury: there is a ‘cost of reproduction’.
The ‘disposable soma’ theory is an optimality account of ageing, in which allocation of resources to reproduction jeopardizes somatic repair mechanisms and hence longevity.
Selection intensity on early, beneficial effects will be stronger than on later, deleterious ones and so the optimal life history will include ageing.
Of course, as for any other trait, it may be impossible for any one homozygous genotype to achieve the optimum.
In diploids, it may instead be best approximated by a heterozygote, if each homozygote is better for a different life history trait, and the alleles are dominant for their advantageous trait (sometimes known as ‘antagonistic pleiotropy’).
If such balancing selection maintains a substantial fraction of life-history variation, it will generate negative genetic correlations among life-history traits.
However, such polymorphism does not account for senescence itself, which depends on the mean life history, determined by maximization of fitness subject to what is possible.
The optimality account of ageing has come to be known as the ‘pleiotropy theory of senescence’, because it is often developed in terms of genes with effects on more than one aspect of the phenotype, in this case on survival and fertility at different ages.
But mutational theories of ageing can also involve pleiotropy (for example see Box 2).
Moreover, under the optimality theory the outcome does not depend on patterns of pleiotropy, and could in theory be reached by fixation of alleles each with an effect on fitness at only one age.
(On Fig. 2, this could be represented by evolution up to the optimum life history by a series of horizontal or vertical steps.)
Such evolution would imply that the constraints on optimization occur only on the trade-off curve itself, and not inside it, and so is hardly plausible: our point is that the optimality argument is independent of genetic details such as pleiotropy.
Provided that the population is not trapped at a local optimum, and provided there is at least some genetic variation in the appropriate direction, the optimal life history will eventually be reached.
Senescence as a consequence of mutation pressure
Mutation pressure could lead to ageing.
Because the intensity of selection on later-acting mutants declines with age, alleles with deleterious effects will reach a higher frequency in a mutation-selection balance the later the age at which they reduce fitness.
In a small population, or with asexual reproduction, random sampling drift may combine with mutation to overwhelm selection, so that alleles with late, deleterious effects become common.
Even in a large sexual population, senescence can be caused by the cumulative effects of many rare deleterious alleles held in mutation-selection balance.
With asexual reproduction of diploids, mutation reduces mean fitness by a factor exp (-2 U), where U is the total number of deleterious mutations per haploid genome per generation, and mutations are assumed not to be completely recessive.
Surprisingly, minor mutations reduce fitness just as much as those with larger effects, because they rise to higher frequency in a mutation selection balance.
This is why the mutation load (that is, the reduction in mean fitness) depends on the total mutation rate,U , and not on the strength of selection.
If the effects of mutations on fitness are multiplicative, similar relations hold in sexual populations: fitness is reduced by exp (-U)if mutations are recessive (or almost so), and exp (-2 U)otherwise.
Suppose now that deleterious mutations are age-specific.
Then, the reduction in fitness caused by a loss in performance at various ages reflects the mutation rates to genes affecting those ages.
But because a given change in performance has less effect on fitness later in life, we expect deleterious mutations to cause a greater drop in fertility and survival probability later in life, assuming the same mutation rate for each age.
This increased load on later life can be accentuated by a positive feedback: as late-life performance declines, selection to maintain it becomes weaker, accelerating the decline.
If mutations that specifically damage survival or fertility of the old are common enough, mutation may overwhelm selection, causing catastrophic senescence (Box 2 and Fig. 2).
The same argument can explain why different functions often decline at a similar age: synchronous collapse does not imply a single mechanism of senescence (J. Maynard Smith, personal communication).
Other evolutionary theories of ageing have been proposed.
Arguing from the example of Huntingdon's chorea, Medawar suggested that there could be selection for genetic modifiers delaying the age of onset of the effects of deleterious alleles.
The argument was not that mutation itself caused senescence, but rather that, given some mutation load, the adaptive evolution of modifiers would shift the effects of that load to later life.
This is closer to the optimality theory than to one based on straightforward mutation accumulation.
As for Fisher's analogous explanation of the evolution of dominance, the argument is implausible, because selection on such specific modifiers is extremely weak (of the order of the mutation rate per locus) and likely to be overwhelmed by their pleiotropic effects.
Hamilton argued that, because selection is stronger on earlier ages, alleles with advantageous effects early in life would be more likely to be fixed by selection than those with a later age of action, an argument that implies that populations are continually adapting, and so are not in equilibrium.
The late part of the lifespan would then lag behind the current optimum more than would the early part, and senescence would be caused by the extra ‘lag load’.
This idea can be seen as the converse of the mutational argument.
For it to be plausible, continual adaptation must be necessary for the maintenance of the life history, just as the Red Queen had to keep running to stay in the same place.
It is then the failure to keep up with the requirements of changing conditions that leads to a substantial ‘lag load’ on late life.
The idea is perhaps implausible because it does not explain why ageing is associated with pathological changes, which would have been the ancestral state under Hamilton's theory.
Empirical tests of evolutionary theories of ageing
We must distinguish between predictions that are common to all evolutionary theories, and those that can distinguish between optimality and mutation-accumulation.
Some support for evolutionary theories comes from the comparative findings, which show that high maximum lifespans in optimal conditions (cited in the introduction) occur in creatures with a low risk of mortality in nature, and hence with strong selection maintaining late life.
For example, birds have higher maximum lifespans than mammals and are less prone to death in the wild.
The ability to fly and so escape predators may be important: among mammals, bats survive well both in nature and under optimal conditions, whereas among birds flightless species survive poorly in both situations.
Bivalves and tortoises have longer maximum lives than their relatives, perhaps because of the protection conferred by their thick shells.
High maximum lifespans are also found in organisms whose fertility increases with age, such as many fish and trees, as the evolutionary theory of ageing would again predict.
More data of this kind would be valuable.
It is very much harder to evaluate different evolutionary theories.
Because we know that there is a substantial input of deleterious mutations to populations, and that it is impossible for individuals to combine indefinitely high survival and fertility, both the optimality and the mutation-accumulation explanations of senescence must apply.
The aim is to discover how far mutation has depressed survival and fertility below their optimal values.
But determining the optimal life history of any organism is difficult because the trade-off curves that reflects constraints on survival and fertility at different ages have never been measured.
Furthermore, the total rate of production of deleterious mutations and their pattern of age-specificity are unknown.
The amount of standing genetic variation for ageing within populations, and the number of genes involved, are not informative.
Both theories are consistent with the absence of any genetic variance because deleterious mutations could become fixed by drift, and the optimal life history could in theory be achieved by fixation of a single optimal genotype by selection.
By contrast, both theories are consistent with the presence of genetic variation for ageing, which is the norm for quantitative characters including other life-history traits.
At least in Drosophila,ageing is in general genetically variable and polygenic.
Genetic variation could result from a balance between mutation and selection, or from balancing selection alone; given the general difficulties of finding the causes and genetic basis of polygenic variation, it is hard to take this line of evidence further.
The pattern of standing genetic variance has been exploited in investigations of the evolution of ageing.
If senescence is primarily due to late-acting deleterious mutations, then (other things being equal) one would expect the additive genetic variance for survival and fertility to increase with age.
One study found no increase in additive genetic variance for female fertility with age in Drosophila.
A problem is that mean values for fertility and survival probability decline with age, which may not necessarily be accounted for by a logarithmic transform.
Also, some genotypes are lost from experiments through death, which will cause an inevitable decrease in variance if fecundity and survival are correlated.
Standing genetic variance has also been used to study the sign and magnitude of genetic correlations between ages, for survival probability and fertility.
Results of chromosome extractions and breeding designs have been mixed, with some showing negative correlations between early and late fitness and others showing no significant associations.
These tests are not particularly sensitive; very large sample sizes are needed to generate reasonable confidence limits on genetic correlations and biases can be introduced by deaths before late fitness is measured.
In addition, some studies used inbred lines of Drosophila,which are liable to give artefactual positive correlations between fitness components, and are therefore unsuitable for testing evolutionary theories of ageing.
Artificial selection has also been used to investigate the evolution of ageing.
Restriction of breeding to older adults would be expected to reduce ageing because there is selection for higher longevity and high fertility at old ages in these ‘old’ lines.
If a response to selection occurs, and if ageing in the original base population were attributable entirely to the presence of more or less age-specific deleterious mutations, then no immediate drop in survival or fertility would be expected to occur earlier in life.
If trade-offs were important, then an immediate drop (a correlated response) would be predicted.
This type of experiment in Drosophila has in general produced evidence for trade-offs, with lifespan and fertility late in life increasing in lines propagated from old adults, and either pre-adult survival or fertility of young adults showing a correlated decline.
Although the timescale of artificial selection experiments means that new mutations can contribute to the responses, in the above experiments accumulation of partially recessive mutations could not account for the decline in early performance, because the drop persisted in crosses between ‘old’ lines.
In any case, the effect occurred too rapidly to be accounted for by mutation accumulation.
At least some of the increase in late life fitness in ‘old’ lines could have been caused by reduction in the frequency of predominantly late-acting mutations, and a study of the effects of reverse selection suggested that this was the case, and that mutation accumulation had therefore also contributed to ageing in the base stock.
A fundamental difficulty with any approach based on standing genetic variance is that there need be no direct connection between the pattern of genetic covariances, and either the trade-off curve (which reflects the set of possible phenotypes), or the effects of spontaneous mutations.
When variation in a set of quantitative traits is maintained by a balance between mutation and selection, the genetic covariances depend in a complex way on the covariances of effects of new mutations on the traits and on fitness, and on the pattern of selection on the traits.
Similar arguments apply when variation is a pleiotropic side-effect of balancing selection.
Artificial selection may circumvent some of these difficulties.
Genetic variation within a base population can be magnified as variation between selected lines, giving greater statistical power.
More important, selection over tens of generations can take traits well beyond their original values, and new mutations can contribute to the response, so that it may reflect the fundamental limits on the character, rather than just the initial covariances.
Artificial selection is not free of problems.
It is possible inadvertently to apply direct selection to the characters whose correlated responses are of interest.
For instance, in many experiments there may have been unintended selection pressure for rapid development and reproductive maturation in the control line flies with which the ‘old’ lines were compared, potentially leading to artefactual effects on early fertility.
In addition, all estimates of quantitative genetic variables by any method are sensitive to the environment in which they are measured; misleading gene-environment interactions can occur in an environment other than that in which the life history evolved.
This objection may apply to some extent to all published studies.
Unless the base stock was kept for many years in the same conditions as those in which estimates were made, problems could have arisen.
An alternative to genetic approaches is to use environmental manipulations of the rate of ageing to study its mechanisms.
For instance, in Drosophila females, reduction of egg production by X-ray irradiation, lowering of protein intake or denial of oviposition sites, has been shown to extend lifespan.
Some aspects of mating itself also shorten female lifespan.
These data suggest that both egg production and mating could accelerate ageing.
Environmental manipulations have the considerable advantage that they can be used in wild populations, and they are also relatively quick.
In addition, reversal experiments can be done, allowing the time course of the effects of the manipulation to be observed.
They can be especially powerful when used in conjunction with genetic manipulation, and the two techniques are at their most convincing when they yield similar results.
In principle, one could find the contribution of deleterious mutations to ageing by turning off mutation, and allowing the population to recover to its optimal life history.
Unfortunately, this is hardly feasible.
One could instead increase mutation rates artificially: if doubling mutation rates doubled senescence, or if a slight increase in the mutation rate produced catastrophic senescence (Box 2), then this would suggest a substantial effect of mutation in the original population.
This is a worthwhile approach, though one should bear in mind that different mutagens give qualitatively different kinds of mutation.
Another promising way forward would be to use mutation-accumulation experiments to make better estimates of the total mutation load and its pattern of age-specificity.
These experiments somewhat underestimate mutation rates because, even where new mutations are held heterozygous against balancer chromosomes, it is impossible to eliminate natural selection altogether if mutations are not completely recessive; to take the extreme example, dominant lethals can never be accumulated.
But because only a small part of the mutation load is likely to be due to alleles with major effects, this gives little error.
Long-inbred populations might be useful for assessing the effects of new mutations.
In outbred populations, selection acts on new mutations mainly through their heterozygous effects.
In contrast, under persistent inbreeding, the mutation load will mainly be due to homozygotes, and can be largely eliminated by outcrossing.
This would allow direct measurement of how far senescence in the original population had been caused by accumulation of partially recessive mutations.
Selfing populations of plants could be valuable material, although the retention of unused yet presumably expensive floral features in some populations raised doubts as to whether they have been selfing for long enough to reach evolutionary equilibrium.
An alternative might be to investigate the effects on life history of making a diploid from two independent strains of a habitually haploid organism.
Additional evidence for the importance of mutation accumulation has come from experiments where artificial selection has proceeded by restricting breeding to young adults, releasing the late part of the life history from natural selection, an approach originally proposed by Edney and Gill.
For instance, restriction of the opportunity for reproduction in Drosophila to 3–6-day-old flies for 120 generations resulted in a fall in the late but not the early-life fecundity of females in these ’ r' lines relative to that of females of ’K' lines where adults of any age could breed.
The fall in late-life fecundity was much smaller in crosses between ‘r' lines, showing that the genetic basis of selection response differed between them, and that senescence had evolved by accumulation of partially recessive deleterious alleles, which would not be expected on the optimization theory.
Further support for mutation accumulation came from the slow appearance of the drop in late fertility.
But the r and K lines were cultured at different densities, so that selection on life-history traits other than late fecundity may also have differed between them and may have accounted for the decline in late fertility of the r -line females.
In addition, population size was smaller in the r lines, so that inbreeding depression may have contributed to the difference from the K lines.
The experimental results suggest that ageing in Drosophila has evolved in part as a consequence of selection for an optimal life history, and in part as a result of accumulation of predominantly late-acting deleterious mutations.
But the magnitude of the contribution from mutation is unknown.
Quantification of these effects presents a major challenge for the future.
Decline and extinction of lineages
If some of the germ lines that led from the primaeval soup had not been, to a first approximation, immortal then extant organisms would not exist.
But germ lines can deteriorate and cause extinction of lineages.
Long-term cultures of unicellular organisms in small, asexual populations have shown a steady decline in the rate of division, and cultures sometimes went extinct, no matter how carefully they were kept.
Senescence could be prevented or reduced either by retaining binary fission but keeping the population size large, or by allowing sexual  reproduction .
This kind of clonal ageing has also been found in multicellular organisms reproducing asexually by apomixis, fission or budding, although the data for vegetative reproduction are mixed.
Senescence of clones is probably caused by the accumulation of deleterious mutations.
The simplest case is where the clone is propagated through a single, randomly chosen cell.
There is then no selection, and an inevitable decline in viability and fertility.
Even if a moderately large number (N)of individuals is used, mutations are likely to be fixed by chance if they reduce fitness by less than s1/N .
Moreover, with strictly asexual reproduction, mutations will inevitably accumulate.
Even in a large population, very few individuals may be free of any deleterious mutations; if this fittest class fails to leave descendents, it can never be recovered, and the mean fitness of the population will decline irreversibly, in a process known as ‘Muller's ratchet’.
In multicellular organisms that reproduce asexually through a single-cell stage, the effects of Muller's ratchet will be exacerbated, both because population sizes tend to be smaller than for protozoans, and because genomes tend to be large and hence to accumulate more mutations per genome.
Sex may therefore have been a necessary prelude to the evolution of multicellular organisms.
Immortal germ lines require, first, efficient systems for the endogenous repair of biochemical damage and, second, large population sizes and sexual reproduction, which allow elimination of the unfit by natural selection (a kind of exogenous repair).
Persistent asexual lineages of organisms with large genomes would therefore present something of a paradox, and they do not seem to occur, at least in animals.
Ostensibly asexual lineages of fish and salamanders have been shown by analysis of their mitochondrial DNA to be of some antiquity (4–5 million and 100,000 years, respectively).
But neither is truly asexual.
Analysis of the nuclear DNA of the mole salamander Ambystoma has shown that there has been crossing with males of related sexual species.
In the fish Poeciliopsis males of a sexual species contribute to every ‘unisexual’ offspring an expressed haploid genome that is then discarded at meiosis.
The effects of Muller's ratchet in the maternal complement in these hybrid offspring may therefore be masked to some extent by wild-type alleles in the paternal complement.
Clonal senescence has been thought to bear on the mechanisms of ageing in Metazoan individuals.
But there is little direct connection.
To the extent that a multicellular soma is not maintained by selection between cells, accumulation of somatic mutations is inevitable.
Nevertheless, the empirical evidence is that these contribute little to individual ageing.
The loss of division potential with age in cultures of mammalian cells is caused by specific mechanisms preventing proliferation in differentiated cells, rather than by accumulation of mutations.
Soma and germ line
Several authors have suggested that ageing should be confined to organisms with ‘…a clear distinction between soma and germ plasm’.
But the logic of this point of view is not compelling, and it is not supported by the data.
Consider a multicellular organism in which randomly chosen cells dedifferentiate and divide to produce germ cells until the organism has completely turned into gametes, and where there is therefore no distinction between soma and germ line.
Will this creature, as an individual, age?
As gamete-production proceeds, it will have a non-zero probability of death or of becoming unable to produce gametes.
The intensity of selection on survival and rate of gamete-production will therefore decline with age and ageing will evolve.
The same argument would apply to a unicellular organism that produces, by asymmetrical cell division, a series of daughter cells that become gametes, before itself dividing to produce gametes.
The critical requirement for the evolution of ageing is that there be a distinction between a parent individual and the smaller offspring for which it provides.
If the organism breeds by dividing equally into identical offspring, then the distinction between parent and offspring disappears, the intensity of selection on survival and reproduction will remain constant and individual ageing is not expected to evolve.
Prospects
The polygenic nature of ageing contains a baleful message for gerontologists; it is most unlikely that engineering of a few genes or intervention in a handful of physiological pathways will prevent the process from occurring.
But an evolutionary decrease in the rate of ageing in humans is likely to occur over the next few generations.
Senescence in industrialized human societies has become so apparent because of the removal of most extrinsic causes of death and lowered fertility; in the circumstances in which the life history evolved, these would have predominated, and few individuals would have lived long enough to show evidence of ageing.
Industrialization has not only uncovered ageing, but has also been accompanied by an increase in the average age of reproduction, and economic factors may mean that this trend continues.
Increasing the age at breeding leads to selection for reduced senescence, and both evolutionary theories specify that survival and fertility later in the lifespan will in consequence increase over the generations to come.
But the two theories carry very different implications for the nature of the correlated responses.
If mutation-accumulation is the predominant evolutionary cause of ageing in humans, then reduced ageing could evolve by purging of late-acting mutations, with little immediate cost to survival and fertility in earlier life.
If, by contrast, ageing has evolved as part of an optimal life history, then there may be a direct cost, for instance in the form of a reduction in survival to maturity, delayed maturity or lower fertility in early adulthood.
These predictions assume a constant environment.
But as well as removing hazard, industrialization has been accompanied by an improvement in nutrition which may, if it persists, reduce or abolish any early-life costs of the late-life improvement.
Unfortunately the authors and contemporary readers of this review are unlikely to see the results of this experiment.
Work with other organisms should yield some insight into the likely outcome.
THE dynamics of an age-structured population depend on the probability l(x) of surviving from birth to age x,and the expected number of offspring at that age,m(x).
The dynamics depend only on the product of survival and fertility, which we denote by .
A homogeneous population will eventually grow at a steady rate r,which is given by the Euler-Lotka equation, In an asexual population, or a population of sexually reproducing haploids that vary only at a single locus, the outcome of natural selection depends simply on the long-term growth rates associated with each genotype, in the absence of density- or frequency-dependent interactions, each genotype will eventually grow exponentially at a rate that depends on its own life history, given by equation (1).
With certain simplifying assumptions (that selection is weak, and mating is random with respect to age and genotype) the theory can be extended to diploids and to variation at multiple loci.
The intensity of selection on different stages of the life history can be found from the effect on fitness,r,as defined above, of small changes in fertility or mortality at age x (refs 2, 32) is the generation time.
These expressions give the effect on fitness of small changes confined to a specific age,x;they are applied to Drosophila data in Fig. 1.
Similar expressions can be found for the effect of changes in age of onset of alleles which have permanent effects once first expressed.
These formulae involve the rate of population growth,r;this is because the value of an offspring depends on the size of the population into which it is born.
In an increasing population, offspring produced early will themselves start to reproduce, and so are more valuable than those produced late.
But in the long term, density-dependent factors must regulate population size by decreasing survival and fertility such that r=0.
Then (for a given total reproductive output ), the timing of offspring production is selectively neutral.
Sensitivities of fitness to changes in both fertility and mortality are related to the probability of reaching the age of gene expression, and are inversely proportional to the generation time.
For a gene affecting survival, the proportion of total reproduction expected to occur after that age (which depends on the fertility schedule) is also important (hence the integral in equation (2b)).
For mortality, the intensity of selection in a stable population (r=0)remains constant during the pre-reproductive period because the consequences of death for reproductive success remain constant; selection intensity starts to decline only at the time of first breeding.
BOX2 Optimality and mutation
HERE we illustrate optimality arguments, and also show how mutation pressure can lead to catastrophic senescence.
Consider a simple model of an organism that reproduces at just two ages.
The probability of survival from birth to age 1 is J , and from age 1 to age 2 is A. For simplicity, we assume that the expected fertility is the same at both ages ().
The growth rate is then given by the discrete version of equation (1),
This has solution:
First, consider the optimal life history, given some constraint on the rates of juvenile and adult survival that can be achieved.
We suppose that it is impossible to sustain both high juvenile and adult survival, and choose the arbitrary constraint that J+A1.
Then there are progressively large decreases in adult survival for each increment in juvenile survival, and hence a convex trade-off curve (heavy line in Fig. 2).
Other constraints give qualitatively similar conclusions, provided that the curve remains convex.
For fertility m=1,the life history that maximizes fitness (r)involves substantial senescence, in the sense that adult survival is much lower than juvenile,J=0.945, A=0.505 (open circle in Fig. 2).
Now, suppose that deleterious mutations reduce survival below this optimal value.
Consider a class of mutations that reduce juvenile survival by a factor (1- ),and adult survival by a factor (1- v ),where  1; v describes the degree of pleiotropy.
These will reduce fitness by,.
(is negative because these mutations decrease fitness).
Selection on deleterious alleles depends on the current life history through γ.
When fertility and adult mortality are high (m, J  A; γ0), r  -,so that selection depends on the effects on juvenile survival.
When fertility is low and juvenile mortality is high (m, J  A; γ1), r  -(v+1)  /2,and selection depends on the average effect on juvenile and adult survival.
If we just consider a single locus, the equilibrium frequency is .
For small μ , homozygotes are rare, and the frequency of heterozygotes is approximately 2 p.
J and A are therefore reduced by factors  respectively.
The next step is to combine these factors across all loci.
For simplicity, we assume that the effects of different loci multiply, and we neglect linkage disequilibrium and genetic variation, to derive approximations to the survival probabilities, give the optimal life history in the absence of mutation.
These two equations can be solved numerically to find the equilibrium load,(),().
Two key points emerge.
First, consider mutations that only affect adult survival ().
As these increase in frequency, adult survival drops, and so selection against the mutations decreases.
Above a critical threshold, mutation overwhelms selection, and the population becomes semelparous.
Then, the only solution to equations (4) is at .
For the present example, the threshold is quite low,.
This quantifies the feedback effect postulated by Williams and Medawar.
If, however, mutations affect both juvenile and adult survival equally, selection against their early effects keeps them at low frequency, and prevents the collapse of late survival.
Surprisingly little pleiotropy is needed to reduce the degree of senescence substantially.
For example, if mutations reduce adult survival 16 times more than they reduce juvenile survival (that is ,v= 16), a net mutation rate  reduces juvenile and adult survival from their optimal values (0.945, 0.505) to (0.866, 0.155); if the mutations only affected adult survival, a mutation rate U  0.067 would reduce adult survival to zero.
Thus, the plausibility of mutation accumulation as an explanation of senescence depends on whether mutations with very age-specific effects are sufficiently frequent.
Combining the effects of many loci is nontrivial.
First, even though the effects of mutations on J and A are assumed multiplicative, their effects on fitness are not.
Hence linkage disequilibrium may build up, and may substantially affect the equilibrium mutational load.
Second, mutation will generate variation in life history around the mean.
A full treatment, following Charlesworth, would be valuable.
FIG. 1 An illustration of how selection on fertility and survival for the two sexes decreases with age.
a,
Survival,l(x) , and fertility,m(x) , in the two sexes, as a function of time since eclosion, for lines of Drosophila melanogaster which had been selected for early or late reproduction.
Female fertility is measured in eggs per day, and male fertility is measured as the percentage of progeny relative to a standard competitor.
Dashed lines correspond to ‘early’ lines, solid lines to ‘late’lines.
Data are from crosses between replicate selected lines, to avoid inbreeding effects.
b,
Sensitivity of fitness (r)to survival and fertility in the two sexes; this is calculated from l(x), m(x) using equation (2)(modified to allow for separate sexes).
In all four figures, selection is stronger in early life on the lines selected for early reproduction,(dashed lines) and stronger in late life for the ‘late’ lines.
The difference is greater for selection on fertility (top row) than on survival (bottom row).
The top pair of figures shows the sensitivity of fitness to an increase in fertility in the two sexes ( r/  m(x)).
We assume that larvae take 10 days to develop (ignoring differences between lines), and that larval viability is adjusted by density-dependence to maintain constant population size (r=0).
The units for females are rate of increase per day per extra egg; to translate these into selection coefficients per generation per extra egg, multiply by the generation time (T= 25 days for ‘early’ lines, 24 days for ‘late’).
Units for relative male mating success are as in a.
The second pair of figures shows the sensitivity of fitness to a decrease in death rate, as a function of adult age (- r/  μ (x);equation (2b)).
Units here are rate of increase per day per unit decrease in death rate.
(Note that these figures are for a hypothetical population with the life history given by a,not for the life history as it was while the lines were selected.)
FIG. 2 A simple model of an organism with two age classes (see Box 2).
Each female produces one daughter at each of two ages (m=1); the chance of survival from birth to age 1 is J , and from age 1 to age 2 is A. The heavy curve shows the maximum possible survival probabilities, and represents the trade-off between adult and juvenile survival (J+A1).
The light curve show contours of fitness, spaced at intervals  r=0.1.
The optimal life history is where the furthest contour from the origin just touches the trade-off curve (open circle,J= 0.935,A= 0.505).
The arrows show the reduction of survival below the optimal value caused by deleterious mutations at a rate U=0.1.
The horizontal arrow shows the effect of mutations that reduce only adult survival (when the net rate of mutation exceeds a threshold (U0.067), these accumulate indefinitely, and the life history becomes semelparous.
The lower diagonal arrow shows the effects of mutations that reduce juvenile and adult survival equally (.
There is now no threshold, as the net mutation rate,U,increases, there is a steady decrease in survival, to 0.765, 0.414 when U= 0.1.
The intermediate arrow shows the effects of mutations with a slight pleiotropic effect (v=16);these reduce survival to 0.866, 0.155 when U= 0.1.
Correction of the ion transport defect in cystic fibrosis transgenic mice by gene therapy
Stephen C. Hyde, Deborah R. Gill, Christopher F. Higgins & Ann E. O. Trezise Lesley J. MacVinish & Alan W. Cuthbert Rosemary Ratcliff, Martin J. Evans & William H. Colledge
CYSTIC fibrosis (CF) is a lethal inherited disorder affecting about 1 in 2,000 Caucasians.
The major cause of morbidity is permanent lung damage resulting from ion transport abnormalities in airway epithelia that lead to mucus accumulation and bacterial colonization.
CF is caused by mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene that encodes a cyclic-AMP-regulated chloride channel.
Cyclic-AMP-regulated chloride conductances are altered in airway epithelia from CF patients r4–6 , suggesting that the functional expression of CFTR in the airways of CF patients may be a strategy for treatment.
Transgenic mice r7–9 with a disrupted cftr gene are appropriate for testing gene therapy protocols.
Here we report the use of liposomes to deliver a CFTR expression plasmid to epithelia of the airway and to alveoli deep in the lung, leading to the correction of the ion conductance defects found in the trachea of transgenic (cf/cf)mice.
These studies illustrate the feasibility of gene therapy for the pulmonary aspects of CF in humans.
Plasmid DNA complexed with cationic liposomes can be successfully delivered and expressed in airway epithelia of rodents.
A suitable plasmid for expressing CFTR protein was constructed in the vector pREP8 (see legend to Fig. 1).
In this plasmid, pREP8-CFTR, the human CFTR complementary DNA is under transcriptional control of the constitutive Rous sarcoma virus (RSV) 3' long terminal repeat (LTR) promoter, known to be active in nonproliferating airway epithelial cells.
To show that pREP8-CFTR expresses CFTR protein after transfection, plasmid DNA complexed with cationic liposomes was introduced into HeLa cells and CFTR protein detected by western blotting (Fig. 1 a).
To ascertain whether the expressed CFTR protein was functional, cAMP-stimulated iodide efflux was measured in transfected cells (Fig.1 b).
In HeLa cells transfected with pREP8-CFTR, iodide efflux was stimulated by a cAMP-agonist cocktail.
The cocktail did not stimulate efflux from cells transfected with the vector pREP8.
The characteristics of this cAMP-stimulated anion efflux were similar to those reported previously for CFTR-expressing cells.
Thus, cells transfected with pREP8-CFTR express functional CFTR protein.
RNA in situ hybridization was used to demonstrate that the CFTR expression plasmid can be delivered to airway epithelial cells by liposome-mediated transfection in vivo.
Because CFTR messenger RNA is expressed at high levels in human and rodent intestinal crypts r14–16 , mouse intestinal sections were used as controls to demonstrate probe specificity.
No hybridization to mouse intestine was detected with either of two human CFTR probes whereas, in consecutive sections, the mouse antisense cftr probe (but not the sense probe) detected abundant cftr mRNA in the crypts (data not shown).
Additionally, neither the antisense nor the sense hisD vector control probes hybridized with mouse intestinal mRNA, as expected (data not shown).
This demonstrates that the human CFTR and vector hisD probes do not cross-hybridize with mouse cftr mRNA.
After transfection of pREP8-CFTR DNA into the airways of mice of 20–28 days old, sequences corresponding to human CFTR were detected by in situ hybridization (Fig.2).
Strong hybridization signals were observed in isolated groups of airway cells using both the human CFTR probe (Fig. 2 a-c)and the hisD vector-specific probe (d-f).
In a series of consecutive sections the hybridization signals observed with the human CFTR and hisD probes colocalized to the same airways and airspaces (Fig.2 a-f).
No hybridization was detected with the mouse cftr probe.
This provides strong evidence that the hybridization signals obtained are highly specific and due to the transfected plasmid.
Hybridization of these same probes to lung sections from untransfected animals served as a negative control against nonspecific hybridization; neither the human CFTR probe (g-i)nor the hisD probe (j-l)hybridized to any mRNAs in the lungs of untransfected mice.
Hybridization signals were obtained with both the sense and antisense probes (Fig.2 a-f).
Normally the antisense probe is used to detect mRNA whereas the sense probe serves as a negative control.
Following transfection, however, both the sense and antisense probes would be expected to recognize vector DNA.
The stronger signal observed with the antisense probe indicates transcription.
This was seen for the hisD gene which is transcribed from a vector promoter.
In most hybridizing cells, the signal obtained with the antisense human CFTR probe (Fig.2 b)was also greater than that obtained with the sense probe (c),implying that human CFTR mRNA is expressed following transfection.
The data in Fig. 3 show hybridization to sections through different regions of the lungs of a mouse which had been transfected with pREP8-CFTR.
No expression of endogenous mouse cftr mRNA was detected in any region of the lung (data not shown), consistent with previous studies showing low-level cftr expression in rodent lung, and with detailed studies of these transgenic animals (A.E.O.T. et al.,manuscript in preparation).
This shows that the transfection protocol does not induce expression of endogenous mouse cftr mRNA.
Human CFTR expression was seen in the airways of three out of four animals transfected with pREP8-CFTR and, in at least one transfected animal, human CFTR sequences were detected in all five lobes of the lung.
Positive cells were detected in large and small airways (Fig.2 a-d),and in cells lining the air spaces of the more distal regions of the lung (e-j).
It appeared to be the surface epithelial cells of the airways that had been transfected.
Colocalization of the CFTR signal with the hisD probe (Fig.2), confirmed that the signal was a consequence of transfection.
Thus, transfection is effective and expression of human CFTR throughout the airway was achieved.
To determine whether delivery of CFTR cDNA to the airways could correct the ion transport defects apparent in CF, we used a recently developed mouse model.
These transgenic (cf/cf)mice are homozygous for a null mutation in cftr and express little or no detectable endogenous cftr mRNA (A.E.O.T. et al.,manuscript in preparation).
CFTR-dependent, cAMP-stimulated chloride conductances are greatly reduced in the airways and caeca of these mice, compared with normal animals, mimicking features of the human disorder.
The mice frequently die shortly after birth as a consequence of intestinal blockages.
Ion transport in the trachea was measured by voltage clamping at zero potential, using pharmacological agents to eliminate or stimulate various processes (Fig.4).
Measurements were also made with the caecum of the same animal as an internal control.
Figure 4 A shows a set of typical results, and Fig. 4B a compilation of the data.
For each tracheal preparation, three measurements were made: amiloride-sensitive sodium absorption (labelled Na + ), cAMP-stimulated chloride secretion (labelled Cl -cAMP), and Ca 2+ -stimulated chloride secretion (labelled Cl -Ca r2+ ).
As expected, CFTR-dependent, cAMP-stimulated chloride secretion was significantly reduced (P 0.01) in both the tracheas and caeca of the cf/cf mice compared with the normal (+/+) mice.
There was no significant difference in the cAMP-stimulated chloride secretion between untreated and pREP8-transfected normal mice, indicating that transfection itself has no effect on ion transport.
Most importantly, transfection of cf/cf mice with pREP8-CFTR restored the cAMP-stimulated chloride secretion in the trachea to a level comparable with that of normal (+/+) animals.
In sharp contrast, transfection of the vf/cf mice with the vector pREP8 had no significant effect on the cAMP-stimulated chloride secretion in the trachea.
The caecum of cf/cf mice transfected with pREP8-CFTR showed no appreciable cAMP-stimulated chloride secretion compared with the control (+/+) mice, confirming the genotypes of the mice and that the transfection procedure did not affect the gut.
Thus, the transfection procedure used can restore CFTR-dependent, cAMP-stimulated chloride secretion by airway epithelia to normal levels.
In the airways of human CF patients there is an increase in amiloride-sensitive sodium absorption, as well as a decrease in chloride secretion, compared with controls r18–20 .
It has been suggested that this is crucial to the development of the disease state, as application of amiloride by aerosol alleviates the decline in lung function in CF. It is not yet clear how a loss of CFTR function leads to this increase in sodium absorption.
In contrast to the human, sodium absorption was reduced in the airways of cf/cf mice (Fig. 4B).
Transfection of the cf/cf mice with pREP8-CFTR, but not with the vector pREP8, significantly increased sodium absorption (seven- to eightfold;P0.05),to essentially wild-type (+/+) levels (Fig. 4B).
Thus, secondary alterations in sodium transport were also corrected to wild-type levels by the transfection protocol used.
Finally, Ca r2+ -induced chloride secretion reflects an alternative pathway for chloride secretion in the airways distinct from the CFTR pathway.
Ca r2+ -stimulated chloride secretory currents were not defective in cf/c f trachea, compared with trachea of normal (+/+) mice, but were significantly increased following transfection with CFTR (P0.05;Fig. 4B).
This latter increase is probably a consequence of hyperpolarization through Ca r2+ -sensitive K + channels, which increases the electrochemical gradient for Cl -exit through the introduced CFTR channels and the pre-existing second pathway.
These data show that the ion transport defects in CF can be corrected in vivo .
Liposomes, which in clinical trials have been shown to be non-toxic and non-immunogenic, may be safer than viral vectors which have the inherent risks of immunogenicity, replication and transmission.
Our results illustrate the invaluable role of transgenic null cf/cf mice in assessing the efficiency of various gene therapy approaches.
We have shown that functional expression of CFTR not only corrects the primary ion transport defect of the trachea (that is, the cAMP-stimulated chloride secretion), but also corrects secondary alterations in sodium absorption which are a consequence of loss of CFTR function.
There seems to be no reason why this approach should not be transferable to humans for the treatment of the pulmonary features of CF.    
FIG. 1 Expression of functional CFTR protein from plasmid pREP8-CFTR in HeLa cells.
a,
Western blot confirming expression of CFTR after transfection of HeLa cells using Lipofectin.
Lanes 1, HT29 cells; 2, HeLa cells transfected with pREP8-CFTR; 3, HeLa cells transfected with the vector pREP8.
The HT29 cells served as a positive control for CFTR expression and migration, indicated by the arrow.
The 115 and 85K bands are due to nonspecific cross reactions of the antibody.
M r x1,000 of markers is indicated.
b,
Time course of iodide efflux from HeLa cells.
Cells were transfected with plasmid pREP8-CFTR (i) or the vector pREP8 (sl;).
The arrow indicates the point at which a cAMP-agonist cocktail was added.
The data are displayed as the mean of three individual experiments (s.e.m.), expressed as a percentage of the total  efflux .
METHODS.
Human CFTR cDNA encoding the entire CFTR coding sequence (nucleotides 133–4,620) was inserted into the plasmid pREP8 (Invitrogen), under transcriptional control of the RSV 3' LTR promoter, to create plasmid pREP8-CFTR.
The cDNA incorporated three minor changes from the published sequence (C to G at nucleotide 136; T to C at nucleotide 936; A to C at nucleotide 1990), and included a Kozak translation initiation sequence (CCACCATG) immediately 5' to the translation initiation codon.
For plasmid transfection, 1x10 6 HeLa cells were seeded into each well of 35-mm, 6-well tissue culture dishes in Dulbecco's modified Eagles medium supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum, and incubated at 37°C.
After 24h growth, cells in each well were transfected with 8μg plasmid DNA mixed with 13μg Lipofectin (Gibco BRL) and diluted to 3ml in Optimem 1 (Gibco BRL).
After a further 24–48-h incubation at 37°C, cells were either collected for protein extraction or used for anion efflux measurements.
For protein extraction, cells were washed five times with ice-cold PBS and collected into a buffer containing 10mM Tris-Cl pH8.0, 10mM KCl, 1.5mM MgCl 2 , and the protease inhibitors antipain (50μgml r-1 ), aprotinin (10μgml r-1 ), benzamidine (310μgml r-1 ), leupeptin (5μgml r-1 ), pepstatin A (5μgml r-1 ) and phenylmethylsulphonyl fluoride (175μgml r-1 ).
Cells were lysed by repeated passage through a 19-gauge needle.
Cellular and nuclear debris were removed from the lysate by a 5-min centrifugation at 300 g and membranes  pelleted by a 30-min centrifugation at 100,000 g.
The membrane pellet was dissolved in 2.5%Triton X-100 and separated by electrophoresis on a 6% SDS-polyacrylamide gel.
CFTR was detected by western blotting after transfer to a Hybond C-super membrane (Amersham) using the well characterized anti-CFTR antisera 181.
Immunodetection was by enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL; Amersham).
To measure cAMP-stimulated efflux, the transfected cells were preloaded with iodide by incubation for 40min at room temperature in 3ml loading buffer (136mM NaI, 3mM KNO 3 , 2mM Ca (NO 3 )2 , 11mM glucose, 20mM HEPES, pH7.4).
Extracellular NaI was removed by 6x1ml rinses in efflux buffer (loading buffer with 136mM NaNO 3 replacing the NaI).
Cells were then washed with 1ml efflux buffer for 1min using a sample-replace procedure.
After the fifth 1-min sample (designated time 0), cAMP-agonists (1mM 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine (IBMX), 200μM dibutyryl-cAMP, 10μM forskolin, dissolved in DMSO) were included in the efflux buffer.
The concentration of iodide in each 1-ml aliquot was determined using an iodide-specific electrode (HNU systems).
FIG. 2 Detection of human CFTR by in situ hybridization in mouse airways following in vivo transfection. a-f,Data obtained for a mouse transfected with pREP8-CFTR;G-l,controls for an untransfected mouse.
The probes used were against human CFTR exons 1–6 (a-c and g-i)or the hisD vector sequences (d-f and j-l).
For each example, three panels are shown:(1) a brightfield view of a section hybridized with the antisense probe, to illustrate tissue morphology (a, d, g, j);(2) a darkfield view of the same section (b, e, h, k);(3) a darkfield view of an adjacent section probed with the control sense probe (c, f, i, l).
Scale bar, 200μm.
Similar results were obtained with several animals.
METHODS.
Mice were given enough avertin by intraperitoneal injection to induce very light anaesthesia.
For transfection, 100μg plasmid DNA was mixed with 25μg Lipofectin in a total volume of 50μl and administered to mice by tracheal instillation in two loads by insertion of a metal applicator, adapted from a 25-gauge blunted syringe needle, through the mouth and into the trachea to the point where the main bronchi branch off.
The animals used weighed between 5g and 12g.
Four days after transfection,in situ hybridization was performed on perfusion-fixed tissue by a modification of the method described by Simmons et al.,as described previously.
35 S-labelled RNA probes were synthesized in vitro by run-off transcription from plasmid DNA, incorporating [35 S]UTP.
The antisense and sense (control) probes were derived from opposite strands of the same plasmid.
The plasmids used for probe generation were as follows.
The two human CFTR probes, corresponding to nucleotides 62–645 (exons 1–6) and nucleotides 1,977–2,461 (exon 13)(numbering according to ref.1), have been described previously.
The mouse cftr probes were derived by reverse transcriptase PCR from mouse testis mRNA and corresponded to nucleotides 305–691 of exons 3–5.
The hisD vector probe was subcloned from pREP8 and corresponded to nucleotides 3,167–3,851.
All probes were cloned into Bluescript vectors (Stratagene).
After developing, sections were counterstained with haematoxylin and eosin and photographed using a Nikon Microphot FX microscope.
FIG. 3 Detection of human CFTR in different regions of the mouse airway following transfection.
Sections from different regions of the airway of a mouse transfected with pREP8-CFTR were hybridized with human antisense CFTR probes corresponding to either exons 1–6 (a-f, i, j)or exon 13 (g and h).
a-d,Expression of human CFTR in small and large airways;e-j,expression in airspaces in the more distal regions of the lung.
Some variation was found in the proportion of cells transfected in different animals which probably reflects differences in the amounts of DNA delivered.
Scale bar, 100μm.
See legend to Fig. 2 for details of methods and hybridization probes.
FIG. 4 Correction of the ion channel defects in the trachea of transgenic (cf/cf)mice.
A,Sample traces showing examples of the data from which panel B was compiled.
Three paired tracheal/caecal preparations are shown.
Upper records show measurements for the caecum and lower records for the trachea of the same animal.
a, cf/cf mouse transfected with pREP8-CFTR;b,+/+ mouse transfected with pREP8;c, cf/cf mouse transfected with the vector pREP8.
Four additions were made to each of the tracheal preparations at the time points indicated by dots.
First, amiloride (100μM) was added (apically) to block electrogenic sodium absorption and to ensure subsequent current increases were not due to this activity.
EC50 for amiloride is 1μM and 100μM will give essentially 100% inhibition.
Second, forskolin (10μM) was added to both sides of the membrane to stimulate adenylate cyclase and activate cAMP-sensitive chloride channels, increasing chloride secretion.
Third, the Ca r2+ ionophore A23187 (1μM) was added to both sides of the membrane to activate Ca r2+ -dependent chloride secretion.
The ionophore-induced responses were much slower than those induced by forskolin.
Finally, frusemide (1mM) was added basolaterally to block chloride secretion, confirming the nature of the electrogenic transporting activity.
Frusemide (1mM) inhibits over 90% of Cl -secretion.
Calibrations for the trachea are the same in each panel.
Caecal preparations (upper records) received two additions, forskolin (10μM, added to both sides of the membrane) and frusemide (1mM, added basolaterally).
Other additions are specifically labelled: C, carbachol (10μM); H, histamine (10μM).
In both the caecum and the trachea the chloride secretory responses were inhibited by frusemide, indicating that they are due to electrogenic chloride secretion from the basolateral to the luminal side of the epithelium.
In 8 out of 10 cf/cf caeca, frusemide led to a slight increase in short-circuit current (SSC)(c,upper record); this is probably due to a blockage of K + secretion and is typical of the caecum of cf/cf mice.
B,Compilation of the data.
Mice were subjected to three different treatment protocols:a, cf/cf mice transfected with pREP8-CFTR;b,+/+ mice transfected with the vector pREP8;c, cf/cf mice transfected with the vector pREP8.
Four animals in each group were matched based on a compromise between weight and age.
Data were only included when paired airway and caecal measurements could be made for the same animal.
The genotypes of the transfected mice, and of the plasmid DNA with which they were transfected, was unknown at the time the measurements were made.
For each treatment regime, three sets of data are shown.
(1) The left hand columns show SCC measurements for the trachea.
Three measurements of SCC changes are presented: Na + , amiloride-sensitive sodium absorption; Cl -cAMP, SCC change induced by forskolin, presumed to reflect CFTR function; Cl -Ca 2+ , SCC change induced by the addition of the calcium ionophore A23187.
As about 50% of the basal current in the airways was due to sodium absorption, chloride secretion was measured after the addition of amiloride (100μM) which abolished electrogenic sodium absorption.
(2) The central columns show SCC measurements for the caecum.
Only cAMP-sensitive chloride secretion (Cl -cAMP), induced by the addition of forskolin (10μM), was measured.
Amiloride was not added because the caecum shows no sodium absorptive current.
(3) The right-hand columns show the weights of the animals used (mean  s.e.m.).
Note: the ion transport characteristics of 4/6 pREP8-CFTR transfected cf/cf mice were altered by transfection; the reason for the failure of the other two mice is almost certainly failure in delivery.
Nevertheless, the forskolin-sensitive SCC (Cl -cAMP) in the whole group including the two failures (9.22.6μAcm r-2 ,n=6 ) was significantly greater (P0.05,Mann and Witney test) than the value for cf/cf mice (1.90.5cm r-2 ,n=4).
Finally, data for two other groups of animals were obtained although these are not illustrated in the figure.
Untreated, wild-type (+/+) mice (n=5;weight  s.e.m.
=32.22.9g) had transport parameters as follows (mean  s.e.m.): for the trachea  for the caecum .
Heterozygous (cf/+) mice transfected with pREP8-CFTR (n=2;mean weight, 7.0g) had the following transport parameters (mean  s.e.m.): for the trachea:: for the caecum .
Note that the forskolin-sensitive currents (Cl -cAMP) in the trachea were smaller than those reported previously for wild-type mice.
This is undoubtedly a consequence of edge damage caused by using only 2.27mm 2 areas of trachea in the present study, necessitated by the small size of the cf/cf mice, compared with 4mm 2 areas of trachea in previous studies.
METHODS.
Transgenic mice were genotyped by PCR and/or Southern blot analysis as described.
Introduction of plasmid DNA into the mouse airways was as described in the legend to Fig. 2.
Trachea and caeca were removed from the transfected animals killed by exposure to 100% CO 2 .
A single tracheal preparation (2.27mm 2 ) and a single caecal preparation (20mm 2 ) was prepared from each animal.
The reduction in tracheal area, compared with a previous report was due to the necessity of using animals as small as 5g.
The trachea were cleaned and cut longitudinally along the dorsal surface and a piece placed under microscopic control in a specially constructed Ussing chamber designed to preserve the curvature of the tissue.
Electrogenic ion transport was measured directly as SCC recorded by voltage clamping the tissue at zero potential, as described previously.
Amino-aromatic interaction between histidine 197 of the neurokinin-1 receptor and CP 96345
Tung Ming Fong, Margaret A. Cascieri, Hong Yu, Alka Bansal, Christopher Swain & Catherine D. Strader
SUBSTANCE P is a peptide neurotransmitter that binds to the neurokinin-1 receptor and is involved in pain transmission and neurogenic inflammation.
Recently, a non-peptide substance P antagonist (CP 96345) has been shown to be effective in animal models of pain and inflammation.
An understanding of the molecular interactions responsible for ligand binding will be critical for the development of more specific and selective antagonists for the neurokinin-1 receptor and for the discovery of new antagonists for related G-protein-coupled receptors.
Here we report that histidine at position 197 in the fifth transmembrane helix of the human neurokinin-1 receptor binds specifically to CP 96345 but not to peptide agonists.
Substitution of His197 by different amino acids and analysis of structural analogues of antagonists suggest that His197 is involved in an amino-aromatic interaction with the benzhydryl moiety of CP 96345.
The neurokinin-1 receptor (NK-1R) is a G-protein-coupled receptor characterized by seven putative transmembrane helices.
Because of the topological similarity among G-protein-coupled receptors and the observation that β- adrenergic receptors and rhodopsin bind small molecule ligands within their transmembrane domains, we reasoned that the transmembrane domain of the NK-1R may be involved in the binding of CP 96345.
We applied Fourier analysis of the putative transmembrane region to identify residues likely to be located at the centre of the human NK-1R near the top of the transmembrane domain.
Among those interior residues, several were selected for site-directed mutagenesis on the basis of side chains that contain functional groups capable of forming hydrogen bonds with ligands.
Substituting four such residues by alanine (T40A, H95A, T201A, Q284A; Fig. 1) did not affect the binding affinity of substance P (SP) or CP 96345 (Table 1), suggesting that these residues are not involved in ligand binding.
In contrast, substitution of His197 in helix 5 by alanine (H197A) resulted in a 30-fold reduction in CP 96345 affinity without affecting substance P affinity (Table 1), suggesting that His197 is specifically involved in antagonist binding.
In order to probe the nature of the interaction between His197 and CP 96345, several different substitutions were introduced at this position.
The H197Q mutant bound CP 96345 with the same affinity as the wild-type receptor (Table 1), indicating that the aromatic characteristics of His197 are not required for the interaction with the antagonist.
Substitution by phenylalanine (H197F) caused only a threefold reduction in CP 96345 affinity, suggesting that a hydrogen-bonding interaction is not critical.
The absence of hydrogen bonds between His197 and CP 96345 is also consistent with the results of the H197Y and H197S mutants, both of which exhibited about 15-fold reduction in CP 96345 affinity compared to the wild-type NK-1R.
Replacement of His197 by lysine (H197K) resulted in a 500-fold reduction in CP 96345 affinity.
Therefore, only glutamine and, to a lesser extent, phenylalanine could substitute directly for His197 in the interaction with CP 96345 (Table 1).
The interaction between CP 96345 and His197 is specific because the binding affinity for the perhydroisoindole antagonist RP67580 (ref. 14) was not affected by the H197A mutation (Table 1).
This is consistent with previous data indicating that different antagonists bind to overlapping but non-identical sites.
Most of the point mutants described here retained normal binding affinity for substance P (Table 1), indicating that the gross conformation of the NK-1R is not perturbed by the substitution of His197.
One mutant (H197K) showed a 5-fold reduction in affinity for substance P but not in the affinities of other neurokinin peptides (data not shown), which may indicate a perturbation of the substance P-receptor interaction as a result of the longer side chain and/or the positive charge of Lys197.
To determine which functional group in CP 96345 interacts with His197, we analysed a series of CP 96345 analogues in which the major substituents were altered.
If a functional group on CP 96345 interacts with His197, removing that functional group should result in a dissociation constant for the H197A mutant equal to that for the wild type because the His197 specific interaction is no longer present.
On the other hand, removal of a functional group interacting with a residue other than His197 should lead to a decrease in affinity for the H197A mutant compared with the wild type, analogous to what is observed for the parent compound CP 96345.
Thus replacement of the quinuclidine nitrogen of CP 96345 by carbon yielded L706164, with an affinity for the human NK-1R substantially lower than CP 96345 (Table 2).
This compound showed further reduced affinities for the series of substitution mutants with a pattern similar to CP 96345; that is, glutamine was a perfect substitution for His197, whereas serine, alanine and lysine were not (Fig. 2 a).
The additive effects of substituting His197 on the NK-1R and replacing the quinuclidine nitrogen on CP 96345 indicate that this nitrogen interacts with a residue other than His197.
Similarly, modification of the secondary amine (L703605) or the N- benzyl substituent (L705084) resulted in the same pattern of relative affinities for the mutant recep- tors as CP 96345 (Fig. 2 a),suggesting that neither the secondary amine nor the substituted benzyl moiety interacts with His197.
L703766 is a CP 96345 analogue in which the benzhydryl at C2 is replaced by a benzyl group.
The affinities of L703766 for all mutants were very similar to that for the wild-type receptor (Table 2).
The observation that the affinity of L703766 is insensitive to the chemical nature of the side chain at position 197, whereas CP 96345 binding is substantially affected by substitution at this position (Fig. 2 a)strongly suggests that His197 interacts directly with the benzhydryl moiety of CP 96345.
This suggestion is supported by analysis of a related compound, L703774, in which p- methoxy substituents are added to the benzhydryl moiety.
Again, removal of one of the aromatic rings of the substituted benzhydryl (L705081) results in a loss of sensitivity to the chemical nature of the residue at position 197 (Table 2, and Fig. 2 a).
It should be noted that the affinity of L703766 for the wild-type receptor was substantially lower than that of CP 96345.
Such a decrease is greater than expected for the loss of a single interaction between CP 96345 and the NK-1R (for example, 30-fold reduction of CP 96345 affinity in the H197A mutant), suggesting that other amino-acid residues may also participate in interactions with the benzhydryl of CP 96345.
The increased conformational flexibility of L703766 may also explain the weakened interaction with the receptor.
The observation that His197 can be perfectly substituted by glutamine suggests that the imidazole of His197 may be involved in an amino-aromatic interaction with the benzhydryl of CP 96345 (Fig. 2 b).
According to this model, the  (+)amino group of histidine or glutamine would form an electrostatic interaction with the  (-)-electrons of the benzhydryl group of the antagonist.
In the case of the H197F mutant, an edge-to-face aromatic-aromatic interaction between the  (+)hydrogen of the phenylalanine and the  (-)-electrons of the benzhydryl group of the antagonist would be similar to an amino-aromatic interaction in its electrostatic origin.
Theoretical calculations have suggested that an electrostatic amino-aromatic interaction can contribute 3 kcal mol -1 of binding enthalpy, which is consistent with the 30-fold reduction in CP 96345 affinity for the H197A mutant (Fig. 2 a).
In contrast, the longer side chain of lysine in the H197K mutant may create an unfavourable positioning for CP 96345, whereas an unfavourable contribution from the  (-)oxygen of serine or tyrosine in the H197S or H197Y mutants might preclude a favourable interaction with the benzhydryl group of CP 96345.
The conclusion that His197 interacts directly with the benzhydryl of CP 96345 suggests that other nearby residues within the transmembrane domain should also interact with the antagonist.
The identification of a specific molecular interaction between CP 96345 and the NK-1R should provide a rational basis for the development of more potent and selective antagonists.
To our knowledge, these data are the first evidence for a specific interaction between a small molecule antagonist and the transmembrane domain of a peptide receptor.
Together with previous data showing a similar location for the small molecule binding sites in adrenergic receptors, these results suggest that there is a general transmembrane binding site for small molecules in G-protein-coupled receptors, and that non-peptide antagonists can be developed for the analogous domain in other peptide receptors.
Point mutations were created by oligonucleotide-mediated site-directed mutagenesis and confirmed by DNA sequencing.
Binding was assayed using intact COS cells expressing the cloned human NK-1R or its mutants.
The data were fitted to the equation , in which c.p.m.
(L) and c.p.m. (0) represent the amount of bound 125 I-labelled substance P in the presence or in the absence of unlabelled ligand, respectively; L represents the concentration of unlabelled ligand, and IC 50 represents the concentration of unlabelled ligand that causes 50% inhibition of specifically bound 125 I-labelled substance P. Either Bolton-Hunter 125 I-labelled substance P or [125 I]Tyr8-substance P were used in the assay; both radioligands gave identical IC 50 values.
The means  s.d. from independent experiments are listed.
Abbreviations: WT, wild type; Ph, phenyl; M, p-methoxyphenyl.
All compounds are 2, 3- cis racemates, and were synthesized as described.
The binding assay was as described in Table 1 legend, except in the case of L706164, L705084, L703766, L703774 and L705081, for which binding was assayed using 0.2nM [125 I]Tyr8-substance P in the presence of 0.05mgml -1 chymostatin, 0.002mgml -1 pepstatin and 0.1mM PMSF instead of bacitracin and phosphoramidon.
The means  s.d. from independent experiments are listed.
FIG. 1 Schematic model of the human NK-1R showing putative transmembrane helices and the relative locations of the residues mutated.
His197 residue is highlighted.
FIG. 2
a,
Difference in the calculated free energies of dissociation between a mutant and the wild-type receptor for various compounds.
The free energy of dissociation is calculated according to the equation , in which the dissociation constant for a compound (K d ) is calculated as , and the dissociation constant for substance P () is calculated as .
Right axis shows the ratio of dissociation constants for a mutant and wild-type receptor.
Left axis shows the difference in the calculated free energies of dissociation .
Each symbol represents one compound:.
Data points outside the vertical axis break represent a mutant-to-wild type ratio of higher than 100, or a  value larger than 20μM.
b,
Schematic drawing of the proposed amino-aromatic interaction between His197 and CP 96345 in the transmembrane core of the NK1R.
Each arc represents a transmembrane helix.