

Patronage
Patronage, Politicians and Voters
Eighteenth-century politics have long had an unsavoury reputation, and although in the case of Scotland much of that reputation can be traced to the persuasive, but not strictly accurate, writings of Henry Cockburn and other Whig reformers of the early nineteenth century, it must be conceded at the outset that there is something to be said for the received account.
The Whig reformers had their own political views in mind when they described the typical Scottish politician as a man whose position was secured by extensive bribery of a small venal electorate concerned only with individual advantage, or, alternatively, by the politician ignoring the true electorate and placing reliance upon nominal and fictitious voters who had been added to the freeholders rolls in the counties.
In their zeal for a long overdue expansion of the tiny electorate, the critics, however, fail to offer a convincing explanation of how any opposition candidates managed to secure election if the whole system was so totally corrupt, for the argument that certain constituencies were blessed with unusually pure and honest voters is not one which carries much conviction.
It would be difficult to seriously question the received account in relation to the royal burghs, for corruption was rampant in most, if not in all, of them.
Politicians who hoped to secure the representation of a burgh district were unlikely to succeed, or, if by some aberration a victory could be obtained, to retain the seat, without satisfying the demands of the burgh oligarchies, whose ambitions were rarely modest.
On the other hand, if Scottish political life in the counties is assumed to be explained by the suggestion that bribery was all in all, this would be a misleading impression, for many freeholders were less in the pocket of a political manager than the managers themselves would have liked to think, or conventional accounts would suggest.
Small electorates can be managed by politicians, and when the typical county might number forty to sixty freeholders in its electoral roll, while even one of the more extensive lists would rarely exceed 150 voters, many of whom would be nominally qualified, there was clearly opportunity for manipulation.
The art of management, however, was more than the successful bribery of fifty per cent plus one, if for no other reason than the fact that there was never enough of the articles of bribery to employ it on such a scale, even if the voters had been willing to be so bought.
The creation of nominal and fictitious votes was by far the greatest abuse to disfigure Scottish politics in the eighteenth century, but that was a form of political corruption which long survived even the Reform Act of 1832, and the only abuse which was truly confined to the period under consideration was that which attempted to capitalise upon the opportunities for manipulating the voters, through a judicious application of patronage, which the small number of voters  appeared to invite.
The freeholder voting upon a nominal qualification was unquestionably a perversion of the constitution, but the appearance of such voters is also a tacit admission by their creators that they were unable to manipulate the genuine freeholders by corrupt means.
Eighteenth-century voters were greedy for patronage, but their openness to bribery was normally limited by their sense of their own position in society.
County voters, like their counterparts in the burghs, could be managed, and some of the politicians acquired considerable reputations for their skill in swaying voters, but does that justify the interpretation so sedulously propagated by early nineteenth-century reformers?
Was Scotland, in fact, an abyss of political corruption before the country was rescued by the Whigs in 1832?
Political management in a county setting was conducted by different methods from the outright bribery which was so significant a tool of burgh politicians.
County freeholders, often indiscriminately styled ‘barons’, as indeed some of them were, whose estates had been erected into free baronies by a crown charter, were gentlemen landowners of the shire, the direct vassals of the crown, and most of them were fully conscious of holding a social position which demanded that they should not be seen to be in any man's pocket.
Such gentlemen freeholders could be manipulated, but they rarely considered themselves the hired retainers of a politician, whose support the latter could take for granted.
Patronage was a vital tool of management, but it was never more than a tool, and it was one which was not generally employed in the form of direct bribery.
Effective management of a county interest required the politician to do more than strike a bargain in which a vote, or votes, was the return for immediate patronage.
When a politician assisted a freeholder with a gift of a patronage appointment, he would almost always give it in the guise of an act of friendship, and it was the friendly relationship which was the truly significant factor.
The intent of the politician was of course to create a feeling of obligation, which he undoubtedly hoped would stand him in good stead at the next election, but such feelings were all the stronger because the shrewd political manager never breathed a word about a bargain or the anticipated political return.
Acts of seemingly disinterested friendship, reinforced by regular social contacts, were in fact the only sound approach to building a powerful county interest.
On the other hand, even if the politician demonstrated his ability to provide a great deal of patronage, if he did not follow it up with effective social contact, he would be laying a poor foundation for a political interest, and the gratitude of the freeholders under those circumstances could be short-lived.
Having laid the groundwork of his interest, the politician had to be ready when election time rolled around again, and at that point an incumbent who could re-apply to constituents whom he had frequent occasion to meet, and ask them for a continuation of their friendship, without suggesting for a moment that any of them had a duty to support him in recognition of an implied bargain for past favours, was in a far stronger position than a man whose only contacts with his constituents took the form of patronage letters.
Patronage was necessary, because it was expected that the member of parliament should be able to obtain it, a fact which goes a long way towards  explaining the close links between so many Scots members of parliament and administration.
The politician's dilemma has never been better stated than by George Dempster in a letter which he wrote to Sir Adam Fergusson in 1783:
Unfortunately, when a minister with a firm grip on government patronage was involved, a refusal to offer such a return would effectively deprive the member of parliament of further opportunities to aid his own constituents.
In a contested election, however, it was impossible to do much with direct patronage, even if such were available, for there was never enough to do more than grease the palms of a handful of venal men, most of whom were to be found in the burgh councils.
There are examples of bribery to be found in the documentation relating to county elections, with votes being purchased outright by timely patronage, but such examples are rare.
In 1734, for example, when Campbell of Ardkinglas was faced with a contest in Stirlingshire, this government politician attempted to secure the support of some of the freeholders who were normally to be found in the interest of the Duke of Montrose.
One of these gentlemen, Buchanan of Balfunning, who had not yet offered his vote to any candidate, was quite open about his ambitions for, as Ardkinglas remarked, ‘he declairs…he is ready to vote for me providing ther is any thing done for John Buchanan his son’.
The laird of Balfunning wanted a tide waiter's place for his son, but Buchanan was clearly not prepared to settle for promises, for he ‘insists that he may see his son's commision before the election’.
An open sale of a vote, such as this, was quite unusual, however, and Buchanan of Balfunning appears to have been particularly unscrupulous, even on Ardkinglas's own showing, for the latter suggessed that if Buchanan could see a commission for his son, ‘we have him, if not Montrose has him, to whom he ows many obligations’.
As it turned out, the government moved too slowly, for Campbell of Ardkinglas was unable to obtain a revenue office in sufficient time, and the laird of Balfunning voted with the Montrose party in the election of 1734.
The same election provides a further example of bribery, once again involving a Buchanan laird, Moses Buchanan of Glins, whose price for supporting Ardkinglas was the consent of government to his son's succession to John McCure's office of keeper of the register of sasines of Renfrew.
In order to secure Moses Buchanan's vote, Sir James Campbell of Ardkinglas was induced to give a bond of £140 Sterling, to be forfeited if the candidate failed to obtain the desired office upon McCure's death.
That bill was given, as Ardkinglas explained, ‘at the very time the Bell was Ringing for the Election, by which I carryed my Election by two Votes’.
Unfortunately for the member of parliament, however, when he approached Lord Ilay to secure the desired permission for young Buchanan to succeed to the office of keeper, his request was denied on the ground that this would be enough to make the post hereditary.
Ilay did offer to make good Sir James Campbell's financial loss, but the latter had still not obtained a settlement for the £140 forfeited to Moses Buchanan even in 1739.
Beyond question, Moses Buchanan and his son bargained for their votes on the actual day of election, and indeed as Sir James acknowledges, it was their votes which carried his election.
In all probability there were always a few freeholders in any county who could be prevailed upon in this way to swing their votes behind a candidate who offered a guarantee of advantage.
Nevertheless, the fact remains, these are exceptional cases, and it is worth remarking that even in the two cases cited, the freeholders concerned had not come under any previous commitment to a rival candidate.
To switch a vote which had been promised was a still rarer occurrence, and such conduct was seen for what it was, ungentlemanly and unacceptable in persons of the social rank of freeholder.
In contrast, in the cruder world of burgh politics, similar conduct was common enough to scarcely elicit comment.
In the counties, however, at any period in the eighteenth century, the open sale of a freeholder's vote to the highest bidder was apt to attract censure.
Social attitudes demanded that the politician who aspired to a county interest should handle his constituents with greater care than merely bargaining for votes.
Most politicians themselves saw matters in this light, and could harshly rebuff freeholders and their relatives who believed otherwise.
David Scott, for example, told one of his Angus constituents in the last years of the eighteenth century, when refusing his request for patronage, that he was 
David Scott was not one of the more successful county politicians, and perhaps his attitude is a little too pure for the real world of eighteenth-century politics, but it represents, even if in an exaggerated form, the general political maxim that the politician performs friendly services for his friends without haggling over a bargain, or even implying that an understanding existed which might suggest that  a vote was given for services rendered, or as in this case, for services which might be performed at a future date.
Almost all freeholders would have taken strong exception to the suggestion that their support had been purchased, and this was as true of those gentlemen who had recently obtained posts for themselves or their sons as it was for those who had been less fortunate.
When a general election took place, the limited amount of disposable patronage was stretched very thinly, and in Scotland most of what was available would be swallowed by the burgh politicians, where a crucial vote or two might carry the election of a delegate without alienating others.
Indeed, in a burgh contest, a well publicised appointment could provide the necessary evidence to the members of council that one of the potential members of parliament had the ear of government.
The ability to obtain some patronage during an election contest was often essential to success, for it was not uncommon for every candidate in a crowded field to claim to be a friend of the administration in power.
Councillors, most of whom firmly believed that their representative should have close ties with the ministers of the crown, found in a candidate's ability to place friends in local revenue offices and other patronage appointments, and equally, his ability to move political enemies out of such places in the district towns, an effective means of evaluating a candidate's qualification for membership in the House of Commons.
In the Scottish burghs bribery and corruption was a way of life for the civic leaders, and direct bribery was rarely absent, but in the counties the employment of patronage would be much more subtle.
It would be wrong to suggest that any segment of an eighteenth-century electorate was truly independent, and a number of ties joined the freeholders to the party, or interest, of a local politician.
In this period few lairds could really afford the luxury of complete freedom of action in their politics, for the only means of avoiding ties of obligation, which were nonetheless real for being unspoken, was to refuse to accept any favour.
No doubt George Dempster was correct when he wrote that ‘the true spirit of our constitution ought to make it criminal in a member of Parliament to offer any constituent the smallest personal favour’, but such an opinion was at variance with the facts of eighteenth and early nineteenth-century life.
In an age in which almost every worthwhile appointment likely to attract a gentleman could be obtained only through political interest, true independence was a luxury for a few wealthy bachelors without close kin, and politicians were expected to satisfy their constituents' needs.
Two bribe-hungry burgesses of North Berwick explained matters quite plainly in a letter which they wrote to Henry Erskine when the latter became Lord Advocate of Scotland in 1806.
They advised  
Henry Erskine's correspondents could have added to their list several other varieties of revenue officer, judicial appointments, university chairs, first appointments in the army or the navy, and where these could be obtained without purchase, advancement in rank in these services, Indian and colonial patronage, and much more.
In any branch of government, civil or military, promotion always came easier to a man who could add political interest to ability, and on occasion the active support of a great man could more than compensate for very limited abilities.
Independence, in so far as this entailed freedom from obligation to a politician, was thus restricted to men with independent wealth and few dependents, but for most freeholders the friendship of a politician was a necessity at some point in their lives.
The need to start younger members of a family upon a career frequently brought a freeholder to seek the aid of a politician, and this was one of the major elements in interest building.
Accordingly, it is necessary to define what should be considered as bribery in the context of the period, rather than as it might be regarded in the twentieth century.
To contemporaries, as their private letters demonstrate, the term was effectively restricted to the sale of a vote in return for money, an offer of employment, or other reward during an actual election contest.
In other words, contemporaries viewed bribery as a bargain in which a vote was exchanged for something tangible at a time of election, but quite apart from the general distaste for such transactions, there was insufficient patronage available to permit its lavish use, and there was certainly never enough money.
Political power in a county, nonetheless, did demand that the politician make efficient use of patronage to help his friends.
No politician, whether a great magnate intent on retaining a traditional dominance in his region, a minister of the crown seeking favourable returns for his administration, or a landowner merely wishing to make a good figure in his own county, could manage without access to patronage with which to reward his friends' loyalty by helping them in their times of need.
To most voters patronage appointments were an economic necessity, and for much of the eighteenth century the relative poverty of so many of the Scottish gentry in comparison to their social counterparts in England eased the task of the politician who sought to manipulate them.
If a freeholder stood in no immediate need of a government office for himself, he would normally have sons or other relatives to provide for, and what other outlets were open to younger sons or brothers without capital save patronage appointments?
Government offices were obtained through the intervention of a great man, a man of influence, and a job-seeker without such connections had virtually no chance of success in his quest.
In 1720, for example, the Duke of Montrose remarked to a Scottish friend, that he had been advised by an official of the Treasury that a presentation to the office of land waiter of the customs at Port Glasgow had been submitted by the commissioners of customs in Scotland.
The response of the Treasury official upon receiving the nomination, according to the duke, was to ‘put the presentation in his pocket, desiring me rather to name somebody that might be useful for my interest, for nobody knows this Achterlonie’.
The salary of the post to which the unlucky Mr Achterlonie  aspired was a mere twenty pounds per annum, but Montrose did not disdain it, conscious that ‘triffling as such a post is it may effectuallie oblidge some body who may be reddie to repay such a favor upon ane other occasion’.
Such favours were the cement of county politics, creating and maintaining political influence, for the Scottish gentry had long memories, both for kindness and injury, and if the latter was rarely, if ever, forgiven, neither was a favour forgotten.
If the recipient acted true to type, a sense of obligation could affect voting behaviour many years after the favour had been conferred.
Arguably, this is another kind of corruption, but it was in general a very long-range bribery, and it was invariably offered in the guise of friendship.
Under normal circumstances the bulk of government patronage in Scotland would be distributed through the agency of ministers familiar with local politics, and it was this which gave the crown its commanding influence in the country.
On the other hand, even efficient ‘managers’, such as Lord Ilay or Henry Dundas, could never claim absolute mastery of Scotland in fact, whatever they may have alleged to their colleagues, for no manager ever possessed a monopoly of desirable patronage, some of which always remained in private hands.
Prior to the abolition of the heritable jurisdictions in 1747, those nobles who possessed extensive judicial rights controlled their own patronage.
Such lords could provide for a number of gentlemen in their direct service, appointing to offices ranging from bailies and sheriffs-depute, procurators-fiscal, and clerks to such minor posts as regality officers and keepers of prisons.
But even the lowliest appointment might oblige a freeholder who in turn desired to serve some obscure relative or other dependent, while in those appointments which demanded legal training, young advocates could establish their reputation as jurists, which in turn might attract business to their law practices in Edinburgh.
James Haldane, when seeking the office of bailie of the regality of Lennox from the Duke of Montrose, hoped by that means to ‘occasion…partys to imploy him at Edinburgh’, and doubtless he was not alone in seeing this connection.
The greater landowners would also employ other gentlemen servants in the management of their estates in the early eighteenth century, some of whom might be freeholders, and all of whom would have connections with the voting freeholders, and while it is true that some of these appointments were poorly paid, one has to bear in mind the comparative poverty of so many of the Scottish gentry in terms of money income.
As the Duke of Montrose remarked, even if the salary were small, ‘a small thing to one that has little is still of value’.
Naturally, with the increasing prosperity of Scotland in the course of the eighteenth century, the value of minor private patronage diminished, but it could be replaced on occasion by alternatives, and at no time did the agents of administration control all available employment.
Some Scottish politicians were major stockholders or directors of the East India Company, and important patronage was attached to the office of director.
Some directors were of course friends of administration, and used their powers of patronage as far as possible to supplement the efforts of government, but others, and notably the Elphinstone family, used their Indian patronage to sustain an opposition to Henry Dundas in Scotland.
First appointments in India were in the  gift of the directors of the East India Company.
When the number of new writerships, cadetships and surgeoncies which would be required became known each year, the total was divided as evenly as possible into thirty shares.
The chairman and deputy-chairman took two shares each, and the remaining directors one share each, and they were free to use these nominations as they saw fit, within certain broad guidelines established by parliament.
All of these appointments could be used to help friends and thus to sustain a political interest.
County freeholders and burgh magistrates alike found Indian patronage attractive, for an Indian appointment opened up a career to a poor gentleman as none of the alternatives then available could do.
In India, army officers in the Company's service were advanced by time promotion, mitigated in some degree by considerations of evident merit, and commissions were not openly bought and sold as they were in the British army.
The lucky recipient of an Indian cadetship had at least the prospect of returning home as a wealthy senior officer, assuming of course that he survived the very real hazards of life in the East.
Not surprisingly gentlemen with poor prospects at home clamoured for Indian appointments, and a large proportion of the successful applicants were in fact Scots.
To a politician there was no better means of building and preserving a political interest than a demonstrated ability to secure some of the Indian patronage.
On the other hand, however much it might be in demand, Indian patronage was never plentiful, for it fluctuated from one year to the next in accordance with Indian needs rather than the wishes of the Scottish politician.
In the period 1821–1825, for example, the number of new appointments each year ranged from a low of 237 to a high of 494, but even in one of the better years such a total divided into thirty shares was not going to permit even the best supplied politician to buy his election.
Used carefully, however, over an extended period, Indian patronage could permit a politician to capitalise upon feelings of gratitude aroused by acts of seemingly disinterested friendship several years earlier, acts which would in fact be quietly brought to mind by a shrewd politician's regular enquiries about the activities of his young friend in India.
Some freeholders were just as keen as was the average burgh councillor to retain close ties with the government ministers.
Lawyers with a keen sense of the value of good political connections for their own professional careers were often very ready to fly in the direction of the politicians who were seen to have power.
Henry Erskine once remarked of a Scottish judge and freeholder that ‘he was first my enemy, when I came into power he was my great friend, when I went out he turned cool again & left off cultivating me, in that state we now remain, but I make no doubts were I in again, I should have him back again'.
Other freeholders, however, were less career-motivated, and often showed considerable loyalty to a particular political interest over an extended period of time, and as a generalisation it might be suggested that they were less likely to jump from one interest to another than were the lawyers with judicial preferment in mind.
Without patronage, however, political interests withered in time, for the needs of the voters would drive them to look for aid elsewhere if there did not seem a reasonable probability that their present connections might recover their lost influence in London.
The scarcity of employment suitable for the sons of a gentleman provided the man who could meet that need with very real influence in his region, and a favour of considerable value to a freeholder need not involve any major place in government service.
In 1749, for example, Lord Panmure was asked to obtain a small revenue post of tide waiter for a brother of one of the Angus freeholders.
The laird who sought the politician's aid had found himself in an embarrassing predicament when a brother had unexpectedly returned to the family estate after many years spent at sea.
As the laird described his situation, his brother 
Clearly, a member of parliament who could take the foul-mouthed uncle William far from the laird of Craigie's children might legitimately expect the memory of such a favour to persist for an election or two.
Under normal circumstances small favours of this type could be obtained by a politician with government connections, and it was only circumstances of a temporary nature which made job provision difficult for Scots politicians, such as the effective block which appeared in 1737 following the lynching of an officer of the City Guard of Edinburgh, when as a writer remarked, the hanging of Captain Porteous ‘sticks vastly in his majesties stomach and has been a great detriment to our countray-men in getting any thing done’.
The more normal situation, however, was that indicated by a correspondent of a Berwickshire member of parliament, who remarked that ‘a Member of a County who has served materially…ought to have full credit 'wt a minister to the extent in view’.
Good connections with a minister would be advantageous to any political interest, for freeholders and councillors often requested assistance which only government could provide.
This was particularly true when the request did not involve employment, for the successful conferment of a small charitable favour was in fact more likely to be long remembered than the award of a place.
On occasion a member of parliament might be asked to obtain a sinecure, a nominal place which would provide income without the necessity of having to do anything to earn it.
John Wallace, one of the magistrates of the burgh of Arbroath, explained his reasons for seeking a sinecure appointment worth £50 or so for his son, by emphasising his fear that ‘the lad will turn out but indifferently qualified for business otherways I should not give so much trouble in asking something for him…
I'm doubtfull he's but unfitt for anything requires attendance’.
Pensions might also be requested for those whose finances had become disordered, and shrewd politicians, like Mungo Graeme of Gorthie, the manager  of the Duke of Montrose's interest in Scotland, knew that time spent asking a pension in the charity roll for the sister of a laird might produce a political return for many years.
The lady in question was married to a lawyer who, in spite of being a writer to the signet, must have been singularly incompetent, for, as Gorthie remarked, ‘he's a senseless fellow that can make no shift for her and a great many children they have’.
The laird, however, would have a short memory indeed if he did not feel a deep sense of gratitude to the man who could remove the spectre of this large indigent family becoming a charge upon his estate.
Councillors and freeholders involved in business activity, particularly manufacturing, might also seek commercial favours through their member of parliament, such as the award of a contract.
In 1789, for example, an unsigned letter received by Sir Thomas Dundas advised the member of parliament that a Mr. Glen, a freeholder of Stirlingshire, would be greatly obliged if he could obtain introductions to colonels of regiments who might be induced to give the enterprising Mr. Glen the clothing contracts for their units.
A land lease was another kind of commercial favour which recurs, and this too could form a useful and persuasive means of keeping a voter's loyalty, as in the attempt to augment the Argyll interest in the burgh of Stirling in 1756 by giving a tack of land in Argyllshire to Robert Campbell, a brother of the laird of Barcaldine, who was one of the merchants of the town.
A politician might even be asked for land grants in the colonies, as Henry Dundas was, on one occasion by Provost John Buchan of Stirling, who requested the favour for one of the former magistrates who intended to settle in Canada.
Occasionally the pressure for favours from a voter who felt that the obligation was on the other side, because of the applicant's voting record, could be excessive, and it might be pushed far beyond what the politician would consider reasonable.
A freeholder named John MacLachlan exerted considerable pressure upon Lord Milton, the manager of the Argyll interest, after MacLachlan had supported that interest in the politics of his county.
MacLachlan successfully obtained through Milton's aid a delay in a foreclosure by the Royal Bank, and the freeholder hoped to persuade the politician to continue to stand between him and his creditors because of the value of his vote to the Argyll interest, arguing that 
Just in case Lord Milton failed to appreciate his value, MacLachlan stressed that he had been approached by the rival interest in the county and had been offered sufficient to make him easy for life, and accordingly implied that Milton had an obligation to aid him with his creditors and enable him to arrange further loans.
MacLachlan, moreover, was not averse to seeking further advantages for himself, for while acknowledging Milton's assistance in getting him a tack of two farms in Morvern for nineteen years, which would scarcely appear to be a short lease, he  complained that he had been informed that other tenants had obtained tacks of three times the length of that which he had from the Duke of Argyll, urging that he could ‘be as usefull as any in that Countrey by introduceing a cheap method of improvement and otherwise’.
Many Scottish freeholders were involved in colonial trade and the plantation economy of the West Indies and, as might be expected, they saw their member of parliament's influence in London as a route to obtaining the advantages which they desired in the colonies.
In 1795–6, for example, the member of parliament for the county of Angus found himself much concerned with the fate of a piece of crown land which happened to be situated within the plantation lands in the island of St Vincent belonging to Patrick Cruickshank of Stracathro, one of the Angus freeholders.
The laird of Stracathro, from the urgency of his correspondence, was clearly in terror that the land in question might be granted to another, for he was not attempting to secure a gift of the land but offering to pay full market value for it.
Voters who themselves got into a brush with the law, or whose friends had done so, were also among those seeking a politician's intervention.
In 1746, for example, William Grant, who in spite of his seemingly humble occupation of carpenter was the son of an Inverness-shire laird, chose a particularly inconvenient moment to take leave from the service of the Hudson's Bay Company and return to Scotland, for he was promptly committed to prison on suspicion of treason when he reached Scotland during the turmoil occasioned by the Jacobite Rising.
William Grant, however, was described as ‘a very honest man & sincere friend to the present happy establishment’, a claim which was being made in the aftermath of the Jacobite defeat for many Scots.
In the circumstances, any aid which a politician could offer was a very material favour which would long be remembered by the friends of the individual in difficulties.
In addition to the services of every kind asked by the voters, effective management would also involve the politician in substantial expenses, for any major political figure owed it to his position in society to give generously for any public concern.
Sir Thomas Dundas, the member of parliament for Stirlingshire, was asked to contribute the not inconsiderable sum of £850 sterling towards the cost of the bridge of Frew.
Sir Thomas's father, Sir Lawrence Dundas, when active in the politics of the city of Edinburgh, was a notable supporter of charities and other good causes, contributing on one occasion as much as £1,000 for the raising of nine companies of Royal Edinburgh Volunteers for service in the American War of Independence, a contribution exceeded only by the city itself, which gave £ 1,050.
Politicians with a burgh interest regularly made contributions to the cost of public works in the communities with which they concerned themselves, as Lord Panmure did in 1761, when he subscribed for the construction of a new town hall in Montrose.
Those who attempted to manage the political affairs of a county or district of burghs had not only to contribute towards any public project in their area, they were expected to be the leading subscribers, and it mattered little whether or not they agreed with the project in view.
In 1739, for example, the Duke of Montrose  was advised that the gentlemen of Stirlingshire had determined to enliven the normal Michaelmas proceedings with an assembly and race meeting, a project whose promoters were not among the duke's political friends.
Montrose, however, understood that although he had not been consulted and 
Charitable donations, however, did nothing to enhance a political interest, even if a lack of charity could seriously harm it, for a substantial contribution from a major political figure was no more than was expected by the gentlemen of a county or the magistrates of a burgh.
The major tool of management was always employment, for it was only through interest that anything worthwhile could be obtained, for even appointments in mercantile houses at home or abroad could often only be obtained through interest, while all appointments in government service were patronage appointments, in fact if not always in theory.
The most desirable form of employment for many Scots in the eighteenth century was that provided by the East India Company, and a politician with access to this commodity was normally a man of strong interest in his region.
Burgh councillors were particularly enthusiastic about the opportunities which a career in India might offer to their sons.
They were indeed too enthusiastic, for the demands of several burgh councils could prove too much for the resources of even the best-endowed East India Company director.
David Scott, for example, complained that he got so many requests for Indian patronage from the council of St. Andrews that if the remaining burghs in his district were to seek aid in proportion to the size of their communities it ‘would require more patronage than the whole East India Direction have in their gift’.
Admittedly, a hard-pressed politician could occasionally borrow a cadetship or other appointment from another director, promising to repay the loan in a future year, but the small size of the Indian official class meant that such a practice of burdening oneself for the future could be hazardous.
The small number of Indian places was, however, one of its attractions and certainly raised its value in the eyes of the applicants.
In the 1830s the total number of European military officers serving in India amounted to only 4,487, of whom 752 were serving in the royal army, as opposed to the regiments in the Company's employ, thus reducing the total to a mere 3,735.
The Indian civil administration was even smaller, numbering only 857, with 32 on average required annually to maintain the strength of the service.
Of the remaining places of interest to freeholders and other voters, the medical service employed 542 officers, while the Indian Marine, the naval service of the Company, provided  places for only 12 captains, 14 commanders, 46 lieutenants and 71 officers of lesser rank in its warships and dockyards.
A place in the small Indian establishment offered the successful applicant a career which could bring great responsibilities at an early age and at what was nominally a junior rank, and perhaps more importantly, it was well rewarded.
The best appointments upon entry were those of writer, the junior civil rank, for such civilians, it was claimed in the course of a debate in the East India House,
The Company's military officers, if less well paid than their civilian brethren, were yet infinitely better placed than their counterparts in the military service of the crown.
Rank for rank, East India Company officers received double the pay of an officer of a royal regiment, while serving in a country with a much lower cost of living.
After twenty-two years' service, an officer of the Company's armies was entitled to retire with a pension equal in value to the full pay of a royal officer or equivalent rank.
The cash value to be placed upon a first appointment as writer or cadet is uncertain, for it obviously depended upon the number of years in which a candidate would draw the salary, but contemporaries no doubt took the possibility of an early death from disease into account when they spoke of a value of £1,000.
Accordingly, it is evident that a gift of such significance could have been of no small value to a freeholder or councillor who would otherwise have found difficulty in endowing a relative so generously at the commencement of his career.
The one major restriction upon the usefulness of Indian patronage to the manager of a political interest was the fact that it was restricted to the young.
There were strict age limits for entry to the training establishment maintained by the Company to train its recruits, for cadets and writers had to enter within the ages of fifteen and twenty-two, and there was thus great anxiety to secure a place in a director's list which would ensure that an appointment could be secured before age excluded the candidate for ever.
Directors would normally maintain such lists of candidates in order of the date of receipt of the applications, but this apparent fairness had occasionally to be circumvented in case of urgent necessity by borrowing from another director with a less crowded list in the case of an older candidate, for it was often not feasible to advance a candidate over the heads of others in a list for fear of giving lasting offence.
The keen demand made patronage a double-edged weapon for the politician, who could find himself making enemies as readily as friends unless he proceeded with the utmost caution in everything he attempted.
Indian patronage was further divided by the intended destination in India, for military cadets were not appointed for service in India at large, but to a particular presidency, each of which maintained its own army.
Of the three divisions, Bengal ranked first, followed by Madras and lastly by Bombay, in an order determined by  the potential opportunities in each location.
A politician who could offer a friend's relative one of the better appointments could consider that he had rendered a signal service, which he was rarely slow to point out.
‘I have got an appointment for young Walker for Madras instead of Bombay which I am sure will please his friends’, David Scott told his agent in St. Andrews, on one occasion.
William Elphinstone, another East India Company director, advised his friend, the Glasgow merchant Peter Spiers, that he could 
If the military and civil branches of the East India Company's service were the most attractive forms of Indian patronage, the appointment of surgeon, either in India itself or on board an East Indiaman, one of the privately owned merchant vessels which carried Indian trade, was considered a desirable place by many Scots with the necessary professional training.
Of the less well known Indian appointments, a place in the Indian Marine also attracted a number of Scots even though it was based at unpopular Bombay, for it was a service which promoted by seniority, and death from wounds or disease could allow the rapid elevation of a healthy midshipman to a position of command.
The attraction of such a place was enhanced by the prize money paid in time of war to officers of the Indian Marine as to those of the Royal Navy, but the time promotion was unique to the Indian service, virtually guaranteeing advancement in rank.
Cargoes taken to and from the East were carried in specially built ships, which were among the largest contemporary merchantmen, the East Indiamen, and the officers' places in these ships were an additional source of private patronage for those politicians who enjoyed influence with the owners of the ships, for it was the owners, not the Company, who appointed the commander and mates of East Indiamen.
Ships sailing to India which were not directly owned or managed by the Company were considered to be permanently chartered to the Company, but the value of the charter to the vessel's owners and officers was determined by the port to which it was sent, and that was a decision made by the Company.
Accordingly, this power to name destinations gave the senior officers of the East India Company considerable influence over shipowners and they could, in turn, make use of such influence to aid their own political interest.
East Indiamen, being large vessels with correspondingly large crews, were run on a lavish scale reflecting the profits generated by Indian voyages, with one of the smaller ships manned by about sixty men and a larger vessel carrying a crew of as many as 130.
The crew would in turn be commanded by an unusually large number of officers for a merchant ship, for, in addition to the commander, the ship might carry six mates, a surgeon, a purser, five midshipmen and a surgeon's mate, any one of whose places would be of value to a politician seeking to build  up an interest.
The value of an officer's place in an East Indiaman did not lie in the salary, which was only marginally more attractive than that paid to other ship's officers.
The great advantage which officers of East Indiamen possessed over their counterparts in less favoured ships was their customary right to own a certain proportion of the cargo carried, and to sell that share at the end of the voyage for their own profit.
Cargo shares were of course proportioned to rank, but for the more senior officers it could almost guarantee wealth.
The commander of an East Indiamen might bring home with him 38 tons of cargo, his chief mate was allowed eight tons, the second officer six tons, and the remaining officers in decreasing proportion, but for all of them it was an important part of their remuneration.
The commander of a ship, however, had additional perquisites which added to the value of his appointment, for it has been claimed that he could make as much as £1,500 in a single voyage from the fares paid by passengers, while he even had the right to sell for his own profit at the end of the voyage the dunnage, that is the bamboos and rattans employed to keep the cargo from shifting.
In short, the command of an East Indiaman was a very profitable situation, and accordingly the award of a good voyage was said to be 
Even if a Bombay or China voyage was as profitable as David Scott suggested, a vessel with excellent accommodation for passengers was likely to bring a greater reward to its commander if it went to Bengal, for the centre of government was the destination of many of the wealthier travellers.
Unfortunately, however, a good many East Indiamen were unable to enter the Bay of Bengal, which was effectively restricted to vessels whose bottoms had been plated with copper to prevent damage from marine worms.
Accordingly, for many ships without such protection, Bombay was the desired port of destination, and getting a suitable voyage was one of the primary concerns of members of parliament with East Indian connections who included among their constituents captains of East Indiamen.
The commander of the East Indiaman Woodcott , Captain Ninian Lowis, married the daughter of a prominent Stirlingshire freeholder, John Monro of Auchenbowie, and thereafter the voyages of Auchenbowie's son-in-law were of no small concern to the county member, Sir Thomas Dundas.
Such examples can easily be multiplied without going beyond the bounds of the county of Stirling, The Honourable William Elphinstone, a gentleman active in the politics of both Dunbartonshire and Stirlingshire, was three times chairman of the East India Company and always maintained close relations with the shipping interest, having himself commanded the East Indiaman Tryton before becoming a director, while the Haldanes of Airthrey, significant in the political life of Perth, Dunbarton and Stirlingshire, had similar connections with the Indian shipping interest.
Indeed, Captain Ninian Lowis, of the Woodcott , like many another officer of the Indian fleet with Scottish connections, became a freeholder in his  home county.
Moreover, through the agency of these men, many Scottish gentlemen found places as midshipmen on board East Indiamen and, with experience gained in that rank, could be advanced in the hierarchy of ship's officers, although it must be conceded that an appointment as midshipman, or fifth or sixth officer of an Indiaman was not to be compared to the value of a writership or cadetship in the Company's own service.
The principal difficulty with an officer's place in an East Indiaman was its insecurity and the difficulty of obtaining advancement in rank.
The system of private ownership, and the profits which were made by the captains, made it very probable that the command would go to a friend of the owner, or, since many of the ships were owned by partnerships, to one of the actual proprietors of the vessel.
The captain and the chief and second mates received cargo allotments of value, but officers of junior rank were unlikely to make very substantial profits, even if they were not forced to share their allocation of cargo space with the commander in order to obtain a place at all.
The profit from private trading, which was the chief attraction of service in an East Indiaman, was really a monopoly of the senior officers, and considerations of nepotism and private interest ensured that there was a considerable element of uncertainty in an officer's career in this service.
In contrast, those lucky enough to obtain a place in the East India Company's own service could anticipate a reasonable career without the necessity of further patronage, even though, without question, a servant of the Company whose career was watched by a great man would rise more rapidly.
A sea officer, however, who was without significant influence, was likely to find himself regularly passed over for promotion by friends of the owners being groomed for command.
Indeed, to secure an officer's place at all for an Indian voyage was something only obtainable by interest.
A commander might be so well pleased with an officer that he might wish to retain his services for another voyage, and if a part-owner might be able to insist upon it, but appointments normally went by interest.
Competition could be fierce, as a young Dundee officer discovered when even the influence of the powerful David Scott failed to secure him a place for the voyage of 1801 because 
The member of parliament did not give up his efforts to find a place for the young officer, but the close connection between parliamentary politics and placement was made abundantly clear by Scott's insistence to his correspondent that the young man's father, a Dundee councillor, would first have to make clear ‘whether he is to be friendly’ to the politician.
‘You know the bad consequence of my laying myself under unnecessary obligation, and you will therefore take care that I only  do it for real Friends that I can depend upon,’ the member of parliament warned.
Accelerated promotion in an East Indiaman was only to be obtained through political or family interest, such as that exerted by the Earl of Findlater upon James Oswald of Dunnikier.
Lord Findlater wrote in favour of a young man named Robert Ross, who had returned to Britain after completing two voyages as midshipman in Captain Haldane of Airthrey's ship, the Duke of Gloucester .
The next step in rank for a man of Ross's experience would be fifth mate, but Lord Findlater, who insisted that young Ross had been ‘much commended’, attempted to secure a fourth mate's place for his friend.
Once again the motive was political.
‘You know my connection with this brothers,’ wrote the earl, ‘and I believe he is a very fine lad.’
Without such interest an officer was likely to remain in a junior post for many years, whatever experience he might accumulate.
Some such unfortunates ultimately abandoned the East Indiamen for a place in the pilot service in India, after they had acquired sufficient influence with important passengers to secure such an appointment, while others might take a place as an officer of one of the so-called country ships, which operated only in the East and did not return to Europe.
In the world of the eighteenth century almost everything went easier with the patronage of a great man, a fact which is as true of non-governmental posts as it is of those in the service of the crown.
It would be a rare individual who was able to make use of a political connection who failed to do so, for the advantages were well known.
Letters of recommendation were often requested by those about to sail for India or another overseas possession, and such letters were even sought by those already serving in India when they appreciated that the interest of a man of influence would accelerate their own advancement.
In the service of the East India Company experience was an asset, and merit was expected in those promoted, but interest united to merit was always a much stronger argument than merit alone.
Thomas Cockburn, a young Berwickshire man serving at Madras, requested his freeholder father to approach his member of parliament to seek letters of recommendation to the governor, Lord Macartney, for as the father pointed out, ‘every thing goes by interest, and he is very anxious to have Letters of Weight’.
It was the scarcity of Indian appointments, coveted by so many applicants, which gave such great influence to those politicians able to produce some of them for their friends.
At the same time, however, the politician's inevitable inability to satisfy all of his friends demanded great management skills to mollify the disappointed.
Failure to secure an appointment, particularly when that failure could be linked to an appearance of neglect, would produce lasting enmity more certainly than the gift of patronage could ensure permanent friendship.
The ability of the politician to provide patronage, of whatever nature, was never more than a tool of management, and however useful it might be to the man who could supply it, patronage in itself did not remove the need for active and continuous management of the voters included within the interest.
Social contacts had to be preserved, and ties flowing from feelings of friendship remained indispensable.
A  member of parliament unable to gratify a constituent's wish for a cadetship for his son had to explain that failure, and if age did not intervene as a barrier to future prospects, the politician would be expected to indicate when a successful outcome might be anticipated.
Politicians, however, were quite capable of making any assistance look somewhat larger than life and thus attempt to reap the last ounce of voter gratitude for their services.
An appointment of fairly uncertain prospects could be described in such glowing terms that a possibility of prosperity could be turned into an appearance of certain advancement to high rank.
David Scott managed this effectively in one of his communications with Patrick Rigg, the principal figure in the burgh of Cupar, to whom he offered an appointment as clerk in the India House for a young man favoured by the burgh council.
The clerkship was in fact virtually unpaid for three years, during which the juniors were paid only £20, and had to live in London in the style of gentlemen.
However, as Rigg was advised,
As David Scott described it, a low-paid clerkship, which would necessitate payment of a living allowance by the clerk's friends, was miraculously translated into a certain path to riches and a special compliment to the civic leaders of the town of Cupar.
Interest was needed to obtain any office, but all too often it was also required to rise in rank thereafter, and something more than the ‘ability and character’ mentioned by Scott would be needed to take the junior clerk to the headship of a department.
Superior qualifications were, indeed, by no means a guarantee of preferment, on the testimony of David Scott himself, who admitted on another occasion that ‘there was some altercation about the superior qualifications of the other candidates, but on my shewing the chairman the anxiety I had to provide for your friend, with his assistance I carried it’.
The desire to satisfy friends could, on occasion, prove embarrassing to a patron if the manifest incapacity of their candidate was disclosed.
David Scott, when strongly pressing the candidacy of Abram Robinson for a surveyor's post in the East India Company's service, encountered one of the occupational hazards of a politician in this period, when he found that his candidate was totally lacking in any manner of qualification for such a situation.
Scott complained bitterly to the gentleman who had recommended Robinson that  
If politicians were normally able to manipulate freeholders and councillors by judicious use of their patronage powers, it is equally clear that they were on occasion themselves manipulated, and for all David Scott's obvious embarrassment over the Robinson affair, it is evident that he felt unable to show much resentment towards the man who had led him into that predicament.
The necessary appearance of friendship had to be maintained at all times, and patronage continued to flow in the direction of the town of Perth from which the unfortunate Mr. Robinson came.
Indian patronage and the prospect of such patronage was the cement of David Scott's political interest in the Dundee district of burghs.
A following based upon the prospect of future advancement and the ability to secure employment for new candidates for office was always much easier for politicians who, like David Scott, were favoured by Administration, for there were so many ways in which Government could afford to help politicians without the age barriers which limited the free employment of Indian patronage.
Nowhere was it easier for an administration politician to provide help than in questions relating to military and naval preferment, but for a politician in opposition it was much more difficult, though not impossible, to help or hinder a career.
Revenue Appointments and Political Management
Of all the varieties of patronage at the disposal of Scottish politicians, the most useful were those connected with taxation, for, quite apart from the undeniable opportunities for profit which might accrue to an official charged with the collection of public revenues, through his possession of such monies between the time of collection and the time of accounting for the receipts, the ability to increase or moderate one's zeal was in itself a valuable asset for officers who were themselves often intimately involved in the political and social life of their communities.
The regular salaries attached to the more important posts in the customs and excise administration, for example, were in themselves attractive to many voters in Scottish constituencies, and were the objects of a great deal of political negotiation, for this kind of appointment was the normal currency of management for the politician able to procure it, and the links between parliamentary politics and the disposal of such offices made the nominal right of appointment possessed by the boards of commissioners in Edinburgh somewhat illusory.
In theory, customs and excise appointments were made by the boards of commissioners in Edinburgh, but the fact that the commissioners' recommendations had subsequently to be confirmed by the Treasury in London allowed plenty of opportunity for political intervention.
Indeed, the appointment of customs commissioners and the various patent officers at the head of the establishment, such as comptroller-general, receiver-general, secretary and solicitor, were themselves items of crown patronage of the most valuable kind.
The general supervisor of the Scottish interests of the Duke of Montrose, Mungo Graeme of Gorthie, received a reward for his political zeal on behalf of his chief in the form of the post of receiver-general of customs in the 1720s, an appointment which carried the not insignificant salary of £300 per annum, together with a supplementary allowance of £230 for payment of clerks.
Important or insignificant, customs appointments were, however, obtainable only by those who could expect a political favour, and many of the officers were in fact the nominees of a member of parliament and often the active partisans of that politician.
The customs establishment was one of the more extensive branches of the eighteenth-century bureaucracy, and the fact that its officers were necessarily widely dispersed enhanced the attraction of the service for freeholders, burgh councillors and their friends, for an appointment in their home district was not an unreasonable objective.
A port of some significance was staffed by a group of customs officials — headed by a collector, who would be assisted by a varying number of additional supervisory officers and a body of tidesmen and boatmen.
The value of the various ranks in the service was not, however, a uniform one, for the rewards varied in accordance with the importance of the trade passing through  the port, and the differences in salary were substantial.
In 1728, for example, while Alexander Legrand, the collector of Leith, enjoyed a place worth £ 100 per annum , William Gordon, the officer holding the same rank at Aberdeen, was paid £50, while Hugh Baillie, the collector of Orkney, had to make do with a mere £30 per annum .
Port Glasgow and Leith, the main centres of trade, were the ports with the best-paid officers, but equally, they would also require the greatest amount of work from the incumbents, who would be much more under the eye of the supervisory staff based at Edinburgh, which might well make a less well-paid, but remote, port more attractive to the more independent officers.
The junior supervisory rank in the service, the landwaiters, were paid a uniform salary of £25, but the ordinary gaugers, or tidesmen, were paid as irregularly as their supervisors, with salaries which ranged from £20 to £12.
Not surprisingly the variations in salary made transfers almost as common an object of solicitation as first appointments and promotions, but requests for a change of post might, however, be occasioned by more significant matters than the possibility of attracting a few additional pounds in salary.
Political correspondence often includes some pretty broad hints of the kind of recompense which local revenue officers may have expected from their offices.
A request which Sir Ludovick Grant of Grant received from one of his friends for the removal of a revenue officer to another port stated the case quite frankly:
Reading between the lines, it would appear that the inconvenient placement of John Brown at Ardersier, and the unwillingness of the supervisor to station Mr. Leitch in his home town, may have been prompted by the suspicion of a conflict of interest between the duties of an officer charged with the prevention of smuggling and the keeper of an inn.
Conflict of interest is rarely emphasised in the eighteenth century, however, and there can be little doubt that many customs officers held their posts for sound business reasons which had little to do with the remuneration offered by the crown.
When Mr. Leitch established his public house in the village of Ardersier, so conveniently placed to catch the military traffic from Fort George, he wisely retained his seat in the council of the royal burgh of Nairn, and for a valuable parliamentary elector a mere transfer to the desired post was very little for a member of parliament to arrange.
Customs officers, moreover, might be located on a particular station as a favour to burgh councillors, some of whom were not infrequently deeply involved in smuggling, and there is a suspicious insistence in some of the correspondence upon the placing of an individual in a very specific place, particularly in those districts distant from Edinburgh.
Why, for example, would a politician with the wide-ranging interests of Lord Fife lay such pointed  emphasis upon the placing of such a minor official as a tide waiter, writing that he wished William King to be appointed at Macduff Down Creek , as opposed to any other location in that district?
The connection between smuggling, parliamentary politics and the conduct of customs officials was brought out strongly in the election for Wigtown in 1761, when that town was the returning burgh of a district of four towns, for the position of the customs officers of Wigtown was thought likely to topple the dominant interest of Lord Galloway and his son Lord Garlies.
Wigtown and Whithorn were normally controlled by the Earl of Galloway, with the Earl of Stair, who dominated the burgh of Stranraer, as the chief rival.
The Dalrymples of Stair, with the backing of the Duke of Argyll, were contesting Galloway's control of this district, and the misconduct of the local customs officials for a time appeared to offer the Argyll interest an unusual opportunity to make a political breakthrough in the south-west.
One of the leading members of the council of Wigtown, Bailie Hooks, was the owner of a ship sailing from the Swedish port of Gothenburg, which brought into Whithorn Bay a large quantity of smuggled tea and iron.
It appears that the tea was intercepted after having been successfully landed, but during the ensuing enquiry it transpired that the bailie had also imported a considerable quantity of Swedish iron in excess of what had been found suitable by the Wigtown customs officers.
Finding himself in some difficulties, with his ship seized by order of the customs commissioners in Edinburgh, Bailie Hooks offered to try to carry the burgh of Wigtown for the candidate favoured by the Duke of Argyll in return for some ready cash and the expectation of assistance with the Court of Exchequer.
As Argyll was informed,
Apart from the strong suspicion that the revenue officers of Wigtown were rather too closely associated with smuggling, their failure to determine at their first survey the proper quantity of dutiable iron imported by Bailie Hooks suggested a method of changing the composition of the town council when the vital election of a delegate to represent the burgh at the ensuing parliamentary election was to be held.
Two members of the Wigtown council could not vote in a parliamentary election without voiding the election, for the Earl of Galloway and his eldest son Lord Garlies were both members.
If Argyll could count on the friendship of the Earl of Selkirk, who had friends on the burgh council, the Galloway interest might prove to be less impregnable than was commonly believed, for two of the councillors were ‘considerable tenants to Lord Selkirk whose leases are near expir'd’.
More importantly, however, David Agnew, the collector of Wigtown, McCulloch of Torhouse, the controller of customs, Gordon of Drumbeg, the  surveyor, and a tide waiter named McKeen, were also councillors, and all of them were in some danger of losing their posts for incompetence if nothing worse.
The suggestion made to the Argyll interest was that an order from the Board of Customs should be sent to Wigtown demanding the attendance of these officers in Edinburgh on the day of election, whereby it was hoped that a party of Lord Galloway's enemies might carry the day.
As it turned out, the plan of Bailie Hooks was too optimistic and Lord Galloway retained control of the council of his town, but the incident affords a clear illustration of the close links between parliamentary and municipal politics and the holding of official appointments in the period, and indeed the officers in question were placed in their situations through the political influence of the Galloway family.
The close connection between politics and revenue patronage made it difficult for superiors to discipline officers who stepped out of line, and even when an officer was actually dismissed he could, and did, fight to secure his reinstatement by pulling political strings.
Robert Carrick, the collector of excise at Inverness, is a case in point.
Carrick reached that rank after twenty years' service which included considerable experience in the intermediate rank of supervisor of excise at Forfar before being advanced to his collectorship.
Unfortunately for Carrick he was quickly reduced to the rank of a ‘common gauger’ when an anonymous letter was received by the Board of Commissioners advising them that all of the excise supervisors in Scotland systematically maintained false diaries allegedly recording their activities.
According to Carrick's admittedly biassed complaint, the anonymous correspondent must have been an ambitious junior officer, for ‘there is no body of Men so full of plot and envy as the Excise’.
The removal of Carrick, and a number of other officers, clearly would open the way to promotion for others, but the charge that Carrick had claimed in an official record to have been in places which he had not in fact visited was not denied by the complainant.
On the other hand it was a very swift descent from the heights of a collectorship to the rank of a common gauger for a man who had friends among the voting freeholders, and some of those friends at once moved to his aid, their resolve strengthened by Carrick's complaint that while five supervisors were dismissed, the other four were quickly reinstated in their rank and only he remained reduced, while, according to Carrick, at least one of the lucky men had been guilty of far more serious omissions than himself.
The other four supervisors, however, had one advantage over Mr. Carrick: they were all political friends of Lord Melville, and for that reason their removal could only be a temporary demotion.
The unlucky Robert Carrick did not despair, however, for he found his own method of bringing political pressure into play, for he was the brother-in-law of Mr. Glassford of Tillicoultry, a Glasgow merchant, whose votes would determine the outcome of the parliamentary election for Clackmannanshire in 1806.
The small county of Clackmannan was closely divided between two candidates, the honourable George Abercromby and Major Robert Dundas, the conflict in fact being between Lord Dundas and the Abercromby family.
The political situation could not have been more evenly divided, as a document in the Zetland papers makes clear:
The political state made it clear that Robert Dundas would win his election if two additional nominal voters could be placed upon the roll, but the whole scheme would of course come to nothing should he lose any of his voters, or if Mr. Glassford would not also divide his valuation and make a second vote.
Lord Dundas was fully aware of Glassford's importance to his political interest in Clackmannan, and had taken steps to try to oblige him in a matter relating to his West Indian business interests, but Glassford was also conscious of his position in the political sphere, and fully intended to use it to secure his brother-in-law's reinstatement.
Glassford had declared his intention of supporting Lord Dundas's interest in the election, but when he was visited by Alexander Bruce of Kennet, who was managing the election for Lord Dundas, ‘we really found all not so right’.
Glassford, in short, would do nothing unless Carrick was restored to his place:
One month later Glassford was reported to be completing the work of preparing nominal votes, and in this his lawyer, who lacked experience in such matters, was being helped by the agent of Lord Dundas, who clearly considered him still an ally, but on August 6th, Glassford removed such illusions by making it quite plain that he meant what he had said about his price for support, and denied that he was in any way pledged to Lord Dundas:
Charles Innes, an experienced lawyer who advised Lord Dundas in political matters, had no doubt about the desirability of acting to meet Glassford's wishes, pointing out that Carrick had not been dismissed for malversation, which would have made reinstatement a difficult matter, but for‘some piece of neglect or  inattention’, and in fact another of Dundas's correspondents appeared to get closer to the heart of the difficulty when he met with Glassford, reporting that 
The surviving correspondence does not make clear what happened to Mr. Carrick, but as Glassford had by the time of election three votes prepared and George Abercromby defeated Major Dundas, it may be surmised that Lord Dundas's failure to secure the reinstatement of the collector of Inverness was seen by Glassford as a neglect which justified his remaining friendly with Abercromby.
Political connections were often the principal criterion suggested to justify the promotion of an officer of excise, and some of them were quite ready to employ their own votes to advance their careers so long as this was permitted by Parliament.
In 1756, for example, John Drummond, supervisor of excise at Paisley, and a freeholder of Perthshire, mustered all of his connections to aid his bid for advancement to the office of general supervisor at Glasgow.
Mrs. Mary Campbell of Boquhan, a lady with important political connections in the town of Stirling, sent Drummond with her letter of recommendation to call on Lord Milton, the intermediary through whom much of the Duke of Argyll's patronage was distributed.
Drummond also took with him several other letters of recommendation, but as Mrs. Mary pointed out, his chief claim to advancement was that 
Drummond also, presumably, was not averse to the larger salary which was attached to the superior rank, and his tenderness did not stop him from making the journey to Perth to vote for Argyll's candidate, when John Murray carried the crucial vote for preses of the Michaelmas head court by a single vote.
On his journey back to Paisley, Drummond did not neglect to stop at Boquhan and call upon Mrs. Mary Campbell, who in turn advised her cousin Lord Milton that Drummond ‘said he wou'd a road a hunder miles to serve our intrest & while he lives you may command him in any manner in his power’.
Having ensured that Argyll's deputy had been made aware of his wishes and of his loyalty to the duke's interest, Drummond did not neglect to advise Lord Milton that he had been approached by Captain Haldane, another candidate seeking the votes of the freeholders of Perthshire.
Haldane, according to Drummond, had assured him that he might ‘depend on all his interest in order to make me happy in every opportunity, in the event on my giveing him my vote & intrest’.
Drummond, however, assured Milton that he had made no reply to this request, but the implication was left quite clear, though unstated.
As the election  approached in the spring of 1761, and it became certain that there would be a close contest in Perthshire, even a single vote could be of material importance, and Drummond was well aware of the strength of his own position.
Promotions in government service were likely to go to those officers who were able to make themselves useful politically, and if the connection between advancement and political activity was blatant in the case of Drummond, it was a link which long persisted, for even when revenue officers were deprived of the franchise, this did not materially alter the connection between holders of a revenue office and the politicians whose solicitations remained the usual route to advancement.
Throughout the eighteenth century and well into the following one, politicians could aid or hinder the career of a revenue officer, and they did not hesitate to employ that ability for their own ends.
To help a friend, such as John Drummond, would always, as Mrs. Campbell remarked, ‘gain us more friends in his way who have votes and show we don't drop or forget a man who dos to the outmost of their power to serve our interest’.
Even in 1789, long after revenue officers ceased to personally exercise the right of voting, and were rarely active in county politics, their promotions were still determined by their connection to voters.
In Lord Dundas's patronage book, for example, an entry states that one of Dundas's political friends, Colonel Erskine, wished Mr. McVay, the officer of excise at Denny in Stirlingshire, to be advanced in rank, citing as the reason for seeking such promotion that the man was the son-in-law of Napier of Craigannet, a freeholder of the county.
When Scotland was under the management of a powerful politician, such as the Earl of Ilay or Henry Dundas, almost all worthwhile patronage was  channelled through the manager's hands.
Experience alone most certainly did not secure an officer advancement in the customs administration and political interest was essential, as a letter received by Lord Panmure in 1739 made clear.
The applicant, who was strongly connected to the voters of Angus, sought Panmure's assistance to obtain a post of inspector of customs for his son, Robert Fullerton, who had served for five years as clerk of the customs and had acted as inspector when some of these officers were under suspension.
There was a vacancy for a permanent inspector, for one of them had been promoted to be solicitor of customs, and Robert Fullerton was considered satisfactory by the customs commissioners.
The problem, however, was that although efficiency demanded that an inspector be experienced and the commissioners, Fullerton believed, would appoint his son if they were permitted, ‘they are actuated in all these matters by the influence of the Earle of Isla, who often fills up these employments at London without any presentments’.
Perhaps wisely, Robert Fullerton did not insist on that particular post, and offered the politician an easier alternative, though one considerably inferior in value to that of an inspector of customs, by suggesting that a lieutenancy of marines might be had through political interest.
At the end of the eighteenth century the situation was essentially unchanged, for we find the private secretary to Henry Dundas writing to a customs commissioner virtually ordering the placement of ‘Mr. John Findlay, Excise Officer at Montrose…upon the Examiners list, if found to be properly qualified’.
Vacancies were  normally filled by the commissioners' presentation by the end of the century, but that presentation could be a formality and their autonomy restricted to the rejection of manifestly unqualified candidates.
The links between politics and patronage cannot have been beneficial to the efficiency of the customs service as a revenue-collecting agency, for all too often strong political interests could secure an important post for a man with little or no experience who was placed over the head of men far better qualified than himself, and presumably resentful of their own failure to secure advancement.
Even Port Glasgow, the centre of the Chesapeake tobacco trade, and as such the port with the largest customs establishment in Scotland, could have an unqualified officer placed in a position of responsibility.
In the admittedly biassed complaint sent to the Duke of Montrose by Mungo Graeme of Gorthie in 1716, Gorthie's brother, John Graeme, does appear more likely to have proven an effective revenue officer than the man whom Campbell interest placed in the post of land surveyor:
In 1721 there was another vacancy for a land surveyor at Port Glasgow, and this time the strongest solicitation was made by George Smollett, whose father was one of the major political figures in the Glasgow district of burghs through his control of the town council of Dumbarton.
Smollett gently reminded the Duke of Montrose of his own political value and then sought the duke's interest to secure the post for one Lauchlane McLauchlane.
The young man was claimed to be ‘abundantly capable of the office’, but if he had any experience which might justify his placement in a supervisory post, it was not mentioned.
McLauchlane, however, had one significant qualification: he had married a granddaughter of the elder Smollett, and the town of Dumbarton's vote might hang on his success.
Many burgh councillors and freeholders were happy enough to see one of their numerous sons placed in even the humblest post in the excise administration.
On the other hand, it was sometimes difficult to be certain of this, for there were some lairds who took a very unfavourable view of such officers, and there was a danger that a politician who desired to win a friend might make a mortal enemy.
Lord Milton, for example, came close to doing that while he was attempting to strengthen the position of Sir James Campbell of Ardkinglas as the Administration's candidate for the representation of Stirlingshire.
Milton had written a letter to one of the Stirlingshire lairds, assuring him of his friendship and advising him that one of the laird's sons had been given a post as a salt officer.
Unfortunately that gesture was not appreciated, for, as Ardkinglas pointed out,
If a misjudgment could offend, equally it was possible to gratify a voter by an offer, even when that offer was refused.
In the troubled politics of the city of Edinburgh in 1761, Ilay and Milton made an easy friendship by offering, through the convener of trades, a post in the customs administration to one of the council deacons.
The post offered, that of general inspector of tobaccos, was a good one, and the intended recipient, Deacon Murray, was well pleased, although he declined to accept.
Murray was reported to have said 
In the meantime, of course, the Administration could dispose of the general inspector's office to another party while being sure of the political interest of Deacon Murray, a result which in all probability was anticipated by the astute Milton.
In the middle of the eighteenth century, customs and excise officers had a particularly high profile in the politics of seaport burghs, where many of them were themselves trades voters with a voice in the election of deacons who would sit in the burgh councils.
Such officers were clearly vulnerable to pressure from their superiors in the service, or from those able to exert influence upon such superiors.
The situation in the burgh of Inverkeithing was made plain by the provost, John Cunningham, who sought the intervention of Lord Milton in 1746 with the supervisory officer in charge of that port.
One of the Inverkeithing officers, the tide waiter, was ‘threatened to be removed or broke’ if he joined Provost Cunningham in the burgh elections, a sad state of affairs, when, as Cunningham complained, ‘your Lordship knows what I do is from no other view than to serve the D[uke] of A[rgyl]e & your lordship's interest, and have his grace's order for doing so’.
In the case of the remaining officer at Inverkeithing, the situation was reversed, for John Main, a wright and watchman of excise, was ‘most inveterate ag[ains]t us’.
Milton, the provost believed, should write to the collector of customs to have him tell the threatened tide waiter that he was in no danger, and at the same time secure an order for Main to cross to West Lothian for a few days, around the time of the burgh elections, in order to get him out of the way, for the election of the deacon of the wrights would turn on this single vote.
The vulnerability of minor revenue officials to demotion or removal made it imperative for them to remain on good terms with men of influence able to mar their careers, and shortly after his clash with the provost of Inverkeithing Main  made his peace with the Cunningham family.
Adherence to the interest of Provost Cunningham, however, inevitably brought the officer into conflict with those interests which might challenge the Cunningham power in the burgh.
Employment was more easily lost than obtained in the eighteenth century, for supervisors with power of removal over their subordinates rarely had much inclination to investigate the accuracy of an accusation against one of their officers, if that charge was brought with the support of a man of political influence who might harm his own career if thwarted.
When conflicting political interests were involved, the supervisor would be forced, however reluctantly, to choose between them.
No doubt this was the choice which prompted the removal of a land waiter from Inverness in 1734, for the politics of that burgh were then particularly troubled.
Lord Lovat attempted, without success, to replace one of his clansmen in his office of land waiter after he had been removed by the commissioners, without investigation, following a complaint that he had spoken disrespectfully of a supervisor.
Equally, in the case of John Main at Inverkeithing, he and his two fellow excisemen were threatened with the board's displeasure in 1752, when the collector of Bo'ness accepted, without any enquiry into the facts, an allegation that they had been guilty of excessive drinking and had thereby neglected their duties.
Whether the men had truly neglected their duties is unknown, though in view of the social norms of the period the drinking must have been heavy indeed to have been called ‘excessive’, but employment in government service, even when obtained, was never easy to retain, and the chance of doing so was greatly enhanced by a wise choice of political friends.
Loss of employment as the result of an uninvestigated charge of neglect of duty or malversation was not the only threat hanging over the head of an officer of the revenue.
For some men promotion was eagerly desired, but even a promotion in rank could be distinctly harmful, as John Main discovered when he was drawn into another political conflict in 1752.
The member of parliament for the district of burghs which included Inverkeithing, Colonel Haldane, was no friend of the Cunningham family, and in 1752 he began to try to overturn that interest in the council of Inverkeithing.
The charge of neglect of duty levelled against the exciseman in September of that year appears to have emanated from the Haldane party, and a further complication appeared soon after the burgh election, in which Provost Cunningham and his friends again prevailed, for John Main was promoted.
Main was removed from his place as salt watchman and advanced to the rank of tidesman, a strange development when linked to a charge of neglect of duty.
Surprisingly, perhaps, at least at first glance, this promotion was secured by Colonel Haldane's interest with the commissioners, for John Main had been firmly attached to the Cunningham interest in burgh politics.
A salt watchman was paid a salary of £15 per annum, while a tidesman was paid £20, so on the face of it Main seemed to have little cause for complaint.
However, as Captain Robert Cunningham pointed out, as watchman Main was actually paid his £15, while in his promoted post he had not been appointed to any port and held an appointment as tidesman at large, which meant that he was only paid when he was actually employed, and Haldane interest with the commissioners would make his tours of  duty few and far between unless he experienced a timely political conversion.
Cunningham rightly remarked that with this appointment Main was placed ‘intirely in the power of his superior officers upon the coast, and if he should happen not to be favoured by them, his employment is not worth one shilling’.
The aggrieved Main, in short, sought either an appointment as tidesman in a particular port, which would carry a regular salary, or failing that even a restoration to his former post of watchman, and naturally he attempted to secure his livelihood through his political friends, the Cunninghams.
There are two sides to every story, of course, and obviously no supervisory officer was likely to admit that he had participated in an attack upon the position of burgh politicians known to be in the interest of the Administration.
The official version of John Main's transformation from watchman to tidesman was that this was a great favour to Main and would be a temporary appointment until he could again be reappointed to his duties as watchman at Inverkeithing.
Colin Campbell, to whom Lord Milton directed his inquiry about the removal of Main, insisted that the watchman could be returned to his former station, and that his temporary appointment as a tidesman was not a punishment, but a favour.
As Campbell described it,
Provost John Cunningham admitted that Main had not possessed a commission as watchman and was indeed an extraordinary officer employed only when there was work for him to perform, but there seems little reason to doubt that Main's removal was intended to serve the political interest of the Haldanes, for his removal was not an isolated case, and, moreover, when the Hamilton salt works resumed operations the excise supervisors did not in fact restore Main to his old post, but appointed an individual named Curinan to the vacancy.
Main was not the only excise officer resident in Inverkeithing, and the Cunningham party, while continuing to press for Main's reinstatement, did not neglect the remainder of the excise establishment.
They were well placed to exert political pressure, for in 1753 Captain Robert Cunningham was the candidate for the parliamentary seat for this district, avowedly standing as a friend of the Duke of Argyll.
Political power was signified to the inhabitants of a burgh by the ability of a dominant faction to place its friends in the local revenue offices, and equally, by their ability to obtain the removal of their enemies among the office holders.
Accordingly, the battle over the excisemen of Inverkeithing was intensified, for the rival Haldane party had no intention of giving way, and they too had friends able to influence the placement of excise officers.
If the first round went to the Haldanes through their removal of that active member of the hammermen's trade, John Main, the Cunningham party quickly  retaliated by securing, through the agency of the member of parliament for Stirlingshire, Captain James Campbell, the removal of a tidesman stationed at Inverkeithing named Morris, who was an active Haldane partisan.
At the same time, with the assistance of Lord Milton, the vacant post of tidesman was given to Colin Sharp, a surgeon and member of the Inverkeithing burgh council, who was, needless to say, a Cunningham man.
Shortly thereafter, however, the Haldane party struck back, by securing the return of Morris to the Inverkeithing station and the transfer of Sharp to distant Ayr, where his ability to participate in burgh politics would be somewhat restricted.
The Haldane partisan, Morris, moreover, said openly that he defied Captain Cunningham and all his friends and supporters to remove him again from the town.
In the circumstances James Cunningham felt that Captain Robert Cunningham's election hopes would be considerably strengthened if Morris were proven wrong, and accordingly advised Lord Milton that 
The last sentence in Captain James Cunningham's statement gets to the heart of the matter, for burgh influence depended above all on evident good relations with the men of power who dispensed patronage.
Failure to keep their friends in office would rapidly doom the Cunningham interest in these burghs to extinction, as councillors and trades voters started to reconsider their former loyalties and to listen to the argument of the Haldane partisans that the colonel had the ear of government.
The proof of a close connection with men of power was provided in burgh politics by a politician's ability to determine the fate of minor resident officials, and the Cunningham party was clearly being outmanoeuvred by the Haldanes in this matter.
Provost John Cuningham, as leader of his party in the council of Inverkeithing, was well aware of political realities and accordingly pressed strongly for some support from his patrons, particularly in the case of the well-known John Main.
If, as the provost pointed out, two watchmen were now required at Inverkeithing, how should Cunnan have a place and Cunningham's friend be left essentially unemployed?
It was a good question, and suggested strongly that the Argyll interest was less powerful than it was believed to be by the community at large.
The provost noted, moreover, that Cunnan was named by the commissioners in Edinburgh, among whom Haldane's influence lay, and the effect was extremely damaging to both the Cunningham and the Argyll interests in the district.
Main's removal at the instigation of Cunningham's enemies, and the appointment shortly thereafter of Cunnan to act in his place, had, as Provost Cunningham remarked, made ‘a very great noise’, and by providing this evidence of their influence, the Haldane party could argue plausibly that all of the partisans of the Cunningham faction then in office would not retain their places for much longer.
Naturally, in view of the political interest of Lord Milton and the Duke of Argyll, John Main was not left to languish in the state of promoted unemployment to which Colonel Haldane's enmity had consigned him, but although they were able to secure a port appointment for Main which brought him a regular salary, it was at Bo'ness, on the Lothian shore of the river Forth and directly under they eye of Haldane's ally, Collector Middleton, who sent the unfortunate Main ‘on every drudgery piece of business to different places to put him to all the expence & trouble the Collector can devise’.
The influence of Argyll and Milton clearly had proved insufficient to turn matters around in the excise establishment at Inverkeithing where it would have done most good.
Burgh politics could be a hard game for little people, for they could be badly injured by those against whom they acted.
John Main was a very minor figure in the politics of Inverkeithing, for he was not a councillor, but Main was influential in the hammermen's trade, and in a contested election for deacon of the hammermen John Main's vote carried the contest for Cunningham's friend.
Colonel Haldane, with considerable vindictiveness, though undoubtedly to make an example to deter others from doing the like, set out to ruin him, and removed him from the place which gave him his living on grounds of redundancy, and replaced him with one of his own friends.
The fate of a watchman became a major element in burgh politics in this district, for although Captain James Cunningham was clearly sympathetic to John Main on personal grounds, there was more at stake than the solvency of a single family.
Main had been promised by the Cunningham party that he would regain his place, yet it had not been done.
Captain James Cunningham remarked that 
With a parliamentary election campaign now in full swing, the failure of the Cunningham party to demonstrate sufficient political interest to keep their friends in their places was immensely damaging.
As the candidate, Captain Robert Cunningham pointed out to Lord Milton, John Main's fate made others hesitate.
His being so ill used for being my friend, makes a great outcry against me, and will certainly contribute largely to make my other friends shy in appearing for me.’
The effects were felt beyond Inverkeithing, for the manager of the Cunningham interest in the eastern burghs of the district, Captain James Cunningham, was clear  that it was essential to have John Main and Colin Sharp back in their places before the election and Haldane's friends removed, as ‘it not only does harm in that one town, but in all the rest; Haldane's interest is cryed up, & the Haldanes can do every thing is the general talk…’
In the burgh of Inverkeithing the effect would have been disastrous had not Captain Robert Cunningham's money been lavishly dispensed among the councillors and magistrates, for as was to be expected, it had not been in Cunningham's power to convince anyone in the town that he was under the protection of the Duke of Argyll.
Cunningham explained that 
To nobody's surprise Colonel George Haldane secured his election for the Dunfermline district of burghs in 1754, in spite of the enmity of the Duke of Argyll, and it must be conceded that the colonel's ability to remove office holders made a substantial contribution to his victory.
On the other hand, Colonel Haldane did not succeed in winning the vote of the burgh of Inverkeithing itself, a failure which may perhaps be linked to the lasting hostility of the burgesses occasioned by his own quick temper two years earlier, for in 1752 he had given Provost John Cunningham a black eye when he had encountered the chief magistrate on the steps of the tolbooth, an error of judgement which served to undo much of the Haldane party's work in that town, and indeed ran the colonel some risk of being mobbed.
A political interest, however, as Colonel Haldane demonstrated could overcome the opposition of powerful politicians, and the chief casualties were often the little people, like the unfortunate John Main, caught in the battle of interests.
But for government officials stationed in the royal burghs neutrality was rarely a viable option, for all of these posts were patronage appointments obtained through political interest, and their retention demanded the continuing friendship of a politician.
The difficult part was picking the correct patron.
Political patronage within the burghs might, however, relate to matters other than the employment of revenue officers, for even the location of an excise office could be a political question.
If a magistrate or other influential figure in a town was the owner of a building in which an excise office was then located, he too was vulnerable to pressure should he waver in his loyalty to the political interest which had given him this tenant.
In October 1734, for example, Captain Charles Campbell, the manager of Lord Ilay's interest in the town of Stirling, attempted to overthrow the existing majority in the burgh council.
Campbell believed he could strengthen his hand by making an example of a council member in order to demonstrate where power lay.
As Captain Campbell wrote to Lord Milton:
In case Lord Milton missed the importance of making this change, Campbell took the trouble of repeating the request three days after first suggesting it, which was clearly long before the judge could have hoped to arrange such an alteration.
The rental of such an office could not have been great, but it was little things which often had a quite disproportionate impact upon burgh councillors, for such a move would give tangible proof that the party which could arrange it had the ear of government and could thus effect other, and perhaps more far-reaching, changes.
Councillors had an understandable reluctance to commit themselves to a political course which would deprive them of access to patronage, and it was for this reason that it was necessary for politicians to provide demonstrations of power.
Minor revenue posts, and as in this case, even the location of rented office space, were one of the more effective methods of impressing the members of a town council with what could be done for them, or to them.
Many men who obtained small posts as excisemen were not themselves members of a burgh council, but it would be unusual to find revenue officers in Scottish towns without close political links with men who mattered in the politics of burgh or county.
Even when a small office was given almost as an act of charity, there would usually be a political motive in the background.
In 1747, for example, Mrs. Mary Campbell of Boquhan sought the patronage of her kinsman, Lord Milton, for a resident of Stirling whose already precarious circumstances had been rendered still more unstable by an unexpectedly large addition to his family, his wife having been ‘brought to bed of three children who are alive and well’.
Mrs. Campbell hoped that a tide waiter's post might be found for the man, but there was more to it than charity, for, as she advised her cousin, William Anderson's brother was a rich baker who had lately filled the office of deacon convener of trades in Stirling, and ‘as he has a near connection with severalls in the present management I wish if possible you could fall on a way to get this small thing for him, it wou'd make a noise amongest the folks to see that we are at pains to do for them’.
As in the counties, the effective manager of a political interest in a burgh would distribute favours in an effort to create feelings of obligation, and if management in the towns could take a much cruder form than would be commonly acceptable among the freeholders, that similarity should not be lost sight of, for as Mrs. Mary Campbell suggested, if such small favours were given, ‘in greatetud they should serve those who get favours done them’.
In the counties likewise, members of parliament were continually bombarded with requests for small offices in the customs for friends of voting freeholders, though the practice of leaving the small posts in the seaports to the burgh members restricted the supply to the provision of officers to towns which were not royal burghs.
The correspondence of members of parliament was filled with information on the state of health of incumbents in order that timely application might be made for the posts should they die or retire from service.
‘There is one  Mr. Milne, officer at Oldcambus, a very old man quite worn out & unfitt for that station & is expected that he can't live much longer’, an eager applicant for a place advised Hugh Scott, the member of parliament of Berwickshire.
A few weeks earlier that same candidate had drawn the member of parliament's attention to ‘one David Denholm an old worn out officer at Thorntonloch nigh Dunglass in East Lothian who is about being supperannuated’.
In the case of this applicant, he would have been happy to have obtained any place in the service, for he hoped to arrange thereafter for a transfer to the stations which he really desired, Coldingham or Eyemouth, where he had business interests.
When a voter who had an interest in securing a revenue place for a friend learned of an opportunity, he would invariably press the member of parliament strongly to obtain it.
Vacancies were not the only occasions for such pressure, for there were on occasion officers functioning without a treasury warrant, and should this fact become known, pressure would be exerted to secure their removal in order to create a vacancy for a man with friends among the freeholders or councillors.
In 1762, for example, Lord Panmure was advised by one of the Angus voters that upon the death of a tide waiter at Montrose, a replacement had been sent there from Alloa or some other place on the Firth of Forth.
The writer remarked that he had ‘never doubted but that he had succeeded in his place by a commission from the Treasury untill of late that I discovered that he only officiated by orders and an interim warrand from the Commissioners of Customs’.
Panmure's constituent left the member of parliament in no doubt about his expectation that the appointment would be transferred to one of his own friends, and in fact it was very difficult for a politician to evade such requests without disobliging a voter.
On the other hand, if the member of parliament was induced to solicit for the removal of an acting officer, any failure to arrange the question satisfactorily would be taken in his constituency as a failure of political interest in London and evidence of a lack of effective power, which again could prove damaging at the next general election.
When a member of parliament was considered to be in a position to influence senior officers' careers, he might, however, find himself offered minor patronage posts to use as he saw fit, without having to do much to seek them.
This was the situation in which James Oswald of Dunnikier found himself in 1751, when a chain of patronage was drawn back to him.
A senior officer advised Oswald that 
More senior posts were employed as tools of patronage at a higher level, for they might be the object of the ambition of a substantial freeholder with his own political interest, whose support might be of value to the Administration directly.
Sir Robert Dalyell of the Binns clearly saw himself in that light when, in 1760, he approached Lord Milton to inform him of his wish to be of use to Milton's politics in West Lothiah.
Dalyell did not pitch his ambitions at too lowly a level, telling the deputy of the Duke of Argyll that 
Sir Robert's luck was not in on this occasion, however, for Milton had already promised the desired appointment to Cockburn of Clerkington to induce him to lead the opposition in East Lothian to Sir Hew Dalrymple of North Berwick, in order to secure the seat for Andrew Fletcher, younger of Saltoun.
Something more than a vote was expected in return for the major posts, but essentially they too were employed to aid the development of a political interest.
An ordinary member of parliament who attempted to gratify constituents by pressing for a senior appointment was likely to be put firmly in his place by the Treasury, for this happened even to the well-connected David Scott, when representing the Dundee burghs in 1796.
The provost and council of St. Andrews, who were never slow to seek patronage of any type, had asked Scott to obtain the placement of a supervisor in the list of candidates for a collectorship.
However much the excise supervisor may have been appreciated by the councillors of St. Andrews, he was regarded with less enthusiasm at the Treasury, and the member of parliament was told bluntly that if any office about St. Andrews fell vacant, which was usually left to the recommendation of the Burgh Member, he should have the nomination, and as Scott advised the provost, ‘they hoped that from reasons which must naturally occur to myself, I would be satisfied with the propriety of their answer’.
The office in question was not minor patronage, for as Scott remarked, it had a value of from £300 to £1,800 per annum, and for that reason it was unlikely to be given to gratify a town council.
The connection between parliamentary politics and the filling of revenue posts was continuous throughout the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries.
The newer taxes, such as that upon windows, were no different from the more traditional revenues.
In 1782, when Roderick McLeod, the surveyor of window lights for Berwickshire, died, there was considerable competition for the succession, during which it emerged that the method of filling such appointments involved the county member of parliament.
These officers held a commission from the Treasury, which was awarded upon the recommendation of the Barons of Exchequer in Edinburgh, supported by the member of parliament for the county.
Postal appointments were equally subject to the demands of politics.
Local post masters were invariably associated with the political life of their communities and were unlikely to retain their posts without strong political interest.
In 1747 the  postmaster of Stirling was one of the magistrates, Bailie Maiben, and it was made clear enough that his job was at stake in the political contest of that year, for Sir Peter Halkett of Pitfirrane, one of the candidates seeking to represent the district in parliament, complained to Lord Milton that the bailie 
The bailie apparently also read the correspondence which passed through his hands, perhaps as part of his own political activities, or he would not have learned of the contents of the letter in question, but in any event his adherence to the Duke of Argyll's friend, Sir Peter Halkett, did him no harm and he was still postmaster of Stirling in 1755, when his ill-health and reported nearness to death induced Lord John Murray to seek the post, in the event of Maiben's death, for a Stirling surgeon who was a son of James Graham of Bowhaple, a Perthshire freeholder.
Politically, the office of postmaster had additional value, for much of the minor patronage was filled by the Treasury upon the first significant application, and here timely notification of a death, or a serious illness, was essential.
Postmasters could, and did, ensure that priority was given to the letter advising of these developments which was intended for their own particular political friend in London, and that his enemies' letters would be delayed until the next post.
Revenue patronage was of course normally restricted to those Scottish politicians friendly to the current administration, but even here there was something in private hands, although its importance was of diminishing value as the country became more prosperous.
In 1718, for example, the Duke of Montrose, as chancellor of the University of Glasgow, was seeking a gentleman to collect the teinds of Drymen, which were payable to the university.
The duke immediately saw an opportunity to improve relations with the powerful Buchanan family, none of whose members were of great wealth, but several of whom were freeholders in Dunbartonshire and Stirlingshire.
The duke and his close associates saw this small office as ‘some mean to treat those folks who Club together and are disposed to believe that I'm incompatible wt them’.
The post of collector was shortly thereafter settled upon Buchanan of Balfunning, one of the freeholders of that name who was in urgent need of remunerative employment, and in this regard, any collection, however small the salary, gave the collector temporary custody of the funds, which could, in all probability, be employed to advantage in the period between collection and transmittal.
Military and Naval Patronage
Many Scots were attracted by the possibility of earning their living with their swords, in spite of the fact that this was not a particularly attractive career in an age when advancement in rank was frequently purchased and promotion hard to obtain without both private means and interest.
Family tradition attracted many Scots into the army who might have been better advised to look elsewhere, but in time of war there was always the hope that disease or wounds would carry off enough military superiors to create vacancies without purchase and permit advancement in rank.
First commissions could be obtained through political interest, and this would appear to have been the situation of Philip Hay, whom Admiral Lord Keith managed to place in the 11th Foot as an ensign on the strength of imaginary past service, though his patron remarked that ‘if his father cannot get at old General Grant or Lady Sutherland he may not be confirmed.
I wrote that he was a volunteer at Ollionles etc. not a word true, but that is nothing’.
An ensign, however, might find the next step a little harder, while command of a company was rarely to be had without the ability to purchase the commission of a holder of a captaincy or very strong political interest to secure the place in an expanding army in a new battalion.
The regular army was never a good career for a poor gentleman, for its strength fluctuated too greatly, with new units created in an emergency and as quickly disbanded with the return of peace.
An officer with private income might find the half-pay given to those no longer employed in active units an agreeable augmentation of his resources, which he might be content to draw for the remainder of his life.
On the other hand, if the half-pay officer was trying to maintain an impoverished existence as an unwanted guest in the home of a brother, he (and the brother) could become very anxious to secure a place for him in an active formation, in spite of the poor pay and poorer prospects.
Necessity sometimes drove half-pay officers to seek a commission in an active battalion even when they had attained such an advanced age that any chance of a successful military career was long over.
The Duke of Montrose wrote in 1733:
The army was an unsatisfactory occupation for a man who lacked the money to purchase promotion, for he was likely to be in the situation of the Master of Elphinstone, who complained in 1715 that ‘I have served as Capt[ai-n] this nine  years which I have the vanity to believe intitelis me to something better than a company of foot’.
War and the resulting expansion of the army, together with the military traditions of the Scottish gentry, invariably, however, brought a flood of Scottish officers into the army, in spite of the poverty of many of them, and that in turn provided politicians with the necessary connections with a useful way of winning friends cheaply.
During the American War of Independence General James Grant of Ballindalloch, the member of parliament for Sutherland, found the attractions of a military life to be a great help to his political interest, asserting to a correspondent that ‘if this business continues I could provide for all the Sutherlands in the country.
A commission is an easier business than a tyde waiter or a land waiter’.
Commissions in an expanding army might be made available without purchase, either to support the interest of Administration politicians or to stimulate recruiting and sometimes both, but rarely could they serve an opposition politician directly, although the fact that military commissions were not immediately under the control of the Government manager for Scotland permitted some indirect approaches by opposition members and their friends.
An alternative way into the commissioned ranks of the regular army was by going on war service with a battalion as a volunteer, hoping to be chosen by the commanding officer to fill a vacancy in the field.
Once again, however, the volunteer with powerful friends to reinforce his claims for advancement was in a much stronger position than a volunteer without influence.
Even opportunities to serve, without rank or pay, as a volunteer, could be elusive, and even previous military experience was of little assistance, as Lieutenant Callander discovered when he attempted to rejoin the army as a volunteer in a regiment about to embark for India.
The Lieutenant's friends were advised that the only way of getting to India, short of enlisting as a private soldier, was to travel as an officer's servant, though with the prospect of becoming a recognised volunteer upon arrival.
Such a passage was not an attractive prospect, for the Lieutenant would be obliged to pay £25 towards the cost of his accommodation, yet he would have to ‘be a servant in fact as well as nominally, that is he must eat and live with the servants of the officers of the ship and those of the passengers, no verry desirable berth for a gentleman’.
It was not impossible for a poor gentleman to rise in the army, even without political connections, but for those lacking the interest of a great man promotion depended upon opportunities to demonstrate outstanding gallantry and leadership qualities.
Scots in this position, however, might hope during their service to encounter a senior officer of the same name, which might induce the latter to act as patron without the normal ulterior motives.
General James Grant, for example, in spite of his political preoccupations, found  
The young corporal, it should perhaps be pointed out, was also a Grant, but indeed with the recommendation of his own officers he was to a great degree responsible for his own advancement to commissioned rank, and this kind of promotion for gallantry was by no means an isolated example, for a considerable number of non-commissioned officers of suitable education, many of them Scots, reached the junior commissioned ranks.
Further advancement, however, was slow indeed for those officers who were unable to purchase a step in rank in their turn.
Although recent research appears to raise some uncertainty about the purchase of commissions in the artillery and engineers, purchase certainly had a less prominent place in the promotions in the technical corps.
On the other hand, entry into commissioned rank in those corps was hard to obtain without significant political interest.
Admiral Lord Keith encountered difficulty with an important freeholder who had requested, through an intermediary, that a young man named Maitland might be admitted as a cadet into the college at Woolwich.
The letter had not been answered, and the Laird of Gartmore took offence, declaring ‘that if he did not get such trifles to oblige his friends that they might depend upon his going against them’.
The appointment, however, was impossible to obtain, because it depended upon the Master General of the Ordnance, Lord Mulgrave, with whom Lord Keith had no influence.
Moreover, it was a scarcely a trifle or a thing easy to get, for Mulgrave's predecessor in office, Lord Chatham, had a list of 165 candidates with vacancies for only sixteen or seventeen a year.
Entry into the artillery or engineer branches through Woolwich demanded early action, for a candidate had to be placed on the list at eleven years old, in order to hope to secure a place before the age limit of fifteen had been passed.
It was an appointment, as William Adam pointed out, which ‘often follows at a great distance of time after the application & entring on the list’.
It followed, therefore, that most of the military appointments to which Scottish freeholders and burgh councillors aspired were in the line infantry and to a lesser degree the cavalry, augmented during the wars with France at the turn of the century with numerous local military units of a temporary nature.
Permission to sell a commission or permission to purchase one was again something which might involve the intervention of a politician.
Occasionally the politician was unable to help.
In 1728, for example, Lord Milton, in spite of his involvement in the political management of Scotland, failed to secure permission for David Stewart of Ballachallan to purchase the commission of Lieutenant Graham of the Royal Regiment of North British Fusiliers, because the King had prohibited buying, selling or resigning commissions.
It should perhaps be added that Stewart was not attempting to enter the service at a higher than normal rank, for fusilier regiments did not employ the rank of ensign, the equivalent rank being that of second lieutenant, which was what was sought.
In 1717, Captain Ferguson, with the support of Brigadier Preston, wrote to the Duke of Montrose to seek his ‘help to his merit in purchasing from Major James Lauson his post as Major’.
Captain Ferguson, however, was not the senior in his rank, but the other captains were unable to make the purchase.
Even then, though, the intervention of a great man was believed to be necessary, and ability to pay was not alone sufficient.
Indeed, the influence of the duke was sought at Court in order to secure the King's permission, and Brigadier Preston argued in support of the transaction that 
Political intervention was often the only means of securing permission for the sale of a commission to another.
In 1753, for example, Provost William Christie of Stirling sought Lord Milton's intervention with Lord Loudoun on behalf of his son-in-law, Ensign Gunning, who wished to purchase from Charles Elphinstone his commission as Lieutenant of Stirling Castle, or if that was not permitted, the commission of the Ensign of the Castle.
Political intervention was advisable even when an applicant had the necessary financial strength to make a purchase, and if a gift of a commission was a greater compliment, permission to purchase was nonetheless gratefully accepted.
Shrewd military gentlemen were always aware of political realities, and upon entry some already had promotion in mind.
John Rose, for example, a son of the laird of Kilravock, was commissioned ensign in Lord Semple's Regiment in 1741, but, upon receiving his choice of the company to which he would be attached, fixed upon that of Captain Campbell of Carrick ‘because the Lieutenant of that Company is a very pretty fellow & will probably be soon made a Capt. which (with Interest) will make room for John's own preferment’.
On occasion, strong political interest could push a young man forward much more rapidly than could have been for the good of the service.
In 1739 Lieutenant Alexander Stewart, of Captain Monro of Culcairn's Highland independent company, died, and Lord Lovat strongly urged that the place should go to Francis Grant, one of the sons of Sir James Grant of Grant.
The appointment, as Lovat advised, ‘would give him the rank of Lieut. & you could easily afterwards get him out of our companys to a marching reg[imen]t either as lieut[enant] or captain’.
The Laird of Grant duly approached Government, through the Earl of Ilay, and secured the commission.
It might be supposed, however, that Francis Grant, as a newcomer to military life, should have entered as an ensign rather than as second-in-command of the company in question.
Lovat, however, had no doubts, insisting that Ensign McDonald should be passed over, alleging that the unfortunate man  
In all probability, however, Ensign McDonald's major failing was that he was neither a Fraser nor a Grant, and in that region dominated by family interests, his political connections were insufficient to secure his advancement.
The relatively plentiful supply of physicians in Scotland and the attraction of the university medical schools for sons of the gentry made the medical officers’ appointments in the army and navy almost as attractive as the similar appointments in the service of the East India Company.
Those places in army units were invariably awarded through political interest, though admittedly rarely in so blatant a manner as that adopted by Sir David Cunynghame, a West Lothian politician, when disposing of the junior medical officer's place in his regiment in 1760.
Sir David advised his friend, Sir Robert Dalyell, that the post of surgeon's mate was worth three shillings and sixpence per day, and requested that his correspondent would oblige by 
In certain regiments, however, qualifications beyond the strictly medical were demanded of the surgeons, for in Highland regiments knowledge of the Gaelic language appears to have been more seriously demanded of medical officers than of the combatant officers.
Malcolm Macqueen, a nephew of an Inverness laird, and recommended by Norman Macleod of Macleod to General Simon Fraser as surgeon of his regiment, had studied medicine at Edinburgh university and had recommendations from his professors, but Macqueen's qualifications were rounded off by his ability to speak Gaelic ‘in its purity, which is necessary for a surgeon of a Highland regiment’.
This too was the strongest argument offered in favour of one Sandy Forbes, who hoped for the office of surgeon's mate of the Sutherland Fencibles in 1779, though in his case he clearly intended to be an officer in name only for he intended to apply for leave to complete his degree at Edinburgh University and to sail for India as an officer of an East Indiaman at the first suitable opportunity.
Medical appointments in military units were believed to provide useful experience to recent graduates or students, and were much in demand.
Politicians were often able to arrange matters to the satisfaction of their constituents in other questions broadly relating to the military profession.
In 1716, for example, the Duke of Montrose was hard pressed to maintain his political dominance of Glasgow when he was approached by a member of the university on behalf of a recently promoted lieutenant of Brigadier Preston's regiment, one of the senior corps of the army.
The lieutenant believed ‘it will be a long time before he can expect to be advanced to be captain in so old a corps.
Theirfor would gladly by y[ou]r Gr[ace's] interest be promoted either to be a captain of foot, or a lieut[enant] of dragoons in the new levies’.
Conversely, when a war was being  concluded and there was a prospect of reductions in the size of the army, many officers of the younger regiments attempted to avoid reduction to half-pay by trying their interest with a politician, but the practice of transferring to a new regiment to accelerate promotion, and then regaining a place in an old one while retaining the rank already gained, demanded very good political connections.
Those with political value, however, could demand and often get what they wanted in the army, and if the expected advancement was delayed too long they could show anger quite openly.
In 1790, when the county of Cromarty was being contested, one of the freeholders serving in the army demanded, as the price of his support for the candidate favoured by Henry Dundas, that he should be given a company in a regiment stationed in Britain.
As Dundas's correspondent advised, the young officer had begun to write letters 
Solicitations for military promotion could become quite pointed if the politician did not act quickly, as the Earl of Marchmont discovered when he failed to secure a promotion for Lieutenant James Wedderburn, whose uncle complained was 
A polite but clear piece of blackmail to a politician who dominated, but was not in absolute control of, the writer's county politics.
Military commissions were in demand in Scotland, and Scottish politicians were expected to be able to satisfy their friends, and with an almost constant 25 per cent of the officer corps drawn from Scotland they clearly succeeded to an astonishing degree in obtaining positions for their countrymen.
The politician who could provide them won friends.
‘If people of small fortunes are carried of by C[ommission]'s can I wonder at it?’ asked the Duke of Montrose.
‘I see what influence such baits have over their betters.’
Politicians who were able to offer such attractions did not hesitate to make good use of their powers to win votes.
In 1723, for example, Colonel John Campbell wrote to a Dunbartonshire laird to warn him that  
The permanent military garrisons in Scotland provided a number of minor posts which featured prominently in burgh politics, particularly in Stirling, where the Christie family influence in council over an extended period ensured that much of the small change of military patronage came their way.
In 1721, for example, Provost Christie approached the Duke of Montrose for his interest to secure the post of armourer of Stirling Castle for his son-in-law, James Graham.
The Duke, aware that the incumbent armourer was dead, used his interest with the Board of Ordnance, pointing out that ‘it might serve my interest in the town of Stirling’.
The Duke passed on this information to his agent among the burgh politicians, instructing that he should ‘take that opportunity of fixing, as much as is possible, Christie’.
Unfortunately the post of armourer was not granted to James Graham, but the need to placate Provost Christie still produced action at the Board of Ordnance which transferred the Master Gunner of Stirling Castle to Portsmouth and commissioned the provost's son-in-law to succeed to the Stirling post.
James Christie, in addition to his civic duties, was a clothier and merchant, and he did not miss the opportunity to translate political connections into contracts.
He ranged widely, soliciting in 1741 the office of sutler of Stirling Castle, believed to be profitable, and at the same time the contract to clothe Lord Loudoun's independent company permanently stationed in the castle.
In the same year, 1741, Christie was also pressing Lord Milton to exert his influence with the colonel of the Highland Regiment ‘to give me the Cloathing of that Regiment for the incouradgement of our Scots manufactorys…this jobb wou'd employ many poor familys in the country…’
It was not Christie alone who saw the connections between peripheral military patronage and profit, and offers of minor posts about the Castle of Stirling were often considered worth making by politicians soliciting the town's vote.
When the Haldanes challenged the Campbell influence in Stirling, they promised Deacon Ellise of the hammermen that he should be made smith of the Castle and that a member of the tailor's trade should replace the castle storeman.
In that instance they were unsuccessful, for the interest of Lord Milton and the Earl of Ilay was considerably stronger than that of the Haldanes, but the more attractive posts in the permanent garrison were always in demand from tradesmen in the town.
In this regard it might be added that the permanent garrison included many soldiers who practised trades in the community when they were not on duty, and the smith and storeman were presumably in this category.
Town and fortress were closely connected, and indeed the burgh of Stirling not infrequently had a battalion of infantry in the town itself as well as the permanent garrison.
That situation lent itself to a kind of reverse patronage if the town annoyed the Administration, and the advice sent to Lord Milton in 1734 when the Stirling people were ‘very insolent’ and ‘were Drinking at the Cross disappointment to L[ord] I[lay] and all his Designs’was that the bulk of the troops should be removed, together with much of the community's  business, as a preliminary to an attack on the town council.
Milton was advised that this ‘will be a means to make most of the Trades fly against the present sett.
I am laying a scheme to get them all turned out against Michaelmas’.
Some of the burgh politicians were themselves military officers.
In the first years of the nineteenth century the town of Inverkeithing was controlled by an officer of the Royal Marines named David Ballingall, and Colonel Ballingall left the Lord Advocate in no doubt that he was most unhappy with his removal from an appointment as an inspecting field officer.
For this reason, the Colonel pointed out, he could not ‘consistent with my wounded feelings support his Lordship's friend at the late General Election…’
Patronage was always a double-edged weapon for the politicians.
If its distribution won them friends, a loss of employment was readily blamed on the same men who assumed credit for the award of patronage, and frequently credit was assumed but blame apportioned when the politician's responsibility was unclear.
Certainly from what Ballingall wrote, it is clear that Lord Melville to whom he had written had shown the letter to the Commandant of Royal Marines, Lieutenant-General John Campbell.
Unfortunately that was insufficient to keep Ballingall employed, for the General was not on good terms with Ballingall, and clearly did not feel compelled to serve Lord Melville, and it was the latter whom Ballingall chose to blame for his misfortunes, complaining of the injustice of this treatment when ‘Lord Melville never had a more staunch friend, nor strinuous supporter in the district of these Boroughs’.
In the early eighteenth century poverty was partially responsible for the many applications for military rank, for in the first half of the century even a commission in a new regiment, and the near certainty of half-pay at the conclusion of the war emergency, was attractive.
James Graham of Airth, for example, urged the Duke of Montrose to provide for Graham of Drynie, one of his relatives, in a new regiment, for ‘it would be a seasonable relief for a numorous and very poor family’.
On the other hand, some of the freeholders seeking patronage demurred at the price expected.
Lord Panmure was solicited by a Forfarshire freeholder in 1739 for a place in the new levies of Royal Marines for his son, for which the laird offered to ‘pay such an allowance…as was reasonable.
And believing the price might be much moderated by your Lordship's intercession…’
The laird was startled to learn, however, that the lieutenancy of Marines would cost £300, and shrewdly wondered if there was not a better opportunity afforded by the expansion of the army and the removal from the infantry regiments of many subalterns to fill captaincies in the Marines.
Panmure's constituent concluded that ‘subaltern commissions would fall much in their price.
And as your Lordship is so good as to talk to some of the Agents that deal that way I shall be exceedingly obliged…if any thing can be done’.
Scottish gentlemen followed military careers in the service of the United Provinces of the Netherlands as well as in that of their own country, and political influence extended over the North Sea to include the Scots-Dutch regiments.
In 1741, for example, political control of the Dunfermline district of burghs turned on the vote of the town of Inverkeithing.
That burgh was controlled by Provost  John Cunningham, whose son was an officer of the Dutch army, and the provost made his wishes quite clear to one of the candidates who solicited the town's vote whom he believed might have friends in the Netherlands.
In short, the town of Inverkeithing was determined by the arrival of a letter from Count Nassau promising that Lieutenant Cuningham should obtain the next company of infantry which fell vacant, and at the same time requesting support for one of the candidates for the parliamentary election.
The other side of the coin was the pressure which could be exerted upon such foreign soldiers if they attempted to come home to vote in an election in opposition to a man of influence.
In the same election, though in a different constituency, as that in which Lieutenant Cunningham secured his captaincy, an impoverished Berwickshire gentleman named Brown, who was serving as a private soldier in Holland, though a son of the late Sir Alexander Brown of Bassenden, returned to Scotland to cast his vote as a freeholder of Berwickshire.
Unfortunately Brown intended to oppose the interest of Lord Home who was himself a soldier serving in the Netherlands and with many powerful friends there.
Lord Home ordered his agents in Scotland to seize Brown as soon as he landed and to impress upon him ‘what is very trew that if he oppose me he will dissoblige Prince Waldeck and all his officers’, and thus presumably ruin any chance which he might have of advancement.
Influence with senior officers and ministers was also employed for arranging the attendance or absence of military freeholders or councillors.
Friends found leave to attend an election easily obtained, while enemies of the powerful would find their services in great demand with their regiments, at least until a vital election had taken place.
The army absorbed most of the Scottish gentry who hoped to make their living from the sword, but there were also many Scots in the Royal Navy and Royal Marines, and those who entered the senior service appear to have been attracted by the substantial advantages which the navy had over the army for a gentleman of limited means.
As a political tool naval patronage was rather less in the control of Administration than was military patronage, for although the Board of Admiralty retained all home patronage, there were many flag officers commanding squadrons in distant waters who enjoyed the right to make necessary promotions in their ships.
At least one of the Scots of flag rank, Admiral Lord Keith, was no friend of the Administration, and he employed his own patronage to augment the Indian patronage distributed by his brother, William Elphinstone, in order to sustain an opposition political interest.
Naval officers required a patron at three times in their career, and it was useful to have powerful friends at all times in order to secure seagoing appointments.
The first need for patronage was to facilitate entry; secondly, it could ease the promotion of midshipmen to the rank of lieutenant; and thirdly, it would aid the advancement of a lieutenant to the rank of commander of a small warship or captain of a larger one.
At the conclusion of a war there were invariably far too many officers for the reduced number of ships retained in commission, and interest was a great help in securing a place in one of them.
On the other hand, naval appointments demanded, in addition, evidence of competence.
Promotion required successful completion of an examination, and no captain would willingly  saddle himself with an incompetent watchkeeping officer when that officer's negligence could lead to the loss of the ship and the captain's inevitable court-martial.
Patronage in effect chose from among the qualified candidates those whose rise would be accelerated, and its advantages in easing the movement upwards on a rapidly narrowing ladder is evident.
Even at the point of entry there was overcrowding, and in 1786 an officer pointed out to a correspondent that ‘the ship is allowed but two midshipmen, and we have sixteen gentlemen on board who are rated able seamen & captain's servants’.
Obviously it would be much easier to leave the ranks of the captain's servants if a candidate had the support of a powerful political interest, though no doubt sheer professional ability might win the assistance of superiors.
All too typical, however, was Lord Keith's remark in 1799 that he had given a lieutenant's commission to ‘the Duchess of Atholle's friend Glen Geary…a heavy dog too’, while passing over a brighter but less well-connected midshipman.
To do the navy justice, however, it must again be emphasised that powerful interest could rarely secure promotion for the unqualified, and in the naval service some ability was a prerequisite for advancement.
There are examples of officers whose promotion was clearly desired by their superiors who yet could not be advanced.
One of the minor problems of a fleet commander involved in politics was the well-connected incompetent.
Lord Keith encountered this difficulty in the person of a Midshipman Mayers, who told the admiral that he was qualified for promotion to lieutenant.
Keith, accordingly, had a commission made out, but, as the admiral complained, ‘behold he had not passed, I ordered three captains to examine him, he declined to go, consequently I was obliged to tear the-commission’.
Even an admiral's good wishes could not dispense with the ability to pass a professional examination.
Incompetent candidates with friends valuable to Keith's political interest could try his patience sorely.
Such was Midshipman Adam Ross, whom Keith after several years of effort finally pushed into commissioned rank.
The first reference to the young gentleman is found in Lord Keith's private correspondence in October 1797, when the admiral complained to his sister that he was ‘plagued with Adam Ross.
He has no intellect and does not improve a bit: I wish he was in the army’.
Keith was at that time second-in-command of the Mediterranean fleet, and his superior, Lord St. Vincent, no doubt familiar with Keith's political needs, was willing to assist, but some midshipmen were not promotable.
‘Lord St. V[incent] offers Ross a commission, but I dare not mention his passing, it is vexatious.’
But the longer Ross remained unpromoted, the more offended his friends would become, especially when they saw the sons of other freeholders advanced in rank.
‘Fintry's son is returned well.
I have put him into the London to act as lieutenant,’ the admiral reported.
‘I had kept it open for Ross as long as I could.’
In 1799, however, things took a turn for the better, for a number of prizes captured from the enemy and retained with the fleet created an acute shortage of officers to command them.
It would seem that this occasioned a relaxation of promotional standards, for Admiral Keith finally disposed of his problem by this addition of two captured corvettes and a frigate to his fleet.
‘Mr. Ross goes  lieutenant into one of them if he can pass his examination on the morrow’, Keith informed his sister, and it would seem that the examining board were duly impressed by their admiral's anxiety, for they took a chance on this doubtful candidate.
‘Ross, I thank God, is off my hands, sent into El Teresa , a Spanish frigate, 3rd lieutenant.’
Ability alone was clearly not the only factor influencing the promotion of naval officers, and it is not surprising that some of those promoted did not successfully fill their new posts.
There were officers like Lieutenant Moncrieff, promoted by Lord Keith at the Cape of Good Hope in 1795 in order to oblige Scottish friends.
‘Will you write Charles Napier that I made his man Moncrieff a lieutenant,’ Keith wrote, ‘and I am now obliged to invalid him to prevent his being dismissed by a court martial.
He is a filthy drunken beast…’
A naval officer could rise in rank quite rapidly if he had the friendship of the commander-in-chief of a distant station.
The honourable George H.L. Dundas, admittedly an officer of considerable merit, as well as the son of Lord Dundas, an important Whig politician, served in the Mediterranean under Lord Keith's command.
Here politics and local interest coincided, for the father of the young officer was an important landowner in the area of Scotland in which the Elphinstone interest was being upheld by Lord Keith, and indeed, before acquiring his peerage, Lord Dundas had represented Stirlingshire in the House of Commons.
George Dundas went to the Mediterranean as a lieutenant in Lord Keith's flagship, the Queen Charlotte , and when that vessel was lost by fire he was immediately appointed in the same rank to the newly commissioned Guillaume Tell , a ship-of-the-line taken from France, on 11th April 1800.
Eighteen days later Lord Keith saw another opportunity to help Mr. Dundas, for a number of new appointments were made in consequence of the commissioning of another captured French vessel, the Carmine , and George Dundas found himself Flag Lieutenant in the Minotaur in place of John Stewart who had been appointed acting commander of another vessel, whose commander in turn had assumed command of the newly commissioned ship.
Within a few months George Dundas was himself commander of the Lutine , and on 2nd November transferred in this rank to the sloop Calpe , again newly commissioned, and with this record of command his career was firmly established and his subsequent rise rapid, for in this case Keith had made no mistake in patronising a friend.
Finally, on 17th August 1801, Commander Dundas was appointed acting captain of the newly commissioned San Antonio , having completed the transition from junior lieutenant to post-captain in just over one year.
Naval patronage was regularly used, within the limits imposed by regulation, to sustain a political interest, and even if the powers of a flag officer in the field of promotion were restricted in Europe, an officer in command of a ship, or in a position to influence that commander, could still place boys on the first rung of the promotional ladder by securing for them appointments as midshipmen or, failing that, captain's servants.
The Royal Navy became a popular career for Scots in the eighteenth century, from about the period of the American Revolution onwards, and it was a particularly apt choice for a gentleman of small means for it was a less expensive profession than that of an army officer.
In 1778, when an English  captain could remark that ‘more than two-thirds of my quarter deck are Scotch’, the proportion of Scots among the officers of a vessel commanded by one of their own countrymen would be substantial.
In theory, the captain of a ship was entitled to take into his ship as midshipmen, volunteers, or captain's servants any of the sons of his friends who hoped for a naval career, but in practice even this form of entrance patronage was limited and largely in the hands of flag-officers, for it would be a captain with a liking for half-pay who would refuse the requests of an influential admiral.
The limitations of a captain's powers of patronage are illustrated by a letter written to William Graham of Airth, a Stirlingshire freeholder, in 1785:
Admirals, and those with influence over such officers, were in a position to patronise persons recommended by their friends.
If an admiral commanded on a distant station, he had considerable patronage at his disposal.
He could make mates and midshipmen into lieutenants, and he could advance some lucky lieutenants to the rank of commander or captain.
At home, where an admiral's powers were much more restricted, and even the most favoured officers could expect to have to wait for their promotion until the end of the admiral's period of command, when it was customary to make him the compliment of a few promotions on striking his flag, it was still possible to introduce new entrants to a seagoing life.
Promotions were always more difficult to arrange than first appointments, for there were always far more qualified candidates for promoted posts than there were places to be filled, but it is clear, from the complaints of those who deplored the favouritism implied by the intervention of political interests, that this was a common route to advancement.
Earl St. Vincent, for example, writing in 1801, remarked that ‘the list of lieutenants abounds with improper persons who have obtained promotions by influence’.
First appointments, on occasion, could be a matter of considerable urgency to a freeholder or a burgh magistrate, and that kind of favour was not particularly difficult to arrange, if a politician had taken the precaution of developing connections with influential navy men.
Sometimes a midshipman's place was sheer necessity, as in the case of a son of an Angus freeholder named David Lyell who found himself involuntarily a member of the Royal Navy.
David Lyell had been returning to Britain from Carolina as a member of the crew of a merchant vessel when his ship was intercepted by a cruiser and he was impressed for service in an undermanned warship.
The young man's brother wrote to Lord Panmure to  see if David could make the best of the situation in which he found himself by obtaining a midshipman's place.
The brother carefully laid the groundwork for his request to the politician at the outset, pointing out that he had now received his charter and was qualified as a voter and promising that ‘you may stedfastly rely I will serve your Lordship on all occasions to the outmost of my power’.
To a man of Panmure's connections this was not a particularly difficult matter in time of war, even with the qualification which the Lyells made to their request, that ships about to sail for the West Indies were not acceptable, but it was clearly a very material favour to the family concerned.
The pressing of a gentleman, though no doubt a poor gentleman in  worldly goods, was not uncommon, and in 1741 Lord Panmure got a very similar request from another of his constituents on behalf of Mr. Charles Duncan, ‘a son of Ardownie's, who's now a foremasthand aboard the Royal Sovereign his Majesty's Ship lying at Chatham…’
The press-gang gave politicians an effective method of giving a very real service to the parties more directly concerned, and it was one which should have created a lasting sense of obligation, for life before the mast in one of His Majesty's ships was not likely to be easily forgotten.
Officers of merchant ships were particularly vulnerable if they did not have in their possession a written protection from impressment issued by the Admiralty, and David Scott was enabled to oblige both Provost Watt of Forfar and several influential merchants of Dundee by securing the freedom of Peter Brown, the mate of the ship John and Nancy of Dundee, though in this case the Dundee magistrates had to provide an able seaman as a replacement for Brown before he was freed from the pressing tender.
To a politician the ability to do this kind of service was vital, and it was even more urgent if a political contest was in progress, lest the opposition perform the service.
Captain Charles Campbell, the Government agent in the burgh of Stirling in 1734, wrote to Lord Milton to desire the freedom of a Stirling man named Kier who had been pressed by Captain Oliphant of the Terrible , a cruiser stationed in the Forth.
The problem was that Kier had friends in the town council and, as Campbell pointed out, ‘my eneemys here have wrote to My Lord Grange; if the man is sett at liberty I begg it may be by y[ou]r interest, and that you'll be so good as write me so, for it will do me service in this place’.
Requests for a place as midshipman, or if that was impossible, as a captain's servant with prospects of future advancement to that rank or that of master's mate, another stepping stone to commissioned rank in the Royal Navy, were much more frequent than requests for aid in freeing a man from the press.
It is clear from the surviving correspondence that a naval career had become attractive to the Scottish gentry by the middle of the eighteenth century, perhaps because expenses at sea were much lower than those incurred in an army officer's mess, while not the least of the attractions of a naval career in time of war was the possibility of prize money.
Pressure for places in the navy was so great that it could prove a difficult tool for politicians able to supply such appointments, for there was never enough to meet all the demands for it, and the obligement of one could offend other freeholders less fortunate.
The difficulty of using this form of patronage whose scarcity could give offence to those who were unlucky is illustrated by the difficulties of the Duke  of Montrose and his son, Lord George Graham, in 1739–40, when Lord George, who hoped to combine a career as a naval officer with membership in the House of Commons, first obtained command of a ship, and was thus enabled to offer places in the line of command to the sons of freeholders in the area of Montrose influence in central Scotland.
Unfortunately, Lord George's first command was a vessel with an extremely small crew of only 45 men, including officers, which left little room for many aspirants to commissioned rank.
Lord George did not long remain in command of such a small vessel, however, and no sooner did he attain a more substantial command than the Duke of Montrose sent orders for the sons of the lairds of Auchenbowie and Balfunning to be sent to London with a view to joining Lord George.
It is clear from the tone of the Duke's letter that these were staunch political friends, and in the case of one of them Montrose was even prepared to help to equip the son for his new life at sea, remarking,
Before Lord George obtained this command, however, his inability to render the services expected of him by some of the family's political friends was a liability, and was seen as such by Montrose, who wrote with some anxiety to deny allegations that the son of another gentleman of the region was serving in Lord George's ship, but was on board the flagship of the admiral.
The Duke insisted that ‘its fitt it be understood…for it might give umbrage to Achinbowie and Balfunning’, and he was very clear that the gentleman in question, the son of Glengyle, should not, under any circumstances, join Lord George's ship.
Given the significance of patronage in securing a promotion, or in placing an officer in a situation where he might have an opportunity to distinguish himself, and thus strengthen his claims to advancement, there was a good incentive to arrange for a transfer to another ship where favour might be expected.
The loss of an efficient officer, however, was not to be accepted without protest by the captain who lost his services, and Captain Robert Digby, for example, protested in strong terms the impending transfer of Midshipman Callender from his ship to Captain Keith Stewart's Berwick in 1778, pointing out that ‘this Mr. Callender I made a midshipman myself upon finding Sir Lawrence Dundas was his friend’ and complained of ‘Scotch captains being allowed to pick the quarterdecks of other ships without the captain's consent…’
Midshipman Callender's friends no doubt were aware that efficiency united to interest was the strongest claim to promotion in the navy, and Lord Keith's correspondence abounds in references to interest being a motive in bringing a man forward in the service: ‘I have made McKenzie a lieutenant into the Rattlesnake ; he was a friend of Mr. Dunsmuress and recommended by Lord Elphinstone to me, so I am glad to have served him’, a comment which suggests that the admiral was influenced by something more than Mr. McKenzie's personal abilities.
Equally, when it came to promotion to captain in the  Mediterranean fleet, interest was obviously a strong influence upon the admiral, for he remarks in July 1799 that ‘Adam Drummond came to me yesterday.
I wish I could give him a post, but I could not pass Lord Bute's son with decency’.
It would be improbable that men totally unqualified for their rank would be placed in a fleet commanded by the patron whose own career might be damaged by inefficiency, but given the situation in the fleet, of far more qualified applicants than available places, the choice was likely to fall upon a friend of a friend.
For the man without interest, the opportunity to distinguish himself in action, and thus by securing mentions in despatches to attract the attention of the Admiralty, was a harder road to advancement.
Many political debts were paid with a word in the right ear at an appropriate moment, and the friends of naval officers were never slow to ask the aid of their member of parliament or another politician with reason to maintain good relations with them.
On occasion the requests were intended to push a candidate forward much more rapidly than was normal.
Such a request was made to Thomas Dundas by four of the councillors of Dunfermline who pressed him to use his interest with Lord Sandwich to get Midshipman Ebenezer Fish serving on board the Warwick a place as a lieutenant of marines, since the marine officers were not required to have the years of sea-service demanded of naval lieutenants.
Freeholders who were disappointed in their expectation of aid from the political interest which they had supported were ripe for an attack by another interest, and some of the freeholders in this situation did not scruple to state their position quite bluntly.
In the autumn of 1751, for example, Alexander Hume Campbell, the brother of the Earl of Marchmont, and member of parliament for Berwickshire, wrote to Lord Anson, the First Lord of the Admiralty, telling him how important it was to his interest that Lieutenant James Home should be made a post-captain, and reminding Lord Anson that this favour had already been promised to Lord Marchmont during a conversation in the House of Lords.
Early in January 1758, however, Lieutenant Home's brother, David Home of Wedderburn, complained that the promise had not been kept and that the lieutenant had been ordered to join a fireship at Spithead which was being prepared for foreign service.
‘This,’ complained Wedderburn, ‘gives him vast uneasiness, for if he is ordered abroad before he gets his Post he dispairs of it for some time.’
Lord Anson, bombarded as he was from all directions by demands for favours, was hard to move towards action, and Lieutenant Home no doubt felt it would be a case of out of sight out of mind.
As Wedderburn pointed out, ‘tho’ he has Lo[rd] Anson's promise to do for him he relies little on it unless your Lo[rdshi]p & the Register intirfire for he will find a readie excuse, he was abroad or he wd have been provided'.
Marchmont himself was forced to admit that ‘Lord Anson's promises are so long in the performing that I reckon none of us will build sudden expectations upon them’.
The member for Berwickshire went immediately to the head of the Administration and ‘desired the D[uke] of Newcastle to refresh his Lordship's memory’, but Lord Anson was a master of diplomatic procrastination, never refusing an important supporter of Government, yet delaying performance of his undertakings.
Marchmont was driven to complain that Anson had been ready  enough to promise that he would ‘do it the first moment it was possible’, and had already been strongly urged to promote Lieutenant Home by the Duke of Newcastle, but yet had done nothing.
The delay and the excuses clearly angered the Laird of Wedderburn, for he responded to Lord Marchmont's letter with an implied threat combined with a reminder of past loyalty.
The message was clearly stated nonetheless, and it must have been an alarming one to Marchmont and his brother, for Wedderburn was an important freeholder with many connections in the country:
The delay in securing the desired promotion appears to suggest that the Marchmont interest, however influential in Berwickshire, was not particularly effective in London, and there were Scottish politicians who showed themselves better able to redeem promises that had a political importance.
James Christie, one of the leading figures in the town council of Stirling, had a son in the navy named Francis Christie, who had served six years as a midshipman in the West Indies, and had confidence in his ability to pass the examination for lieutenant.
Interest, however, was required to secure an appointment in this rank, for the alternative was an unwanted retiral to Stirling on half-pay.
Christie, so adept at getting the aid of Administration for his own business, knew exactly where to look for help, and approached Lord Ilay through his deputy, Lord Milton, and without any attempt to bargain simply asked for an appointment for his son, promising that it would ‘forever laye me under the deepest obligationes’.
Since Christie had the vote of the burgh of Stirling at his disposal after the Michaelmas elections of 1740, when the friends of James Erskine of Grange were turned out of council by Christie's party, Ilay and Milton showed their appreciation of the magistrate's friendship by ensuring that Sir Robert Walpole recommended Mr. Christie to Sir Charles Wager to such effect that the admiral named Christie to the highly desirable post of lieutenant in a new frigate, with all the prospects of prize money which such an appointment entailed.
Among the senior naval officers with Scottish political interests some were in opposition to the Administration, and one at least, Admiral Lord Keith, because of the importance of the commands which he held, was able to utilise naval patronage to sustain the political interest of the Elphinstone family of which he was a member.
Lord Keith was followed in the navy by his nephew, Admiral Fleming of Cumbernauld, who was even further estranged from the Administration by his  support of parliamentary reform.
A senior officer, when employed, was able to place young men in the line of command by securing their entry as midshipmen, an appointment which became increasingly in demand with the expansion of the navy during the wars against France at the end of the eighteenth and opening of the nineteenth centuries.
Junior naval officers were nominally ratings, for a midshipman was a warrant officer in contrast to the army equivalents, the ensign of foot or cornet of cavalry, who enjoyed commissioned rank, but it was for that reason that the Admiralty did not monopolise first appointments in the fleet, only interesting themselves in appointments at the rank of lieutenant or above.
Lord Keith's career, in which he held important commands in distant waters, particularly at the Cape of Good Hope and in the Mediterranean, gave him further opportunities to strengthen his political interest by advancing his friends in the service.
Both commands were theatres of war in which many prizes were taken, some of which were added to the fleet and consequently required officers to command them.
Keith was able to appoint officers even to the coveted rank of captain, which was in that period for all practical purposes the ultimate promotion, since admirals were drawn automatically from the more senior members of the captains' list.
But if naval patronage did prove to be of considerable value to the Elphinstone family interest, reinforcing the impact of the Indian patronage distributed by Keith's brother, William Elphinstone, the fleet could only provide patronage for those officers fortunate enough to be employed in a command in a suitable station far from Great Britain.
Officers employed in northern Europe, where much of the navy was inevitably disposed, had little patronage at their disposal, and what they got was obtained only after a battle with the Board of Admiralty.
Lord Keith, however, employed his powers of patronage effectively to make the Elphinstone interest powerful enough to defy even Henry Dundas's dominance of Scottish politics.
Much of the remaining employment suitable for gentlemen, however, was more fully in the hands of the Administration and its delegates, and that in itself affords sufficient explanation of the strength of government in Scottish political life.
Legal, Church and University Patronage
The link between judicial appointments and parliamentary politics has been one of the most durable connections, and it is therefore scarcely surprising that in the eighteenth century an appointment to the bench was not to be had without considerable political interest, and that this culmination of the career of a lawyer-freeholder was the reward of lengthy association with the great men of the period.
But if appointment as a lord of session was major patronage at any period in Scotland's history, there was in the eighteenth century considerable demand for any post which could make use of legal education, for there is some reason to believe that the country was oversupplied with lawyers in view of the desperate efforts which some of them made to obtain a salaried post, no matter how minor.
Equally, in this period, the chances of becoming a beneficed clergyman were greatly enhanced if political interest was exerted on the candidate's behalf in the case of crown patronages, while no politician-nobleman, with his own ecclesiastical patronage available, would be likely to ignore political considerations when placing a minister.
The Administration, moreover, while having the greatest influence in both judicial and church appointments, had sole control over a number of academic posts, which were also attractive to some of the freeholders, several of whom succeeded in obtaining university chairs.
The abolition of the heritable jurisdictions in 1747 substantially increased the influence of the Government over the Scottish voters by effectively restricting judicial patronage to the Crown.
Prior to that date, however, some of the greater landowners, as lords of regality, maintained private courts which gave them opportunities to attract lawyer-freeholders to their service and hence to their political interest.
Regalian jurisdiction could be extensive, as for example that of the Duke of Montrose, whose bailie officiated within the baronies of Mugdock, Dundaff, Fintry, Buchanan, Kincardine and Aberuthven, and the lands of Kilpont, Eliston, Pumpherston, Clifton and Cliftonhall.
Montrose also appointed a second bailie to hold his courts in the regality of Tarbolton, which was considered too detached from the main body of the duke's superiorities to be handled by the same judge, and, in addition, the duke was himself bailie of the regality of Glasgow with power to appoint a deputy to act in his place.
Taking all of these courts and their personnel, bailies, clerks and procurators-fiscal, a great landowner like the Duke of Montrose was able to oblige a considerable number of his friends with offices which owed nothing to the Government.
Many of the sheriffships were also heritable offices, which again conferred powers of private patronage upon their holders where this had not been specifically reserved to the Crown, and a great magnate who had inherited a small empire of such judicial rights had considerable powers of influence in his region, both from the offices  themselves and the opportunities which they gave to oblige friends, and from the powers of the courts, for regalian jurisdiction was extended over the possessions of landowners who held their estates as the vassals of the magnate.
The connection between patronage of this type and parliamentary politics could not be stated more clearly than in a letter which John Graham of Dougalston wrote to Mungo Graeme of Gorthie in 1741, saying that he had made an arrangement with the Laird of Glinns, one of the Stirlingshire voters:
In 1714, the laird of Gleneagles solicited the post of bailie of the regality of Lennox for his son James Haldane, an advocate who ‘not haveing reccommendation or interest enought to bring him quickly into business…thought this might contribute some thing to it’, but the Duke of Montrose kept such appointments firmly in the hands of Graham gentlemen who looked upon him as their chief.
Private court patronage was not just a reserve of employment for members of a political interest, however, for there was danger in it for the patron.
A bad choice could arouse discontent which would more than offset the value of an appointment in attaching an individual voter to an interest, and it was wise to take abilities and honesty into account when disposing of the posts.
When the Duke of Montrose arranged for his own appointment as bailie of the regality of Glasgow in the winter of 1714/15, in order to prevent the office from being obtained by his rival the Duke of Argyll, the object was not to make money out of the profits of the court but to increase the duke's influence in the city of Glasgow.
In a town where the politics of two great interests clashed, it was essential to make the best possible use of any means of influence and to have a deputy functioning in the regality court in a way which would make friends for the duke's interest rather than enemies.
The incumbent bailie-depute, a man named Sproull, was not acceptable, for in his other capacity as commissary, Sproull was making life difficult for some of the duke's friends, notably the duke's ‘vassal Dowan, whose son marryed irregularly’.
Upon investigation it appeared that the bailie had been acting in a manner which aroused doubts about his honesty, for after a conversation with Dowan, Mungo Graeme of Gorthie informed the duke that 
A deputy of Sproull's reputation, officiating in the regality court, would be certain  to make enemies for the politician who appointed him, and Gorthie strongly advised the duke to get rid of the bailie-depute immediately.
Sproull, in Gorthie's opinion, was ‘the most unacceptable man in the whole earth’, and in fact it does appear that the official was chiefly concerned with his own profits, for he had even interfered with the jurisdiction of the Duke of Montrose's regality court of Lennox.
‘He has no regard to the decreets of y[ou]r courts, but repells them currently,’ the duke was told, and the writer added his own opinion of the intention of the bailie-depute in thus attacking a rival jurisdiction.
By rejecting the decreets of the Lennox court, the bailie-depute forced the litigants to incur the charges of an action in the Court of Session, or, alternatively, as Sproull was said to expect, ‘by this means to bring them to a composition’.
Forcing a litigant to settle with a judge who had usurped jurisdiction, in order to avoid still higher costs in a superior court, was not likely to have enhanced the popularity of the regality court of Glasgow, and, quite apart from the fact that he was himself injured by Sproull's actions, Montrose had little choice but to remove the bailie-depute at the first opportunity.
That, however, raised the question of a suitable successor.
The difficulty with a post like that of judge of the regality court of Glasgow was that while it could help or harm a political interest, depending upon the use made of the powers of the court by the appointee, the office itself was not a profitable one if the judge was not trying to bend the laws to his own advantage.
As Gorthie pointed out, ‘its a post that no honest man can make any profit by, anything near to compense his pains’.
The post, in short, was not too easy to give, for it required a suitably qualified candidate who would be willing to serve without any real prospect of personal advantage, and such people are always somewhat scarce.
It would, of course, benefit the Montrose interest to see the post in safe and honest hands, for the court had considerable powers in the suburbs of the city of Glasgow.
Alternatively, the duke might give the post to someone who would take it in order to oblige the town council of Glasgow, perhaps even a member of that council, or one of the town's lawyers.
On the face of it, the last alternative looked the most promising in the circumstances, but unfortunately the principal lawyer employed by the burgh council, Blackhouse, lived in Edinburgh, and was thus unsuitable for a charge which required residence because of the frequency of the court's meetings.
The town's procurator-fiscal, a lawyer named Sim, was the only other professionally qualified man in the town's service whom it was thought safe to appoint.
According to John Graham, who knew Glasgow well, Sim was ‘the only man of our town's set of lawyers that he can think proper to trust it with, ye know the naturall temper of those lawyers of a low class is to be sharpers, and thats what ye would avoid…’
In this case, however, since the post itself was unattractive, it appears that Sim decided against accepting a place which might have necessitated his abandoning his other and more profitable place of procurator-fiscal, for in the end the Duke of Montrose had to give the commission to a member of the burgh council, although subject to recall in the event of any difficulty.
A similar situation in some respects developed over the office of fiscal of the regality court of Lennox, or Mugdock, an appointment which was held by William Weir, the town clerk of the burgh of Rutherglen, a gentleman who also officiated as  commissary of Hamilton and Campsie.
The combination of duties proved to be more than one man could perform, and Weir, in short, neglected his duties in the regality court and in fact spent most of his time in Rutherglen, where his family resided.
The judge of the regality court of Lennox was James Graham, an advocate closely connected to the Montrose family and its interests, but much of the day-to-day business of his court was actually performed by Woodrop, who was Graham's substitute, and Colquhoun, the regality clerk.
In 1739 Woodrop and Colquhoun precipitated a minor crisis by refusing to tolerate Weir's absenteeism any longer, and the former in fact greatly alarmed James Graham by threatening to resign.
Once again the problem was a lack of suitable replacements should Woodrop go, and Graham indeed considered the bailie-substitute indispensable, for 
James Graham's solution was to suggest that the Duke of Montrose dismiss William Weir, but that was easier said than done, for Weir had been appointed in order to oblige one of Montrose's friends, and James Graham had not made a solution any easier to obtain by promising his substitute that Woodrop should have the appointment of procurator-fiscal to give as he chose.
Weir quickly got wind of the plan to remove him and discussed the matter with the bailie, James Graham, and the latter had to agree that there was no blame which could be attached to Weir's conduct beyond his recent irregular attendance, but it was hardly possible for a court to function without a prosecutor, and although Weir was going to have to go, James Graham insisted that ‘it should be done in the most decent manner and almost with his own consent’.
Weir had been piling one office upon another, and had recently added to his collection that of sheriff-substitute in the Nether-ward of Lanarkshire, although, as his friend Andrew Gardner urgently pointed out to the duke, this was a precarious place which was held only during the pleasure of the sheriff-depute of Lanarkshire.
but Weir had undoubtedly taken on too much.
Most reluctantly, for he had no wish to offend Andrew Gardner, a good friend, whose wife was William Weir's aunt, the Duke of Montrose agreed to James Graham's proposal for Weir's removal, but this was done only in order to retain the services of a good man in the office of bailie-substitute, for whom no alternative was in sight.
From what we have seen it might be supposed that private judicial patronage was more trouble than it was worth, but the offices were in fact received as a sign of favour by many lawyers, who could of course use them as stepping stones to better things.
Perhaps also, a new officer might learn how little his place was actually worth after he had accepted it, although in this regard it must be remembered that  even the crown offices were poorly paid.
In 1734, for example, Gabriel Napier of Craigannet, the sheriff-depute of Stirlingshire, pressed Lord Ilay to help him add the office of keeper of the register of sasines for Stirling and the stewartry of Menteith to his official holdings, for he found the sheriffship to be more trouble than it was worth.
Napier complained that this post had been solicited by friends on his behalf, acting in the belief 
Napier was not the only sheriff to find that there was more honour than reward in his office, for according to the petition submitted by Erskine of Alva, who had been appointed sheriff-depute of Perthshire in 1748, his salary of £250 per annum did not take him very far, for his county,
Gabriel Napier, however, did not neglect to tell Lord Ilay that the failure of his sheriffship to provide adequate compensation for his services was only a partial explanation of his financial embarrassment.
The minister was told plainly that ‘the election of a member of parliament, and other publick services, has drawn me into a great deall of expence, and no small trouble…’
The return expected for his political friendship was an additional post to augment his salary, and one advantage of a sheriffship was that it could be combined with another small office in the same district.
The combined salaries of two or more such offices might keep a government supporter happy, while the sheriffship itself was a stepping stone to an appointment as a baron of exchequer or a lord of session, should the lawyer be well connected and joined to a strong political interest.
The important judicial dignities in Edinburgh attracted a great deal of competitive interest, and men watched the health of the incumbents closely in order to be sure to be first to ask for the vacant place in the event of a death.
In 1734, for example, Lord Lovat wrote to Ilay seeking an appointment as a lord of session for Lewis Colquhoun, a son of the Laird of Grant, remarking that 
Lovat ended that appeal by emphasising his belief that it was ‘a most wise &  prudent maxim that a man in power should do for those that he is pretty sure will stand & fall with him in all events’, and in general that was the major qualification for appointment to the judicial bench in eighteenth-century Scotland.
It was not merely the major items of patronage, such as appointment to the Court of Session, which occasioned deathwatch reports to politicians from the jobhunters, for the health of local officers was as much a matter of careful calculation, and the first to apply was the most likely to be successful when a vacancy occurred.
Sir John Stuart, the sheriff-depute of Berwickshire and solicitor of the stamps in Scotland, was, in 1782, failing in health and was unable to ‘take his exercise on horseback, which was his life, and is deprived of his ordinary potations by his confinement’, reported a Berwickshire freeholder.
The writer wanted Hugh Scott, the member of parliament for the county, to secure one of Sir John's places for him, remarking that ‘I have had the sheriffship in view at his death,[although]the other place is reckoned more lucrative and is possibly already secured’.
When an energetic Government manager had successfully concentrated much of the available patronage in his hands throughout the country, the chance of obtaining very much without paying active court to the great man was slight.
On the other hand, should a change take place in the Administration, opportunities were created for those who were not established in the ministerial waiting list, and pressure could be increased upon the member of parliament to actively solicit preferment for his own constituents.
Thomas Cockburn, a Berwickshire freeholder, was an active member of the interest of Hugh Scott, younger of Harden, the member of parliament for the county of Berwick, and he presented Scott with a number of alternatives.
Cockburn would prefer appointment as a clerk of session, but failing that 
Appointments to places in the Court of Session at any level were valuable items of patronage which were employed in general to enhance the political position of the Government.
When political considerations took primacy over whether qualifications it is not surprising that some of the appointments were given to candidates ill-suited to the duties they were called upon to perform, such as the Lanarkshire freeholder appointed macer of the Court of Session who, according to James Boswell, ‘had a constant hoarseness, so that he could scarcely be heard when he called the causes and the lawyers, and was indeed as unfit for a crier of court as a man could be.
I said he had no voice but at an election .’
Influence over the machinery of the law could give a politician additional means of gratifying friends and intimidating enemies, for a word in the right place could  greatly ease the problems of those who came into conflict with the laws.
Two major Jacobite risings, and the plotting which took place on other occasions, were enough to put a considerable number of gentlemen in danger and, indeed, so long as the Jacobite cause retained a substantial following in Scotland it had a further effect upon politics, for the unwillingness of many gentlemen of Jacobite sentiments to take the oaths to Government further limited an already small electorate.
It was, however, the politician's ability, if well connected in London, to secure pardon for gentlemen implicated in Jacobite plotting, but who were not obvious leaders which proved a valuable management tool.
Obviously a politician able to perform this service conferred a very material favour on the endangered man and his relatives, and such a favour could attach their loyalty to the interest able to save them.
Whatever the gentleman in question might feel about the Hanoverian monarchy and the Jacobite cause he could, in the circumstances, hardly refuse to take the oaths to Government and cast his vote for his friend in a subsequent election.
It should not be forgotten, moreover, that Jacobite gentlemen had non-Jacobite relatives, and a favour to the kinsman in difficulties with the law was also a favour to lairds who might have good reason to expect the politician's help.
Those politicians who were connected with the Administration found that the year 1716 produced a bumper crop of solicitations for the pardon of those implicated in the Rising of the previous year.
Typical of the requests reaching government politicians was a letter sent to the Duke of Montrose by John Graham of Killearn, writing on behalf of the Laird of Culcreuch, a Stirlingshire freeholder.
Killearn told the duke that the laird intended to write 
When a politician with an interest to maintain was a member of the House of Lords, the practice of taking appeals from the Scottish courts to the Upper House of Parliament afforded the politician further opportunities to oblige his friends.
Lairds, and even peers, found it worth their while to seek the attention of their friends among the lords of parliament when an appeal in which they were concerned was about to be considered.
In the eighteenth century the scales of justice could be tilted in favour of a relative or friend, or it was feared that this was the case, unless strong interest was made in behalf of a litigant in order to ensure equity.
The fear, whether justified or not, undoubtedly enhanced the influence of a politician, for evenhanded justice would therefore appear to be due to his favour.
In 1707, for example, when one of the Duke of Montrose's associates found himself in legal difficulties, he begged for his chiefs intervention, pointing out that ‘my pursuer is laterlie marryed to a near relative of the Justice Clerks and My Lord Arnistons, which makes it more necessar Your Gr[ace] should interest your self to take it away by arbitratione’.
Criminal charges and fines were other matters capable of adjustment by a  politician, and again were likely to encourage lasting feelings of gratitude to the man who secured a suspension or remission.
A Dunbartonshire gentleman attached to the Duke of Montrose became involved in what he described as ‘a foolish ploy [which]happened at Glasgow the first day at the Circuit held ther with some of our friends & Barrowfields, wher we were all fyned’.
The Exchequer was now demanding payment of the fines, and the duke was informed that the Earl of Mar, as Secretary of State, had secured a remission of the fine for one of his friends; Montrose's dependent, getting quickly to the point, inquired whether ‘your Gr[ace] can without truble tip a wink to any of the Barrounes [of Exchequer]for Wattie and me’.
The ability to ‘tip a wink’ was another of the assets of a political manager which has received less attention than the more obvious ability to secure employment for friends.
In burgh politics the habit of taking quarrels to law made the ability to suspend a legal process or to threaten its resumption a regular tool of the Administration's local managers.
It was perhaps not accidental that the deputy political manager for the Earl of Ilay, Lord Milton, was the Lord Justice Clerk, for between them the head of the Justiciary Court and the crown law officers controlled the criminal justice system.
Typical of many letters was one which Milton received from the provost of one of the royal burghs in 1740, reporting that one of the councillors was wavering in his political loyalty.
The provost had confronted the man and had issued a warning, telling him that ‘the process before the Judiciary at the Croun's Instance was still hanging over his head & if he transgressed those who assisted to bring him of[f] may also get the affair moved againe, at least for £30 of expenses’.
The ability to help or to harm was not the least of the tools in the politician's inventory, and it may indeed have been of greater value than some of the more troublesome varieties of patronage, where a favour for one could easily anger others who were disappointed.
The most hazardous of all forms of patronage for the political manager was the presentation of a minister to a parish, for unless there was general agreement among the heritors and other parishioners, strong feelings were likely to be aroused in a church where patronage was still regarded as an alien intrusion without scriptural authority.
The fact remained, however, that the right to present a minister was shared between the Crown, the nobility and some of the major landed gentry, while town ministers were often the appointees of the burgh councils.
Accordingly every politician was confronted with the sometimes unpleasant duty of suggesting a suitable replacement for a deceased minister after a delicate balancing of the claims of potential candidates.
Patronage of this type produced a great deal of difficulty for both the church and the politicians, and in 1742 Robert Dundas, lord Arniston, was induced to complain of the  
Lord Arniston's complaint was entirely justified, for church patronage was grossly abused to serve immediate political ends.
George Dempster, the member of parliament for Dundee burghs, whose election at St. Andrews would ‘certainly turn on a single vote unless I am able to provide a Councillors son in a Kirk’, urged nothing more than political consequences when pressing for the settlement of the St. Andrews clergyman, and many presentations were indeed political bribes.
In county politics much the same attitude prevailed, for in 1799 Admiral Lord Keith's chief complaint about a presentation made by Lord Elphinstone was that the latter had not seen fit to agree to the wishes of an important laird, remarking that ‘I should suppose Lord E. does not recollect that the Gleneagles people have 3 votes in Dumbarton.
I know not where he will bestow a kirk to more advantage…’
The difficulty with kirks, however, was that there was almost always someone, apart from unsuccessful candidates for the post of minister, who was unhappy.
In 1719, for example, when Mr. Muir, the minister of Kilbryde, died, the Duke of Montrose, with the support of the Duke of Roxburghe, offered to appoint any man whom Montrose's friends Gorthie and Dougalston would recommend.
Naturally, what the duke had in mind was his own political interest, and his managers duly picked a man named Hamilton for the vacant charge, a gentleman whose brother was a bailie of one of the royal burghs in which the Montrose faction took an interest.
The presentation, however, was resisted by Lord Selkirk, who had been ‘importuned with letters from Scotland which jumble him’.
Montrose, however, pressed the candidacy of William Hamilton, chiding his fellow peer for ingratitude and suggesting ‘that its ane ill requitall he's likely to give by showeing a backwardness to [a]brother of Baillie Hamilton's who showed some zeall for the service of his bro[the]r at his election.
I'le try him again'.
The issue clearly was not the merit of William Hamilton as a pastor, and the duke felt that the question turned on the past and future services of the clergyman's brother, the bailie.
It might be added that William Hamilton was well supplied with interest to advance his settlement, for he had served Lord Haddington as a page when at college and had continued in Haddington's service as chaplain.
In 1721, when the minister of Inchinnan in Renfrewshire was named to the chair of church history in the University of Edinburgh, thus creating a vacancy for a minister, the right of presentation belonged to the Duke of Montrose.
On this occasion the duke was more cautious, asking his friend Gorthie to take care to seek a suitable candidate.
‘Pray think of a right man wt out regard to recommendations, which hitherto have not been of great service to me in the like cases,’ the duke suggested.
Good intentions quickly evaporated, however, when Sir Robert Pollock, a gentleman with whom the duke had no wish to quarrel, suggested a candidate for the vacant charge.
Fortunately the man with this powerful patron was popular with the parishioners, but one cannot help suspecting, from Montrose's comments, that this was really a secondary consideration:
The burgh of Paisley, although not a royal burgh and thus not forming part of one of the parliamentary districts, had a vote in the county elections for Renfrewshire in right of the burgh lands, and it was the burgh vote which provided the candidate with his strongest argument for preferment.
The trouble which a political interest could encounter, however, came when friends of the political interest fell out over a choice of minister, and in a country which took its religion seriously that was all too easy to do, and that in turn opened the road to intrigue by political enemies.
The Duke of Montrose ran into this difficulty in 1725 when he obtained a crown presentation for a minister named Smith to serve the parish of Cardross.
To give the duke his due, he was suitably cautious, for he advised that the presentation be kept secret ‘till things be ripen'd wt the ministers of the presbytery and heretors, and people, as much as possible’.
The threat, however, was apparent from the outset, for Montrose's enemies the Campbells had been actively attempting to disappoint the duke's recommendation, and were thus well placed to take full advantage of any subsequent trouble to strengthen Argyll's following and weaken the interest of the family of Montrose.
A second note of warning was issued a month later, when Andrew Gardner, a member of the Montrose interest, advised that Smith would meet with much opposition from the heritors, and indeed one of the heritors attempted to bargain with the duke by letting it be known that his attitude towards Mr. Smith might change if the Duke of Montrose allowed the laird to purchase the superiority of some of his lands.
On this occasion there was serious difficulty in settling the crown presentee, and the very real danger to the political interest of the duke lay in the fact that the Opposition and the rival candidate were set up by some of his own friends.
It was this danger which made church presentations so hazardous for the stability of a political interest, for however a presentation was given, almost always there were some who were grievously offended.
The danger of harming an interest to help an individual friend demanded the greatest caution in placing ministers in rural parishes, and after a number of mistakes the Duke of Montrose became very reluctant to present any candidate without a careful sounding of opinion together with an evaluation of the merits of the candidate himself.
The duke's attitude is made plain in a letter which he wrote to Mungo Graeme of Gorthie in 1737 when asked to obtain a church for a brother of a Graham laird, who was one of the most active members of the Montrose interest.
In spite of that claim to assistance, Montrose told his political manager that he was unwilling to recommend a candidate for presentation to another peer when he was ‘intirely ignorant what sort of man he is’.
Having been disappointed in some of the ministers whom he had presented, the duke insisted that  
Sir James Campbell of Ardkinglas, the member of parliament for Stirlingshire in the Argyll interest, found out the cost of a disputed patronage appointment in 1756, when the church of Gargunnock became vacant.
The formidable Mrs. Mary Campbell of Boquhan, a lady with great influence in the affairs of the town of Stirling, and with equally strong views on the choice of a minister for her parish church, demanded that the king's presentation should be obtained for Robert Ure, who was the assistant minister of St. Ninian's parish.
Writing to Lord Milton, Mary Campbell told him that Ure was ‘the choice of two heritors & your humll. servt. and the whole session with the whole congregation except three heritors’.
Unfortunately there was some uncertainty about the right of presentation, for there was some question whether the right to present belonged to Erskine of Carnock, and the latter had given his presentation, at the request of the member of parliament, to a clergyman named Bruce.
That was Sir James Campbell's undoing in this section of his county, for he had undertaken to get the presentation for Bruce in order to oblige one of his friends who had accepted a nominal vote from him, but the friend, David Gourlay, was only a small heritor, and the bulk of the landed property in the parish together with the kirk session were firmly attached to Mr. Ure.
Mrs. Campbell insisted that Lord Milton should go over Sir James Campbell's head and obtain a crown presentation, for ‘if Bruce be our Minister the whole session will demit and a great division will be in the parish’.
Milton had no intention of sharing the unpopularity which was attaching itself to Sir James and promptly referred the matter to the Solicitor-General for action, but the end result, as Mrs. Campbell pointed out, was that ‘our Member has lost his interest in this parish and really by most of our friends in the shire’.
Milton's prompt offer of assistance, however, had deflected the criticism from the Argyll party itself, and Mrs. Mary happily was able to report that those who were once Sir James Campbell's friends ‘continues firm in their good wishes to my Chief and Lord Milton, those two healths is often drunk without naming their Member’.
Presentations in the hands of the Crown were normally disposed of by the county member in a manner agreeable to the majority of the heritors, although obviously the wishes of political friends would have the greatest weight, but that in itself could be troublesome, for by the later eighteenth century the Treasury was imposing its own rather rigid rules.
In 1783, for example, when a vacancy arose in the parish of Campsie, almost all of the heritors were united with the body of inhabitants of the parish in favour of a Mr. Burns to be their minister, and they requested Sir Thomas Dundas, then the county member, to obtain a presentation.
Sir Thomas was quite willing to try, even though‘four gentlemen, two of whom are of another communion’, had declined to sign the petition.
Unfortunately Lord North saw the question in a different light, for the four dissenting  proprietors had asked for the presentation of another candidate.
The Minister's choice was based upon an examination of the Registers of Exchequer, by which it appeared ‘that the owners of much of the greater part of the property in the district interest themselves for Mr. Lapslie’, who accordingly obtained the presentation regardless of the fact that two of Lapslie's supporters were not members of the Church of Scotland.
In short, as a presentation changed from a piece of management patronage, it became a right of the major landowners of a parish to present whomsoever they wished, providing a majority of the landed property was favourable.
Earlier in the century there was much less emphasis upon the exact valuation of a heritor's holdings, but there was, equally, little doubt in the minds of freeholder-heritors that they should be the judges of the qualifications of a candidate, and that a presentation should be obtained in accordance with their views.
A Nairnshire laird, writing in 1728, strongly discounted any popular opinion, remarking that 
Presentees were, however, not infrequently the objects of popular hostility whether for doctrinal differences, style of preaching or the fact that the people were not sufficiently involved in the choice.
In the Highlands it might even be a matter of clanship, for in 1776 Lord Kames declared fugitive five women who had been responsible for assembling a mob which had insulted and attacked Patrick Grant, the new presentee at Boleskine, part of the forfeited Lovat estate, ‘in resentment that they were not to get a gentleman of the name of Fraser to be their minister’.
The right to present was a doubtful political asset, for although it was a means of obliging some who might be useful upon a future occasion, many more might easily be alienated and mindful of the offence every Sunday.
University posts, however, were an attractive means of obliging friends, and a good deal safer, for popular feeling was rarely aroused and it was relatively easy to escape from an importunate friend by arguing that the place had already been promised.
It was, moreover, generally a patronage source for government itself, and no ordinary burgh or county member of parliament would have much concern with it, though George Dempster of Dunnichen, when member of parliament for the Dundee district, thought it worth his while to attempt an approach to Lord Cassillis, who had the right of presentation to the chair of humanity in the University of St. Andrews, to seek that appointment for political advantage.
It appeared that one of the bailies of St. Andrews was completely subservient to a Mr. Dick, who was the burgh schoolmaster and the bailie's brother-in-law.
The schoolmaster of St. Andrews was ambitious ‘and aspires eagerly to the dignity of being professor of humanity in this university’.
The member of parliament saw in this ambition an opportunity to strengthen his own interest in the burgh by  detaching the schoolmaster's brother-in-law, the bailie, from the opposition party in the council, for the bailie was at that moment firmly attached to that faction by a promise from Dempster's rival that he would procure a kirk for the bailie's son.
A letter from Lord Cassillis, on the other hand, would, Dempster believed, ‘cancel in a moment the obligation arising from my opponent's promise.
Most of the chairs, however, were not subject to such private patronage, but they were still employed for political purposes, though usually on a somewhat higher political level than Dempster intended.
A politician with sufficient interest, moreover, was not above contemplating forcing out of their posts political enemies holding university appointments, as the Duke of Montrose clearly intended when expressing the hope that ‘wee might have ane opportunity of makeing two empty sadles’ in the university of Glasgow, namely the professors of law and medicine.
Professors, in consequence, were often active politicians, engaging in the politics of the university burghs and sometimes holding freehold qualifications in the shires.
The duties attached to some of these appointments were not too arduous, which made them all the more attractive to a landed gentleman with other interests but a great desire for an increased income.
This was the situation outlined by that astute political fixer, Lord Milton, in a letter to the Earl of Ilay suggesting a suitable candidate for a vacant post.
The vacancy had been occasioned by the untimely departure of James Haldane, the professor of church history at St. Andrews, who had been burned to death in his room after retiring for the night leaving a candle burning.
Milton remarked that this chair had hitherto been a sinecure, though it carried a salary of over £100 per annum and would ‘serve any gentleman especially a law[y]er’.
The extent to which some university appointments were political spoils in the eighteenth century is suggested by the demand made in 1714 by Murray of Cringletie, an administration candidate for the representation of the county of Peebles, who made it a condition of his coming forward that his brother should be given the vacant chair of church history in the University of Edinburgh.
The Marquis of Tweeddale, when reporting Murray's demand to the Duke of Montrose, remarked of the young gentleman who thus intended to begin an academic career that he was ‘scearce one & twenty but people think themselves fitt for any post in this countrey’.
The late professor, Mr. Cummyn, had received £100 a year for his services, which was clearly the attraction, and the true note of weary cynicism was provided by Mungo Graeme of Gorthie who, while acknowledging the youth of the candidate, suggested that ‘a dispensation from the king for him to travell a year or two will make him a very good professor, as good as Cuminyn was’.
The professorship in question was seen by the politicians as nothing more than a means of keeping the Laird of Cringletie happy; it was, as Gorthie put it, ‘a very good way to answer the Laird's own expectations till once a good occasion offer’.
If professorial patronage was, in general, a perquisite of those at the centre of political power in Scotland, there was another, though much less valuable, form of academic patronage available to some of the politicians.
This was the award of scholarships, which once again was a useful means of obliging voters and  strengthening an interest by continuing good service to the voters who adhered to it.
As chancellor of the University of Glasgow, the Duke of Montrose was solicited for the scholarships in the University's gift tenable at the University of Oxford, known as Snell's exhibitions, while Sir James Grant of Grant was constantly being asked for bursaries for students at the University of St. Andrews.
Typical of many such letters sent to the Laird of Grant was one written by Lord Kinnoull in 1780 seeking such a bursary for John Duff, a son of the minister of Tippermuir.
Connections quickly came to the fore in the application, however, for Kinnoull pointed out that the wife of the minister of Tippermuir was a lady ‘for whom the Dowager Lady Findlater has a particular regard’, and she was herself the niece of Sir James Grant's uncle, Sir William Dunbar.
Where else therefore could a small scholarship be more usefully bestowed than in a manner which would, as Kinnoull indicated, ‘much oblige Lady Findlater, & many other friends’, while conferring a favour upon a grateful man?
Perhaps that type of patronage was of small value in comparison with the need to provide employment for friends, but it was all grist to the mill of a politician intent on keeping his interest solidly united, and it was certainly not scorned by those with bursaries in their gift.
Political Interest and the Collectorship of Supply
Of all of the appointments which might easily be held by a resident freeholder, none was more attractive to many gentlemen than the post of collector of supply.
The collectorship, however, was not in the gift of even the most influential politician, for it was an elective office, but it was, nonetheless, intimately connected with parliamentary politics.
The collector of the land tax, or cess, was chosen by the gentlemen named as commissioners of supply for the county, and although this might often be a wider cross-section of the county gentry than the parliamentary electors, there was sufficient overlap in membership to make this a political decision.
Accordingly, on many occasions the choice of a collector became in itself a trial of strength between the political interests in a county, not only because of the intrinsic attractions of the office itself, but because the collector would be involved in the production of the certificates of valuation required as part of the documentation to be produced for claimants seeking admission to the freeholders roll.
A friend in the office of collector of supply could greatly speed up the processing of the claims of allies, while at the same time delaying the completion of the titles of opponents.
The office of collector was a valuable one, and it was regarded as an attractive prize by gentlemen in need of an improved cash flow, for temporary custody of tax revenues and the ability to make some use of such funds for short-term personal advantage was one of the great attractions of any kind of government service which brought an individual into contact with money.
The salary paid to the collector by the county for his efforts to extract the cess from the taxpayers, moreover, was sufficient to stimulate competition for the post, and the attraction was enough on occasion to cause severe embarrassment to county politicians, who feared that support for one candidate would lead to the permanent alienation of his rivals and their friends.
In short, the office of collector of supply was at the same time highly desirable and extremely dangerous to political interests.
When one political interest was dominant in a county, the politician could attempt to carry matters with a high hand, as Colonel John Campbell of Mamore did in 1727, when a dispute arose over the collectorship of Dunbartonshire.
On that occasion the member of parliament openly told the meeting of commissioners of supply that ‘as he look't on the representing this shire to be hereditary in some measure in their family, soe he look't on the appointing the collector to be a consequentiall priviledge of it, and he would take ill any opposition given to him’.
While the Duke of Argyll had indeed a well-established interest in the county, and John Campbell of Mamore had a long tenure of the parliamentary seat, it is hardly to be wondered that some of the gentlemen resented that blunt statement of Campbell power.
John Campbell of Mamore, however, had one powerful weapon  at his disposal to reinforce his will, for he told the commissioners that for the future ‘none but sure friends should be nominate[d]’ commissioners of supply, ‘and that all others should be razed out’.
The nomination of commissioners of supply was normally entrusted to the county member of parliament, who would submit a list of suitable candidates.
As the Duke of Montrose commented, ‘such a list is properly the business of the representative of the shire, who certainly will look to his own interest in that matter’.
On the other hand, even if in Dunbartonshire Campbell influence was too powerful to be shaken by those who were resentful, in a county which was less securely held, and where a powerful opposition was in being, tactics like those of Colonel Campbell would have been an invitation to disaster.
In a county where more than one political interest existed, competition over the post of collector of supply brought many headaches for the politicians, whose desire to support a friendly candidate was tempered by their very real fears of losing the friendship of those who also desired the collectorship.
Sometimes a solution could be found in compromise, in which two candidates would join forces to defeat a third and thereafter share the perquisites of office equitably.
In 1715, for example, when the collectorship of Stirlingshire was being made an issue by interests unfriendly to the Administration, the friends of the Duke of Montrose, who was then Secretary of State, arranged for John Stirling, a brother of the Laird of Herbertshire, to become collector jointly with the previous holder of the office, Gabriel Napier of Craigannet.
The Montrose interest settled the question in this way through political pressure on the two candidates, for John Stirling was less than enthusiastic about sharing his responsibilities with Craigannet, and it was obviously hazardous to be joined in responsibility for accounting for public money with a colleague of whom the Stirling family had ‘no good character’.
The arrangement, however, was successfully pressed by the friends of the Duke of Montrose, in order, hopefully, to heal the threat of division in the county, lest feelings of dislike be aroused to the point of threatening the stability of the Montrose interest in parliamentary politics.
The joint-collectorship was short-lived, however, and the office was shortly thereafter acquired in the county of Stirling by another freeholder in the Montrose interest, MacFarlane of Kirkton, though not without some difficulties.
The annual election of a collector was carried by similar means to those employed to secure the election of a member of parliament.
The standard approach was to seek the friendship of the major landowners in the county, particularly the leaders of the dominant political interest, and they in turn approached their own friends.
In 1723, for example, the member of parliament for Stirlingshire was John Graham of Killearn, the chamberlain of the Duke of Montrose, a man chiefly remembered for having been relieved of the duke's rents at pistol point by Rob Roy MacGregor.
Killearn, in 1723, acted as the intermediary between the duke and the gentlemen of Stirlingshire, informing the duke's local representative of Montrose's wish that his friends should be asked to appear for MacFarlane of Kirkton to be collector of supply.
When a politician took a stand on the question of the collectorship, a successful election was essentially a reaffirmation of the strength of the political  interest which was then in control of the parliamentary seat, while a defeat in this apparently local question was usually the harbinger of a severe electoral contest when Parliament should be dissolved.
The difficulty facing any county politician in relation to the collectorship of the cess was his inability to please everyone.
A staunch friend expected the countenance of the politician to whom he had attached himself, and a failure to actively canvass for a candidate might well he repaid in full by hostility at the next general election.
At the same time, if two friends were running in opposition to one another for the same office, aid to one was sure to offend the other.
Equally, the office had to be filled by a gentleman who would be acceptable to the majority of the county, and would preferably gain general acceptance, for anything less than that once again raised the spectre of potential hostility at the following parliamentary election.
The year 1726 saw this difficulty emerge in an aggravated form in the county of Stirling, where two candidates came forward to challenge the re-election of MacFarlane of Kirkton, who had enjoyed the endorsement of the Duke of Montrose for several years past.
Unfortunately for the peace of mind of the duke, both of the new candidates had the support of influential lairds to whom Montrose was himself obliged.
Stirling of Craigbarnet, an impoverished member of an important regional family, was the first to solicit support for his attempt to displace Kirkton, and Craigbarnet and his relatives were friends of the Montrose political interest and therefore dangerous to offend.
The incumbent, MacFarlane of Kirkton, was also sure of a substantial body of support among the gentry of the county, while the situation was made even more hazardous when David Cunningham, a brother of the laird of Ballindalloch, a gentleman who could not be ranked among Montrose's friends, also came forward, but with the support of two important lairds, Colonel Blackadder, and Callendar of Craigforth, to both of whom, as Montrose ruefully remarked, he had obligations.
To his increasing embarrassment, Montrose found himself bombarded with solicitations from three directions, which left him in an impossible situation.
Montrose, like many politicians of the period, was loyal to those who were loyal to him, and in this case felt he had no choice but to support MacFarlane of Kirkton, for ‘Kirkton haveing allways stood by me its impossible in honour to drop him.
I think I am oblidged to show him my good will, and to give him my interest upon this occasion’.
Clearly, however, the disputed collectorship was creating an unusually good opportunity for the enemies of the Montrose interest to split that interest and thus prepare the way for an attack upon it on a future occasion.
If Montrose openly endorsed Kirkton, and carried his re-election, he might gravely offend some of his own friends.
At the same time, if by a failure to take a decisive stand Kirkton should be defeated, it would be easy to describe that as a defeat for the Montrose interest to which Kirkton had long been attached.
Stirling of Craigbarnet was in urgent need of remunerative employment, for he was a poor laird whose ‘circumstances are realy such as not to have bread’.
Even if such remarks are not to be taken literally, Craigbarnet was clearly living in poverty and was burdened with a ‘numerous family’.
More to the point, Craigbarnet had the sympathy of prominent members of the Montrose interest, like John Graham of Dougalston, who told Montrose's commissioner that Craigbarnet was entitled to expect aid, for 
Memories were long in Scotland, and a gentleman whose forefathers had fought and died with the Marquis of Montrose in the wars against the Covenanter Government in the previous century could still feel entitled to expect assistance from the current chief of that family, and more importantly there were others in the county who thought likewise.
In all probability Craigbarnet did not really expect to displace Kirkton as collector, for as one of his friends put it, ‘if your grace be not alrady ingaged it would be a great act of charity, but if you are he is willing to joyn him self wt any on[e] your Grace will name’.
The sharing of the collector's salary was really what appears to have been in the thoughts of Craigbarnet and his friends, for Dougalston too returned to this point in his letter to Montrose's commissioner, telling him that Craigbarnet's friends had given him to understand that they would support Kirkton's re-election, ‘with the same sellary that he now has if he would give Craigbarnett fifteen or twentie pound sterling yearly out of it’.
The land tax was not intended to be a pension fund, but it is evident that it could, and occasionally did, serve as such, for joint-collectorships were common.
Montrose, however, finding himself in such an impasse, and with the prospect of recurring battles before him, for the collector held office for only a single year before having to seek re-election, had his own solution to the difficulties which the office entailed for such as himself.
In his view the only way of preventing the disputes was to make the office less attractive, and the best means of doing that was to lower the salary.
Early in February 1726 Montrose instructed his commissioner in Scotland to organise his friends to support the plan of a reduction in emoluments for the collector, believing that this would discourage the new candidates and ensure Kirkton's re-election, for the duke was determined ‘to stand by him upon the above terms, I mean of a smaller sellary for the future’.
In the duke's opinion, successfully lowering the salary would effectively ‘remove the eternal lure of division’.
The friends of Montrose who supported the various candidates were very troublesome, for political management required careful and friendly replies, and it was clear that they could not all be given the answers they expected or hoped to receive.
The friends of David Cunningham, such as Colonel Blackadder, had to be put off with a clear refusal, and a request to persuade Cunningham to withdraw, while at the same time every effort had to be made to engage all those gentlemen who had not committed themselves to a candidate to rally to Kirkton.
At first  glance the easiest solution to the difficulty which the eager candidates for the collectorship had created would appear to have been to take the advice which was being so strongly urged, and install Craigbarnet to share the office with Kirkton, for Craigbarnet would certainly have been willing to accept even a small fraction of the emoluments in his desperate need.
Such a solution would without question have pleased many of the gentry, but it was impossible for Montrose to agree to it.
‘Craigbarnet I know is poor and the interest of his friends might be of service,’ the duke remarked, ‘but do you know that he was att Sheriff Moor, how would that sound here?’
If Philiphaugh was a mark in Craigbarnet's favour with the Montrose interest, and his ancestor's service with the Great Marquis deserved reward, his own participation in the 1715 Rising and his continuing Jacobitism made him an undesirable ally for a Whig politician like Montrose.
It was, moreover, a particularly inconvenient time to create any appearance of associating with Jacobitism, for the election of a member of parliament in the Montrose interest, Graham of Killearn, was in dispute, and it would be a bad bargain to lose a parliamentary seat in return for securing the collection of supply to a Jacobite, however needy.
There was no taint of Jacobitism about the other challenger.
David Cunningham was ensign of the garrison company of Stirling Castle, and was son-in-law of Callander of Craigforth, an influential laird, and brother of another freeholder, but Montrose's arranged reduction of the salary of the collector appears to have reconciled Mr. Cunningham to his military duties, and MacFarlane of Kirkton retained the post for another year.
Craigbarnet was not so easily disposed of, however, and by the winter of 1726–7 the Montrose interest had hit on another scheme designed to satisfy the needy Jacobite laird with the influential friends.
Obviously it was no more sensible for a politician to compromise his own position at court by allowing enemies to point to a connection between his politics.
and Jacobitism than it had been in the previous year, yet Craigbarnet's plight was serious and a failure to help him would offend many.
The man's Jacobitism clearly prevented him from securing any alternative office, and the division of the collectorship had to be resurrected.
The means of providing for Craigbarnet was provided by another candidate, Michael Elphinstone of Quarrel, a relative of Lord Elphinstone, who, in December 1726, announced his own candidacy.
The Laird of Quarrel did not have the slightest intention of sharing the spoils of office with Craigbarnet, but he was unlikely to get anywhere near the office without strong interest, and those upon whom he relied were ready to see the wisdom of returning to the old practice of sharing the office.
It did not prove difficult for John Graham of Dougalston, the sheriff-depute of Stirlingshire, and one of the commissioners of the Duke of Montrose, to arrange a compromise, whereby the commission of collector would run in the name of Michael Elphinstone, but the office would in reality be divided with Craigbarnet, who would receive almost half of the salary.
It was 1747 before trouble was again encountered over the question of the collectorship, and at that time the office had been held without dispute for several years by Michael Elphinstone of Quarrel, whose election had been secured by an  alliance of the Duke of Montrose and Lord Elphinstone.
By 1747, however, the first Duke of Montrose was dead and his successor was much less actively involved in politics, while the Jacobite rising of 1745–6 effectively removed Stirling of Craigbarnet from the field.
Accordingly, with the collector's salary no longer burdened with a kind of pension to a colleague, Elphinstone of Quarrel was challenged by Buchanan of Aucheneen, apparently with the support of friends of the second Duke of Montrose.
According to Lord Elphinstone, the candidacy of Buchanan of Aucheneen was being pressed by Dundas of Lethem, one of Montrose's friends, a gentleman who does not seem to have hesitated to make use of the duke's name in the course of his canvass for Aucheneen.
The laird of Lethem's motive, as interpreted by Lord Elphinstone, was to serve his own interest, for it appeared that Aucheneen was ‘a bankrupt maltman who broke sixty pounds in Mr. Dundas's debt, & by getting Mr. Buchanan chosen collector of the cess he expects to opperate his payment’.
Needless to say Lord Elphinstone did not hesitate to respond to the challenge and rallied his friends, while at the same time pointedly expressing his hope, when writing to the duke, that ‘neither my friend or I have done any thing to deserve your Grace's withdrawing your friendship, interest & protection’.
Elphinstone also reminded his fellow peer that he had always ‘endeavoured to support & strengthen’ Montrose's interest in Stirlingshire, and the implication, though unstated, was certainly clear to the duke.
The situation which had developed in 1747 was in fact identical with that of 1726, with one friend in opposition to another, and the politician being asked to choose between them.
Montrose was hard pressed to draft a reply to Lord Elphinstone, and in fact the duke took refuge in a claim of ill-health to excuse his failure to solicit his friend's attendance at the meeting of the commissioners of supply on 17th May, 1747.
Lord Elphinstone had to content himself with the duke's assurance that he ‘would mention to those who mannage my affairs my being honoured with a letter from your Lordship & recommend unanimity upon this occasion…which I hope will be an inducement to the commissioners of supply to settle without varience’.
Montrose was much more open when writing to his friend Mungo Graeme of Gorthie, however, to whom he also sent a copy of Lord Elphinstone's letter.
‘You see I plead want of health,’ the duke remarked,
The energetic Mungo Graeme of Gorthie was soon at work among the commissioners of supply, trying to prevent any difference among them over the collectorship, and succeeded, through the mediation of Robert Graham of  Killearn, in persuading Buchanan of Aucheneen to make no opposition to Michael Elphinstone's re-election.
The two episodes, however, plainly show the danger to a political interest in any contest for the collectorship, particularly when the candidates are both political friends.
An avowed enemy could of course be opposed with propriety, but if sufficient effort was not made to put victory beyond dispute, there was always some danger of humiliation, and, since there were inevitably many gentlemen who loved a winner, there would be some to see such a defeat as a sign to reconsider their political friendships.
Craigbarnet had been supported, at considerable inconvenience, by the Montrose interest, mainly in order to please the head of the Stirling family, Stirling of Keir, who was a relative of the Duke of Montrose, but no sooner was Craigbarnet out of the running than another potentially explosive dispute arose which might well have set the Duke of Montrose at variance with Lord Elphinstone or another valuable ally, Dundas of Lethem.
The collectorship of supply, as Montrose remarked on another occasion, was ‘an affair that too often divides neighbours’, and he might have added, it also divided political interests.
The link with parliamentary politics was effective in both directions, however, and a collector who openly opposed the political interest of the politician in control of the parliamentary seat was unlikely to retain his own position beyond the next meeting of the commission of supply, unless of course the political interest in power was about to be destroyed.
In 1739, for example, when Lord Panmure held the Angus parliamentary seat, it began to appear likely that the Earl of Strathmore was contemplating a challenge to Panmure's position in the county.
One of the freeholders whose continuing friendship to Panmure appeared uncertain was Erskine of Dun, one of the lords of session, but a relative of Lord Dun was then the collector of supply for Angus.
Accordingly, some of Panmure's friends were reported to ‘have been so free with Mr. Erskine as to tell him that if L[or]d Dunn should appear against’ the Panmure interest, then Erskine would certainly lose his collectorship.
The office of collector of supply was one which held its value over time, for the salary appears to have increased at a rate which more than compensated the holder for the ravages of inflation.
It was a valuable office in the early eighteenth century, and it was still so at the beginning of the next century.
In fact, the collectorship of Aberdeenshire, formerly worth about £70 per annum to the holder, was considered to have increased in value to between £800 and £1,000 by 1800.
Equally, the office could never be separated from parliamentary politics, and the frequent elections for the office provided a ready means to measure the strength of political interests.
The significance of the election of the collector of supply for parliamentary politics is emphasised over and over again by the politicians in their correspondence.
In 1743, for example, when a number of the friends of Lord Panmure solicited his intervention in support of the candidacy of James Milne for the collectorship of Angus, Panmure was provided with a marked list of commissioners of supply, with those whom Panmure and his brother might be expected to influence carefully pointed out for personal solicitation.
The group of  gentlemen who prepared the list and signed the covering letter to Panmure, however, emphasised that unless Panmure wrote the letters in favour of James Milne which they had requested, then their friend would withdraw ‘& let your declared oposers run away with what they could not, were you either present or your intrest heartily interposed’.
In these circumstances an election campaign was to be waged with the same zeal which would otherwise be reserved for a parliamentary election.
Getting out the vote was a perennial problem in any kind of election, for many lairds could find plenty of excuses to avoid a tedious journey to the shire town.
In the case of the commissioners of supply, there were many gentlemen who accepted that appointment not out of any great and compelling interest in aiding the collection of the land tax but in recognition of their social rank in their county.
It was such men who had to be galvanised into action by a pressing personal letter from the leader of the political interest to which they adhered, and, as Panmure was advised, it was ‘getting such good friends to take a troublesome jaunt on them’ which would ‘save a sett of friends from being either affronted or over run’.
The office of collector, however, was not like other forms of employment in the period, an asset to a politician able to obtain it.
Win or lose, in a contest over a collectorship the office was a liability to a politician, more apt to cost him friends than to lead to anything useful for his interest.
The contests, however, were almost impossible to avoid, and they could occasionally be pushed to the extremity of a prolonged election, likely to embitter all concerned in the losing cause.
In such contests everyone concerned was fully aware that there was much more at stake than an annual office.
David Graeme of Orchill, when describing the contest for the collector of the cess for Perthshire in 1738, which terminated in an election lasting two days, saw his party's victory as one by which ‘some peoples management of this shire is interrupted’.
However much a politician might desire to avoid involvement in the collectorship contests, it was virtually impossible to escape being drawn in if the friends were involved.
Were those friends to suffer humiliation, it would be seen as a defeat for the political interest to which they belonged, and if the politician had attempted to avoid a commitment, that abstention would merely add the resentment of his friends to the consequences of the defeat.
In effect, therefore, the collectorship of supply became a gauge of party strength in a county, and unlike the parliamentary elections, the election of a friend only provided security for a single year.
The office was, however, ideally suited for a gentleman of ancient lineage, who, for whatever reason, had determined to live upon his own estate, and was experiencing difficulty maintaining his social rank and providing for his family.
For such people the office of collector of the cess was eminently attractive, and for that reason the strongest solicitations were made to those who might assist in securing the place.
Sir James Grant, for example, was asked in the most pressing terms to assist Mr. Maxton of Tulloquhey, a relation, to secure the collectorship of the cess for Perthshire in 1779.
Grant was not himself a landowner in Perthshire, but he was believed to have influence with those who were, and his correspondent insisted that  
The office of collector attracted that type of candidate, and throughout the century it remained in high demand, occasioning many notable political battles in the counties.