

1 Foundations: Beccaria and the Basis of Classicism
Some tangible motives had to be introduced, therefore, to prevent the despotic spirit, which is in every man, from plunging the laws of society into its original chaos.
These tangible motives are the punishments established against infractors of laws….
These motives, by dint of repeated presentation to the mind, counterbalance the powerful impressions of the private passions that oppose the common good (Beccaria, 1963, p. 12).
By far the most significant figure responsible for the formulation of the principles of classical criminology was Cesare Beccaria (1738–94).
Indeed, classical criminology is almost entirely constituted by the one, short book that he wrote,Dei Delitti e delle Pene in 1764 (Beccaria, 1963).
It was not particularly its originality that distinguished it — it consisted mainly of ideas borrowed from the Enlightenment and from earlier social contract writers.
Nor, evidently, was Beccaria himself a towering figure of his time; in fact, he was unknown when he wrote it, never wrote anything else of note and was an embarrassing failure in personal appearances to evangelise his cause.
It has even been darkly insinuated by Paolucci (in Beccaria, 1963) that he may merely have been used as a front by his radical friends, the Verri brothers, who were too much in trouble with the authorities at the time to risk writing it themselves
Whatever its origins,Dei Delitti e delle Pene is a masterpiece of compression, focusing its borrowed ideas into a comprehensive, coherent treatise on the iniquities of the contemporary European criminal justice systems and offering a systematic alternative.
The iniquities that Beccaria had in mind were cruelty, arbitrariness and inefficiency (like all reformers he has, of course, been accused of gross exaggeration — see Paolucci in Beccaria, 1963); the alternatives he offered were humanity, consistency and rationality.
Cesare Beccaria: On Crimes and Punishments
Beccaria starts by looking at the justification of the right to punish; he concludes that it is to be found in the social contract whose central tenet he declares to be ‘the greatest happiness of the greatest number’(it is possible that he is responsible for originating this particular cliché).
The social contract involves our sacrificing a portion of our personal liberty to achieve this end, but not out of some innate desire for the common good, since ‘If it were possible, every one of us would prefer that  the compacts binding others do not bind us’.
Rather, it is because, ‘Weary of living in a continual state of war, and of enjoying liberty rendered useless by the uncertainty of preserving it,[we]sacrifice a part so that[we]might enjoy the rest of it in peace and safety’(p. 11).
So the social contract is selfishly motivated; it comes about through our rational ability to perceive a personal advantage from it.
Consequently, it is precarious.
Disincentives are also needed (to ‘prevent reversion’) in the form of punishments for law infractors.
We would will this as part of the social contract because our own selfishness would enable us to see its necessity.
Punishments, however, must not exceed the minimum that is necessary to deter — we would not, Beccaria again argues, will it otherwise in the social contract.
Thus, the ‘humanitarianism’ that informs his programme is also derived from selfish, rational motives; it stems from the fact that, since we can imagine ourselves breaking the contract, we can also imagine ourselves being the objects of punishment.
Beccaria's reputation for humanity comes from the famous sections that oppose the use of torture and of capital punishment.
While his arguments about capital punishment are still of great relevance, it now seems rather odd that it could have been thought necessary to have to argue against the use of torture for extracting confessions.
At the time Beccaria was writing, however, it was assumed that God and righteousness would prevent innocents from breaking under torture and falsely confessing.
He points to the irrationality of this assumption and makes the seemingly rather obvious point that ‘Torture…is an infallible means for absolving robust scoundrels and for condemning innocent persons who happen to be weak’(p. 32).
His opposition to capital punishment is, again, based on utilitarian and social contractual reasons.
No rational person, he says, would enter into a social contract that would ‘leave to other men the choice of killing him’.
His alternative, ‘perpetual servitude’, is chosen because of its supposed greater effectiveness as a general deterrent rather than its lesser cruelty:
To anyone raising the argument that perpetual servitude is as painful as death and therefore equally cruel, I will reply that, adding up all the moments of unhappiness of servitude, it may well be even more cruel; but these are drawn out over an entire lifetime, while the pain of death exerts its whole force in a moment.
And precisely this is the advantage of penal servitude, that it inspires terror in the spectator more than in the sufferer (p. 48).
Beccaria was not, on the other hand, opposed to corporal punishment.
This is much less often commented upon, probably because he mentions it in a rather throwaway fashion, losing it in a section almost entirely devoted to the argument that noblemen should receive the same punishments as people of the lower orders.
For crimes which are ‘attempts against the person’ he says, ‘the penalties…should always be corporal punishments’(p. 68).
That is absolutely all he has to say on the matter.
I shall return to the question of Beccaria's humanity later.
As the above quotation on ‘perpetual servitude’ suggests, Beccaria considered the purpose of punishment to be to deter, with the emphasis on general rather than individual deterrence.
It is aimed at minds rather than bodies (though it uses bodies) and its intent is not to torment (though it may do so).
Its overriding concern is with efficient crime control.
Although this is quite different from retribution (an aim that Beccaria specifically rejects), he retains the idea, usually associated with retribution, that the punishment should be proportional to the crime — but not, he insists, proportional to its sinfulness (since only God can gauge that).
It should, instead, be proportional to the harm done to society .
All personal characteristics of offenders, including their subjective intent, should be excluded from consideration; the sole measure of the punishment should be the objective harm done.
If we ask who is to gauge that (presumably not God), he gives the unhelpful and not a little pompous reply that it is ‘known with clarity and precision only by some few thinking men in every nation and every age’(p. 64).
The reason that Beccaria gives for his requirement of proportionality is that ‘If an equal punishment be ordained for two crimes that do not equally injure society, men will not be any more deterred from committing the greater crime, if they find a greater advantage associated with it’(p. 63).
It is this feature of Beccaria's programme that has caused more problems than probably anything else, as we shall see later.
Briefly, the problems are both practical and moral.
On the practical side, Beccaria makes the quite unwarranted assumption that more serious crimes are more attractive and of necessity require more serious punishments to deter them than do lesser ones.
The moral problem arises from Beccaria's insistence that all personal characteristics of offenders and circumstances of their offences should be excluded from consideration in determining punishments.
This violates such deep-seated feelings of justice that it has proved to be unacceptable under any criminal law jurisdiction.
Two other requirements that Beccaria makes of punishments for them to be effective are that they should be prompt and certain .
These two qualities make ‘so much stronger and more lasting in the human mind…the association of these two ideas crime and punishment ….
The association of ideas is the cement that forms the fabric of the human intellect’(p.56).
He attaches great importance to ‘the association of ideas’ and sees it as being most powerfully achieved where the punishment symbolises the offence as far as possible.
Thus property offences should be dealt with by fines (to be earned by forced labour if the offender cannot pay) and violent offences by corporal punishment.
Imprisonment, because of its invisibility (symbolism obviously requires public visibility) seems to be relegated to a relatively minor role, though he is not very clear on this.
His opposition to capital punishment, on the other hand, does not seem to fit very well with the principle of symbolic representation — the public execution of murderers appears to satisfy all his requirements.
Beccaria concludes with a section on prevention, which he sees as being very much preferable to punishment — it increases aggregate utility, the happiness of the greatest number (or, rather, decreases their aggregate unhappiness).
Prevention  requires laws to be clear, simple and universally supported.
It also seems to require a restriction of the scope of the criminal law and a readiness to consider decriminalisation:
For one motive that drives men to commit a real crime there are a thousand that drives them to commit those indifferent acts which are called crimes by bad laws; and if the probability of crimes is proportionate to the number of motives, to enlarge the sphere of crimes is to increase the probability of their being committed (p. 94).
Another important resource for the prevention of crime is the spread of enlightenment via education.
‘Knowledge’ says Beccaria ‘breeds evil in reverse ratio to its diffusion’since ‘no enlightened person can fail to approve the clear and useful public compacts of mutual security’which constitute the social contract (p. 95).
Beccaria summarises his arguments in a ‘general theorem’:
In order for punishment not to be, in every instance, an act of violence of one or of many against a private citizen, it must be essentially public, prompt, necessary, the least possible in the given circumstances, proportionate to the crimes, dictated by the laws (p. 99).
Beccaria and Bentham: Utility and Humanity
In Britain, the ideas of Beccaria are probably best known through their influence on Bentham.
Certainly, Bentham acknowledged his debt to Beccaria.
Almost all of the basic principles of his utilitarian programme in relation to the criminal justice system can be traced back to Dei Delitti e delle Pene .
The most striking difference between them is in the amount they wrote — Beccaria so little and Bentham so much.
If Beccaria's fault was brevity, then Bentham's was immense, often boring, detail (as exhibited, for example, in his celebrated attempt to specify all possible pains and pleasures).
One important distinction between the two writers is that Bentham became much more favourably disposed towards the prison as a medium of criminal reformation than Beccaria appeared to be (a point to which I shall return later).
Hart (1983, p. 51) has drawn attention to a second important difference: Beccaria, he says, has ‘a respect for the individual person’ that is lacking in Bentham:
I think that very often where Bentham and Beccaria differ in detail this is traceable to Beccaria's conviction that what may be done in the name of utility should be limited by consideration of what befits the dignity of man.
In that long-noted contradiction between the happiness of the greatest number and the ‘natural’ rights of the individual, Hart locates the two writers in quite different positions.
This is an important distinction, since it relates to a fundamental dilemma in the classical conception of what is legitimate in punishing crime.
Clearly, what humanity there is in Bentham is very much aggregate humanity; his willingness to sacrifice individual humanity to achieve it is legendary.
A good example (and one that affords an interesting comparison with Beccaria) is his attitude towards torture.
Bentham was perfectly willing to countenance torture if it would reveal information that would prevent more injury and suffering than was used in obtaining it (Twining and Twining, 1973).
Beccaria, as already noted, was famous for his opposition to torture.
Tempting as this comparison is, however, it is not quite fair; they were talking about different things.
Beccaria was opposing the use of torture for extracting confessions.
His opposition was on utilitarian rather than humane grounds: it does not work; it ‘absolves robust scoundrels’ and condemns  weak innocents.
Indeed, Beccaria always avoided direct appeals to humanity or individual rights.
Even in his opposition to capital punishment, as we have seen, his arguments are in terms of effectiveness and utility.
He was not at all put off by the possibility that his alternative ‘may well be even more cruel’.
Nor was he averse to corporal punishments where the logic of his ‘symbolic representation’ thesis seemed to require it.
Indeed, the logic seemed to require that such punishment should take place in public.
Since it would have been unlikely that many property offenders would have been able to pay the fines that he advocated, they would mostly have been subjected to the forced labour that he proposed as the alternative.
None of these examples suggests a particularly marked concern with the ‘dignity of man’.
Beccaria's appearance of humanity is perhaps to some extent due to the fact that, unlike Bentham, he often glossed over the darker implications of his arguments.
This, in turn, suggests that perhaps he found himself in a dilemma — caught between his naturally humane feelings and the logic of his unsentimental, utilitarian theory.
Yet, on the other hand, his particular version of the social contract allows for both.
The requirement of effective deterrence is potentially extremely harsh.
It is moderated by the fact that since we are all naturally deviant given the chance, we can identify with offenders because we can imagine them being ourselves.
This is why only the minimum necessary punishments are prescribed; we would not will it otherwise.
The view that the punishments are, potentially, things that may happen to us provides a selfish (and, therefore, suitably utilitarian) basis for a concern with humanity and the rights of the individual offender.
Beccaria uses just such an argument against capital punishment (in addition to his rational, effectiveness arguments); we simply would not enter into a social contract that gave someone the right to kill us.
What is perhaps surprising, if it is the case that Beccaria was moved by humane sentiments towards the individual offender, is that he did not use this argument more often.
Would we, for example, be happy with giving someone the right to administer corporal punishment to us (in public )?
It seems that Beccaria did not often err, in his balancing of contradictory requirements, in favour of the rights of the individual against the achievement of effective deterrence via symbolic representation.
Whatever Beccaria's personal position, his vision of a social contract set up by people who can at least imagine themselves as the recipients of its punishments is in marked contrast to the later, positivist position that tended to see criminals as  different kinds of people altogether.
Ferri (1967, p. 7), in his criticisms of classical criminology and its influence, writing in 1917, was particularly concerned with its ‘excessive solicitude for delinquents’.
The vision of delinquents as a different species of being threatening society provided a potentially much more unfettered entitlement to take action against them than was allowable under Beccaria's version of the social contract that underpinned the classical theory.
Neoclassicism
Beccaria's classical criminology is universally attributed with a powerful influence over subsequent developments in the criminal justice systems of most European countries.
Paolucci claims (in Beccaria 1963, p. ix) that Dei Delitti e delle Pene has had ‘more practical effect than any other treatise ever written in the long campaign against barbarism in criminal law and procedure’.
And Monachesi (1960, p.49) goes as far as to say that ‘The reader will find proposed in his essay practically all of the important reforms in the administration of criminal justice and in penology which have been achieved in the civilised world since 1764’.
An abbreviated version of the ‘general theorem’ with which Beccaria summarised his arguments was incorporated as Article VII of the ‘Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen’, passed by the revolutionary National Assembly of France, on 26 August 1789.
However, actual attempts to legislate and operate Beccaria's programme in Europe encountered a serious stumbling block, and the final outcome was invariably something significantly different from what he actually proposed.
The main example was the French Code of 1791, where legislators consciously attempted to put his ideas into practice.
The problem that soon emerged was Beccaria's insistence on the strict proportionality between offences and punishments, regardless of the circumstances of the offence or characteristics of the offender.
This proved to be quite unacceptable, and the French Code moved progressively over the years towards allowing judges more and more discretion to vary punishments on precisely these grounds.
The resulting system has come to be referred to as ‘neoclassicism’— a retention of the assumption of free will, but with an allowance that it is sometimes freer than at other times and that the proportionality of punishments should be adjusted to these varying degrees of freedom.
Neoclassicism, in this sense, became the basis of all European and Western criminal law jurisdictions and has remained so, more or less, to this day.
Even in Britain, with its relative isolation from, and suspicion of, continental legal thinking, Beccaria's ideas made some impression.
In 1833 commissioners were appointed to rationalise the criminal law and procedure.
Radzinowicz and Hood (1986, p. 726) have noted their obvious (and acknowledged) debt to Beccaria.
But these ideas soon became diluted (very much along ‘neoclassical’ lines), ‘Perhaps because of the English Common Law tradition that room should always be left to accommodate the peculiarities of individual cases’(ibid., p.727).
Eventually, however, the whole project came to nothing.
Any idea of codification was out of keeping with the English tradition of relatively unfettered judicial discretion and  the elasticity of the common law.
But despite this, the English system developed to incorporate ‘neoclassical’ assumptions very similar to those on the Continent.
The main individual characteristics that have been incorporated, under neoclassicism, as making a difference to the culpability of offenders have been age, mental capacity and intent (for instance, degree of premeditation).
The reason for their inclusion is that they are seen as influencing (or being indicative of) the responsibility of offenders for their actions.
They are expressive of the sentiments of retributive justice that Beccaria wished to exclude from consideration of punishments.
He was solely concerned with whether punishments were effective as deterrents and not with whether they were ‘fair’(though, as we shall see later, his views on deterrence were also problematic).
Indeed, his insistence that punishments should only reflect the harm done to society and have nothing to do with subjective intent would seem to imply that the accident-prone should be treated the same as those who cause harm by design!
Perhaps not surprisingly, no criminal justice system was able to take on such gross violations of widely-held sentiments of retributive justice.
Interestingly, although neoclassicism allowed individual differences to influence punishments on the grounds of justice, in doing so it paved the way for the later, positivist conception of the causes and treatment of crime.
For in accepting that age and, more importantly, insanity could influence the degree of individuals' responsibility for their actions it was also accepting that in some cases, and to some extent at least, human actions could be seen as determined .
Thus, it began to incorporate the principles of determinism and the differentiation of offenders from non-offenders that were to be the later hallmarks of positivist criminology.
Classicism and the Prison
Neoclassicism represented, at least in part, a conscious attempt by reformers to put into practice Beccaria's ideas about the administration of criminal justice.
On the other hand, the relationship between classical criminology and the major development in penal practice in the ensuing century — the rising dominance of the prison — is much more problematic.
When I say ‘relationship’ I mean this in its purely formal sense; there is no attempt here to make any claim about possible causal relationships between ideas and practice.
But the formal relationship between classical criminology and the prison is of considerable importance since, it has been claimed, they embodied quite different ideas about the way to control crime.
The most important exponent of this view has been Michel Foucault (1977).
He claims that by the latter half of the eighteenth century the fading ‘monarchical law’ of the ancien régime was being confronted by two different alternatives: the programme of the ‘reforming jurists’(classical criminology) and that of the advocates of the prison:
Broadly speaking, one might say that, in monarchical law, punishment is a ceremonial of sovereignty; it uses the ritual marks of the vengeance that it applies  to the body of the condemned man; and it deploys before the eyes of the spectators an effect of terror as intense as it is discontinuous, irregular and always above its own laws, the physical presence of the sovereign and of his power.
The reforming jurists, on the other hand, saw punishment as a procedure for requalifying individuals as subjects, as juridical subjects; it uses not marks, but signs, coded sets of representations, which would be given the most rapid circulation and the most general acceptance possible by citizens witnessing the scene of punishment.
Lastly, in the project for a prison institution that was then developing, punishment was seen as a technique for the coercion of individuals; it operated methods of training the body — not signs — by the traces it leaves, in the form of habits, in behaviour; and it  presupposed the setting up of a specific power for the administration of the penalty (ibid., p. 130–1).
It was the prison, of course, which was to come out on top.
Indeed, Beccaria's classical model, at least as far as the form and content of actual penal treatments are concerned, has never really been tried — if we are to accept Foucault's version of events.
There are two elements in Foucault's characterisation of the prison as an alternative model to that of classicism.
First, there is the prison itself, as a physical entity — apparently given only a very minor role in the classical model.
Second, there is the aim — the prison (according to Foucault), being concerned with transforming individual offenders into non-offenders via disciplinary training, classicism with utilising individual offenders to symbolise the offence and deter others.
I think there is evidence to suggest that neither of these distinctions was, in practice, nearly as sharp as Foucault suggests.
To take the second element first, it does seem to be true that there is not much mention in Beccaria's book of reformative effects on the individual offender; he is far more concerned with frightening off potential offenders.
Even where he does show an interest in ‘education’ it is, as we have seen, only as a preventive device aimed at the public at large.
However, this does not mean that his position was incompatible with individual reformation; he just did not happen to consider it.
Bentham, starting from almost identical premises as Beccaria, gets much nearer to it.
Ignatieff (1978) suggests that Bentham like the prison reformer John Howard, also arrived at the idea of the corrigibility of man by re-education directed at the mind, albeit it by a different route.
Bentham arrived at it via his belief in the universality of reason and hence the possibility of correctly socialising man's instinct for pleasure; Howard by his belief in original sin, guilt and the possibility of awakening man's consciousness of sin.
Anyway, whatever the ideas that inspired the advocates of the prison, it would obviously be very dangerous to assume that their ideas were automatically embodied in the actual operation of the prison system when it came into being.
Garland (1985b), in his detailed consideration of the Victorian prison system, concluded that, for Britain at least, Foucault's characterisation is wide of the mark.
Individualised reformation as a dominant penal principle did not emerge here until the early part of the twentieth century, when positivist criminology was in the  ascendant (though, again, that is not to suggest a simple causal relation).
Garland puts Foucault as being around a century out in his characterisation!
His analysis (Garland 1985b, p. 32) concludes that ‘the constraints of legal principle and political ideology’ produced a system aimed at ‘uniformity, equality of treatment and proportionality’in which concerns for individual reformation played only a very minor part.
Thus Garland's version of the prison suggests the mixture of Beccarian classicism (proportionality for deterrent purposes) and retributive justice (proportionality according to desert) that, as we have seen, was the hallmark of neoclassicism.
Foucault, of course, acknowledged that the reformative ideals that gave rise to the prison were a failure, in practice, from the start.
Garland, however, seems to go rather further than this in suggesting that, in Britain at least, the emergent prison system never really embodied a ‘reformative’ alternative to classicism and neoclassicism at all .
The other distinction that Foucault makes relates to the significance of the institution of the prison itself.
Again, at first reading, the evidence appears to be on his side: there is scarcely a mention of the prison in Beccaria's book.
However, as we have seen earlier in relation to corporal punishment, it is instructive to look at the ‘small print’ in his writings.
Beccaria's prescribed punishment for property crime was the fine.
He recognised, however, that since most property crime was committed by the poor, they would not be able to pay fines.
Consequently, they were to be subjected to forced labour to pay the equivalent.
Let us examine the implications of this; property crime became by far the most common form of crime during the period in which the prison emerged; therefore forced labour would have become the most common punishment; forced labour requires incarceration (people tend not to turn up for it of their own free will).
Would Beccaria's programme have looked much different in practice?
The only real difference would have been that since Beccaria required his punishments to be public, his offenders would have laboured in the open air during the day rather than within the confines of their prison (presumably led out in chain-gangs).
Even the particular architectural form of the prison, with its emphasis on facilitating supervision, discipline and hygiene, was hardly alien to the spirit of rationality and efficiency that inspired classicism.
It was, after all, Bentham's ‘panopticon’ that provided the inspirational model.
It is true that Beccaria's classical programme has never been given a full trial (the image of his public floggings and toiling chain-gangs rather than his denial of capital punishment may help the liberal-minded to feel this less of a loss).
But despite this, the prison does not appear to represent the radically different model that Foucault suggests.
Rather, it seems that, in its usage at least, it can best be seen as having been incorporated into the neoclassical compromise which has dominated most Western criminal justice systems.
Conclusions: The Basis of Classicism
Beccaria's classical programme is a mixture of basic assumptions about the nature of human beings and the way they relate to crime and conformity, and empirical conclusions that he draws from these assumptions about how best to control crime.
It is the former that constitute the ‘classical perspective’ and, in this final section, I want to try and extricate them and look at some of the problems that Beccaria's version of them encountered.
In doing so I am not suggesting that I am delineating some objective essence of classicism.
What follows is, of course, a personal selection.
I think the classical perspective can be seen as incorporating three fundamental assumptions about the nature of human beings that are crucial to it position on crime and conformity:freedom, rationality and manipulability .
Freedom
Like those who advocate retributive justice, Beccaria sees humans as free-willed and choice-making.
It is important, however, to distinguish his use of the conception of human freedom.
Under retributive justice punishment is justified because it is ‘deserved’ by free, choice-making individuals who are held responsible for their actions.
As we have seen, Beccaria's justification for punishment was on quite different, purely utilitarian grounds: efficient crime control.
His utilitarianism required a practical, socially useful justification for punishment; retribution was totally inadequate.
A bonus of rejecting retribution, it seemed, was that he could avoid the particularly tricky problems raised in trying to assess subjective intent, desert and responsibility.
Perhaps Beccaria was also conscious of the incompatibility of retribution and deterrence as penal aims.
It is certainly the case that sentencing practice to the present day has manifested an uneasy and uneven relationship between the two.
But, as we saw in the discussion of neoclassicism, it was unrealistic to suppose that questions of intent and responsibility could be abandoned.
To do so would not only be to abandon deep-seated conceptions of justice and desert, but to abandon the conception of ‘guilt’ itself.
For Beccaria's conception of punishing purely in proportion to harm done failed to distinguish between ‘crimes’ committed intentionally, under duress or provocation, or even by accident.
The sense of injustice created by such a system would inevitably work against its deterrent effectiveness (Beccaria always acknowledged the importance of consent in producing compliance; it is difficult to imagine how his version of the social contract would have allowed such a system to operate).
Beccaria's attempt to avoid considerations of responsibility and desert must be regarded as something of a failure.
Later on, positivists attempted to do the same by postulating a view of humans as determined in their actions by forces beyond their control.
Whatever one may think of such a position, it at least had the merit of being internally consistent.
Beccaria's attempt to avoid the issue while retaining the conception of tree will was, perhaps, asking for trouble.
Rationality
According to classical criminology we mostly behave in a rational manner.
The goal of our rationality is personal satisfaction; rational self-interest is the key motivational characteristic that governs our relationship with crime and conformity.
Since crime, however it is defined in any particular society, always involves some degree of restraint on individual self-interest, our natural tendency is always towards deviation: we will, it seems, always choose the deviant alternative when it suits us and when we think we can get away with it.
We appear to be selfish, cynical creatures; our greatest ambition in relation to rules of behaviour is to get other people to obey them so that our own cheating is even more productive.
It is odd that the holder of such a view of human beings could have appeared in history as a humanitarian and heroic opponent of cruelty and barbarism; it seems more appropriate to Hitler than to Beccaria.
I have suggested earlier that part of Beccaria's reputation may have resulted from his glossing over the more unsavoury implications of his views, and the fact that his full programme has never really been put into practice; but this is not to deny that, in so far as he has been an influence, he has been a relatively benign one.
A more complex view of our selfishness emerges if we consider its crucial feature its rationality — a little further.
As we have seen, it is our rationality that enables us also to appreciate the personal advantages we would derive from a social contract that promotes self-denial and individual rights.
Thus, we are simultaneously capable of altruism.
True, it is an altruism grounded in selfishness, but that need not bother us (it can only lead into the usual teenage casuistry about altruism always being ultimately selfish).
More important is the fact that our simultaneous selfish demands make it a precarious, situational altruism.
It is this ambiguous, contradictory and fluctuating view of our relationship with deviance and conformity that makes the classical position so much more dynamic and plausible than subsequent versions.
Beccaria also implies that our rationality would enable us to agree on what constitutes social harm.
It thus provides the basis for defining objective legal rules.
In practice though, as we saw, Beccaria thought that most people had not developed their rational insight sufficiently for this to be the case — full rational insight had only been achieved by ‘some few thinking men in every nation in every age’.
The source of objective legal rules thus appears to be the fully developed rationality of the intellectual elites of different nations.
But the implication is that through education we all have the potential to achieve the rational insight of the ‘few thinking men’ and that, if we did, we, too, would agree on the legal rules that would prevent social harm.
Fully rational reasoning, then, would provide an objective, consensual determination of legal rules (though not, of course, any guarantee that we would not break them!).
Despite the possibility of there being objective legal rules, however, Beccaria was clearly not implying that existing legal systems, including that of his own society, necessarily embody them.
His critique was open to the inclusion of the content as well as the administration of the law.
There was certainly no implication in classical criminology, as there was to be in positivist, that we can ignore the content and operation of legal rules in addressing ourselves to the question of the causes and treatment of crime.
If anything it is more open to criticism for solely addressing itself to these areas.
Manipulability
Although classical criminology clearly portrays humans as being free, responsible and choice-making, this does not preclude their being manipulated.
The universally-shared human motive of rational self-interest makes human action predictable, generalisable and controllable.
In its concern with manipulation, classical criminology was fully compatible with its successor, positivist criminology; they were both based on the belief that the primary purpose of the penal system was to control crime.
However, their views on the way in which this could be achieved were quite different.
In the classical version, we are manipulable only through threats or appeals; in the positivist it is through the alteration of mechanistic causal variables.
Beccaria's unwillingness to allow individual differences — whether in terms of personal characteristics or socio-economic position — to enter into considerations of punishment, also distanced him from the positivist version of human manipulability.
Strangely enough, as we saw earlier, neoclassicism's inclusion of apparently incompatible retributive concerns provided a more direct link in this respect.
Neoclassicism allowed that some offenders were less guilty than others because they were less responsible.
When immaturity and, more especially, insanity came to be accepted as making people less responsible, this allowed for the possibility that, for some offenders at least, personal characteristics (or defects) could be seen as both differentiating them from other people and causing their criminality.
This was to be precisely the starting assumption of positivist criminologists (although they were interested in these differences not because they justified different levels of desert, but because they suggested different types of treatment).
To some extent, positivist criminology can be seen as incorporating both the classical concern with rational crime control, and the neoclassical concern with individual differentiation.
In general, the classical perspective contained a peculiarly narrow view of what it actually is that controls human behaviour.
It was concerned solely with the formal legal apparatus and relied on a very specific mechanism of control (deterrence by making punishments proportional to crimes).
I will be considering the empirical evidence on the  effectiveness of this particular mechanism in Chapter 9.
It has already been noted, however, that there is no particular reason inherent in the classical view of human motivation to assume that this is the only possible means of control.
Beccaria just happened to think it was.
There was no consideration at all given to the possibility of disincentives operating in the informal social context, and a total neglect of social and economic incentives of all kinds.
Leftist critics have suggested that this is because any consideration of the socio-economic context of crime would have proved an embarrassment to the classical position.
Taylor, Walton and Young (1973), for example, argue that it would inevitably have raised unpalatable issues: that there are important socio-economic differences between people, and that these are relevant to crime causation; in other words, issues of differentiation and social determinism (inimical to the classical position) would have demanded attention.
They suggest that the particular problem that confronted Beccaria was the observable fact that criminals were in one important respect clearly differentiated: they were mostly poor.
This suggested poverty as both a cause and a rational reason for crime.
They give (ibid., pp. 5–6) an example of how Beccaria deals with this problem (in a discussion of theft):
He who endeavours to enrich himself with the property of others, should be deprived of part of his own.
But this crime, alas! is commonly the effect of misery and despair; the crime of that unhappy part of mankind, to whom the right of exclusive property (a terrible and perhaps unnecessary right) has left but a bare existence.
Besides, as pecuniary punishments may increase the number of robbers, by increasing the number of poor, and may deprive an innocent family of subsistence, the most proper punishment will be that kind of slavery, which alone can be called just; that is, which makes society, for a time, absolute master of the person, and labour of the criminal, in order to oblige him to repair, by this dependence, the unjust despotism he usurped over the property of another, and his violation of the social compact.
They interpret this as showing that Beccaria, through his commitment to a social contract that accepted the necessity of the inequities and poverty resulting from private property, was forced to overlook these as much more plausible reasons for crime than his own.
Interestingly, Paolucci in his translation of Beccaria (1963, p. 74)(not the one used by Taylor, Walton and Young) adds the following footnote to the above passage:
in a manuscript of Beccaria's own hand as well as in the first edition, Beccaria had written ‘a terrible but perhaps necessary right’— that is to say, quite the opposite of ‘a terrible and perhaps unnecessary right,’ as found here.
The ‘original’ actually fits Taylor, Walton and Young's argument rather better than the amended version they quote above which implies at least the possibility of poverty as a cause of ‘rational’crime.
Vold and Bernard (1986, p. 29) are critical of Taylor, Walton and Young for not allowing that Beccaria could see crime as being sometimes rational and justified.
But they are being rather generous; whatever Beccaria may have privately thought or hinted at, he never developed his position on these matters.
At most, it suggests that he lacked the courage of his more radical convictions, rather than being a straightforward conservative.
Certainly, his intellectual position would not have been jeopardised by such an extension of his arguments.
His version of human freedom and motivation could easily have included poverty as a ‘rational’ reason for crime; and there was no necessary reason for him to equate his social contract with the status quo as far as property relations were concerned (after all, he did not equate it with the status quo in many other respects).
In general, there was nothing inherent in Beccaria's intellectual position to preclude a consideration of the socio-economic context of crime, any more than there was to necessitate his sole concentration on deterrence that was remarked on earlier.
Indeed, it is an oddity that he seemed to see the criminal justice system as being the only aspect of the environment that influences individual decisions about whether it is worthwhile to commit crime or not.
Conclusion
A recent assessment of Beccaria has portrayed him as a cautious conservative who successfully redirected enlightenment thinking away from a potentially much more radical path: ‘His sudden fame can be attributed to the relief of educated society that it was possible to hold rational ‘enlightened’ views on human behaviour without having to accept radical materialism' (Jenkins, 1984, p. 113).
Jenkins argues that enlightenment thinking in Beccaria's time was ‘advanced’: atheistic and deterministic ideas proposing that humans are determined by their social environment, that morality is relative and that the justification for the existing social order was consequently bogus, were being openly espoused.
He uses William Godwin and the Marquis de Sade as examples.
Beccaria's offer of a less radical alternative, says Jenkins, had the effect of postponing the positivist revolution for over a century.
It is true that Beccaria seems careful not to offend.
The introduction to his book contains a strong denial that he is an atheist, revolutionary or opponent of sovereign rulers.
But this is hardly surprising; such things could get you into trouble (his ‘promoters’, the Verri brothers, were already in trouble).
It is also true that most people would look fairly conventional, even today, when compared with de Sade.
What is rather more strange is that Jenkins should portray the postponement of the positivist revolution as being an anti-radical step.
After all, when it did come it initially avoided these political problems by the simple device of locating the determinants of crime in the individual's make-up (and for that reason the early version of positivism has been a firm favourite with rulers and governments ever since).
Certainly, positivism did also produce social determinist critiques of the existing order.
But then, as I have argued earlier, there was nothing in the basic assumptions of classicism that necessarily prevented it from being equally critical.
In both classical and positivist criminology, it is the particular way their basic assumptions are interpreted and developed that establishes their political and ideological positions.
Despite all the problems that have been discussed in relation to the basic assumptions of classical criminology, I have emphasised that they have stemmed mostly from the way they were interpreted, and from their underdevelopment.
The assumptions themselves have remained more or less intact, and in Part Two I will return to them in developing a ‘postclassical’ perspective.
2 Opposition: Positivist Criminology
In the space of approximately the last quarter of the nineteenth century positivist criminology ‘developed from the idiosyncratic concerns of a few individuals into a programme of investigation and social action which attracted support throughout the whole of Europe and North America’(Garland, 1985a).
If we interpret its principles in their widest sense, they were to dominate academic thinking about crime and its treatment until the 1960s.
Indeed, when the academic discipline of ‘criminology’ is referred to it is almost invariably taken to mean only positivist criminology in this wider sense, with its extensive research and literature and established (though competing) theories.
There is a considerable number of textbooks which provide a run-through of positivist research findings and theories and it is not the intention to attempt yet another one here.
Rather, my aim is to look at the kinds of assumption that informed the various strands of positivist criminology, and at the way they differed from classical assumptions in both theory and practice.
In the previous chapter it was pointed out that both classical and neoclassical criminology had already incorporated some principles that were to be fundamental to positivism: classical criminology had insisted on practical crime control rather than retributive desert as the aim of punishment, and neoclassicism had allowed for the principle at least of ‘determinants’ of crime.
But to the positivists these similarities were purely superficial, since in both cases there was an underlying assumption that was totally unacceptable to them: free will.
In their view this had hopelessly inhibited the quest for the causes of crime in the case of classical criminology, and diverted attention away from social defence in the case of the neoclassicists (since the latter were only interested in ‘determinants’ of crime in so far as they reduced the offender's responsibility).
Above all, the new positivists portrayed the existing penal process based on such principles as having failed to provide for the proper defence of society against crime — partly through prescientific wrongheadedness, and partly through a misplaced concern with the rights of offenders (Ferri, 1967).
The positivists' rejection of free will was fundamental to their position.
They did not portray it simply as a change in philosophical stance, but as an outcome of the advance in scientific psychological knowledge.
As Ferri (1967, p. 289), one of the founder-members, put it: ‘The positivist physio-psychology has completely destroyed the belief in free choice or moral liberty, in which it demonstrates we should recognize a pure illusion of subjective psychological observation.’
Garland (1985a) suggests that it was the advancement in the standing of ‘scientific’ psychiatry (together with developments in government statistical surveys and data and the provision, by the prison system, of a captive ‘laboratory’for criminological research) that favoured the emergence of positivist criminology at this particular time.
This, in turn, was part of what was seen at the time as the natural extension of scientific and technological principles from their successful application to the material and animal world to apply to human beings themselves.
Humans could no longer be allowed any such privileged, mystical feature as free will to distinguish them.
The replacement of free will with scientific determinism was consequently the crucial starting point for the new positivist criminology.
Before looking further at the way this assumption was developed, it would be useful to clear up a confusion that may arise in the use of the category ‘positivist criminology’.
In textbooks on criminology it has often been used to distinguish the specific school of thought of the original founding fathers of criminology: Lombroso, Garofalo and Ferri.
But it has also been argued that the basic features of positivism applied to all causal theories of crime, whether biological (as in the case of the founding fathers), psychological or sociological, that were to appear over the next half century or more (Jeffery, 1960; Matza, 1964).
In order to clarify the two uses of ‘positivist criminology’, it might be helpful to use the term ‘biological positivist’ to distinguish the founding fathers from the more general category.
However, one of the aims of this chapter is to see if there are the significant continuities that have been claimed.
To do this, it is first necessary to see if it is possible to agree on what the crucial principles are that characterise both the original biological positivists and the proposed wider category.
Fortunately, this does not appear to be too difficult: Garland (1985a), who has provided a pioneer account of the emergence of the biological positivists, would, I think, agree with Jeffery and Matza on the following:determinism, differentiation and pathology .
These three features also appear to distinguish it from classical criminology (although I will reconsider the distinction later).
Determinism , in the more general positivist sense, means that crime is seen as behaviour that is caused by biological, psychological or social factors, depending on the academic origins of the criminologist concerned.
On this view crime does not consist of actions , rationally chosen by the ‘criminal’.
Differentiation refers to the positivist assumption that there is something (preferably measurably) different about criminals; they may be seen as differing from non-criminals in terms of their biological or psychological make-up, or in terms of their values, again according to the academic origins of the criminologist  concerned.
There may also be sub-categories of criminals committing different types of crime caused by different types of factors.
Pathology means that criminals are not only different from non-criminals, but there is also something ‘wrong’ with them.
Their different make-up or values are not simply variations of the ‘normal’.
Before considering how (and how far) these three features are actually manifested in the different positivist theories, there are two other contingent and interdependent features that Jeffery (and Matza following him) pick on as of central significance to the positivist programme: the shift of focus from crime to the criminal , and the quest for a universal, objective category of ‘criminal’ behaviour.
It was natural that the original biological positivists should focus exclusively on the criminal, since they were committed to the view that the causes of crime were to be found in the individual's biological make-up.
But Jeffery (1960, p. 377) goes much further:
The importance of the Positive School is that it focussed attention on motivation and on the individual criminal.
It sought an explanation of crime in the criminal, not in the criminal law.
This is true of every theory of criminal behaviour which is discussed in the textbooks today, even though the explanation is in terms of social and group factors rather than in terms of biological factors….
The emphasis is still upon the individual offender, not the crime.
What Jeffery (and Matza, who quotes Jeffery in support of his own position) are pointing to here is that whatever positivists chose as the causes of crime, even when they were ‘external’ such as‘social and group’factors, they always excluded the nature and operation of the criminal law from consideration; such things were simply not taken to be implicated in the process of causing criminal behaviour.
Because positivists were seeking general theories of behaviour to explain crime, they also required ‘crime’ to be a universal, objective category of behaviour.
As Jeffery points out, this meant that the legal category was unacceptable since it was too obviously variable over different time periods and between different societies.
Positivists, of all varieties, have consequently been caught up in an endless quest for a universal, objective but non-legal concept of ‘crime’.
The original biological positivists mostly settled for Garofalo's concept of ‘natural crime’—‘an act that offends the moral sentiments of pity and probity in a community’.
Needless to say Jeffery, and many others, have had little difficulty in showing how all such attempts have inevitably boiled down to the arbitrary moral predilections of the criminologists concerned.
The positivist attempt to disengage itself from legal conceptions of crime and the operations of legal processes generally, clearly marked it off from classical criminology.
Jeffery (1960, pp. 367–8) draws an interesting conclusion from this, which echoes one of our concerns in the last chapter:
the positivistic notion of crime is susceptible to corruption in the hands of corrupt political officials.
I he fact that Ferri became a member of the Fascist movement  in Italy is of concern to those who regard civil liberties as a fundamental aspect of criminal law.
Whereas for Beccaria individual rights are supreme, there are no safeguards against abuse of state power in the work of Garofalo and Ferri.
Garland (1985a, p. 129) has made a similar point: although both classical and positivist criminology incorporated a conception of the relationship between the individual and the state, he sees the positivist version as ‘moving from a liberal mode to a more authoritarian, interventionist one’, at least in the case of the early, biological school.
Such arguments perhaps illustrate the extent of the fall from grace to positivist criminology in recent years.
Not only, apparently, was it based on a misguided assumption about the nature of human action, but it also stands accused of paving the way for nefarious political ideologies!
Such a contrast between classicism and positivism seems rather generous to Beccaria.
As we saw in the last chapter, he, too, believed in the possibility of an objective category of crime which was not necessarily the same as that defined by the existing criminal law, and its source — the reason of the ‘few thinking men in every nation’ seems just as elitist and potentially authoritarian.
Indeed, as we also saw in the last chapter, one recent writer (Jenkins, 1984) portrays Beccaria's postponement of the positivist revolution as being anti-radical and supportive of existing authoritarian rulers.
Perhaps these contradictory interpretations illustrate the dangers, to which I alluded in the earlier discussion, of assuming an automatic association between classicism and positivism and specific political ideologies.
In general, however, classical and positivist criminology were at almost opposite poles in their views of the significance of the criminal law and its operation, for classicism it was virtually everything, for the positivists it was virtually irrelevant.
Garland has argued that the reason why the early, biological positivists had the extraordinary ambition of arriving at a theory of the causes of crime where both the theory and the category of behaviour it was explaining had nothing to do with the criminal law, was that they were also engaged in a struggle to assert themselves as a ‘new’ profession of penal experts against the ‘old’, legal profession.
But, as Jeffery and Matza rightly point out, this exclusion was to characterise all subsequent positivist criminology.
It was also, as we shall see later, to prove to be one of its greatest weaknesses.
The Causes of Crime
Having outlined the key features that have been used to distinguish positivist criminology, in its wider sense, it remains to consider the manner in which they have actually been manifested in the different causal theories that have been proposed.
What all the theories have in common is the fundamental assumption that criminals are different from non-criminals in that they have a more or less enduring disposition towards the commission of crime and that this disposition is explicable in terms of‘causes’.
However, even in this basic assumption, all had to acknowledge a problem: not all crime is committed by such people; a proportion has  to be attributed to ‘ordinary’ people acting on a casual or occasional basis, or in response to extraordinary circumstances.
Even the ‘hardest’ determinists, such as the earliest biological positivists had to allow themselves this let-out.
It is in the proposed causal origins of this enduring disposition towards crime that the different theories diverge.
Most of them fall into one (or sometimes more) of three categories in this respect: the disposition is seen as being inherited, acquired or invented .
The choice usually (but by no means always) corresponds to whether the theorist concerned was a physiological psychologist, non-physiological psychologist or sociologist , respectively — which in turn tends to be associated with the causes being located in the biology, psyche or values of the individual.
In the first two cases, this has also usually meant that criminals are seen as being distinguished by biological or psychic features which are identifiable separately from the disposition towards crime (although they are causally implicated in it).
That is, they are seen as falling into specific biological or psychological (for example , ‘personality’) categories which include features other than the criminal disposition.
This is not usually the case with the third category: here, criminals are seen as being distinguishable only by their (pro-crime) values.
I will not be considering ‘control’ theories here.
This is because although they are usually regarded as an important branch of positivist theorising, they also have much in common with the classical tradition.
My aim, later, will be to try to bring them even closer together.
For this reason, they will be introduced as part of the ‘reassessment’ of classicism, in Chapter 3.
Inheritance
If the criminal disposition were inherited then, ideally, we would be able to point to a specific chromosome which was invariably associated with criminal behaviour.
Needless to say, this has never been the case, although in the 1960s much excitement was temporarily generated by what appeared to be a relationship between the possession of an extra Y chromosome and persistent crime (see Hall Williams, 1982, Chapter 2).
This particular example demonstrated a common pitfall of this kind of positivist criminology: even if all the possessors of the chromosomal anomaly had turned out to be persistent criminals (in the event, they did not) then it would still only have been capable of ‘explaining’ a fraction of 1 per cent of recorded crime, simply because the condition was so rare.
It would indeed have defined a biological category of criminals, but as an explanation of crime in general it would have been virtually irrelevant.
Usually, the supposed relationship between inheritance and crime has been inferred from experimental methods designed to distinguish between the effects of heredity and environment.
Until fairly recently the most popular technique was to compare the ‘concordance rate’ of monozygotic (MZ) twins (who have identical inheritance), with that of dizygotic (DZ) twins (who do not).
Perhaps the most celebrated user of this method has been Eysenck (1977) in his theory of crime.
The method has always been widely criticised, mainly because of its basic assumption  that the effects of environment are equally similar for both types of twin.
For this and other reasons, more recent approaches, even those favourably disposed to the idea of criminal inheritance, have tended to reject the twin method as unsound and to rely instead on adoption studies (Ellis, 1982).
The assumption here is that if inheritance is a factor then adopted children should be more similar, in their criminality, to their biological than to their adopting parents.
There has been a fairly consistent finding in such studies that this does tend to be the case.
However, as Jencks (1987) has pointed out, intriguing as the adoption studies findings are, they are of no practical interest unless we know why they arise — and at present we do not.
More importantly, such findings are entirely compatible with an environmental explanation of crime ‘since genes can influence behaviour by influencing the environment’(ibid., p. 34).
That is, whatever it is that is inherited may cause crime because it alters the way in which the person who inherits it is treated by others.
One of the examples that Jencks uses to make this point is that of IQ.
If IQ were entirely inherited (a contentious assumption) and if IQ were related to crime (many studies have found that low IQ is), this would be perfectly compatible with an environmental explanation: it could well be that people with low IQ are treated unfavourably by others and this unfavourable treatment makes them more likely to commit crime.
What Jencks's argument makes clear is that inheritance theories are only of practical value when the inherited characteristic is specified, together with the way in which it actually operates to produce criminal behaviour.
Various other studies have, however, attempted to do this; the usual technique has been to suggest that it is a particular psychological characteristic that is inherited and which leads ‘naturally’ to crime.
That is, they tend to be ‘crime-prone personality’ theories.
This description applies, for example, to the founding fathers of positivist criminology, the biological positivists.
Lombroso, the originator of this school, is famous for his theory that criminals can be picked out by inherited physical stigmata (cranial deformities, excessive body hair, and so on).
But these features were obviously not the ‘causes’ of crime, they were merely signs that supposedly enabled us to spot criminals.
Their causal theory was in terms of‘atavism’: that is , criminals were genetic ‘throwbacks’ to more primitive human forms.
‘The fact that Lombroso's stigmata turned out to be no more common among criminals than among any other section of the community (see Wolfgang, 1960), although often thought to be a refutation of his theory, is in fact not crucial to it.
His causal explanation relied on two factors: that primitive humans were all criminals (even in terms of the definitions of crime operating in nineteenth-century Italy!) and that contemporary criminals (or an important section of them) were genetic throwbacks to these primitives.
Needless to say, despite Lombroso's commitment to ‘science’, he did not provide any evidence to support this preposterous assumption, nor could he have done.
But Lombroso laid down the foundations of most of what was to follow in genetic theories of crime.
Even the idea that criminals are physically distinguishable has continued to be pursued to the present day (Hartl et al.,1982), although it later took  the form of relating types of body build to personality types.
Eysenck, for example, incorporated this idea into his theory and he has probably been the most influential proponent of the genetic strand of positivist criminology in recent years.
Eysenck claims that criminals tend to rate highly on two personality characteristics — extroversion and neuroticism — both of which he sees as being predominantly inherited.
Various features of these personality characteristics relate to crime, the most important being extroversion's association with a resistance to being ‘conditioned’ out of various forms of behaviour.
A notable feature of Eysenck's theory is his starting assumption that we are all ‘naturally’ criminal, in line with that of classical criminology.
However, in his version we are ‘normally’ conditioned out of this; his theory still contains the positivist assumption that criminals are different from non-criminals (and ‘pathological’)— in this case through their abnormal resistance to the conditioning process.
Eysenck's theory depends on a high correlation between criminality and particular personality characteristics identified by personality tests.
In this respect, it is part of a very broad category of positivist criminology indeed.
The quest for identifiable crime-prone personality types has included learning theorists as well as heredity theorists, psychoanalysts (‘anti-social’ or ‘affectionless’personality theories), and studies not concerning themselves with the question of how such types come about.
A common instrument is the ‘personality inventory’, of which the Minnesota multi-phasic personality inventory (MMPI) is an example.
Various surveys of such studies, over a long period of time (Schuessler and Cressey, 1950; Hood and Sparks, 1970; Hindelang, 1972; Feldman, 1977) and covering various categorisations (including Eysenck's), have not suggested widespread agreement on clear-cut categories covering significant proportions of offenders, although various relationships have been found.
Further doubt has been thrown on such findings when validity tests have been included (Rathus and Siegel, 1980).
An additional problem that has dogged personality theories is that of tautology; if the categories are to mean anything, they must not be identified only by the fact that the people who fall into them tend to commit crimes.
This sometimes occurs in a disguised form.
An example might be the psychoanalytic theory that ‘anti-social’ behaviour is caused by failure to develop the superego, where the superego is defined as the faculty that inhibits anti-social behaviour.
Tautology also appears to occur sometimes in personality inventories where the characteristics' can be boiled down to ‘attitudes favourable to the commission of crime’(or ‘anti-social’ acts); that is to say, ‘criminals are people who hold pro-crime values’.
However, this is not as tautological as it seems, since it implies a relationship between values and action that is problematic, as we shall see later.
All these problems seem to have made the criminal personality difficult to track down.
Thus Wilson and Herrnstein (1985), in their generally sympathetic analysis, conclude that there is probably no such thing.
However, they suggest that two personality traits have emerged as consistently associated: impulsiveness (lack of ability or desire to defer gratification); and undersocialisation (lack of regard for feelings of others).
But there is perhaps a more fundamental problem here: establishing personality traits or types that are related to crime does not constitute an explanation; it is the way such traits and types come about, and how they lead to crime, that provides that.
And they come about through inheritance, acquisition or invention.
Attempting to describe the outcome of these processes in terms of‘traits’ or ‘types’does not really seem to help the explanation very much.
Acquisition
If the tendency towards crime is not seen as being already determined at the point of conception through the genes we inherit, then the obvious conclusion is that it must be subsequently acquired in some way.
Positivist theories under this latter heading have taken two quite different forms: the acquisition is through the occurrence of some physical damage (or illness); or it is through learning.
The idea that criminality is the outcome of organic disorder or disease goes back at least as far as Lombroso, who associated crime with epilepsy.
In his case, of course, such disorders were presumed to be predominantly inherited.
Thus mental disorders as causes of crime in fact straddle both acquisition and inheritance, since the origins of such disorders have always been, and continue to be, a subject of intense debate.
Either way, however, the issue need not detain us long.
Despite popular beliefs and well-publicised particular instances, all serious analysts agree that the association between specific mental disorders (whatever their origin) and crime is extremely limited (see Hall Williams 1982, Chapter 3).
Furthermore, if crimes are clearly established as the outcome of mental disorder they are no longer‘crimes’.
For unlike other supposed causal determinants of crime, mental disorder has been accepted by most criminal jurisdictions as taking away some of the fundamental elements that constitute an act as a crime.
In other words, to the limited extent that mental disorder explains particular crimes, it denies their very status as crimes.
Rather than explaining crime, mental disorder redefines it as something else.
Learning theories have been much more important in positivist theorising about the acquisition of criminal tendencies.
Sometimes, however, there is a problem in distinguishing ‘learning’ theories because they can easily become all-embracing.
In its widest sense, learning has been taken to mean changes in people's behaviour, knowledge, beliefs, motives, and so on, brought about as a result of their experiences.
With such a wide definition, it might be more useful to consider what this leaves out, rather than what it includes — which gets us back to the categories I am working with here: it excludes inheritance and invention.
Distinguishing inheritance from learning is, I think, no problem: the definition of learning, even in its widest sense clearly excludes it (some learning theorists allow inheritance to play a part as well as learning but that, of course, is a different point).
Distinguishing invention presents much more of a problem.
By invention I mean behaviour, values, beliefs, and so on, that come at out through ‘internal’ processes of thinking and working out rather than through imitating or mechanically responding to external stimuli.
The problem is that these internal processes are  bound to be influenced by the person's experiences; it would be unreasonable to think of them as being entirely autonomous.
Also, some learning theorists (other than behaviourists) allow learning to be an interactive process, involving these internal events.
These considerations tend to blur the distinction somewhat.
Consequently, I would like to suggest the following working distinction: learning refers to actions, beliefs, and so on, that come about either through direct imitation of others, or as a conditioned response to punishments and rewards; invention refers to actions, beliefs, and so on , that result from internal processes of thinking and working out solutions to problems (though acknowledging that such processes are influenced by the individual's experience).
The difference is in the degree to which internal, cognitive processes are seen as being involved in producing the response.
The most famous of criminology's learning theories, differential association, highlights some problems that result from this uneasy relationship between external and internal factors that have been used to distinguish learning from invention.
Originated and developed by sociologists (Sutherland and Cressey, 1970) the theory was clearly intended to incorporate interactive and internal, cognitive processes.
But because this left it so generalised as to sometimes appear to be saying hardly anything at all, it was open to imperialist take-over by more established, but much more mechanistic learning theories such as behaviourism.
Differential association starts with the observation that we all grow up in environments where we receive, from our associates, definitions both favourable and unfavourable to the acquisition of the motives for and the techniques to commit crime.
The theory states that if we receive an excess of definitions favourable over those unfavourable, then we will commit crime.
It allows that some definitions will be of greater ‘priority and intensity’ than others and this has been taken to imply that the definitions will differ in their subjective interpretation by those who receive them (see Taylor, Walton and Young, 1973).
But this causes problems from the hard-line positivist point of view: if ‘definitions’ can vary in terms of such nebulous things as subjective meanings, how can they possibly be counted and measured?
In a study attempting to utilise the theory, Cressey (1953) concluded that they probably could not be.
Cressey (1962) himself saw that the lack of specificity on the actual process of learning was a problem with the theory, but pointed out that Sutherland had left it open to clarification in the light of future developments in learning theory.
Perhaps inevitably, this left it open to attempted incorporation by behaviourist psychology: Burgess and Akers (1966) provided a translation of differential association into the language of behaviourist ‘reinforcement’ theory.
All this achieved was to take on the even more serious problems of behaviourism itself.
Taylor, Walton and Young (1973) were highly critical of this example of behaviourist imperialism and claimed that the exclusion of all reference to subjective mental events which the take-over bid necessarily entailed was entirely alien to the whole spirit of differential association.
Although this is true in relation to the intellectual background from which both Sutherland and Cressey were writing, it is nevertheless the case that Cressey, in particular, was sufficiently part of the positivist tradition to be interested  in a precise, quantifiable theory which did not automatically rule out such mechanistic approaches.
The commitment to a learning theory which explained all crime clearly required the specification of empirically identifiable learning processes if it was to progress beyond the simple assertion that crime is learned.
In practice, it is difficult to see how learning theories could explain crime without any reference to invention.
If crime is learned from others (as differential association proposes) where did it come from in the first place?
Presumably, in the distant past, somebody must have invented it (in the sense that I have defined invention earlier).
But if someone in the past was capable of inventing it, why cannot other people be inventing it now?
In other words, to solve the ‘origins’ problem of learning theories it is necessary to propose an invention theory which then becomes an equally plausible explanation of all crime.
To take a specific example, Lemert's (1958) study of cheque forgers found that they had not, typically, associated with other cheque forgers or people favourably disposed towards it; cheque forgery had not been handed down from some primeval inventor.
The inescapable conclusion was that people were continually managing to think it up for themselves.
The idea that we are influenced by our environment, especially our social environment (family, friends and associates) seems unexceptionable.
The problems seem to arise when this relationship is couched in terms of a ‘learning theory’.
The more literally this is interpreted the more it seems to lead into mechanistic, one-way formulations such as behaviourism.
The more open it is to cognitive, interactive and voluntaristic elements, the more misleading seems the whole vocabulary of learning theory as a means of describing it.
Differential association is a good illustration of these two contradictory tendencies.
The positivist learning theory side of it did, despite protestations to the contrary, make possible the intrusion of the likes of Burgess and Akers.
Its voluntaristic side, influenced as it was by the ideas of G. H. Mead, had more affinity with the analyses of the acquisition of motives, techniques, and so on, that were to characterise the ‘symbolic interactionist revolution’ of the 1960s.
However, as we shall see, this revolution represented not only a movement away from the strict tenets of learning theory, but away from the assumptions and concerns of positivist criminology itself.
Invention
Some learning theories (differential association was an example) moved away from the idea of criminals being identifiably different kinds of people: their criminal behaviour was seen as being acquired in much the same way as any other behaviour was acquired; it did not require any special, predisposing characteristics for it to happen to particular people.
On this view, criminals are still ‘differentiated’— but only in terms of values, motives and skills favourable to the commission of crime, and these could be acquired by anyone given the right circumstances.
This view characterises most sociological explanations of crime, including those that fall into the third category of causal explanation: invention.
In the previous subsection I distinguished invention from learning by stressing  the extent to which the former involves internal processes of thinking and working out solutions to problems.
In this sense invention seems to imply that crime is the outcome of the kind of rational decision-making that is associated with the classical criminological view (and I will suggest later that it is much the same idea).
But sociological explanations of this kind have nevertheless been incorporated into the general category of positivist criminology because of their implication that the invention is not freely made but forced : some problem confronted by individuals in their environment pushes them out of convention and into crime.
As in the case of learning theories, it is the compelling, determining influence of the individual's environmental experience that provides the link with positivism (though in the case of invention some room is still left for internal, cognitive processes in arriving at the solution).
By far the most important problem that has been selected as providing the push into the invention of crime has been thwarted conventional ambitions — Merton's (1938)‘anomie’ theory and the ‘delinquent subculture’theories of Cohen (1955) and Cloward and Ohlin (1960) being the most influential examples.
In anomie theory the impetus that pushes people into crime is that the ambitions for status and pecuniary success that they share with everyone else are thwarted by the restrictions on the opportunities to achieve them that result from low socio-economic status.
They are consequently forced into cheating.
Delinquent subculture theory locates the impetus more specifically in the social setting of lower-class adolescent males (who were shown to be the most crime-prone by official statistics): they are disadvantaged in their quest for status and achievement (defined by conventional agencies such as the school) and consequently construct their own, alternative criteria.
They use delinquent criteria in order to distance themselves as far as possible from conventional ones, and hence insulate themselves from a sense of failure.
In all cases the lower-class ‘victims’ are pushed from a natural state of conformity into a state of delinquency by the relative lack of availability of conventional means to achieve conventional goals.
Delinquent subculture theory, with its emphasis on a collective solution to the problem, also allowed for social learning to augment and expedite the generation of delinquent values.
The basic themes established by these four writers stimulated a truly enormous literature which dominated sociological thinking about crime in the 1950s and 1960s.
Again, it is not my intention here to review the variations and criticisms in detail this has been done many times elsewhere.
Rather, I would like to consider some of the more fundamental problems that are connected with the general nature of ‘sociological positivism’ and its relation to classical criminology.
One problem of these theories was, strangely enough, the obverse of the problem with the biological and personality-type theories.
The latter, it may be remembered, tended to generate categories (for example, biological or personality types) that could only possibly incorporate small amounts of criminal behaviour; that is , they explained too little crime.
The sociological theories, on the other hand worked with categories that explained too much crime (what Matza, 1964, called the ‘embarrassment of riches’ problem).
This is because they relied on features  common to the whole of the lower class (restricted legitimate opportunities); these were very common, crime relatively rare.
Even the weaker version — that the theories simply implied a relationship between low social class and crime — came later to be dismissed as an artefact of class-biased law enforcement (however, the argument about the relationship between social class and crime is a complex one to which I shall be returning in Part Two).
Actually, the ‘embarrassment of riches’ problem boils down to the same failing as that of the biological and personality-type theories: they both produced categories that were, apparently, far too weakly related to crime to be worthy of a ‘positivist’discipline.
It seems perfectly reasonable to assume that people who frequently commit crime hold ‘pro-criminal’ values.
For delinquent subculture theories this assumption was vital; the term itself defines a different (‘sub’) culture from the host culture, the difference being that the ‘subcultural’ values are ‘delinquent’.
Perhaps because it seems so obvious, the theorists did not bother to try to find out whether delinquents did in fact hold delinquent values, but concentrated more on explaining how these values came about.
When Matza (1964) did enquire into the matter (using his attack on subcultural theory as a basis for attacking positivist criminology generally) he found it simply was not the case: on the whole delinquents seemed to hold very conventional values.
Oddly enough, given that this was part of an attack on positivism generally, Matza used the traditional tool of positivism (the questionnaire) to make the point.
However, he did not use it very well — not bothering with a control group, for example(perhaps this was his concession to anti-positivism).
Later, more rigorous studies (Hirschi, 1969; Hindelang, 1974) complicated the picture; delinquents were predominantly conventional in their values, but were less so than non-delinquents.
But the problem was still there; even in relation to this seemingly most obvious of variables, the differentiation of criminals from non-criminals, which was so important to positivist criminology, failed to stand out adequately.
The theme of thwarted conventional ambitions that was essential to both anomie and delinquent subculture theories implied that criminals and delinquents suffered from a ‘gap’ between their aspirations and expectations, and the existence of such a gap came to be taken as the measure of the validity of the theories.
Unfortunately it almost invariably failed to materialise; delinquents seemed to be, if anything, even more ‘realistic’ in their aspirations than non-delinquents (see, for example, Hirschi, 1969).
Part of this problem seemed to stem from the fundamental assumption of such theories that everyone is, initially at least, conventional (the opposite of the assumption of classical criminology).
This required some disturbance (‘strain’ as Hirschi calls it)— such as the ‘gap’— to push them out of convention and into crime.
It was the reversal of the classical position that was causing the problem.
Yet in other respects, as was mentioned earlier, anomie-based ‘invention’ theories seemed to have much in common with classical criminology in their assumptions about human behaviour.
In Part Two I will suggest that if they are pushed a little closer to the classical position, via some judicious reinterpretation, the problems dealt with above are eased considerably.
Positivism and Penal Treatment
One of the features by which positivism was characterised earlier was its inclusion of the idea of ‘pathology’: not only was crime seen as obviously wrong, but there was also something wrong with the people who did it — for example, in their biology or personality.
In the sociological theories the pathology was to some extent transferred from the make-up of individual criminals to their social settings, although there was still an individual manifestation of that pathology in their pro-criminal values.
For positivist criminology, as with its classical predecessor, crime was clearly a problem that begged a solution.
The shift of focus from the crime to the criminal, however, seemed to be accompanied by a diversion of attention away from specific considerations of appropriate penal treatments.
For most positivist criminologists such concerns were often left to an appendix to their main causal concerns, or omitted altogether.
This was partly because it was felt that a true understanding of the causes of crime was necessary before a clear corrective programme could be enunciated and that point, of course, was never quite reached —‘more research’ was always needed.
Also, deriving cures from causes is not as straightforward as it might seem: sometimes the causes are factors that are not very readily manipulable.
Although the original biological positivists' work was overwhelmingly concerned with the causes of crime, they were associated with a particular penal programme as well.
Or rather, they laid down specific principles that were to be more or less taken for granted by subsequent positivists.
Penal practice was another area that they wanted to make ‘scientific’.
As we have already seen, this involved the abandonment of the metaphysics of freedom, responsibility and desert in favour of the practical objectives of reformation, prevention and the protection of society.
Their specific programme was derived from their conception of the causes of crime.
In their later writings they had been forced to acknowledge, in the light of much critical evidence, that their biologically determined criminal was only one of a variety of types: their theory had become eclectic and multi-factorial.
Consequently, a variety of reformative treatments were necessary to suit the different requirements of different types of offender.
Treatment was to be individualised , based on scientific assessment and classification.
Ferri (1967, p. 443) proposed three principles:
(a) An equilibrium of right and protection must be established between the individual to be judged and the society which judges in order to escape the exaggerations…introduced by the classical school, which failed to distinguish between dangerous and not dangerous, atavistic and evolutive delinquents.
(b) The duty of a criminal judge is not to determine the degree of moral responsibility of a delinquent but his material guilt or physical responsibility, and this once proven, to fix the form of social preservation best suited to the defendant according to the anthropological category to which he belongs.
(c) Continuity and solidarity between the different practical divisions of social defence from the judiciary police to sentence and execution.
The first principle reiterates a point made earlier: although they favoured reform rather than punishment, this was not for humanitarian reasons.
They saw the mixture of deterrence and retribution that characterised neoclassical criminology as too soft — favouring criminals' rights at the expense of the protection of society.
Garland (1985a) notes three themes in their programme: reform, prevention — and extinction;those who could not be reformed were to be eliminated.
The biological positivists did not, however, involve themselves in the detailed specification of penal treatments.
And subsequently, the practical discipline of ‘penology’ tended to become separated from ‘criminology proper’.
To some extent this reflected the accepted division between ‘science’ and ‘policy-making’as intellectual activities; policy-making involved value judgements, and these were simply not appropriate to the ‘objective’scientist.
This was particularly the case with sociological theories where such judgements were, inevitably, politically loaded.
Wilson (1975) has suggested another reason for the division between positivist criminology and penology: the causal variables that were proposed related to areas that were difficult to change — especially with the limited powers and resources available to penal practitioners.
Genetic make-up, early childhood socialisation, class divisions and inequalities of opportunity are things which we either do not know how to change, or would involve a degree of social and economic transformation which is very unlikely to be embarked on in the name of reducing crime.
Good examples of intractable causal variables are those that relate to genetic make-up.
The biological positivists could only propose indeterminate detention or extinction for such categories of offender.
Their forced accommodation to the existence of a wide range of non-genetic categories saved them from being solely associated with such a negative approach.
However, since these latter categories were derived from lay ‘common-sense’ belief's rather than the scientific rigour they advocated so much (see Wolfgang, 1960; and Garland, 1985a), their specific reformative recommendations tended not to amount to very much either.
Interestingly, Eysenck (1977) seems to encounter the same kind of problem.
At the end of a book almost entirely devoted to arguing for a strong genetic component in the causes of crime, he turns his attention to the contemporary ‘crime wave’ and what should be done about it.
He concludes that changes in genetic factors obviously cannot explain the crime wave.
Rather, it can only be explained in terms of a massive decline in the quality of conditioning of children: ‘We live in an era of permissiveness and thus have largely abandoned all attempts to inculcate standards, values and ‘conscience’ into our children’(ibid., p. 209).
The cure is a return to the traditional values of discipline in the home, school, and so on.
Like the biological positivists before him, after a long treatise devoted to ‘scientific rigour’ he suddenly turns, at the crucial point, to unrigorous lay belief.
Generally speaking, however, those psychological theories that have located the cause of crime in problems in early childhood ‘socialisation’ have tended to have closer links with both penological thinking and practice.
They also tend to be  associated with more specific therapeutic practices, derived from the tenets of the particular psychological theory; for example, psychoanalytic theories are associated with various forms of psychotherapy, and behaviourist-type theories are associated with different versions of conditioning.
And the more general view that the causes of crime are located in problems in early family relationships has, of course, been incorporated into most criminal jurisdictions.
The relationship between sociological theories of the causes of crime and theories about its treatment is much more tenuous.
Because these theories stressed social structural features such as inequality of opportunity, proposing cures involved entering into political debate, endangering the theorists' stance as objective scientists ‘just giving the facts’.
They consequently tended to be rather coy about drawing corrective conclusions from their theories.
Merton (1938), for example, does not conclude his exposition of anomie theory by proposing a solution (though he gives enough away elsewhere for Taylor, Walton and Young, 1973, to see him as favouring a ‘meritocratic’ solution).
Cohen (1955) devotes only three pages to the control of delinquent subcultures and states that ‘from a diagnosis of a social ill, even a correct one, the ‘right’ solution does not leap to the eye in any obvious way’(ibid., p. 177).
The rest of his discussion in these few pages is about how all sorts of possible answers could be proposed, involving the ‘balancing of social values’.
Cloward and Ohlin (1960), in a highly influential work did not themselves draw any treatment conclusions (although their ideas inspired a major treatment programme).
The key textbooks of sociological theories did sometimes conclude with a discussion of treatment implications, but often in the form of an analysis of existing provisions with occasional nods of approval or disapproval.
A good example would be the many editions of Sutherland and Cressey (1970).
In the course of their analysis they state the following:
Thus crime would be prevented by modifying those who can be modified, segregating those who cannot be so modified, correcting in advance of crime those who are proved to be most likely to commit crime, and attacking and eliminating the social situations which are most conducive to crime (ibid., p. 608).
The most striking feature of this is its similarity to the ‘reform, prevention and extinction’ ascribed to Ferri earlier (except that the ‘extinction’is replaced by the more moderate ‘segregation’).
However, Sutherland and Cressey do go on to include a consideration of poverty, unemployment, bad housing, and the like, under the heading of ‘social situations which are most conducive to crime’.
But, perhaps sensing dangerous moral and political overtones, they add (ibid., p. 634, quoting Taft): ‘It is not the task of the criminologist to determine what is the major social good’.
It would be misleading to suggest that there was anything approaching a complete intellectual segregation between criminology and penology, even in their sociological versions.
And where the two overlapped it is possible to discern a general acceptance of the basic positivist principles of individualised rehabilitation, prevention and societal protection.
But there was a general reluctance on the part of positivist criminologists, especially the later ones, to draw clear-cut corrective conclusions from their causal analyses.
In the case of the sociological positivists, this reluctance applied even when they did become involved in the analysis of the operation of penal institutions — when the ‘sociology of the prison blossomed in the 1950s and 1960s.
In 1958 Clemmer's The Prison Community was reissued and, in the same year, Sykes's The Society of Captives was published.
These two books initiated a substantial body of sociological research into the ‘social world’ of the prison.
The focus was on the social relationships in the prison (especially the informal ones), prison culture, argot roles and the ‘inmate code’.
Despite this direct involvement with the penal process, the spirit was decidedly anti-correctionalist: the intention was to provide an appreciative understanding of the prison social world.
Sometimes the findings were examined for their implications for the effectiveness of prisons in preventing recidivism (European Committee on Crime Problems, 1967), but this was a side issue: the sociology of the prison was not about devising effective treatment programmes.
Anyway, the news was not good: the findings emphasised a resilient, informal inmate code based on anti-prison, anti-therapeutic values acting as a bulwark against the ‘pains’ and indignities of imprisonment.
If anything, these studies had more in common with the avowedly anti-correctionalist ‘labelling’ theories of the later 1960s.
The basic principles of penal treatment that I have portrayed as running through most positivist criminological theorising, also became incorporated into penal practice.
In Britain, this began to happen at about the same time as the emergence of positivist criminology — though, again, this is not to suggest any simple causal relation, in either direction (see Garland, 1985b).
Nor must this process be exaggerated: as Bottoms (1983) has pointed out, by far the most significant development in penal practice this century, in sheer quantitative terms, has been the increased use of the fine — and this expresses classical ‘deterrence-through-symbolism’ rather than positivist principles.
Nevertheless, the twentieth century also witnessed a significant movement towards the acceptance of the principles of assessment, diversity of provision, rehabilitation, segregation and prevention, into penal practice.
This had the effect of making the penal system available as a ‘laboratory’ for testing positivist principles of correction, as well as for providing the bodies for testing their causal theories.
The positivist commitment to the achievement of empirical goals such as causally relevant variables and effective penal treatments (rather than such nebulous things as ‘justice’ and ‘desert’) required it to be subjected to such empirical assessment.
This proved to be one of the sources of its downfall: there came a point when failure to come up with the goods, rationalised by ‘the need for more research’, began to sound a little hollow and begged the asking of more fundamental questions.
And this was what happened in the 1960s and 1970s — the subject of the next chapter.
Positivism and Classicism
At the beginning of this chapter it was suggested that the main features by which we can characterise the wider category of positivist criminology (and which also serve to distinguish it from classical criminology) are determinism, differentiation, pathology and the diversion of attention away from crime (and the criminal law) to the criminal.
To conclude, it would be useful to reconsider these categories in the light of the preceding discussion.
Determinism and differentiation are inextricably linked in the positivist programme: the determinants are identified by the way they make criminals differ from non-criminals.
Positivist causal theories stand or fall by the extent to which they are able to establish the existence of ‘types’ of human beings (whether in terms of biology, personality, or values) who are crime-prone.
As we have seen, they had tended to fall — no such clear-cut categories seem to have emerged.
The best that we seem to be able to say is that biological and psychological categories have tended to contain only a very small minority of offenders (as well as a significant proportion of non-offenders), while sociological categories have contained a large majority of non-offenders (and by no means all offenders).
Perhaps part of the problem is that far too much has been expected of positivist criminology or, alternatively, positivist criminologists have been responsible for fostering too grandiose expectations.
In its most basic sense, determinism is only committed to the view that behaviour is the outcome of antecedent causes.
It allows for a multiplicity of different causes acting in different combinations on different people in different situations (it even allows that every particular criminal act may result from a unique constellation of antecedent causes).
On this view, we can only realistically expect positivist criminology to produce ‘probabilistic’ theories — associating variability of cause with variability of outcome; we should expect no more than loose associations between specified causal variables and criminal behaviour.
An interesting consequence of taking this much looser view of determinism is that it brings us much closer to the classical position.
Classical criminology clearly allows for a loose association between antecedent variables and outcomes: the probability of crime varies according to the degree of rationality of individuals and the efficiency and consistency of the criminal justice system.
The difference between this and the more probabilistic version of determinism is in what it is that is seen as being responsible for the ‘looseness’ of the association.
In classical criminology it is our ability to make free choices and resist so-called causal pressures; in the determinist version it is the fact that there is an unknowable amount of other causal variables in play, pulling in varying directions.
But, as Hook has pointed out (see Matza, 1964, pp. 10–11),in practice the two positions are virtually identical: both ‘free choice’ and ‘unknown causes’manifest themselves in unpredictability .
The ‘free’ person and the person who acts from an unknowable constellation of causes are difficult to distinguish; the problem of explaining their behaviour is, for all practical purposes, the same.
To the extent that positivist  criminology incorporates a realistic, manageable version of determinism, it becomes compatible with its classical predecessor.
An example of the practical similarity between determinist and indeterminist positions occurred earlier in the difficulty that was encountered in identifying sociological ‘invention’ theories, such as anomie, as being in the deterministic, positivist tradition (where writers such as Jeffery and Matza have located them).
‘Pure’ invention is akin to ‘pure’free choice.
Yet as was noted, inventions, like choices, are always constrained by social experiential factors such as available opportunities and knowledge of alternatives; even the most ardent indeterminist would acknowledge such things (while still holding out for an irreducible residue of free choice).
But this seems also to be the stance of anomie theory: the anomic individuals are clearly pushed and constrained yet, within those constraints, they manage to invent rational solutions (in the sense that these solutions come about through internal reasoning processes, rather than as an autonomic response).
Admittedly, anomie theory accentuates the constraints rather more than would perhaps be acceptable to indeterminists, but this is simply a matter of emphasis rather than qualitative difference from a ‘realistic’ indeterminist position.
The important difference between sociological invention theorists and classicists is not so much in their ultimate stances on determinism, but in their assumptions about the nature and consequences of human motives, and in the degree to which they saw criminals as being differentiated from non-criminals.
Anomie theorists and their subcultural followers reversed the classical position on these matters, and in doing so encountered serious problems.
They assumed that we are all naturally motivated towards convention and require some force (‘strain’) to push us out of it.
In turn, this implied that deviants should exhibit a ‘gap’ between their conventional aspirations and expectations, and should be clearly differentiated from non-deviants by their adherence to oppositional values (neither of which turned out to be the case).
As we have seen, classicism allows for a much more complex human relationship with deviance and conformity, with a natural, self-interested potentiality for both.
Using this as a starting point, we would not expect the kinds of social pressure defined by anomie-type theories to force change from one finite state to the other.
Rather, we would simply expect the relative demotion of conformity (in terms of both goals and means) as against deviance, because it offers less.
There would be no reason to expect either the ‘gap’ or the clear commitment to deviant values that have been such persistent stumbling blocks for the traditional versions of these theories.
In Part Two I will suggest a way in which the important contribution that anomie theory makes to understanding crime can be reformulated in classical terms, much to its benefit.
The third defining feature of positivist criminology — pathology — is closely related to differentiation.
In fact, as we have seen, it boils down to a moral evaluation of differentiation (rather than a ‘scientific’ finding): the differences that distinguish criminals are things that are deemed to have ‘gone wrong’with their biology, psyche or values.
As such, of course, it fails to the extent that the attempt to establish the  differentiation fails.
If criminals on the whole are not clearly differentiated from non-criminals, it is difficult to explain their crime in terms of something having gone wrong with them (except in the tautological sense that the commission of the crime itself represents something having gone wrong with them).
As in the ease of classical criminology, positivist criminology embodied an assumption that there is some objective category of ‘crime’ that is obviously wrong and needs something doing about it.
Classical criminology did not assume that existing legal definitions of crime and the way they are enforced necessarily constitute this objective category.
Similarly, as we saw, positivists tended to recognise the need for a category of ‘crime’ outside of the existing legal one.
But in practice positivists almost invariably worked uncritically and unquestioningly with the products of the existing legal definitions; by default , they endowed them with an objective status.
This, of course, stemmed from their general lack of interest in the significance of the criminal justice system — the final feature that distinguishes them from classical criminology.
The division seems almost complete: classical criminology focused entirely on the causal-corrective significance of the criminal justice system and ignored individual, social and economic factors; positivist criminology focused almost entirely on the causal significance of individual, social and economic factors and ignored the criminal justice system.
The latter is not entirely true, of course: the sociologists of the prison did provide evidence of causal significance in the effects of imprisonment, as we saw (even if it was not, usually, their concern to do so).
In neither ease was the omission a necessary consequence of the intellectual stance of the two schools.
We saw in Chapter 1 that there was no logical reason for classical criminology's omission of individual, social and economic factors.
Positivist criminologists' omission of the causal significance of the operations of the criminal justice system is perhaps even more of an oddity: they sought causes of crime in the social world of the criminal, and yet omitted legal processes as being a significant part of that social world!
Although positivist criminologists ignored the causal implications of the criminal justice system, they were fairly uniformly associated with a specific corrective programme , even though this was not their primary concern.
As was pointed out at the beginning of this chapter, they shared classical criminology's view that the purpose of penal practice was effective crime control.
But their view on how this should be achieved was quite different: correction was to be an applied science whose goal, where feasible, was to be the rehabilitation of individual offenders (where it was not feasible, segregation or elimination, for the protection of society, was to suffice).
But they tended not to become involved outside of their support for these very general principles.
As we saw, this was partly because their stance of ‘scientific detachment’ precluded too close an involvement in matters of ‘policy’and partly because the causes of crime that they generated tended to involve factors that were beyond the scope of penal practitioners.
For these reasons they tended to be much less closely associated with the advocacy of specific legal and penal reforms than classical criminology was.
In Chapter 1 it was suggested that Beccaria may have felt inhibited in including economic and social conditions in his programme because of their dangerous political implications.
The positivists seem to have tried to avoid this problem by, once again, adopting the ‘scientific’ stance.
When they considered social and economic factors they saw themselves as detached scientists just ‘presenting the facts’ and not (as Taft (1942, p. 634) put it) aiming ‘to determine what is the major social good’.
So although positivist criminology did concern itself with social and economic conditions, in a way that classical criminology did not, it mostly ended up just as timid-looking as far as drawing ‘corrective’ conclusions was concerned.
It is tempting to conclude that perhaps there could be a complementary relationship between positivist and classical criminology — one providing the focus on individual, social and economic factors, the other on penal and legal ones.
This seems particularly the case if we draw them closer together in their positions on determinism, along the lines suggested earlier.
But before this could be contemplated, there are some more serious problems with the positivist stance that would have to be resolved — again relating to its neglect of criminal justice processes.
For it was the complex machinations of these processes that provided the ‘data’ on crime and criminals that positivist criminologists used to build their theories.
Their assumption that this could be ignored, and the data assumed to be objective representations of crime and criminality, was to prove to be one of their greatest weaknesses, as we shall see in the next chapter.
3 Reassessment: Classical and Anti-classical Themes in the 1960s and 1970s
Classical criminology reflected contemporary ideas about the social contract, rationality and utility; positivist criminology celebrated what seemed to be the successful application of science and technology to human beings.
Behind both we may, if we wish (and many do), suggest causal relationships between such ideas and changing social and economic conditions and the supposed needs of dominant social classes.
My concern, however, has been the more modest one of simply characterising and comparing classical and positivist ideas.
Where such ideas ultimately came from and what practical consequences they have had are questions which, on the whole, I have preferred to avoid.
However, we can directly relate the intellectual ideas of the 1960s about crime and criminals with events in the world, because the proponents themselves acknowledged the connection.
Things happened in this period that profoundly influenced sociological thinking in particular, and especially in so far as it related to crime and criminals; they led to a comprehensive rejection of the most cherished principles of positivist criminology.
Incorporated in this revolt was both the resurrection of classical principles and the development of new ones that appear to be incompatible.
Both sets of principles will be the subject of this chapter.
But first, a little more on the background to their emergence.
The 1960s and early 1970s have been characterised by Pearson (1975), perhaps rather extravagantly, as the period of ‘the great refusal’.
The central focus of that ‘refusal’ was the opposition to the involvement of the United States in the Vietnam War.
Loosely linked to it were the emerging environmentalist movements (the link being forged by a deep suspicion of advanced technology which had raised the spectre of nuclear holocaust and then manifested itself in the devastation inflicted on Vietnam).
An additional kind of refusal was provided by the activities of the various civil rights movements, starting with blacks, then incorporating gay and women's liberation.
Caught up in these movements was the hippie culture of the  period, with its involvement with hallucinogenic drugs.
What these various movements had in common was that they provoked confrontations, first in the [United States and then to a lesser extent in Britain, which highlighted features of law and its enforcement that made academic, positivist criminology look; extremely complacent and conservative.
It became particularly apparent that ‘crimes’ were not absolutes that could be taken for granted as being ‘obviously wrong’in the way that positivist criminology seemed to do.
Rather they appeared as a selection — and a selection that seemed to reflect the interests of the powerful.
Thus, much was made of the fact that while the war in Vietnam was ‘legal’, protesting against it was liable to lead to the protester being defined as a criminal; that drinking alcohol was respectable, while smoking cannabis was not.
Such observations highlighted the fact that ‘criminal’ was a status that was conferred upon particular acts, reflecting particular power interests.
Yet positivist criminology had, as we have seen, almost completely ignored such processes, concerning itself solely with criminals and the causes of their criminality.
Perhaps not surprisingly, the ‘new’ criminologists insisted that attention should be redirected to the definers of crime.
In doing so, they extended the field of interest to all those acts which are adversely defined and stigmatised — that is, from crime to the wider category of deviance .
For similar reasons, the new sociologists of deviance were hostile to what appeared to them to be the reduction of crime to a ‘technical’ problem.
Positivist criminology seemed to represent another example of the misuse of technology — in this case in its application to human beings themselves.
Crime had been portrayed by positivists as a pathology, requiring the application of psychological or sociological technology to put it right; criminals were seen as a kind of societal waste product requiring hygienic processing.
When ‘criminals’ were seen to include protesters against war, pollution and the infringement of minority rights, or people who preferred cannabis to alcohol, such a view was seen as highly offensive.
It was here, too, that broader links were formed with other kinds of social deviance which had similarly been reduced to technical problems.
Thus, ‘mental illness’ was seen as a label by which genuine human responses to oppressive social conditions were reduced to mental faults, requiring technical (in this case medical) solutions; for a while the ‘new deviance’attempted to incorporate writers as different as R. D. Laing and Thomas Szasz from what was temporarily known as ‘anti-psychiatry’.
The rejection of the pathological view of crime required a concomitant rejection of the ‘correctionalist’ stance of positivist criminology.
The new deviance writers were naturally anxious to disengage themselves from association with such conservative goals.
A favoured alternative was Matza's (1969)‘appreciative’ stance; the aim of the new sociologist of deviance was to enter into and appreciate the meaning world of the deviant.
The new view also required a rejection of the basic determinism of positivist criminology.
It favoured a more voluntaristic conception of human action — a need to see human beings fighting back against an oppressive state, and capable of making things happen.
Indeed, Matza's appreciation of the deviant sometimes extended, in other writers, to endowing the deviant with an  embryonic revolutionary or even transcendental consciousness.
Against this, positivist criminology's deterministic conception was hopelessly stifling and fatalistic.
It was this interplay of ideas and practical events that lay behind the ‘interactionist revolution’ of the 1960s and 1970s and was to have a powerful influence over both psychological and sociological thinking about crime and deviance.
As this brief background has perhaps already suggested, it incorporated themes with a distinctly classical flavour to them; sometimes, as we will see, this connection was acknowledged.
In other respects, however, it seems quite different.
The picture is further complicated by the appearance, at roughly the same time, of classical themes from sources that, in other respects, were much closer to positivist criminology.
This chapter is an attempt to sort these various pro- and anti-classical elements in to some kind of order.
Classical Themes in the ‘New Sociology of Deviance’
It seemed that the circumstances of the 1960s favoured, for the more radical and involved academic, a relativistic conception of crime and a more positive, voluntaristic conception of the criminal or deviant.
The new ‘sociologists of deviance’ who emerged from this background have been loosely grouped under the headings of symbolic interactionists, transactionalists and societal reaction theorists.
They can be broadly characterised by the work of Matza (1964; 1969), Becker (1963; 1964), Lemert (1967) and Goffman (1968a; 1968b) in the United States, and Cohen (1971), Taylor and Taylor (1973) and Phillipson (1971) in Britain, among many others.
The interactionist perspective (as it is most familiarly known) proved in the end to be unable to incorporate all the radical demands that came to be made of it.
But, initially at least, it seemed to express the right kinds of sentiment.
It was based in part on the resurrection of ideas originally propounded by G. H. Mead.
Human beings are seen as constructing their actions in a process of interaction with others via the use of symbols, such as language — hence ‘symbolic interactionism’.
But we are not seen merely as passive recipients in these interaction processes; we bring our own autonomous motives and meanings to bear on them — we are at least partially ‘free’.
An important feature of these interactions, which was to play a major part in the new interactionism, was that we use stereotypical ‘labels’ to make sense of other people, based on cues or knowledge that we have about them.
One such important label is that of criminal (or deviant ).
The main thesis of the interactionists was that the ‘official’ application of these particular labels (via agencies such as school-teachers and police) had profound consequences for the persons so labelled, and for the way we perceive and understand crime and deviance.
In other words, to explain or understand crime and deviance we must be at least as much concerned with the activities of the conferers of these labels as with the recipients .
Matza (1964) explicitly portrayed these kinds of idea as involving a partial return to classicism.
As we saw in Chapter 2, in his criticism of subcultural theory Matza  favoured a return to the less deterministic, less differentiated view of the criminal that was characteristic of classical criminology though, in his later work (Matza, 1969) he moved to a more fully indeterminist view.
In the earlier book he had proposed an additional reversion to classical principles: that the focus of attention be switched back from the criminal to the crime.
This involved, as with classical criminology, a consideration of the significance of the operations of the criminal justice system — a similar focus to that of the more general interactionist concern with the conferers of criminal and deviant labels.
Matza thus highlighted the link between the assumptions and concerns of classical criminology with those of the new interactionists.
His own contribution was to suggest ways in which the legal process exerted a powerful influence over delinquents: it provided them with a vocabulary which enabled them to justify their delinquent actions ‘in the circumstances’(‘techniques of neutralisation’) and with a sense of injustice which helped to release them from feelings of obligation to conform.
As this suggests, although his focus was the same as that of classical criminology, the conclusions that Matza came to about the influence of the criminal justice system seem to be rather different.
When we consider the more general conclusions that emerged from the other interactionists' concern with ‘the labellers’, the divergence becomes even more apparent.
For example, interactionists took a much more profoundly relativistic view of crime than the original classical position allowed for.
They emphasised that crimes are defined by processes of human deliberation and that those definitions are then applied by human agencies.
To behave as if such human processes produce some kind of universal, objective category that can be taken for granted by criminologists was, they argued, absurd.
‘Crimes’ varied from place to place and from time-period to time-period; they reflected the interests, moral concerns and ideological positions of those who were in the power positions that defined and enforced them.
To take existing definitions and enforcement practices for granted was in fact, they argued, to take a very specific —conservative — position.
These arguments suggested that the starting point for criminology should be a consideration of how the legal rules that define crimes come about and whose interests they serve.
And, indeed, they helped to establish a new resurgence of interest in the sociology of law.
Perhaps the most crucial point of these arguments from the point of view of positivist criminologists, however, was that these very human processes that define and enforce crimes produce the criminals and data on which positivists had built their theories.
Criminal statistics are not produced by criminals — they are produced by people defining other people and acts as criminal.
Admittedly, most positivists had acknowledged that there were problems with their data.
However, after a statutory early chapter outlining these problems, the implications were invariably ignored in the serious empirical analysis and theorising that took place later.
For the interactionists this was grossly inadequate.
They emphasised that the data represented the successful application of labels to acts — on a highly selective basis, reflecting the kinds of people agents of control such as the police regard as likely suspects, or as being dangerous enough to warrant official action.
The implications  of such a view were potentially disastrous for positivist criminology.
For example, the concentration of crime in the lower social class, which was the starting point for all the main sociological theories, could be explained simply by the fact that members of the lower social class were more likely to be selected for labelling.
Similarly, if the police believed (thanks to psychological theories) that ‘real’ delinquents came from broken or otherwise disrupted homes, it could be that they would be more likely to take official action against offenders from such backgrounds, with the result that subsequent analysis of official ‘delinquents’would automatically confirm the theories.
Since it is the public who report crime, and the police who decide whether to record such reports officially, crime rates and crime trends are also the products of the ‘reactors to’ rather than the ‘doers of’crime.
This meant that changes in crime rates, or variations between different settings (such as urban and rural), which had played an important part in theories relating social or economic conditions and change to crime, could equally well be explained by variations in crime-recording practices.
Interactionists made much of how such variations could lead to a ‘deviancy amplification spiral’: if the public (informed by the media of rises in the criminal statistics) believes crime to be on the increase and more of a problem they may be more sensitive to it, report more to the police who will then record more and therefore produce a further rise in recorded crime, which is then fed back to the public by the media, and so on(see Wilkins, 1964; and Young, 1971).
Such arguments were not simply suggesting that criminal statistics were ‘biased’.
In Cicourel's (1968) analysis it seemed that the data presented a different kind of reality altogether: they only reflected the meanings, moral categories and stereotypes of those who collect and interpret the data; they told us nothing about criminals themselves (though in the Preface to the second edition Cicourel (1976) seemed to retreat from this more radical position).
In the work of Bottomley and Coleman (1981) criminal statistics are so much a function of highly variable administrative practices that they seem almost incapable of telling us anything about anything.
The new deviance writers went further than suggesting that the appearance of crime (on which positivists built their theories) was in fact the product of the criminal justice system.
The ‘societal reaction’ that defines crime and deviance was also seen as having a profound effect on the criminals and deviants themselves.
Lemert (1967) proposed a second component to the ‘amplification spiral’— what he called ‘secondary deviance’: a consequence of being officially labelled ‘deviant’ is that other people come to regard the labelled person differently, as a different kind of person.
Lemert suggested that this cuts off access to conventional settings, activities and identities and in time leads to the ‘deviants’ acquiring a different conception of themselves: they live up to the deviant identity given to them by the labellers and indulge in more (‘secondary’) deviance.
Lemert's concept of secondary deviance perhaps represented the most thorough resurrection of the criminological concern with the criminal justice system.
From counting for virtually nothing in positivist criminology it now seemed to count for  everything, as it had originally done in classical criminology.
Not only did it designate the nature and appearance of crime, but it also reappeared as causally implicated: in both classical criminology and the new deviance perspective, the amount of crime was primarily a function of the operations of the criminal justice system.
But there was one rather important difference: in classical criminology the criminal justice system, properly reformed, was seen as the means of reducing crime.
In the new perspective it seemed only capable of increasing it!
Indeed, Schur (1973) was to develop the logic of this argument into a book entitled Radical Non-intervention .
However, it was in this reversal of the classical conclusion on the potentialities of the criminal justice system that interactionism encountered some of its more serious problems.
One of these was a matter of internal consistency.
As we have seen, one of the main intentions of interactionism was to get away from the conservative, causal-corrective stance that was seen as resulting from the determinism and absolutism of positivist criminology.
While the idea that the response to crime actually caused more crime was pleasantly ironic, it was nevertheless still very much a causal-sounding theory, and one of a particularly deterministic nature.
‘Labels’ seemed to be highly constraining; once applied, the receivers seemed to have little say in what happened to them.
The ‘societal response’ seemed to determine the outcome in much the same way, if not more so, as social and economic variables in sociological positivism.
Indeed, it was the same social and economic variables (low socio-economic status and powerlessness) that ‘explained’ crime (though in quite a different way — by increasing vulnerability to labelling rather than by increasing actual deviation).
Interactionist writers later denied that they ever intended such deterministic conclusions.
But they illustrated the difficulty of purging language of all causal terminology.
Looking back on it, Lemert (1974, p. 4513) both acknowledges and, unwittingly, illustrates the problem:
The societal reactions approach sought to show how deviance was shaped and stabilised by efforts to ameliorate it.
In retrospect, the break with structural conceptions of deviance and the traditional concerns of sociology with causes was by no means complete.
Presumably, Lemert is using ‘shaped and stabilised’ to avoid some more overtly causal expression.
But it is difficult to see what this could mean other than that some deviance, at least, would not have occurred had it not been for the societal response — that is , had been caused by it.
Similarly, it is difficult to construe his distinction between primary and secondary deviance as meaning anything other than that secondary deviance is caused by societal reaction and its consequences for the deviant.
Young (1971), for example, utilising the primary-to-secondary progression in his study of drug-takers in Notting Hill, London, provides what seems like a highly deterministic causal explanation of this process.
Perhaps as a result of the unintended involvement in causal explanation the boundaries of; and empirical support for, ‘labelling theory’ as a causal explanation  were not systematically explored.
The fact that the majority of people officially labelled as ‘criminal’ by the criminal justice system for the first time, never are again, seems to be a restriction on labelling theory's potential in this respect.
Nor was any indication given as to under what circumstances the minority ‘labelling’ effect occurred.
Consequently it did not really manage to achieve the level of plausibility of the more popularly accepted opposite view of classical criminology — that official processing deters further deviant acts.
However, the issue of the relationship between classical deterrence and interactionist ‘labelling’ clearly needs further attention, and I will be returning to it in Chapter 8.
Classicism and ‘Control Theory’
The ‘new deviance’ writers resurrected one major theme of classical criminology (the significance of the criminal justice system), though they modified it considerably in doing so.
Other themes reappeared at approximately the same time, but from quite different sources.
Most notable was the ‘control theory’ developed by Hirschi (1969) and utilised by many others including, in Britain, Box (1981).
Although rooted in the positivist tradition (especially in the case of Hirschi), control theories also owe a clear and acknowledged debt to the classical tradition.
Kornhauser (1978) has pointed out that the main tenets of control theory are to be found in the ideas of the pioneers of sociological criminology — the sociologists of the Chicago school, working in the early decades of this century (Thrasher, 1927; Shaw, 1929).
These theorists accounted for the high rates of crime found in the broken-down inner-city areas in terms of‘social disorganisation’.
By this they meant that the economic disadvantage, conflict of cultures and high mobility of these areas resulted in a lack of opportunities for the satisfaction of conventional needs, and the relative absence, or weakness, of conventional controls.
In their portrayal, delinquency is seen as a natural and rational choice for residents of these areas.
Thrasher's delinquent gang members are not seen as frustrated conventionalists ‘forced’ into crime, but rather as normal kids, with normal needs, making the best available choices to satisfy those needs, just like everyone else.
These assumptions of the naturalness of deviation in the light of its relative costs and benefits are, of course, highly reminiscent of the classical position.
It was Hirschi (1969), however, who developed ideas such as these into a ‘control theory’.
His starting point was dissatisfaction with most sociological theories of crime (especially anomie and subcultural theories) for reasons which are now familiar: their assumption that we naturally conform to conventionally defined goals and the means of achieving them, and that we consequently require some ‘push’(or ‘strain’, as Hirschi calls it) to propel us into crime.
Hirschi's control theory reverts to a more classical starting assumption: that human motives are naturally diverse, often self-seeking and hence likely to favour violation of whatever rules there are defining ‘crimes’.
For control theory the question that requires answering is ‘what causes people to conform?’
However, control theory does not take our diverse, potentially deviant motives as  being expressive of ‘free will’ in the way that classical criminology does.
Rather, it treats them as ‘given’, in the sense that it is seen as neither plausible nor fruitful to attempt a causal explanation of them.
But as I suggested in the last part of Chapter 2, this difference is not of any great practical significance: whether deviant motivations are taken as given because they express free will (classical theory) or because it is not deemed fruitful to attempt their explanation (control theory) does not, in itself; have any practical implications for the subsequent criminological enterprise.
Another similarity between control theory and classical criminology is in the kinds of answer they give to the question ‘why do we conform?’.
In both cases the answer is that we will conform when we see it as being in our interests to do so.
If it is not, then we will not.
Control theory echoes the classical, utilitarian, ‘rational self-seeking’ view of human beings.
However, the similarity ends there — there is no return to the vague, semi-mystical idea of a ‘social contract’.
Hirschi treats the question of what ‘bonds’ individuals to conformity as an empirical problem.
He proposes four bonds: attachment (the extent to which individuals have close emotional ties to other people); commitment (the extent to which they see conventional behaviour, for example at school, as offering immediate or long-term rewards); involvement (the extent to which their time is taken up with conventional activities); belief (the extent to which their beliefs about what is permissible or not coincide with conventional ones).
He subjects these bonds to rigorous empirical testing using the standard techniques of positivist criminology (survey, statistical analysis), while in addition attempting to avoid the problem of the selectivity of ‘official’ definitions of criminality by using alternative sources of data (‘self-report’data).
Hirschi's control theory seems also to fill an important gap that was noted earlier in relation to the original formulation of classical criminology.
Beccaria, it may be remembered, was criticised for only considering the disincentives associated with the operations of the criminal justice system in controlling crime, when the logic of his position clearly suggested the relevance of all incentives and disincentives for conformity or deviance encountered by individuals in their social settings.
Control theory partly rectifies this: Hirschi focuses almost exclusively on the incentives for conformity that are built in (or not) to individuals' relationships with, and expectations of, their more immediate social environment, such as parents, peers, school and local community.
However, Hirschi does not consider the wider social context in which these relationships operate, in the way that earlier sociological theories did.
This is because he rejects social class differences and class-based theories such as anomie as explanations of crime — partly because of their ‘strain’ assumption, and partly because his data (which use sources other than‘official’ones) fail to support the existence of a class differential.
Also, his different bonds to conformity are not fully independent of each other, with a tendency towards being reducible to the primary bond of attachment — particularly to parents.
This tends further to narrow the social context of his variables.
Nevertheless, Hirschi considerably extends the focus of the original classical formulation beyond the criminal justice system, and towards considering incentives  towards conformity rather than disincentives towards deviation.
Indeed, he reverses the classical emphasis since he gives no consideration at all to the significance of the criminal justice system in controlling crime.
In Hirschi's version of control theory people conform because they perceive benefits in doing so, and fear losing them.
When they do not perceive any such benefits, they feel free to deviate.
It is the failure of incentives, not the failure of disincentives, that is crucial.
In this respect Hirschi shared the long-standing positivist rejection of the central tenet of classicism: deterrence.
As Gibbs (1975, p. 11) points out, in a book marking a later resurgence of interest, the positivist eclipse of classicism led to an almost total loss of interest in deterrence in the writings of criminologists, even when they were considering ‘policy questions pertaining to the control of crime’; and he gives many examples.
However, following Hirschi, and from a variety of sources of which Gibbs was only one (and not a particularly favourably disposed one), the neglect of the classical concern with effective deterrence has been fully rectified.
If interactionism was the leftist response to the inadequacies and failures of positivism, the new deterrence writers represent much more the response of the right (although neither category is ideologically homogeneous).
The better-known writers who may be included in this category are Wilson (1975), Van Den Haag (1975) and Ehrlich (1975) in the United States, and Clark (1980) in Britain.
Their approaches have been included under the general category of ‘administrative criminology’(see Young, 1986), or seen as varieties of control theory (Downes and Rock, 1982).
The title ‘administrative criminology’ is of significance in that it is the title that Vold gave to the classical criminology of Beccaria and Bentham (as we saw in Chapter 1).
Thus, the connections with both classicism and control theory have been explicitly recognised.
While recognising a variety of emphases and ideological leanings, Young suggests some common characteristics of these writers: a lack of interest in the causes of crime — or even opposition in the case of proposed social causes; a voluntaristic, rather than deterministic, view of human action; a belief in the effectiveness of deterrence.
Wilson (1975) specifically relates these new emphases to the failures of positivism.
As we have already seen, he noted that positivist criminology had tended to propose causal variables that were difficult, if not impossible to manipulate.
He also concluded that in most cases they had simply been wrong.
For example, he arrived at the contentious conclusion that the dramatic increase in recorded crime during the period of post-war economic growth in the United States had ruled out poverty and deprivation as being causes of crime.
These new control theorists have mostly ignored the simplistic classical assumption that ‘proportional punishment’ will guarantee effective deterrence.
Instead, they have concentrated on two main approaches to crime control that they see as appropriate and achievable: increasing the risks and decreasing the opportunities.
They have tended to conclude that the most effective method of increasing the risks is by increasing the certainty of detection rather than by increasing the severity of the penalty (but not always; Ehrlich, 1975, is best known  for his advocacy of stiffer penalties, especially the use of capital punishment).
Wilson is also an advocate of the particular significance of informal, local community control rather than just more effective policing (these informal controls, it may be remembered, were not considered by the original classical criminologists).
The interaction between effective but sensitive community self-surveillance and police surveillance has emerged as perhaps the most favoured approach.
Techniques for decreasing the opportunities for crime include such things as the better protection of property, which have been the usual focus of police crime-prevention programmes.
Increasing risks and decreasing opportunities tend to be interrelated, of course: better protection and surveillance decrease opportunities by increasing perceived risks.
The arguments about the importance of architecture and ‘environmental design’ in preventing crime that have developed since Newman's (1973) pioneering work, have incorporated a mixture of both these elements (see Hope, 1986, for a useful review of the literature in this area).
This narrowing down of the focus of the original control theory seems to constitute a switch of attention from offenders to situations .
Offenders are assumed to make rational choices (indeed, ‘rational choice theory’ is now a favoured title for these approaches — see Cornish and Clarke, 1986).
Consequently, the offenders are not important; what matters is that opportunities must be reduced and risks increased and this requires that attention be given to the situations in which offences may occur.
This is quite different from the original control theory, which was concerned with the differences between individuals in their general dispositions towards offending (based on the strength of their bonds to conformity) and how those differences come about.
Hirschi and Gottfredson (1986) have made a useful distinction between these two branches of control theory: the situational approaches constitute explanations of crime , while the original control theory is an explanation of criminality .
That is, the first explain events (offences) and the second account for individual dispositions (offenders).
Whether Beccaria would have been impressed with these developments is difficult to say: he would probably have liked the logic, practicality and apparent efficiency of the proposals of the situational theorists; like them, he seemed to favour the prevention-is-better-than-cure approach.
His own programme was equally narrow in its focus (though different, of course).
However, as I suggested in Chapter 1, the basic assumptions of Beccaria's classical model suggest a much wider canvas.
He went no further either because of ideological conservatism, or because of lack of courage of his convictions.
The new theorists seem to have gone the same way because of ideological conservatism, or fatalism about what is possible.
Clearly, these narrower concerns are an important part of classicism, but a fully classical approach has the potential to go much further.
As I have already intimated, Hirschi's control perspective seems to me to invite expansion along classical lines, rather than narrowing.
Consequently, this is the direction I will be taking in Part Two.
Anti-correctionalism
In the earlier discussion of the background to the emergence of the new sociologists of deviance in the 1960s, one particular theme was mentioned that was not at all compatible with classical criminology: the hostility that the new theorists exhibited to the ‘causal-corrective stance’.
A discipline devoted to finding out the causes of crime in order that it may be stopped was, they pointed out, uncritically taking up an ideologically committed, conservative stance.
For some of the writers this point was taken much further: it was not just a matter of unacknowledged ideological leanings; the causal-corrective stance came to be portrayed as a fundamentally misguided and distorting approach to the study of crime.
The target of this attack was primarily positivist criminology.
As we have seen, although positivist criminologists were often shy of associating themselves with specific corrective programmes, they saw crime as pathological and shared a general consensus in favour of a broadly rehabilitative approach to ridding ourselves of it.
However, in classical criminology the correctionalist stance was, if anything, more explicit.
The mode of correction was, of course, different — reflecting the different assumptions about the nature of human beings: in classical criminology correction is achieved by appeals or threats made to free, rational, choice-making individuals; in positivist criminology it is achieved by altering the variables that cause individuals to indulge in criminal behaviour.
But this difference does not alter the fundamental similarity in aim; the arguments against correctionalism apply as much to classicism as they do to positivism.
Consequently, they must be answered if the potential of the classical perspective is to be developed.
A whole series of arguments against correctionalism can be discerned, originating from various sources, but all gaining impetus in the 1960s and early 1970s: the corrective stance was seen as being inappropriate to an academic discipline in that its partiality had the effect of distorting the nature and appearance of the phenomena it was studying; it was seen as neglecting the possibility that crime may have positive qualities and consequences; correctionalism was seen as having led to the violation of fundamental human rights and principles of justice in its single-minded quest for efficient crime control.
I will deal with four main forms that these anti-correctionalist arguments have taken.
Correction versus Appreciation
Matza (1969) was particularly influential in proposing that the correctionalist stance had had a distorting effect in criminology, and in advocating an alternative.
He argued that correctionalism ‘systematically interferes with the capacity to empathise and thus comprehend the subject of enquiry’(ibid., p. 15), and consequently increases ‘the possibility of ‘losing the phenomenon’— reducing it to that which it is not’(ibid. p. 17).
It is the assumption of pathology that is the root of the problem.
The kinds of untruth and distortion that this leads to, he says, stem from the fact that it ‘reckons without the patent tenability and durability of deviant enterprise, and without the subjective capacity of man to create novelty and manage diversity’(ibid., p. 44): that is, correctionalism is insensitive to the more positive features of deviance.
However, Matza is anxious to avoid romanticising deviance; he sees this as having an equally distorting effect by obscuring ‘the seamier and more mundane aspects of the world’.
His alternative is what he calls an ‘appreciative’ stance: ‘These appreciative sentiments are easily summarized: we do not for a moment wish that we could rid ourselves of deviant phenomena.
We are intrigued by them.
They are an intrinsic, ineradicable and vital part of human society’(ibid., p. 17).
Despite his opposition to romanticisation, the reference to deviance as being ‘vital’ clearly suggests that he sees as an established truth that deviance is, to some extent at least, a necessary and positive thing for society.
If this can be established as an objective truth, then this would indeed make a correctionalist approach misguided — although only if it were committed to the total elimination of deviance.
I will be dealing with these kinds of argument, however, in the next subsection.
What seems objectionable in Matza's argument is that he clearly believes there is a ‘hierarchy’ of stances in relation to deviance, not just alternatives: the appreciative stance is portrayed as superior to either the romantic or the correctionalist in that it is inherently more likely to get at the truth.
In analysing this argument, Hirschi (1973, p. 171) concludes that ‘Sociology will suffer…so long as we believe that our assumptions guarantee truth, while their assumptions guarantee error, whatever the facts may be’.
This, however, seems a little unfair to Matza.
On a less arrogant interpretation, he seems to be making the reasonable point that the appreciative stance is less likely to overlook both positive and negative aspects of deviance simply because it is more open to the acceptance of both possibilities.
If we eliminate all ideas of ‘guaranteeing’ truth or error in any particular approach, this argument seems perfectly acceptable.
Matza would clearly be wrong, on the other hand, if he were implying that it was inherently impossible for a corrective stance to acknowledge the ‘patent tenability and durability of deviant enterprise’.
In the end, Matza's argument is not so much an attack on correctionalism as an assertion of the not very original point that, whatever your starting assumption, it is best to keep your mind open to all possibilities (although he was right to draw attention to the fact that correctionalists had often been guilty of not doing so).
Not only does this mean that you are more likely to get at the truth, but it is also likely to be more fruitful for whatever purpose you have in mind.
For example, correctionalists prepared to enter appreciatively into the meaning world of deviants may well come up with something useful for their purposes (although that, of course , is not at all what Matza had in mind).
The Functions of Crime and Deviance
Matza's reference to deviance being ‘vital’ for society relates to an idea, borrowed from Durkheim, that was popular with the ‘new deviance’writers and has played an important part in academic thinking about crime and deviance generally.
This is the idea that crime and deviance have positive qualities and consequences that make  them necessary for the healthy functioning of society.
It is easy to see how such a view suited the mood of the period.
If crime and deviance could be shown to be vitally necessary then this would be a serious blow indeed to the correctionalist stance — of both positivists and classicists.
The arguments amounted to a resurrection of Durkheim's views about the ‘functions’ of crime.
I have argued against these views elsewhere (Roshier, 1977).
Since the issue is important to both classical and positivist criminology, I will recapitulate some of the main points here.
The key figure responsible for resurrecting the Durkheimian idea of the functions of crime was Erikson (1966), but it was taken up and used by other writers of the period (for example, Box, 1981).
Its Durkheimian origin meant that it suffered at the outset from the more general problems of Durkheim's functionalist approach.
The most important of these is that the use of expressions such as‘functional’ or ‘vitally necessary for society's health’are really ways of disguising value-judgements about what the user finds acceptable or unacceptable in society.
This is simply because there are no objective criteria about what constitutes ‘health’ in a society as there are in the case of biological organisms (such expressions are examples of Durkheim's much-discredited use of biological analogies).
But there is no need to revert to these basic objections to functionalism in order to deal with the specific question of the functions of crime.
First, it is necessary to distinguish two quite separate arguments that sometimes seem to get confused: the argument that crime is inevitable ; and the argument that crime is functional .
It is obviously the case that showing that something is inevitable is not the same as showing that it is necessary for health and survival.
Yet Durkheim himself is responsible for confusing this issue, as well as introducing the suspect assertion of inevitability (see Roshier, 1977, pp. 310–12).
But much more important is the assertion of the functions.
Two separate ones have been proposed: the ‘boundary-maintaining’ function, and the ‘adaptive’function.
The latter is definitely derived from Durkheim.
The former is usually associated with him, and Erikson attributes it to him, but in fact it is extremely doubtful whether this is a legitimate interpretation (Roshier, 1977, pp. 310–15).
The boundary-maintaining function, as stated by Erikson, says that crime and the response it evokes provide the essential function of defining and maintaining the moral boundaries of society.
Society's need for this is so strong, he says, that it promotes continual and dramatic celebration of deviant acts (originally via public punishments, later via the mass media), and uses inefficient control agencies such as prison in order to produce more, rather than less, crime.
The fallacy in this argument, and in other similar versions, is that it confuses the functions of crime with the functions of social control .
It is social control , in sanctioning some forms of behaviour and not others, that defines the normative contours of society.
The criminal acts themselves contribute nothing to this process since they do not exist as criminal acts unless they have been defined as such by official defining and sanctioning agencies (a point made much of by interactionist writers, including Erikson).
A common reply to this is that you cannot have social control without crime or deviance and hence, if social control is necessary, then crime and deviance  must be, too.
The answer to this, of course, is that if there were no deviance, there would be no need for social control.
Social control performs the function of defining those acts that are deemed to be harmful to the society.
If such acts did not occur, then neither would social control.
The boundary-maintaining function just does not stand up as a function of crime or deviance.
The ‘adaptive’ function is based on the proposition that what we call crime today includes forms of behaviour that will be crucially necessary to future society — Durkheim's (1938) examples, are the ideas of Socrates and liberal philosophy which were once criminalised but which he sees as vital for contemporary society.
The general argument is that the existence of crime ensures sufficient diversity of behaviour and belief to allow society to adapt to new conditions.
But proving the necessity of crime requires more than showing that some things that were formerly criminal are now important parts of healthy social life (even if we were to accept that we can objectively determine what constitutes healthy social life).
It also requires showing that it was necessary for such behaviour and beliefs to have been formerly defined as crimes .
If we were to accept that societies need to include a diversity of behaviour and belief in order to adapt to new conditions, this could surely be achieved by simply allowing such diversity.
It seems perverse, to say the least, to argue that criminalising some forms of behaviour ensures their survival and future usefulness (or, conversely, that not criminalising them would guarantee their extinction)!
Arguments such as these for the functional necessity of a category of ‘crime’ are quite different from arguments that particular activities defined as criminal may in fact be beneficial to society.
There may be occasions when we feel ourselves in favour of particular activities that are defined as crimes; but that is entirely different from being in favour of crime.
In such cases, the activities are beneficial in spite of being defined as crimes, not because they are.
They are arguments for, if anything,de criminalisation.
The ‘functions’ argument is the opposite: it is arguing for the necessity of criminalisation .
To say that crime is functional and necessary for society's health is to say that we must always ensure that we retain a stock of people whom we humiliate, imprison or (perhaps worst of all) regard as suitable cases for treatment.
It is as well that such arguments do not stand up to serious scrutiny.
Socialists Anti-correctionalism
The different sense of ‘the functions of crime’— that sometimes what is defined as crime includes activities that some may regard as useful and beneficial — relates to an issue that has long confronted socialists: what is the status of crime and criminals under capitalism?
Are they an aspect of the struggle against it?
Is correctionalist criminology, of any variety, consequently a part of the ideological superstructure that helps to maintain capitalism?
If the answer to these questions is ‘yes’, then we are back to something rather similar to Durkheim's adaptive function: today's criminals are in fact helping to usher in the better society of tomorrow.
To reiterate the point just made, this is not an argument about the functional necessity for all  societies to have a category of ‘crime’ but an argument about the positive qualities of what happens to be defined as crime under capitalism; indeed, the argument is usually combined with the assumption that under socialism there would be no such thing as crime.
Nevertheless, since we live in a capitalist society, the argument is an important one for those who would take up a correctionalist stance under it.
The ‘new’ socialist criminology that emerged from the more politically conscious branch of 1960s interactionism brought this dilemma once again to the forefront.
I say ‘dilemma’ since the ‘heroic’view of the criminal under capitalism had always had its problems.
Although most socialist writers were agreed that crime resulted from the misery, exploitation, greed and selfishness promoted by the private property relationships of capitalism, they were rather less agreed on the status of the criminal.
The fact that ‘official’ criminals were overwhelmingly from the working class and were seen to be responding to the same forces that promoted socialist consciousness tended to favour at least a positive, if not heroic view of their activities.
On the other hand, what they actually did was usually very difficult to relate to the requirements of socialist revolution, particularly since it typically victimised its own class rather than capitalists.
But to move to the other extreme and regard it as some kind of waste product was to endorse bourgeois correctionalism and, worse still, to acknowledge that the forces that were supposed to produce socialist consciousness could also produce something quite different.
Radzinowicz and Hood (1986) have shown how this dilemma had confronted English socialists from the earliest times.
Although Marx and Engels did not systematically apply themselves to crime and its treatment, they too showed some ambivalence in their attitudes to the status of crime under capitalism.
According to Radzinowicz and Hood (1986, p.42), this applied particularly to Engels, who seemed to radically change his mind in the course of his life:
At first he regarded crime as a form of rebellion among those who had ‘courage and passion enough openly to resist society, to reply with declared war upon the bourgeoisie.’
But later he stigmatised them as ‘the social scum, the passively rotting mass thrown off by the lower layers of the old society.’
His final verdict, and in his eyes, the most damaging, was that they were anti-revolutionary.
Their crimes were merely a low-grade reflection of the competitive and individualistic element in capitalism; they indulged in an activity which, even in the form of mob violence, could never be effective in the revolutionary movement and, if not crushed, they were more likely to serve as ‘part of a bribed tool of reactionary intrigue.’
Engels was in no doubt that the lumpenproletariat was ‘the worst of all possible allies.’
So ended his initial socialist heroic conception of the criminal.
The new socialist criminology of the 1960s and 1970s, however, marked a return to the more romantic view.
This was perhaps aided by the fact that the ‘criminals’ who were the initial focus of attention (counter-culture drug-takers, radical protesters against the Vietnam war and in favour of civil rights) were rather easier to romanticise about.
Thus, the two highly influential volumes produced by Taylor, Walton and Young (1973; 1975) espoused a commitment to socialist praxis which  opposed both correctionalism and the ‘identification of deviance with pathology’(1975, p. 44).
Young was later to go through an Engels-like change of heart, though it was clear that he was sceptical from the start (see his contribution to Taylor, Walton and Young, 1975).
On the other hand, his early work on Notting Hill drug-takers (1971) exhibited some of the features of what he was later to call ‘left idealism’.
But there was no ambivalence in other writers: Quinney (1975) insisted that the criminal law must be seen simply as ‘a coercive means of enforcing the capitalist social and economic order on an unwilling populace’, and added:
The war against people abroad is part of the same war waged against the oppressed at home….
A military war is being fought in Asia, while the war on crime with its own weapons is being fought within the USA.
All of this to avoid changing the capitalist order,(ibid., p. 200).
Thus was the criminal equated with the Vietcong soldier, the only difference being that the former was struggling against capitalism on the home front.
Fitzgerald (1977, p. 38) criticised the traditional left for not seizing the opportunity of incorporating the prison population as part of the working-class struggle: ‘The left, particularly in Britain, has been reluctant to move beyond its traditional insistent focus on the building of the working-class movement and embrace the struggles of minority groups such as prisoners, mental patients, gay liberation.’
Attempts were also made to locate revolutionary potential in the deviant activities of the varieties of working-class youth culture of the period.
For example, this was a major theme in the influential collection of essays published by the Centre for Contemporary Cultural Studies (1975).
Corrigan and Frith (CCCS, 1975, p. 238) concluded: ‘even if youth culture is not political in the sense of being part of a class-conscious struggle for state power, it nevertheless does provide a necessary precondition of such a struggle’.
Such ideas were even graced with a ‘theory of convergence’.
Liebowitz and Horowitz (1968) suggested that what was happening in the United States at the time, was a process of merging of politics and social deviance such that they were becoming indistinguishable.
This convergence was, they claimed, occurring from both directions: ‘conventional’ deviants were organising politically to alter their treatment (prisoners rights organisations, gay liberation, organised ghetto riots) and politically marginal groups were using conventional deviant methods such as robbery and violence to achieve political goals (black power movements, the weathermen, the angry brigade in Britain).
Liebowitz and Horowitz were primarily concerned with attacking what they saw as the myopic perspectives of politics and the sociology of deviance, but the clear implication of their convergence thesis was that conventional deviance and leftist political struggle were slowly but surely converging.
Sometimes, however, an alternative, less heroic but equally anti-correctionalist picture was painted: working-class crime was in reality mostly petty, irrelevant and not a problem, but had been made to appear so by the mass media blowing it up, misrepresenting it and creating crime-scares.
The reason they do this is to divert attention from the real problem — the crisis of capitalism manifested in economic failure and unrest (see, for example, Hall et al.,1978, on mugging).
Rises in crime are thus, in reality, rises in criminalisation by the state's agents (the police) prompted by the requirement for diversionary scapegoats.
Meanwhile, the ‘real’ criminals were defined as being capitalism's large corporations and state agencies.
They were seen as being responsible for the real problems that confront ordinary citizens.
Because of their dominant power position, however, they were able to avoid such actions being defined as crimes or, where they were (for the purpose of ideological mystification), they were deliberately ineffectively sanctioned.
For this reason, one of the major spin-offs of left idealism was a resurgence of interest in the sociology of law, concerned with how the legal rules that define crimes come about and serve the changing requirements of capitalism (see Young, 1986, p. 17).
These arguments amounted to a double attack on correctionalism.
On the one hand the ‘official’ crime that correctionalists were bent on correcting was either authentic working-class rebellion or an irrelevance blown up out of all proportion by the agents of capitalism for their own malevolent purposes.
On the other hand the ‘real’ crime that did need correcting was being perpetrated by the capitalists themselves (and those very same agents), and was being ignored.
An important point to note here is that these were not really arguments against correctionalism as such.
Rather, they were arguments about the focus of correctionalism: that the definitions of crime, the supposed causes and supposed cures were all wrong.
Interestingly, while for positivist criminologists the causes of and cures for crime were matters that always needed ‘more research’, for left idealists they needed no research at all— they were already clearly known: crime was caused by the inequalities and degradations of capitalism, and was cured by the transition to socialism.
It was not simply a matter of switching the definitions of crime from what the working class do to what the capitalist class do (that would merely be a transitional strategy); in the socialist society both upper- and lower-class crime would disappear since there would be ‘a set of social arrangements in which there would be no politically, economically and socially-induced need to criminalise deviance’(Taylor, Walton and Young, 1973, p. 270).
For these reasons, however, left idealism constitutes a very serious attack on correctionalism under capitalism .
If the arguments are correct, then involving oneself with correctionalism is an act of commitment to pro-capitalist, conservative ideology.
Correctionalist criminologists, of all varieties, join all the other agents of social control that capitalism utilises to patch itself up and keep its exploitative machinations justified and operational.
There are several crucial assumptions in the left idealist position.
First, and most important, there are its assumptions about the nature and meaning of working-class crime; second, the view that ‘real’ crime is located in the activities of the ruling class; and finally, there is its particular version of the causes of and cures for crime.
The last point will be taken up, in a wider context, in Chapter 7.
The other two require some attention here.
The better documented of the two is the second idea of ‘ruling-class’ crime.
There has undoubtedly been a remarkable increase in research and literature in this area, stimulated by left idealist and other post-interactionist writers, although the pioneer work had been done much earlier by Sutherland (1945).
This new interest has not relied simply on a moral redefinition of ‘crime’ to draw attention to analogous, but uncriminalised, activities of the ruling class (although that has been part of it).
Much work has centred on activities that are criminal, by contemporary definitions, but are hidden and undetected — one of the greatest benefits of power being the privacy and impunity that it seems to guarantee (see Geis and Stotland, 1980).
On the face of it, however, this does not seem to favour an anti-correctionalist position, but rather a redirection of its focus from lower-to upper-class crime.
But that would be to ignore the taken-for-granted causal-corrective argument of left idealism: that ruling-class crime, like so-called working-class crime, can only be eliminated by the transition to socialism; anything else would be useless tinkering.
However, if this is not taken as proven, and if everything is not to be left to the socialist revolution, the evidence about ruling-class crime suggests, if anything, an extension of the scope of correctionalist criminology rather than its rejection.
Returning to the first assumption of left idealism — the interpretation of the ideological nature of working-class crime — here we are presented with much greater difficulties.
Even if working-class crime is promoted by the same features of capitalism as produce socialist consciousness this is no basis for automatically equating them: working-class crime may express purely personal goals or, if there are some wider underlying objectives, they cannot necessarily be assumed to be socialist ones.
With the exception of deeply divided societies such as Northern Ireland, it has tended in practice to be very difficult to attribute more than the most limited amount of crime to any kind of underlying ideological commitment.
For example, even in the relatively active period in which Liebowitz and Horowitz were writing, only a minute proportion of total crime could conceivably be attributed to marginal political groups' expressing themselves in conventional criminal activity.
But perhaps it is asking too much to expect some sort of articulated political goal — especially of the young adolescents who are responsible for the bulk of working-class crime.
As Corrigan and Frith (1975) suggested, we should really be looking at the potential that is expressed in their deviant lifestyles and ‘resistance’ activities.
The problem here, however, is what counts as potential, and what is it potential of?
Not surprisingly, left idealist writers have been very reluctant to identify anything as being other than potentially indicative of leftist revolutionary consciousness.
A good example of the problems this can create was Pearson's (1976) study of ‘Paki-bashing’ by working-class youths in Accrington.
On the face of it, such activity would seem to be more expressive of right-wing rather than left-wing sentiments.
Yet Pearson specifically rejected this interpretation by arguing that, in the context of the insecure industrial history of Accrington, such behaviour could be seen as an understandable response although not, of course, one to be approved of.
But this seems to be an extremely dangerous conclusion from the point of view of a leftist interpretation.
The most obvious conclusion to be drawn from his study, although not at all what he intended, was that an embryonic rightist consciousness may  emerge as an authentic, meaningful response to the contradictions of capitalism.
But Pearson does not allow this: it is a ‘false’ response generated by the capitalist media.
He falls back on the popular device for explaining why the working class fail to live up to what is expected of them — they are reduced to mindless automatons, responding only to right-wing media messages.
The relative success of right-wing organisations, compared with left-wing ones, in recruiting among lower-class youth culture has always been a problem for left idealism.
Robins and Cohen (1978) provide the sad and honest tale of an attempt to work with and politicise working-class youths in a working-class area of London.
They were constantly overwhelmed by racist, anti-radical attitudes and by the much greater appeal of the National Front.
But, once again, they are loath to recognise this as a real and alternative response to the conditions confronting lower-class youth.
Rather, it is seen as something having gone wrong: corruption by the ‘commercial entrepreneurs of youth fashion’ and ‘social disorganisation’makes them ‘vulnerable’to right-wing populism and racism (ibid., pp. 171–2).
Thus they replace positivist criminology's pathological view of working-class crime with a pathological view of working-class criminals' ideology.
The nature of the  implicit political ideology of criminals is well illustrated when we consider what happens when they become organised and powerful, as in the case of the Mafia in the United States, and the smaller-scale, localised organisations that have appeared in some of our cities.
In these circumstances they are more able to realise their true ideological potential, which seems to mean taking on the characteristics of the most rapacious forms of capitalist entrepreneurship.
As Packer (1968) has pointed out, the criminality of their enterprise acts as a kind of ‘tariff’ that protects them from the competition of ‘legitimate’ entrepreneurs unwilling to take the risks of illegal enterprise, and provides them with customers who have no legal redress against the most excessive forms of exploitation.
In almost every respect they represent the exact antithesis of the spirit of socialist collectivism.
The burgeoning of leftist idealism in the 1970s was, however, opposed from within the ranks of the left from the start.
Hirst (1975), for example, was a particular opponent of the position of Taylor, Walton and Young on various grounds.
He was particularly scathing of any suggestion of romanticisation, invoking the later, revised view of Engels of criminals as parasites on their own class and ideologically and politically at odds with the worker's movement towards socialism.
The weaker version of left idealism — that working-class crime is an irrelevance, dramatised by the capitalist media for diversionary purposes — has had an important resurgence in the 1980s with reference to black urban crime, thus adding a racial component to the original class issue (see Tierney, 1988, for both an analysis and an evocation of the sense of déjà vu ).
Here the argument is that correctionalists are helping to divert attention away from the ‘real’ problems, rather than that they are necessarily helping to crush revolutionary potential.
This view has been powerfully opposed under the title of ‘socialist realism’, principally espoused by Jock Young, now fully divested of whatever idealist tendencies he may have had in his Taylor, Walton and Young days (Lea and Young, 1984; Matthews and Young, 1986).
Armed with the  powerful empirical evidence of the Islington Crime Survey (Jones, Mac Lean and Young, 1986), socialist realism challenges the view that working-class crime is a non-problem which does not deserve the attention of left-thinking criminologists.
In doing so it has been heaped with opprobrium by other sections of the left (see Kettle, 1984).
The Crime Survey is a victimisation study and its main conclusion is one that has been noted, in a less systematic way, many times before: working-class crime is a problem, and it is a problem for the working class , since they are its principal victims, as they are of all types of crime:
Crime is not an activity of latter day Robin Hoods — the vast majority of working class crime is directed within the working class.
It is intra-class not inter-class in its nature….
Crimes of violence, for example, are by and large one poor person hitting another poor person — and in almost half these instances it is a man hitting his wife or lover…the more vulnerable a person is economically and socially the more likely it is that both working class and white-collar crime will occur against them (Matthews and Young, 1986, p. 23).
As a result, socialist realism espouses a new interest in correctionalism — even under capitalism.
Left idealism has badly misrepresented the nature and meaning of crime and has failed in its dismissal of correctionalism.
However, it did draw attention to an important point that seemed to have eluded positivist correctionalism: crime does not have a blanket, objective status that enables us automatically to be against it regardless of what ‘it’ is.
In this respect it does have an important message for correctionalism.
Crime is a moral and political category.
The nature, and application, of the legal rules that define crime, together with the moral and political debate that their consideration inevitably involves, is as important for correctionalism as for any other criminological enterprise .
To a limited and inadequate extent this was recognised in classical criminology: Beccaria acknowledged that the content , as well as the operation, of legal rules was likely to be a significant factor in the degree of compliance that could be expected.
Positivist criminology, on the other hand, seemed scarcely to recognise it at all.
Correctionalism and Injustice
It was noted in Chapter I that attempts in the early nineteenth century to put Beccaria's classical programme into practice encountered severe difficulties: the desire to make punishment solely concerned with effective deterrence, rather than with equating suffering with desert, proved to be unacceptable on the grounds of its retributive injustice.
The result was the uneasy compromise between deterrent and retributive aims that characterised neoclassicism.
The twentieth-century advance of rehabilitation as a penal aim, which was favoured by positivist criminologists, also attempted to exclude retributive considerations of desert from penal treatment.
Ultimately, it too was to be opposed, on the same grounds.
The charge of inherent injustice represents yet another attack on correctionalism, in whatever guise it appears.
The problem was essentially the same for both classical deterrence and rehabilitation, despite their different aims: there was no necessary relationship between either the amount of deterrent punishment or the amount of rehabilitation required to deter or cure particular criminals, and the gravity of their offences.
As penal aims, they both led to injustice in retributive terms.
However, as we have seen, Beccaria avoided the main confrontation with retribution by making the totally unwarranted assumption that the most effective deterrents would be those that equated punishments with offences.
By a different route, he arrived at the same conclusion of ‘proportionality’ as retribution required.
But he also wished to exclude from consideration all ‘mitigating’ factors, such as the personal characteristics of the offender and the circumstances of the offence, since he saw these as irrelevant to effective deterrence (as was the concept of ‘mitigation’itself).
Consequently, the end result was still a serious violation of retributive justice.
Rehabilitation represented a much more comprehensive rejection of retributive justice.
The fact that it also rejects punishment in favour of individualised treatment geared to the particular needs of the offender has meant that, unlike deterrence, it has managed to present itself as a humane, caring alternative to the ‘primitive revenge’ of retribution.
Indeed, since the claim is that punishment does not happen, questions of ‘proportionality’ simply do not arise.
Yet, alongside the other rebellions of the 1960s and 1970s, rehabilitation has been the subject of virulent attack — and precisely on the grounds of its actual inhumanity, as well as its injustice and hypocrisy.
I will briefly outline the nature of this reaction, and then consider its implications for classical criminology.
We saw in Chapter 1 that, in Britain, there is some dispute as to when rehabilitation began to make serious inroads into penal practice: Foucault saw it as manifesting itself in the rise of the prison as the dominant penal institution; Garland puts it much later, in the early part of this century.
But either way, by the 1960s there was an extraordinarily wide and established consensus among penal administrators about the primacy of rehabilitative aims.
Conrad (1965, pp. 12–13), in his interesting study of penal practice in nine different European countries, was able to come up with five postulates shared by penal administrators in all of them; and they spell out precisely the rehabilitative programme:
(1) Offenders are social deviates; something is wrong with them.
(2) Punishment exacted by the system is futile.
Commitment to the system is punishment enough.
(3) During the period of commitment the correctional agency has an obligation to administer a regime which will equip offenders to ‘lead a good and useful life on discharge’.
(4) Because the treatment required by the offender varies from individual to individual in accordance with what is ‘wrong’ with each, the duration and circumstances of the commitment must also vary.
(5) All correctional agencies have the obligation to maintain control over committed offenders.
Conrad rightly emphasises that this was a consensus about what should be happening.
What was happening was rather different.
Nor did the consensus extend much beyond ranks of penal administrators (or even to their immediate subordinates, as Conrad noted).
The overall picture of sentencing and penal practice presents a rather more complicated situation.
I think it can be summarised in the following way: it incorporates penal treatments with different aims; deterrent (fines), rehabilitative (probation), deterrent and rehabilitative (prison), and so on; for sentencing purposes these different treatments are arranged in a notional ‘tariff’ system which equates the gravity of the offence and the culpability of the offender with the seriousness of the treatment.
In other words, rehabilitation has been added as another complication to the already compromised neoclassical position which, as we have already seen, has dominated most Western systems since the early part of the last century: the dominant operational framework is still the retributive tariff.
The most quantitatively significant development in terms of content this century has not been rehabilitation but deterrence (through the massive expansion in the use of the fine, as we saw in Chapter 2).
However, rehabilitation has made rather more significant inroads than is suggested by the formal description of the system.
This is because the sentence itself only partly determines what happens to offenders.
For example, the length of time offenders spend in institutions is not decided by the sentence.
Prisoners can be released, on parole, after serving only one-third of their sentence; the decision is made on rehabilitative grounds — the offender is released when considered ‘cured’ and safe.
Similarly, for juvenile offenders, the ‘care order’ under which they may be detained in an institution is for an unspecified period; again, release is determined by rehabilitative, treatment criteria.
Borstal, too (now abandoned), was an ‘indeterminate’ sentence.
In some jurisdictions (for example, Scotland) juvenile offenders are dealt with almost entirely under civil rather than criminal proceedings; in others, including the English, this is partly the case.
Under civil proceedings, the appropriate care and cure of the young offender is, in theory at least, the only consideration.
Most academic criminologists had tended to regard the advances of rehabilitation in the penal process as being a beneficial and humane trend.
But in the late 1960s and early 1970s there was a marked turn of the tide.
Starting in those countries where the rehabilitative approach had progressed furthest, the United States (see the American Friends Service Committee, 1971), and Scandinavia (see Christie, 1974) this reversal of opinion soon established itself in Britain (see Bean, 1976; Hood, 1978; Taylor, Lacey and Bracken, 1980).
All of these studies emphasised the same, fundamental point: that rehabilitation had led to the sacrifice of justice in favour of an alternative goal that it had manifestly failed to achieve.
First it was pointed out that, whatever the intention , rehabilitation does punish people; in particular, it allows people to be put into institutions where they would rather not be.
More importantly, it puts them there for indeterminate periods (until they are ‘cured’) which can, and does, mean longer than would be warranted by retributive justice (determined by the gravity of their offence).
Also, it was argued  that the ‘relaxation’ of the criminal process for juveniles in practice often means simply the abandonment of the safeguards guaranteed by the ‘due process’of law, and a slipshod approach to, for example, the vital matter of guilt determination.
Finally, the abandonment of desert in favour of individual diagnosis and treatment justified treating people with the same offence and record entirely differently, leaving it wide open to bias — especially in terms of social class.
This is particularly the case in relation to juveniles, since there is a heavy reliance on family background characteristics as indicators of treatment need, which themselves are likely to be class-related (see Roshier and Teff, 1980, pp. 140–1).
These problems would be serious enough even if the rehabilitative approach were demonstrably successful in ‘curing’ crime.
But perhaps the greatest source of its downfall was the fact that there was no evidence that it was.
Despite some early false claims, properly controlled studies of various rehabilitative programmes invariably concluded that they were no more (and no less) successful than their alternatives in preventing reconvictions (see Hood and Sparks, 1970).
In the course of the 1970s various ‘summary’ analyses of large numbers of ‘effectiveness’studies — Lipton, Martinson and Wilks (1975) and Brody (1976) being perhaps the best known — came to the same negative conclusion.
When combined with the growing criticisms of its injustice, these findings undermined all the claims for enlightenment and scientific efficiency that had been made for rehabilitation as a penal aim.
Rehabilitation is another manifestation of positivism which was under general attack at this time.
In some ways it represents its worst dehumanising features — the reduction of meaningful human action to a kind of technical fault (based on the medical analogy) to be cured by applied technology.
A common theme in the reaction against it has been a demand for the ‘return to justice’: retributive justice is seen as having the virtue of acknowledging that it is punishing ‘responsible’ people, which in turn requires the safeguards of individual rights and public accountability of the ‘due process of law’, and the limitations on intervention in people's lives provided by the principle of retributive proportionality.
Von Hirsch (1983) has noted that this disenchantment with rehabilitation and the revival of the concern with justice and proportionality have been quite wrongly labelled as a revival of classicism.
This is probably due to confusion caused by Beccaria's advocacy of proportionality: his version, of course, specifically excluded any concern with justice and desert.
In fact, the arguments about the injustice of rehabilitation apply equally to classical criminology's advocacy of efficient deterrence.
Beccaria's assumption of the special effectiveness of proportional deterrence is unsubstantiated.
The same analyses that have undermined rehabilitation have also undermined some classical deterrent assumptions: the evidence does not suggest that more punishment automatically provides more deterrence or that more serious crimes necessarily require more punishment to deter them.
Effective deterrence, if there is such a thing, is just as likely to violate retributive justice and proportionality as rehabilitation does.
The revived concern for retributive justice has not been the only response to the failure of the rehabilitative ideal.
As we saw in the earlier section on control theory, there has been a new interest in deterrence and prevention as well, attempting to improve on the original, crude formulations of Beccaria.
There have also been attempts to promote more humane-looking alternatives such as restitution and reconciliation (for example, Wright, 1982).
The problem with the ‘return to justice’ is the same problem that classical criminology reacted against: retributive justice seems pointless and irrational; it has no practical objectives in relation to crime — unlike deterrence, rehabilitation, restitution and reconciliation.
Yet, at the same time, practical programmes that ignore justice in retributive terms are not only likely to prove unacceptable, but are also likely to be self-defeating: the sense of injustice that they generate militates against the effectiveness of their programmes.
The incompatibility of justice and correction as penal objectives has long been, and still remains, the major unsolved problem of penal practice and consequently remains a major issue for the correctionalist stance in criminology.
I will return to it again in Chapter 8.
But, briefly, a concluding point needs to be made here about the way classical criminology relates to this dilemma.
I have suggested that although Beccaria selected deterrence as his mode of crime control, his arguments invite other possibilities.
His primary commitment was to effective control; he chose deterrence because it seemed most obviously to follow from his views on human rationality.
But he acknowledged that, for example, education could achieve the same objectives.
Thus, one of the main tenets of rehabilitation (faith in education) was also  compatible with classical criminology.
However, this hardly helps with the problem of retributive justice, of which Beccaria was  particularly dismissive.
But again, there is the other side to Beccaria's version of the social contract mentioned in Chapter 1 — that we would not will for others what we would not will for ourselves — and Hart's view that Beccaria's position was sensitive to individual rights.
Both allow that the individual's sense of justice is an important consideration both for its own sake and for the sense of commitment to the social contract that is as important for controlling crime as was deterrence.
As we saw in Chapter 1, there are unresolved conflicts between Beccaria's fundamental assumptions about the nature of human beings, the social contract and the functions of punishment, on the one hand, and the particular mode of control that he derives from them, on the other.
A coherent classical position by no means precludes the issue of retributive justice.
Consequently, an attempt will be made to reconcile justice and correction in the postclassical perspective put forward in Part Two (in Chapter 8).
Conclusion
This chapter has given more space to the anti-rather than to the pro-classical themes that emerged in the 1960s and 1970s.
But this is not representative of the balance between them.
My general conclusion is that the pro-classical themes are the more important: they have opened up the opportunity for an extensive development of the unnecessarily narrow focus of Beccaria's original formulation of classical criminology, and this opportunity will be taken up in Part Two.
The general attacks on positivism since the 1960s, together with the various dismissals of correctionalism that have been associated with them, have had the effect of virtually eclipsing the traditional causal-corrective concern of criminology.
As Young (1986) has pointed out, we seem to be left only with the practical but extremely narrow focus of the new ‘administrative’ criminologists, or the unexamined, taken-for-granted (and contradictory) explanations of ‘left idealism’.
The attacks on correctionalism are particularly important here since, as I have stressed throughout, they apply equally (if they apply at all) to classical criminology.
I have argued that correctionalism is no more inherently flawed than any other starting assumption (including ‘appreciation’) that the alleged functions of crime are a myth, and that socialist anti-correctionalism is really nothing of the sort, but an argument about the nature of officially defined crime (though it rightly draws attention to the fact that correctionalism cannot justifiably avoid such an argument).
The relationship between justice and classical correctionalism, it was concluded, raises some long-term, complex issues which will require further consideration later.
Introduction
In Part One I have briefly outlined the origins and fate of the classical perspective in criminology.
It seems to have finally resolved itself into an increased interest in practical deterrence and street-level prevention programmes.
While such concerns are admirable in their no-nonsense practicality, they represent a significant decline in ambition when compared with the other criminologies that have appeared during the two hundred years that have passed since Beccaria wrote.
To use Hirschi and Gottfredson's (1986) terminology, there seems to have been a retreat from explanations of criminality , to explanations of crime — from explaining criminal dispositions, to explaining (or rather preventing) criminal acts.
It could be argued, and indeed is, that since the more ambitious criminologies of the past are mostly in ruins, this new modesty and realism are a welcome change.
Others, including myself, share the feelings of Young (1986) that this purely ‘administrative’ criminology is a poor thing — anti-theoretical, unrelated to wider social contexts, and depoliticised.
It can be perfectly reasonably claimed that this current heir of classicism owes much to the original: we saw, in Chapter 1, that Beccaria's focus was equally practical and almost as narrow.
However, I have argued that this need not be so; the classical perspective, in the basic form laid down by Beccaria, has much greater potential than has been exploited so far.
In Part Two I want to try to develop some of this potential and outline a ‘postclassical’ perspective: that is, a perspective grounded on the fundamental assumptions made by Beccaria, but with some liberties taken and adjustments made in the light of the various problems it has encountered.
But first, in looking at the history of classical principles in the previous chapters I have left loose ends untied and contradictions unresolved.
It may help to summarise briefly the current position.
I have suggested that classical criminology can be formulated in terms of some basic assumptions about the nature of human beings and of criminal action.
Three were selected as the most important: freedom, rationality and manipulability.
But Beccaria took a narrow view of how to manipulate the human tendency freely and  rationally to choose deviation: he saw it only in terms of the effectiveness of the operations of the criminal justice system.
In addition, he only considered those operations in terms of deterrence, and ignored such vital factors as the practical (as well as the moral) consequences of abandoning retributive justice.
Positivist criminology has failed in its avowed intention to replace classical criminology with an objective, scientific model of the causes and treatment of crime.
It has failed to establish clear-cut causal variables that differentiate offenders from non-offenders, and failed to specify effective individualised treatment programmes.
The best it has been able to achieve is loose, probabilistic associations which sometimes, in all but the terminology used, have treated individual offenders as at least partially free, rational and choice-making (and in so doing, has to some extent converged with classical criminology).
Positivist criminology's almost complete abandonment of the classical concern with the significance of the criminal justice system has been a serious omission.
The 1960s and 1970s witnessed the reappearance and redirection of some classical themes.
Interactionism reinstated the voluntarism of human action and the focus on crime rather than the criminal.
In the latter case, however, it emphasised the crime-producing rather than the crime-controlling features of the criminal justice system.
It also pointed to an important development that can and should be expected of the classical perspective: the assertion of the relativity and selectivity of criminal definitions and their application.
However, interactionism became predominantly associated with ‘labelling theory’ which, as we saw, tended to revert to the status of another (and suspect) positivist-type causal theory.
At about the same time, control theory emerged, utilising similar basic assumptions to those of classical criminology, despite being located in the positivist tradition.
Its contribution was to concentrate on factors outside of the criminal justice system that control the natural human tendency towards deviance.
However, even in Hirschi's formulation, the social context that was considered was a fairly narrow one and, in subsequent developments, became narrower still.
Nevertheless, in conjunction with the classical themes of interactionism, it seemed to offer the basis for a new, resurgent classical criminology.
But this has not happened.
The main developments since interactionism have been in phenomenological, Marxist and feminist sociology.
The first two of these have, for different reasons, dissociated themselves from the causal-corrective concerns of traditional criminology.
Phenomenological sociology, with its micro-level focus on human meaning construction, has mostly ruled out any specific interest in substantive areas of human action such as crime.
For Marxist sociology, as we have seen, cause and correction have not usually been problematic, since capitalism has been assumed to be the cause and the transition to socialism the cure; their attention has been more directed to capitalist law-creation and-enforcement.
Feminist sociology, on the other hand, in its critique of the male-centred character of all previous criminology,has involved itself with the traditional criminological concerns.
The ‘postclassical’ criminology I have in mind needs to bring together and  develop these various ‘lost’strands of classicism.
It requires a wider view of both the sources of control and the contexts in which they operate, and must be applicable to more than just male working-class crime.
This is the task of Part Two.
4 Assumptions and Definitions
The particular starting assumptions by which I have characterised classical criminology in Chapter 1 concern the nature of human beings and their relationship with crime and conformity.
These assumptions require some reconsideration as a starting point for the development of the postclassical perspective.
The issues I will be discussing are ones that have engaged philosophers for many hundreds of years and on which a vast literature has accumulated.
Consequently, it would be unrealistic, not to mention arrogant, to suppose that I am likely to make any new contribution to them.
In which case, it seems worth asking why I am considering them at all within the limited confines of this book.
The answer to that, I think, is fairly straightforward: they are issues on which some position has to be taken; if the position is not spelled out it is still nevertheless there, implicitly guiding the way the work is conducted.
I think this has been well illustrated in the previous chapters — particularly in the case of positivist criminology.
Not spelling your position out does have some advantages — it leaves your options slightly more open in the event of future attacks.
But it has the disadvantage of confusion and obscurantism.
In what follows I will not be proposing solutions so much as ways of working with these problems in relation to the study of crime and its correction.
They are ways which, in the light of the previous two hundred years of intellectual engagement with these areas, seem to me to be the most fruitful.
Freedom and Manipulability
In the conclusion to Chapter 2, I suggested that the gulf between the view of humans as free and choice-making, on the one hand, and determined by forces outside of their control, on the other, may not be as unbridgeable as it seems.
In the study of crime, particularly with respect to its predictability (and manipulability, which I will be looking at next), the more moderate versions of these two positions have shown some potentiality for convergence.
I pointed out that in practice  determinist theories have always had to acknowledge a low level of predictive power for their causal variables.
In determinist terms, this is explained by the virtually infinite complexity of different constellations of different causal variables in individual cases.
In principle these constellations are knowable, and criminal behaviour fully predictable.
In practice it is always out of the question: there is always a residuum of unpredictability.
Similarly, moderate versions of indeterminism (especially the classical version) allow a degree of predictability: although we are seen as making free choices, this does not preclude the specification of circumstances that influence choices in a particular direction.
But again, there is always a residuum of unpredictability; we can always opt to choose not to be influenced in the predicted direction.
‘Practical’ determinism and ‘practical’indeterminism thus converge in allowing that circumstances can be specified which give rise to varying levels of probability of crime occurring.
And they both acknowledge the inevitability of a residuum of unpredictability.
The main difference is in the language used to describe what is responsible for that residuum: for determinists it is the variability of constellations of causes in individual cases; for indeterminists it is our ability to choose not to be predictable.
Which language should be used by postclassical criminology?
Its name and original allegiance suggests the indeterminist.
And there is another reason that would favour it: the language of free choice is the language that is used in everyday life by the people it purports to describe.
However, there is a debit side as well: how do we know when we have reached the limits of predictability and ‘bottomed out’ on the residuum of free choice?
Matza (1964), whose ‘soft determinist’ position approximates the one under consideration, shows how arbitrary the answer to this question can be — in his case it seems to be when you have finished reading his book!
The determinist position, with its assumption that the complexity of causes is at least potentially discoverable, avoids such arbitrary cut-off points and fires researchers continually to attempt to improve their predictive effectiveness (a point made by Hook, cited, but not heeded, by Matza, 1964, pp. 10–11).
Heuristically, determinism seems to have the advantage.
So the answer seems to be:talk like an indeterminist,act like a determinist.
The argument about the convergence of moderate determinism and moderate indeterminism in their positions on the predictability of criminal action, applies equally to their positions on manipulability.
Again, the difference between them is in the language used to describe this process: for determinists manipulation is achieved by altering the factors that cause criminal behaviour; for indeterminists it is achieved by making crime a relatively less attractive choice.
And once again I would propose that the language of indeterminism is preferable: it portrays human action as an expression of motives, reasons and purposes open to the influence of incentives and disincentives in a way that ‘makes sense’ to us as potential offenders ourselves.
I am not suggesting that it is proven that our motives, reasons and purposes are not themselves reducible to mechanically operating causal factors, as a fully determinist model would have it; but if that is the case, we are so far from being  able to specify these factors that they do not offer a model we can actually work with — as we saw in the discussion of positivist criminology in Chapter 2.
Postclassical criminology, then, sees criminal action as chosen and as expressing the purposes, intentions, and meanings attached to the situations in which it occurs, of those who indulge in it.
But these choices are not seen as being so individually idiosyncratic as to make crime totally unpredictable or uncontrollable.
It is assumed that there is sufficient uniformity to facilitate the specification of situations and circumstances that make it more, or less, likely to occur.
These situations and circumstances are not seen as operating as ‘causes’, in a determinist sense, but as offering incentives or disincentives that will have some degree of probability of influencing the direction in which the choices are made.
Finally, the concern with manipulation means that postclassical criminology is correctionalist, as were its classical and positivist predecessors; that is why I have spent some time, in Chapter 3, countering anti-correctionalist arguments.
Crime, in the postclassical perspective, is seen as undesirable — something that, as far as possible, we could do without.
But this does not mean that it takes the conservative stance of necessarily accepting existing definitions of crime.
Quite the contrary, it assumes that the nature of criminal definitions and their application are factors that influence people's decisions whether to comply with them or not , and are therefore an issue for correctionalism.
The moral debate about what should be defined as crime is a debate about what we think is undesirable, and should not therefore be tolerated.
Crime cannot be controlled without confronting the issue of what should be crime; and to say what should be crime is to say what should be controlled.
Rationality and Criminal Motivation
If human action expresses motives and purposes, a question that arises is where the motives for criminal action come from (especially if we are unable to specify their ‘causes’, in the positivist sense).
The classical answer is simply that they are there; they are taken as given.
They are part of the conception of human rationality which, as we saw in Chapter 1, is one of the starting assumptions of classical criminology.
Our dominant motivations are those of rational self-interest and they tend to lead us into crime because crime, however defined, involves self-restraint.
So, in classical terms, our rationality makes us ‘naturally’ criminal.
However, I have stressed the importance of the other side of our self-interested rationality — the side that also enables us to appreciate the personal advantages to be gained from compliance with the restraints of the social contract.
In Chapter 1 I suggested that these two sides to our rational self-interestedness imply that we have an ambiguous, fluctuating relationship with whatever is defined as crime and conformity.
In ‘postclassical criminology’ I want to emphasise this ambiguity much more.
In particular, I am interpreting it to imply that we are not simply governed by considerations of immediate personal advantage.
We will also be more prepared (though by no means certain) to comply with personal constraints under two conditions: that the constraints are seen as being in the service of some greater  ‘good’ and that they are seen as operating justly and fairly.
This allows a much more complicated picture of our relationship with crime and conformity than that proposed by the simple deterrence of Beccaria's classical criminology, or the cause-effect of positivism.
There are different considerations, often pulling in different directions.
It also means a more complicated view of humans than the interpretation that is often put on the classical conception — that we are ‘naturally evil’.
In the postclassical view, we are both ‘evil’ and ‘good’(however these are socially defined); the same people are capable of either.
The ‘natural’ deviance that is taken for granted as a human capability in the postclassical perspective is precisely that — a capability, not an inevitability.
Although this postclassical perspective contains some important modifications of the original classical position, it still retains its essential spirit as an explanatory framework.
Deviant motivations, for example, are still taken as given; it is conformity rather than deviance that remains problematic.
This is because, despite the partial retreat from the more uniformly selfish version of humans in the original classical position, the postclassical view still also retains Beccaria's vision of the uneasy relationship between ‘private passions’ and the ‘common good’.
Both of these expressions, however, have rather different underlying assumptions.
Private passions are not assumed to be a universal, biologically determined category (they are of unknown origin, not assumed to be necessarily identical across different cultures).
Similarly, the common good (or rather, that part of it defined by legal rules) is not taken to be an objective category.
It is a common good defined by those who have been in a position to define it as such (through their access to the processes that determine the nature of legal rules).
Yet, despite this relativistic view of both private passions and the common good, the inevitability of a tension between them — of the problematic nature of conformity to the common good rather than deviation — is retained.
This point will be elaborated further in the discussion of ‘crime’ in the next section.
The postclassical version of human rationality and motivation can perhaps be illustrated by taking a simple example — my relationship with the laws against speeding when I am driving home late at night.
I generally approve of this restraint — I see it as serving some greater ‘good’ and, on the whole, as being applied reasonably fairly.
I have relatively high stakes in conformity — I happen to have done fairly well out of it; I would have a certain amount to lose in terms of reputation were I to be apprehended.
On the other hand, I do not have that much to lose — speeding, in our culture at least, does not carry all that much stigma (even in the section of it that I inhabit).
Also, as it is late with few people around, I see the dangers to others of my speeding as being less.
But I also acknowledge that such exceptions cannot be realistically incorporated into the application of such rules.
At the same time, my sense of impunity is high — there are few police around and it would be easy to spot them if they were; the risk in terms of the formal sanction (probably a fine and endorsement) are consequently low.
And I would gain considerable advantage from speeding; I am tired and I want to get home to bed.
I am not suggesting that all such considerations are rationally run through and  weighed up on every occasion; they are too familiar to require it.
But the elements (both dispositional and situational) are variable — according to the particular person involved and the particular circumstances.
Although the above example is a relatively trivial one, it is the kind of image of our imprecise and variable relationship with crime and conformity that I wish to portray in postclassical criminology.
Later I will be trying to explore some of the factors which influence our dispositions towards whether or not to commit crimes.
First, however, there are some objections to the starting assumption of our ‘natural’ criminality that require some attention.
Some of these are tied up with the conception of crime itself; and will be dealt with in the next section.
But there are others that must be dealt with here.
Taking criminal motivations as ‘given’ seems a rather glib way of dealing with them.
It excludes them from consideration — not, of course, because they play no part in accounting for crime (quite the opposite, they are the essential prerequisite).
But it appears to imply that we are all equally disposed to crime all the time; there are no individual differences in motivation; variations in individual criminal action are solely accounted for by variations in the constellations of incentives and disincentives that apply in each case.
This is not how I conceive of the situation in postclassical criminology.
Differences in motivation between individuals, and during individuals' life-spans, and for different kinds of crime, are acknowledged.
But individual differences are seen as relatively much less significant in accounting for variations in criminal action between different individuals, different groups, and over different time-periods than are variations in the control exercised by perceived incentives and disincentives .
Essentially, postclassical criminology sees crime as best accounted for in terms of the factors that influence the likelihood of ‘given’ motives being translated into action.
Once again, it is purely a matter of heuristic fruitfulness.
The argument is that the postclassical perspective is a relatively more useful one for accounting for, and understanding the manipulation of, criminal action.
The prevalence of criminal motivations is not too difficult to accept in the case of examples such as that of speeding, used above.
But in other categories, it becomes rather more difficult to convince people that it is a potentiality of most of us and that no ‘special’ motivation is required to explain it.
Some time ago, Matza and Sykes (1961) suggested that this is because among ‘respectable’ people criminal motivations exist at the ‘subterranean’level and only surface on special, licensing situations such as the business man's night on the town, carnivals, office parties, student rags, and so on.
Alternatively, they are expressed vicariously through tastes in films and television.
An interesting example of the latter would be vandalism — often picked on as being a particularly ‘inexplicable’ activity in conventional motivational terms; yet in the early years of the film industry the destruction of property (especially the most prized objects such as cars) constituted the most popular film content, and still draws large audiences today.
Fiction and drama, when they are done well and provide a convincing, realistic context in which serious crimes occur, can often enable us to imagine ourselves  doing things which, in the abstract description, we would consider impossible.
Also, real contexts such as wars or urban riots provide innumerable examples of ‘ordinary’ people doing things that would be unimaginable of them in more conventional contexts.
Veblen (1922, p. 237), in his ‘theory of the leisure class’, has drawn attention to the fact that it would be difficult to argue that we are ‘naturally’ inhibited against committing crimes because they have adverse consequences for others, since conventional and respected activities (such as private entrepreneurship) often manifest identical qualities:
The ideal pecuniary man is like the ideal delinquent in his unscrupulous conversion of goods and persons to his own ends, and in a callous disregard for the feelings and wishes of others and of the remoter effects of his actions.
All these examples perhaps help to suggest that at least sometimes, and in some contexts, we are capable of a wide range of crimes.
This is all that is required by postclassical criminology.
The fact that most of us, most of the time, do not translate these capabilities into action is precisely what is seen as needing an explanation.
The assumption is that it is relatively more fruitful to regard our conformity, rather than our criminality, as problematic.
Perhaps this position can best be tested by taking an extreme example — a crime which it would seem to be impossible to accept as being within the ‘normal’ range of human motivations: sexual abuse of children.
Surely these crimes are accounted for by the existence of ‘special’ motives?
And surely they are best explained in terms of how these special motives come about?
The answer here could be simply to acknowledge this particular crime as an exception.
After all, the postclassical position recognises that variability in human criminal motivations plays a part in accounting for the prevalence of crimes: it would not be too damaging to the overall position to allow that in some cases it plays the major part (provided that the exceptions only constitute a tiny proportion of total crime — which would certainly be the case with sexual abuse of children).
However, I am not sure that even in this case an exception must automatically be made.
The advantages of the postclassical approach apply wherever the motivations towards particular criminal actions are vastly more prevalent than the actions .
In all such cases the prevalence of such actions and the possibilities for their control are better accounted for by addressing the question of what it is that usually inhibits the actions, rather than by accounting for how the motivations arise.
Unfortunately, the empirical evidence is not available to decide whether this applies to the case of sexual abuse of children.
Currently, the evidence is suggesting that both the motives and the actions are more prevalent than was previously supposed.
However, this does suggest that the motives are not so ‘special’ as to preclude the possibility of a considerable disparity between the prevalence of motives and the  prevalence of actions.
Whether this is the case or not, even the more special crimes such as this one cannot automatically be assumed to be outside the scope of the postclassical perspective.
Crime
So far I have discussed the different criminologies of the previous two centuries with little reference to the problem of the concept of ‘crime’ itself: Worse, I have sometimes used ‘crime’and ‘deviance’interchangeably — though I hope I have only done this where the argument has happened to apply equally to both.
But clearly, some discussion of the subject-matter of postclassical criminology is in order.
First, it must be asserted that the subject-matter is crime, and not the more nebulous category of deviance.
Second, crime is accepted to be a legal category — no attempt is being made to propose, as we saw some positivists tried to do, that we can arrive at some more objective conception that stands above the acts of human deliberation that constitute the process of legal definition.
Crimes are violations of legal rules; legal rules are those rules that are defined and enforced by agencies of the state that have, ultimately, the authority to use coercion.
Crimes thus come about through human beings interpreting and applying rules (which are themselves the product of human deliberation) to the actions of others.
This is why it is extremely dangerous to imagine, as many positivist criminologists seemed to do, that such actions can be understood and explained without reference to these processes of definition and application.
As we saw when considering the interactionist critique of positivism, there are two particularly important reasons for this: first, the processes of definition and application produce the data specifying the nature of, and the trends in, crime, and the characteristics of criminals that are subsequently used by criminologists to construct their theories and explanations; second, these processes of definition and application have consequences for the meanings, implications and justifications that those ‘labelled’ by them give to their own actions.
Postclassical criminology must be alive to both of these considerations.
Fortunately, the legal definition of crime incorporates the assumption of its ‘naturalness’ to free and rational human beings, which was discussed in the previous section.
Indeed, if the actions are not deemed to be free and rational (in the sense that the offenders are capable of understanding their nature, moral meaning and consequences) then they will not usually be defined as crimes in legal terms.
Also, the fact that free, rational human beings are still seen as requiring organised discouragement from committing crime implies an acceptance of its ‘naturalness’.
This, incidentally, could help with the problem encountered earlier of incorporating unusual crimes such as child abuse in the postclassical perspective.
If such crimes really are entirely accounted for by the possession of abnormal motives propelling their possessors into crime regardless of any other considerations, then it does not really possess the features that usually class actions as ‘crimes’; rather, it would belong in some alternative category, such as mental illness.
As in the legal definition, the interactionist conception of crime also implicitly portrays it as something that ordinary people are likely to want to do.
Crime is seen as only identifiable by the discouraging response it evokes.
In other words, its sole defining feature (discouraging reaction) is predicated on the prior existence of the desire to do it.
This applies regardless of the content of criminal  definitions which, for interactionists, are highly variable.
Thus, between them, the legal and interactionist conceptions illustrate the point that crime, however relativistically it is viewed, always incorporates the assumption of the naturalness of human motivation towards it.
Postclassical criminology embraces the relativity of criminal definitions — though without necessarily accepting that they are, or have been, as randomly selective as interactionism sometimes seemed to suggest.
But this poses a problem: if ‘crimes’ are diverse, changeable and selective, how can we expect to be able to make any general statements about the conditions that influence their prevalence?
The answer, I think, involves a partial refutation of the interactionist position: crimes do share an intrinsic quality — they involve the knowing transgression of rules laid down and enforced by the state.
And they involve actions that most people, at least sometimes, are likely to want to perform.
It is perfectly conceivable that we can make some general statements about the conditions that influence our self-indulgence or self-restraint in relation to rules laid down and enforced by the state, particularly when the nature of those rules and the way they are enforced are included for consideration.
5 Sources of Control
By rejecting the stance of positivist criminology and by taking criminal motivations as given, postclassical criminology shifts the question from what causes crime to what influences people in the direction of conformity.
The answer is in terms of incentives and disincentives.
Any attempt to specify these incentives and disincentives would seem to get us back to something very much like the attempt to specify all possible human pleasures and pains which, as was mentioned in Chapter 1, was one of Bentham's less successful utilitarian ventures.
Nevertheless, if we are to define what it is that influences our decisions whether or not to indulge our motivations towards crime we inevitably make suppositions about human needs or requirements, which are in turn predicated on assumptions about what it is that gives us pleasure or pain.
Throughout history moral philosophers, jurisprudentialists, anthropologists and sociologists (in their quests for universal moral ideals, natural law, cultural universals or minimum requirements for social life) have all, of necessity, been led into speculation about basic human needs as foundation stones for their theories.
Most notable of the more recent examples would perhaps be Rawls (1972) with his assumption of ‘primary goods’ such as liberty, opportunity, wealth and self-respect, and Finnis (1980, p. 59) with his ‘forms of good…that are irreducibly basic’of life, knowledge, play and aesthetic experience.
At a rather more humble level of philosophical sophistication, sociologists of crime and deviance have built their theories on similar suppositions.
Thrasher (1927), whom we encountered in Chapter 3 as one of the founders of a control perspective, borrowed Thomas's (1923) speculations as the basis of his universal childhood needs of security, response, recognition and desire for new experiences.
For the purposes of the postclassical perspective being developed here, Thrasher and Thomas highlight an important feature of these needs: they are as readily (often more readily) satisfied by deviant activity as they are by conventional.
Thomas (1923, p. 38) nicely overstates this point in relation to his postulated needs (or ‘wishes’ as he calls them):
The moral good or evil of a wish depends on the social meaning or value of the activity which results from it.
Thus the vagabond, the adventurer, the spendthrift, the bohemian are dominated by the desire for new experience, but so are the inventor and scientist; adventurers with women and the tendency to domesticity are both expressions of the desire for response; vain ostentation and creative artistic work both are designed to provoke recognition; avarice and business enterprise are actuated by the desire for security.
This point once again reinforces the assumption of the ‘naturalness’ of deviant motivations that underpins both the classical and the postclassical perspectives.
In these attempts to specify human needs two problems dominate: validating the particular ‘needs’ that are specified, and establishing their universality.
These problems also obviously apply to the attempt about to be made here.
As far as validation is concerned, there does not seem to be a lot to live up to.
Most writers, including those mentioned above, invariably refer, in the last resort, to ‘self-evidence’ to ‘rational’human beings as their authority.
In the case of ‘universality’, whatever the authority (‘cross-cultural studies’ are popular) the claim tends to be belied by the fact that different writers have arrived at rather different (though by no means completely different) lists.
In the needs that I am proposing there is no claim to their universality over time and place, only that they are broadly applicable to most contemporary Western societies (more or less).
My authority is that they are recognised and utilised by informal and formal agencies such as parents, schools, governments and criminal justice systems as ‘sources’ of control.
I will be dealing with seven (although another claim I am not making is that of exhaustiveness):affection, status, stimulation, autonomy, security, money and belief .
These ‘needs’ constitute sources of control because they provide for both incentives and disincentives: their satisfaction can be used to lure us into conformity, and the threat of their denial can be used to divert us from criminality.
The satisfaction provided by conformity is in competition with the often more immediate satisfaction that can be provided by crime.
Consequently, agencies of control always operate by threatening to withdraw or actually withdrawing the satisfaction of these needs, in an attempt to redress the balance.
It must be stressed that the necessary level of fulfilment to encourage conformity is relative , not absolute .
It is relative to what we perceive as being possible, through our knowledge of the experience of others, or from our own experiences in different periods of our lives.
It is also, of course, relative to the nature and certainty of the losses we anticipate from indulging our deviant motivations.
Both of these sets of expectations are variable, over different time-periods and in the different social settings in which we find ourselves.
The social settings can sometimes change quite rapidly — as in the case of the urban riot — giving rise to sudden and dramatic changes in behaviour.
Such variability of criminal behaviour has been difficult to explain in positivist theories which see criminality as resulting from specific, more or less permanent characteristics of particular ‘types’ of individual.
A virtue of the postclassical perspective is that, although it too is concerned with differences in  individual dispositions towards crime, it allows more readily for changes in such dispositions, and for a more dynamic relationship between them and the situations in which they are likely to be activated.
The complicated picture that emerges from this variability in the relative expectations that we have of reward or loss from criminal as against conforming behaviour is compounded by the fact that our different needs and requirements may often pull in quite different directions.
An obvious example is the contradiction that may arise between the requirements for parental affection, on the one hand, and status with peers, on the other.
On other occasions, however, they may reinforce each other.
In the ensuing chapters I will be looking at these processes in more detail.
But first, I will say a little more about what actually constitutes these needs and requirements and how they operate as sources of control.
Affection
Our need for ties of mutual affection — our desire to please, and our fear of hurting, or losing the affection, of those we care about — provides the earliest and one of the most potent sources of control of our deviant motivations.
Later, the presence, or even the existence, of the people we care about may not be necessary for their influence to apply, for we may retain the desire to be the kind of person who would have won their affection and approval.
But the loss or gradual erosion of ties of affection is nevertheless a liberator of our criminality; never to have experienced them is perhaps the greatest liberator of all.
Most criminological theories have, in various ways, acknowledged their significance.
Usually, they have been recognised in the context of our early years in the family, since this is their dominant source during a period of particular dependence, and because later childhood is the age at which officially recorded criminality is at its greatest.
Consequently, this particular instrument of control will loom large when we consider the family later.
It is clearly the case, however, that although the lack of ties of affection liberates criminal tendencies, their existence does not necessarily guarantee conformity.
A vital additional factor is required: that those we are tied to disapprove of criminal acts (as they are defined) and that our own criminal acts would risk hurting them, or the diminution of their affection.
The significance of affection is thus dependent on a pre-existing degree of acceptance of conformity; there must be a shortage of ‘parental Fagins’ as Matza (1964) put it.
If subcultures exist where there is a lack of acceptance, or where the prohibitions of ‘crimes’ are not applied to victims seen as ‘outsiders’, then affective ties will be irrelevant to the control of crime.
Thus, despite their apparent primacy and the universal significance given to them in criminological research, they are themselves dependent on the pre-existence and effective operation of other controls.
Status
Like affection, status relates to our feelings about other peoples' feelings for us.
But it is different in nature.
It is less intimate and based on different emotions.
It relates  to feelings of respect, admiration, importance, sometimes even fear, that we wish to evoke in others.
Though such feelings are usually also involved in our intimate, affectionate relationships, they are not absolutely necessary to them.
Status relates to our concern for our standing in the eyes of people more distant from us.
Where affection is the preserve of family and friends, status is more the preserve of the wider peer group or community.
We also need status in our own eyes, as well as in the eyes of others; status, as I wish to use it here, includes self-esteem as well as reputation.
These two elements tend, of course, to go together; but they are not synonymous.
It is difficult, but not impossible to have self-esteem without reputation; easier, perhaps, to have reputation without self-esteem.
The negative side of reputation is stigma.
Fear of the loss of reputation, or the acquisition of an unfavourable one in the form of stigma, can act as an important constraint.
These fears may be greater, for example, than those which we attach to the actual penalties imposed by the law — hence the use, and fear, of publicity in relation to criminal offences.
But the caveat that was applied to affection applies even more strongly to status: it only acts as a constraint in settings where criminal activity is generally unfavourably evaluated.
Indeed, in this respect status is a less reliable control than affection, since it is usually available in more varied forms.
Status is about ‘being somebody’ and not necessarily about being liked.
And to be feared is to be somebody.
The varied forms in which status is available have been recognised by social controllers, and have made them wary of too much reliance on stigmatisation: conventional stigma can provide deviant status.
Penal reformers, especially those concerned with children, have consequently argued for playing it down, and penal legislation (again, mostly in relation to children) has sometimes responded.
It was mentioned earlier that the requirements for status and for affection may pull in quite different directions.
There is often a kind of tension between them: the stances for some forms of status (for example, for masculinity) may act as barriers to affection.
And real affection may negate such stances.
Such tensions may be particularly significant in the adolescent peer group.
Stimulation
As was noted earlier, Thrasher (1927), borrowing from Thomas (1923), rated the ‘desire for new experiences’ as one of his universal childhood  needs .
I have in mind something similar under the heading of ‘stimulation’.
It refers to our need for physical and emotional experience — excitement, danger, relaxation, challenge (physical or intellectual), humour, sex, art, music.
Individual constellations of these requirements are infinitely varied, of course.
Some of them, sometimes, can be at least partially satisfied vicariously rather than directly (when we are audiences or spectators).
They can also, of course, be satisfied by crime (again, vicariously as well as actually).
The need for stimulation has been recognised and utilised by social controllers at  all levels, throughout history.
Being sent to your room by your parents, being kept in after school, being given mindless repetitive tasks to do — are all deliberate withdrawals of stimulation.
Treats and incentives invariably take the form of opportunities for stimulation.
In the penal sphere, the final, and total withdrawal of stimulation — in the form of solitary confinement — has been one of the most ubiquitous forms of punishment.
Autonomy
The significance of autonomy is perhaps best illustrated by considering its absence.
Matza (1964, p. 188) described among his delinquents a ‘mood of fatalism’, ‘the experience of seeing one's self as effect.
It is elicited by being ‘pushed around’ and yields the feeling that one's self exercises no control over the circumstances surrounding it and the destiny awaiting it’.
The denial of autonomy — in the form of imprisonment — is also one of the principle weapons used in the formal penal apparatus to attempt to control crime.
But as Matza's quotation makes clear, its absence can be felt regardless of any formal attempt to withdraw it.
Since crimes usually involve positive, self-expressive acts, they are ideally suited to the task of asserting our autonomy.
They ‘make something happen’.
Because, by our definition, crimes are things that most people, on some occasions, will want to do, their constraint is a constraint of our autonomy.
Our compliance will consequently depend to some extent on the opportunities for self-expression through conventional avenues.
If they are absent, then we will feel freer to deviate.
Our ‘need’ for autonomy is not, of course, total and universal, any more than any of the needs and requirements under discussion here.
Indeed it illustrates the probabilistic nature of these arguments rather well.
The significance of autonomy (or rather the threat of its loss) in relation to crime control is generally recognised because of its association with imprisonment.
Yet we clearly do not always require it.
Sometimes some people wish to withdraw into settings deliberately chosen for their regulation and predictability, such as the armed forces, nunneries, monasteries — even prison itself.
But such cases are exceptions, sometimes perhaps simply reflecting the relative lack of satisfaction of needs on the outside (especially in the case of the ‘choice’ of prison).
Generally, our need for autonomy, and the fear of its loss, are important factors in influencing our decisions about criminal actions.
Security
Security refers to our need to feel tree of the actual experience of, or threat of; physical discomfort or injury.
In a sense, it is the counterpart of our need for autonomy: while autonomy is the freedom to make things happen, security is the freedom from things we do not want to happen.
If the conventional realms of activity are not accompanied by a sense of security then — we will feel less committed to them we will be more likely to ‘take the law into our own hands’; insecurity is associated with lawlessness.
Conversely, if we  anticipate the loss of security through our own lawlessness, we will be that much more likely to conform.
Historically, threatening our security in this ‘physical’ sense has been the most common way in which penal systems have attempted to force our compliance (through capital and corporal punishments).
They have usually relied on the grossness of the physical threat, rather than its certainty, to do the work.
In recent times, however, physical threats have been dropped in favour of threats to our autonomy and money.
But this has only been at the ‘official’ level; as Sykes (1958) and many subsequent studies have shown, loss of a sense of physical security is still one of the major ‘pains of imprisonment’as perceived by inmates.
Money
It almost goes without saying that in contemporary society a certain amount of money is an important human requirement, not necessarily for its own sake (though that may also be the case), but because it is the wherewithal for other requirements.
To claim money as a major human goal is not to make any specific claim about ‘human nature’(such as its mercenariness) since it is not so much a goal in itself but the facilitator of almost all possible human goals — expressive, artistic, acquisitive or whatever.
Again, this is not to claim that we all aspire to it equally: it is simply to claim that, whatever our personal specific goals,some amount of money is almost invariably required for their realisation.
The criminal justice system, of course, now recognises this even more than it recognises our need for autonomy: monetary penalties are by far the most common form of penalty that it uses in its attempt to control crime.
To claim money as a current human necessity, however, is not to claim the concomitant necessity of any particular mode for its generation and distribution (such as the capitalist economy).
Nor is it to deny that a society capable of providing for the fulfilment of all human needs, all the time, would eliminate the need for money altogether.
Unfortunately, at the moment there are no known examples of the latter being achieved, and there is no way of knowing whether it is achievable.
So for the time being it would be prudent to treat money as a major variable in our relationship with crime and conformity.
Belief
We are more likely to conform if we believe in the rules and constraints that conformity imposes upon us.
Although belief is not a ‘need’ in the same sense as the others, its strength is dependent on the satisfaction of a need, as we will see.
It is also similarly a source of control; its satisfaction or neglect will affect the likelihood of our compliance.
Belief does not guarantee anything, of course.
We are perfectly capable of breaking rules we believe in (for, example, where conformity fails adequately to satisfy our other needs) and we may comply in the absence of belief (where the fear  of the consequences of non-compliance is strong).
As with all the needs and requirements that constitute the sources of control, its influence is mediated by the influence of the others.
A question that arises is whether belief exercises any independent influence at all.
It could be that it is reducible to the other needs; that our belief in convention is purely a function of the degree to which it satisfies our needs for affection, status, and so on.
Clearly, it must be acknowledged that this is likely to be the case.
But I think we can allow belief some independent influence as well, and the basis of that independence can be derived from the classical conception of our self-interested rationality.
This, it will be remembered, enables us to perceive the deferred, but ultimate greater, advantages of self-denial: we will accept the immediate constraints of convention if they are seen as serving some general advantage.
Belief, in this sense, facilitates a more abstract acceptance of conformity; it leads us to conform in the absence of immediate personal advantage from doing so (or even where it would be to our advantage not to do so).
The offer of some greater good in the future, however, is not usually sufficient to guarantee our belief in present conformity, and it is in this connection that we must introduce an additional need: the need for a sense of fairness, or justice.
That is, we must also feel that the immediate personal sacrifices that are expected of us are just and fair, if we are to comply.
To feel this we need to be sure that other people are making similar sacrifices or, if they are not, that there are acceptable grounds for their not doing so.
We must feel that the existing social arrangements allow for equal, or justifiably unequal, satisfaction of our other needs, if we are to believe in conformity.
In the legal context, we need to feel that the prohibitions of laws, in the way they are defined and in the way they are applied, are justifiable and influence us all equally (or, again, if they do not, that they discriminate on acceptable grounds).
The strength of our belief in conformity, based on this ‘sense of justice’ may act quite independently of considerations of immediate personal advantage.
Sources and Contexts of Control
The sources of control play their part to varying degrees and in varying combinations in the different contexts that constitute our social worlds.
In the following three chapters I will be examining their significance in three broad contexts:family and community; the social divisions brought about by age, class, race and gender ; and the criminal justice system and crime control policy .
In doing so I will be making frequent reference to the empirical research findings of criminologists working mostly in the positivist tradition.
Given the difficulties involved in this kind of work, especially when it is based on ‘official’ data (see Chapter 3), this may seem rather dubious.
In particular, there is almost always the problem of determining whether the ‘findings’ are findings about crime and criminals, or about the assumptions, beliefs and stereotypes of those who ‘label’people as criminals.
Unless some attempt is made to address such problems it is unreasonable to suppose that such findings have any privileged status over any other kinds of assertion.
However, where comparisons can be made with alternative sources of data, and where it is possible to provide some evidence to counter the possibility that the findings are due purely to ‘data collection’ effects, we can perhaps arrive at some tentative conclusions.
In the following chapters I will attempt to do this, wherever possible.
But even then, this is not to suggest, in the way that the positivists often seemed to do, that the result is some form of objective, scientific exercise.
Also, the associations that will be discussed, and the interpretations of them in postclassical terms that will be offered, should not be seen as suggesting the operation of ‘causes’ or ‘determinants’, even where such language has been used by those involved in establishing the associations.
The earlier discussion should have made clear that the postclassical perspective does not allow for the degree of certainty or inevitability that such terms are usually taken to imply.
Rather, they should be seen as establishing ‘influences’ pulling in particular directions (in contexts where, for particular individuals, there are many other influences), sometimes supportive, sometimes contradictory, but always open to some degree of individually idiosyncratic interpretation.