

Introduction
It is a paradox that while sex crimes are popularly abhorred little action is taken against the majority of offenders.
We know that the majority of women who are raped do not approach the police for fear of the judicial procedure they may face and the publicity they may have to endure.
We know that in 1987 only 18 per cent of these complaints ended in the conviction of a rapist.
Yet simultaneously rapists, and indeed all men who commit violent sexual offences, are regarded as particularly villainous by the majority of the population, and these crimes have a high priority in the public's demand for law and order.
Why is such a hated crime dealt with so ineffectively?
One of the themes of the book is to explore how this contradiction is negotiated in popular discourse via an examination of newspapers.
What is the image of sex crime which is portrayed in the press?
Why does most of the coverage focus on the very few disturbed serial rapists, rather than typical rape?
How is it that the majority of people are given such a highly distorted overall picture of the nature and incidence of sexual violence?
How does the manner and level of reporting affect women's fear of crime?
There have been major changes in both the interface of the police and raped women and in the media coverage.
Firstly, we are seeing a dramatically increased number of rapes being processed by the police and courts.
Secondly, there have been major changes in the amount of rape reported in the press.
A second major theme is with the viability of a variety of policy options to control the negative aspects of press reporting of sex crimes, especially rape.
This practical reference frames our discussion of the newspaper reporting.
Hence we examine the issues surrounding the development of legislative and other means of intervening in the press.
Changes in reporting of crimes of sexual violence to the police
There has been a significant increase in the amount of sexual violence reported to the police.
The number of rapes reported to the police increased from 1,015 in 1977 to 2,471 in 1987, an increase of 143 per cent.
However, since the majority of rapes are not reported to the police, it is difficult to interpret these figures.
On the one hand they could indicate a large increase in the level of rape.
On the other they could indicate that more women are reporting the crime.
If the former is correct then we are seeing an enormous increase in the use of violence against women.
If the latter then perhaps we are seeing a reduction in the distrust women have for the police in relation to their handling of rape, or maybe the greater ability of women to withstand the trauma of carrying through a complaint of rape.
However, while the increase in the rate of rape reporting has increased, the rate of conviction has declined.
In 1977 32 per cent of rape complaints were concluded by conviction of the rapist, while in 1987 only 18 per cent were similarly convicted.
The rate of increase of convicted rapists is 39 per cent as against an increase in rape reports of 143 per cent.
If we take the former interpretation of the increase in rape reporting then this would mean that not only are more men raping, but also the judiciary is increasingly allowing them to get away with it.
If it is the latter, then we are seeing a constant rate of rape over the last decade but where women are more willing to make legal complaints and the police and courts not willing to convict other than a very small increase in the number.
A similar but less marked pattern is to be found in other cases of sexual violence.
The reported cases of indecent or sexual assault increased by 21 per cent over the 1977–87 decade, while the number of men convicted rose by only 2 per cent, a decline in the conviction rate from 31 per cent to 26 per cent .
In the same decade reports of incest increased by 73 per cent, while the number of those convicted rose by 55 per cent , a decline in the conviction rate from 53 per cent to 48 per cent .
Whichever way we look at these figures, whether we believe they represent a real increase in the rate of sexual violence or not, the decreasing conviction rate indicates that the state has not effectively responded to demands that sex crimes be treated more seriously.
Yet there has been sustained pressure from two political directions to do so.
The first is that of feminist campaigners based, not only in rape crisis centres and refuges, but also in specialist lobby groups such as Women Against Rape and Women Against Violence Against Women.
The second is the law and order lobby of the right, which is also picking up  on demands that the law be tougher with rapists and other violent criminals.
So why has it not led to a rise in conviction rates?
The optimistic reading is that we have been successful, in that the number of men convicted of rape has increased over the last decade by 39 per cent in the case of rape, 2 per cent in the case of sexual assault, and 55 per cent in the case of incest.
The pessimistic view is evidenced by the fact that the rate of conviction stemming from reported rapes has declined by 44 per cent in the case of rape, 16 per cent in the case of sexual assault and 9 per cent in the case of incest.
Whether the increase in reported rates of sexual violence are positive or negative depends on whether they are considered to be real increases or higher rates of reporting.
Changes in press coverage
There have been major increases in the amount of reporting of rape and other sex crimes in the media.
The popular daily newspapers are much more likely to carry such stories today than twenty years ago.
However, the reports are typically sensational and titillating, rather than serious accounts of these crimes.
All manner of sexual detail is squeezed into these reports, anything from the previous sex life of a convicted rapist (‘the savage between the sheets’) to the newspapers' reading of the sexual history of the raped woman ‘Para case girl was ‘sex maniac’‘.
This sort of press coverage is problematic for all manner of people.
Firstly, the woman or girl who has suffered a sexual assault is made to suffer again by having sensationalist accounts of their ordeal blazoned to the entire nation, defeating attempts to forget.
Secondly, the lives of others may be dragged through the media if they have been associated with a notorious rapist.
Thirdly, the image of rape portrayed is misleading and may encourage mistaken beliefs by judges and juries, so that they do not convict in cases which fall outside this narrow stereotype.
What do we think about this increased reporting?
Is it good that rape is now reported, and its existence no longer denied?
Is this coming into the open of crimes against women useful in assisting reforms in this area?
Or are the stereotypes of rape portrayed by the press so narrow and unusual that they hinder the process of effective intervention by the state and others.
Does the reporting raise women's fear of crime?
In a society where many women are afraid to walk alone at night does this increase in reporting increase women's fear still further?
Do the rape reports encourage further rapes, by providing information to potential rapists?
Does the pornographic nature of some of the reports encourage attitudes which facilitate rape?
Given that we have so little information about rape, does the increased press reporting, given its restricted nature, hinder the chance of a raped woman getting a fair ‘trial’?
Are juries  increasingly inhibited from convicting men who are different from this stereotype?
Does the press narrow popular conceptions of rape and make it more difficult for raped women to obtain justice?
If the reports do contribute negatively, what should be done about it?
Should they be compulsorily edited so as to be accurate and balanced, that is censored?
Or is this going too far and risks losing more, in terms of freedom of speech, than we would gain?
These questions demonstrate the complexity of the freedom and control issue which are implicitly in discussion in many parts of the world.
National differences
The balance between press freedom and control over problematic reportage varies between different countries.
In the USA press freedom is held up as sovereign.
The First Amendment of the Constitution about freedom of speech and the press not only symbolises this commitment, but also is used to defend this position in the courts, though even here there are some limits.
In Scandinavia the interests of the victim of sexual attack are given highest priority.
In Sweden the press engages in comparatively little coverage of sex crimes, with the exception of the most popular evening papers.
Britain is in between with more constraints upon the media than happens in the USA, but more press reponing than in many Scandinavian countries.
The British ‘compromise’ is in practice closer to the American than Scandinavian model.
British legislation
In 1976 Britain, or more strictly England and Wales, introduced legislation which sought to control the worst excesses of the press and the courts in relation to rape.
The press was banned from publishing the name of the raped woman and the courts were prohibited from enquiring into her previous sexual history except at the discretion of the judge.
This legislation has had a limited effect, as we shall show.
We evaluated the effect of the 1976 legislation on the issue of the anonymity of the rape survivor; on the basis of press reporting in 1978, we found that she was now most unlikely to be named, but identifying detail was still published.
Adler's study of eighty rape trials examined actual court procedure in detail, providing evidence on what actually happens rather than what should.
Adler found that despite the legislation a woman's sexual history was routinely introduced during a rape trial.
This usually occurred indirectly, but none the less effectively introducing this information which Parliament had tried to rule out as admissible evidence.
This practice did not strictly contravene the legislation since  there is a loophole which allowed the introduction of this line of questioning at the discretion of the judge, if the judge thought it was essential.
It is this discretion that has been used routinely to allow questioning which Parliament had intended should be exceptional.
This questioning is of direct relevance to press coverage because reporters use the courtroom as a major source of their information for their writing.
When the judges allow the woman's sexual history to be heard in court, they allow it to be reported in the press.
Policy instruments
The three main forms of regulation of press reporting of sexual offences are, firstly, that embodied in the Sexual Offences Amendment Act 1976, secondly, the Press Council administered Code of Practice, and thirdly, the libel laws.
In the first the press is expressly refused permission to print the name of the raped woman.
The Act also sought to restrict the extent to which a woman's prior sexual history could be used as admissible evidence in court, thus indirectly affecting the material available to the press to publish.
In the second the press is restrained by its own professional Code of Practice not to misrepresent or mislead the public.
In the third, the press faces financial penalties if anyone successfully sues the paper through the civil courts for defamation of character.
Studies of sexual violence
Why do men rape and sexually assault women and girls?
It is important to discuss the various explanations briefly, if only because these surface in the press in a variety of forms.
Classically these crimes have been seen as a result of a few mentally deranged men.
They have had unfortunate childhoods in which they have been neglected and brutalised.
They grow up unbalanced, and need only minor frustrations or the stimulus of pornography to tip them into an orgy of violence against women and girls.
There are occasional academic studies which appear at first glance to support such interpretations, such as that of West, Roy and Nichols.
But on closer examination it can usually be found that they have used very selected samples that are not representative of sexual offenders as a whole.
For instance, the West, Roy and Nichols study looked at the cases of men who had already been incarcerated in an institution for mentally ill offenders — they were not a random sample of even those few rapists who are convicted.
A second explanation is in terms of the frustrations that men of the disadvantaged classes and ethnic groups suffer in a class-based and racist society.
These socially and economically deprived men are  considered to develop alternative social values in consequence of being excluded from the possibility of success in terms of the mainstream society.
These values include a macho version of masculinity and an embracing of violence.
Women suffer from the resulting behaviour.
The problem with this type of explanation is that it fails to explain why women, who are surely more deprived than men, do not also engage in violent acts.
In fact women are significantly less violent than men, suggesting that frustration with socio-economic deprivation is not a sufficient explanation.
Both these explanations fail to deal with the generalised nature of aggressive actions by men towards women.
There is a wide range of sexually aggressive actions from men to women which form a continuum from sex murders through rape and sexual assault to sexual harassment and flashing to wolf whistling.
To understand this we must turn to explanations at the level of social relations in a sexist society.
These acts can be traced to a plethora of practices which encourage sexually aggressive behaviour in men and boys, in a context in which there are few effective sanctions.
Not only pornography, but also the general denigration of women, has been implicated in the construction of male sexual scripts in which aggression is seen as a positive masculine quality.
Further, the failure of the police and courts to prosecute and convict more than a small proportion of rapists means that there is little effective legal deterrent.
Recent feminist work has focused not only on the continuum of male sexual violence, but also on the serial rapists and sex murderers.
The politicisation of crimes of sexual violence
Sex crimes against women have emerged on to the political agenda over the last twenty years.
This can be traced to two, radically different, political forces.
Firstly, feminism; secondly, the right wing law and order lobby.
Feminists have launched major political campaigns about male violence and backed these up with the establishment of national networks of centres to help those who have suffered male violence.
The 1970s and 1980s saw the setting up of rape crisis centres, refuges for battered women, groups for incest survivors, and a host of local and national campaigning groups including Women Against Rape, Women Against Violence Against Women, and the Women's Aid Federation.
They have extended their protests to the legal process and judges' behaviour in court.
Feminist debates on the control of representations of sexual violence are examined below.
The law and order lobby has grown in strength during the Conservative ascendancy.
While it is closely associated with the Conservatives, it is not to be simply equated with the Conservative Party, and indeed, sometimes acts as a lobby within that party for stronger intervention against crime.
For instance, the Home Secretary is regularly criticised for leniency on such issues from this lobby at the Conservative Party conferences.
The place of ‘Thatcherism’ in these issues is discussed below.
Interestingly women form a disproportionately large section of the law and order lobby.
Campbell suggests that this is due to their own recognition, as vulnerable women, of the problem of male violence and thus wish to have it controlled.
Hence, it is women in particular, though not alone, who have raised the issue of criminal violence, but with radically different policy proposals.
Feminists tend to start by asking the survivors of this violence what they want and need, and hence have focused their efforts on assisting these women, often with considerable amounts of voluntary labour.
The law and order lobby, in contrast, focuses on deterring the offender with ever harsher punishments.
A brief history of recent reforms
The recent changes in police practice and courtroom procedure stem from this politicisation of sexual assault in the 1970s and 1980s.
The first set of changes in this period led to the Sexual Offences Amendment Act in 1976; the second led to Home Office guidelines on revised police procedures in 1983 (and later 1986).
While there had been a lot of activity by feminists regarding questions of rape in the early 1970s, it was the Morgan case which was the focus of the mainstream public debate prior to the 1976 Act.
In this way, some of the concerns of the women's movement gained a more public stage.
The Morgan case created a legal debate which produced some contortions of legal reasoning.
In this case the judge held that a man is not guilty of rape if he has sexual intercourse with a woman who does not consent to it if he believes she does consent, whether his belief is based on reasonable grounds or not.
That is, the woman's experience of rape was deemed irrelevant to the question as to whether she was legally raped, since this depends upon the man's state of mind.
It was this statement of the law which led to outcries that it was a ‘Rapist's Charter’.
Eventually, however, all four men were convicted, but this did not settle the legal issue at stake.
The Morgan case was one of several which generated controversy.
For example, in the Stapleton case in 1975 the defendant was acquitted of rape despite the fact that even the judge in passing sentence had said: ‘I have no doubt you instilled terror into this woman when you went into that room and made your intentions quite clear’.
Another controversy  was caused by Justice Stevenson effectively blaming the woman for getting raped because she had hitched a lift, giving the rapist only a suspended sentence, and summing up thus —‘It was, as rape goes, a pretty anaemic affair.
The man has made a fool of himself, but the girl was almost equally stupid.
This practice of hitch-hiking must be stopped’.
Following the Morgan controversy the Home Secretary appointed an Advisory Group chaired by Justice Rose Heilbron to consider the law of rape in June 1975.
This led to the Sexual Offences (Amendment) Act in 1976.
One of the issues in the passage of this legislation was that of the anonymity of raped women and girls, although the nearly all-male Parliament was also concerned about anonymity for the accused men.
In the summer of 1974 there had been several questions regarding the possibility of anonymity in rape cases.
In answer to questions the Home Secretary at this time had stated that this was an issue for individual courts to make requests of the press, not a matter for legislation.
However, there were attempts at a private member's bill: the Rape (Anonymity of Victims) Bill was introduced by Mr F.P. Crowder, and there was another in 1975 by Jack Ashley, stemming from concern that raped women were not reporting the crime because of fear of press publicity.
This potential increase of reporting rape incidents became the main rationale for seeking anonymity for the victim.
The Heilbron Advisory Group confirmed these fears and maintained that ‘disclosure of a rape victim's name caused her great distress and also tended to discourage women from reporting alleged rape’.
Specifically the Heilbron Report did not recommend similar anonymity for defendants in rape cases.
However, the Heilbron Report made no proposals to change the law on the issue which had been at stake in the Morgan case — that a man could escape a rape conviction if he thought that the woman was consenting whether she was or not.
Thus while the original concern was not dealt with, other issues which had been raised earlier were.
During the parliamentary debates, the main feature was the male MPs' interest in the ‘equality’ issue.
Mr Rees-Davies suggested that ‘surely…if anonymity is to be given during a trial to the complainant, it should also be given to the accused’.
Others maintained that the ordeal of publicity was essential to ‘effectively test the veracity of a witness’.
The official Conservative Opposition was unenthusiastic about the Bill.
A specific interest of the almost entirely male chamber was to focus on the defendant.
The tale of the prospective parliamentary candidate who, a few months before a General Election, was charged with a rape offence, and acquitted, haunted the debate and it was alleged that his whole prospective parliamentary career had been unnecessarily  ruined.
This account helped the inclusion of anonymity for the rape defendant as well.
The Act also attempted to deal with the problem of the tendency of defence lawyers to pillory a woman if she had had any non-marital sexual experience.
This could in turn receive extensive media coverage.
The Act thus attempted to control the admissibility of such evidence in the courtroom for reasons not only for its biasing effects upon a jury, but also for subsequent press coverage, which is often based on courtroom interaction.
Further, it was hoped that if nothing happened during the trial which newspapers could turn into titillating copy for their readers, then there would be less incentive for the papers to give widespread coverage.
Indeed, in the absence of titillating and embarrassing revelations, the need for anonymity becomes less pressing.
So why the demand for anonymity?
The reformers were not merely considering the desire of actual rape victims to avoid publicity.
In fact, how the rape survivor feels about her experience in the criminal justice process is more likely to be affected by what happens in the police station and then in the courtroom than how it is reported in the press.
For the rape survivor the experience of the court interaction is likely to be primary and the media coverage is secondary; thus for such women and girls, anonymity in the media may be a minor reform compared to others in which they have an interest.
However, the portrayal of raped women in the press may be considered likely to deter women from reporting rape to the police.
Most women gain most of their knowledge of the criminal justice process from the media since few will have attended actual court cases or learnt from friends of what actually happens in the criminal justice system.
The significance of the anonymity issue for many of the legal experts lies more with their own concern with getting more women to report rape, than with raped women's own priorities for legal change.
Reforms of police practice
In the 1980s the focus of reform shifted from the press and courtroom to police practices.
In 1982 a series of events highlighted the appalling treatment that raped women suffered at the hands of the police, leading to a public outcry and revised procedures.
The police handling of rape complaints was shown in a documentary on Thames television, with the approval of the police, suggesting that they saw no problem in this.
Millions of viewers saw the vicious and disbelieving interrogation of a woman who went to the police saying she had been raped.
This produced widespread and lasting protest.
Police mishandling of the case of the ‘Yorkshire Ripper’, who was not caught despite the evidence available, was subject to scrutiny and complaints.
Public protest followed a  judge who fined a rapist 2,000 after asserting that the woman had been guilty of contributory negligence by hitch-hiking.
Prosecution decisions were criticised in the case of the ‘Glasgow razor rape’ case in which the authorities had refused to prosecute; the woman herself then successfully undertook a private prosecution.
Each of these incidents provoked widespread protest, not confined to the feminist groups which focused on issues of sexual violence.
In this context of public protest the Home Office issued guidelines on how the police should behave in cases of rape complaints.
The protest had succeeded in forcing a change in police policy.
A number of changes have taken place, and a number of experimental schemes introduced.
These include the setting up in some areas of special rooms and facilities where cases of sexual assault can be dealt with, the training of police by Rape Crisis groups, and some specialist police units.
The first of these has involved the so-called ‘rape suites’, a set of rooms away from the main police station, often including shower, examination room, waiting-room and kitchen.
Sometimes they are purpose built (Wiltshire and London), sometimes specially furnished rooms in police stations (Northamptonshire), sometimes separate rooms in hospitals (Hampshire).
In Manchester there has been a major development of a Sexual Assault Referral Centre, jointly funded by the police and hospital authorities.
This has all the facilities mentioned above, and in addition uses a medical model of the treatment of rape.
It offers counselling as well as physical medical support.
Special police units have been set up in some areas, usually but not always staffed by women police officers.
These exist in Glasgow, Leeds and Bradford, Huddersfield, and Worthing.
Furthermore, many police forces now receive specialist training in dealing with victims of sexual assault, often provided by members of Rape Crisis Lines.
Victim support services for the victims of all crimes are now being set up and funded by the Home Office.
This involves talking to those who have suffered crimes recently, including sexual assault.
Most of these developments have bypassed the work of the established Rape Crisis Lines, which have been developing expertise in the counselling of women who have suffered sexual assault.
These Rape Crisis groups usually draw extensively on the experience and sense of priorities of women who have been raped.
This bypassing of these groups leads to a worrying loss of expertise, for what appears to be political reasons, namely, that the Rape Crisis Lines have radical politics.
Feminism, censorship and the state
The control of rape reporting by the state raises some of the same issues  as that concerning the control of pornography.
That is, the debates raise difficult issues on censorship.
There are parallels with the ‘porn the theory, rape the practice’ debate, and the censorship debate in feminism.
Newspaper reports of rape are not usually thought of as pornography, though sometimes they are in effect.
Should the same debates apply to this?
Many of the writers within this debate assume that there is a choice between censorship and freedom of speech.
In relation to the material we are discussing there are already forms of legal restriction over the material which constitute regulation, though this is not usually called censorship.
If pornography were to be restricted legally the mechanisms would likely to be similar to those which already affect rape reporting, so their use is relevant to both issues.
The feminist debate on censorship, as for instance caught in the collection edited by Chester and Dickey, involves many complex issues of the relationship between representations and practice.
Does the portrayal of sexual violence have the effect of making it more likely?
To most social scientists and policy makers this is the most important question about pornography, and is pertinent to our discussion of newspaper reports.
This question in relation to pornography has been central to government commissions on the availability of pornography in Britain, the USA and elsewhere.
These commissions have drawn on expert opinion from the social science community, and found evidence for both sides.
On the one hand we can cite the experiments of social psychologists such as Malamuth, who state that an empirical correlation can be established between men's exposure to pornography and propensity to rape.
He and his colleagues performed a variety of laboratory experiments in which men's attitudes and responses to rape were tested before and after exposure to pornography.
The means of measuring response varied from attitudinal statements to degree of penile tumescence.
Malamuth's methods are rigorous and his analysis convincing.
On the other hand, theorists in the field of Cultural Studies caution against any simple notion that exposure of individuals to cultural representations modifies their behaviour.
Typically they regard such questions as untestable and, since unanswerable, not worth asking.
Such scholars suggest that we should analyse pornographic representations as representations, not causes of social behaviour.
This does not necessarily imply acceptance of these images since they may be seen as unacceptable in their own right.
That is, unacceptable as representations, whether or not they have effects on sexually violent behaviour.
Kappeller argues that pornography should be analysed as representation, and that it is degrading to women.
And that is sufficient to argue against it.
The feminist debate on pornography often, but not always, links it to  that of censorship.
The question appears at first in terms of whether the suppression of pornography by censorship is worth the price in terms of loss of freedom of expression.
Initially it appears as an act of balance, with vigorous debate between those who think that censorship is never worth it, and those for whom pornography is so dangerous that censorship is not too high a price at all.
However, this debate is over-simple since it is predicated on an assumption that censorship would work, that it is possible to stop pornography by state action.
The dubiousness of this is obvious when we reflect on the failure of the state to stop all manner of illicit and illegal activity.
Censorship may have an impact on pornography, but is unlikely to stop it.
Further, there is the problem of the practice of censorship once introduced, as to whether it would focus on the kinds of sexual behaviour which are violent and degrading to women, or whether it would be used to ban representations of sexual behaviour that feminists found acceptable, such as non-violent gay and lesbian sex.
There is a question as to who would control the censorship apparatus, and whether it would be used by reactionary rather than progressive forces once in place.
The initial apparent similarity between some feminists and some of the right on the issue of pornography is curious.
At first glance some strands of these otherwise opposed political forces seem to agree on the use of censorship to oppose pornography.
However, on further examination it is clear that they often disagree as to what constitutes pornography, while overlapping on representations of sexual violence, they radically disagree on those of non-violent, non-marital sexual practices.
The historical reporting of rape
The use of sex crime in the media as a source of titillation has a long and inglorious past which has emerged spectacularly again in the Thatcher years.
As far back as the eighteenth century, and probably before, trial reports about cases of sexual crimes, adultery and non-traditional sexual practices have been constructed as a genre of pornography.
In addition, some trials of priests charged with sexual crimes provided material for pornographic and anti-religious writings.
While as early as Elizabethan times crime chap-books were published to give news about recent crimes, Wagner suggests that it was only toward the end of the seventeenth century that a diverse crime literature appeared.
Some sections of the reading public became enthusiastic for trial reports as bawdy ‘entertainment’.
By the 1740s newspapers were replacing books as the primary source of this material with an interest by middle-stratum men in the sexual misconduct of the  nobility.
Towards the end of the century pornographic magazines, which extensively used the sexual content of cases with accompanying obscene prints, began to emerge and the number of these kinds of magazines increased appreciably after 1800.
In the nineteenth century there were a variety of sources available about criminal cases.
The 1840 Preface to The Chronicles of Crime; or The New Newgate Calendar indicates a new ‘moral’ tone —‘Chronicles of Crime must comprise details, not only interesting to every person concerned for the welfare of society, but useful to the world in pointing out the consequences of guilt to be equally dreadful and inevitable’.
Similarly, the broadsheets — produced in large quantities from the sixteenth to the nineteenth centuries —‘were the popular journalism of the day, recording [such events], usually with a combination of a report and ballad, sometimes with a ballad alone’.
Goodman stresses how ‘the crime broadsheets, with their tut-tutting moral tone giving the excuse of a welter of gory details, are the ancestors of our mass circulation Sunday newspapers’.
Clearly the News of the World strongly maintained the tradition of the crime broadsheets through most of the twentieth century.
Today, this mode of reporting continues to be controversial.
A crucial question is whether ‘Thatcherism’ has a distinctive position on crimes of sexual violence.
The law on the control over sexually violent images has been slightly strengthened with the introduction of legislation against the ‘video nasties’ and the banning of pornographic images from direct public view, although not preventing their availability.
This relates to the general issue of whether there is a consistent policy on state control of the media.
Television and media have come under increasing pressure from the government not to publicise controversies about military and security matters.
The press were taken to court over publication of extracts from Spycatcher with its details of the adventures of the ‘security’ forces.
Film about a new spy satellite was seized from the BBC under a court order.
Yet in contradiction to these developments, which increase state control, there is also the policy of encouraging the market and decreasing the size and scope of the state.
For instance, the development of satellite television which necessarily decreases government control has been welcomed and there is a policy of decreasing the regulation over existing commercial television.
Government policy over the media and its display of sexually violent images thus appears contradictory.
There is some pattern in that commercial matters are given greater freedom, while issues pertaining to the military are subject to greater control.
This is illuminated by Gamble in his thesis that Thatcher's policies represent simultaneous moves  towards both a free economy and a strong state.
However, the policing of images of sexual violence appears to fall down the gap between the two, sometimes being subject to one policy, and sometimes the other.
Thus on the one hand the liberal, free economy strategy is evidenced in the non-censorship of all but the most extreme pornography and the encouragement of commercial values in broadcasting, which is likely to mean decreased control over pornographic images, while on the other the strong state strategy is evidenced by that hard core pornography is not open to direct viewing by the public and by the appointment of censorious watchdogs over the BBC.
Today's newspapers
The debates on sexual violence raise a series of questions about the way that ideas on this subject are constructed and maintained.
Clearly there is some discrepancy between the facts about these crimes and the ideas that many people hold.
Our present study was designed to examine one of the major sources of information available to people about rape and sexual assault — newspaper reports of the crimes.
There is obviously a complicated relationship between what is printed in the newspapers and what people come to believe, and we would not wish to suggest that people passively and uncritically absorb all that they read there.
The meaning is formed within the relationship between the text and the reader.
It is not simply pre-given on the page, ready to be absorbed.
Some media studies writers have suggested that the meaning of a text is mediated via discussions people have with the friends and household about their viewing and reading.
That is, it is not shaped simply by individuals, but by group interpretations.
If this latter is important, then we would expect the big rape cases which get a lot of media coverage to be especially important in the formation of beliefs, since they are more likely to be common currency for discussion than the smaller cases.
Some Cultural Studies writers, however, despair of being able to specify this relationship at all.
However, this indeterminacy of meaning should not be pushed too far.
It is not realistic to suggest that any meaning is possible.
Certain meanings are privileged, in the sense that they are more likely interpretations, given the context of the existing social and cultural codes.
In our study a sample of newspapers was examined for all their stories about rape and sexual crime more generally.
This book focuses upon 1985, a mid-way point in the Thatcher years, but places it in the context of the changing reporting which we have studied in the years 1951, 1961, 1971, 1978 as well as 1985.
The material for the newspaper reports can be gathered in four main ways.
Firstly, it can be taken from court proceedings.
Many of the small reports are produced from such a data source.
Because of this, many of the reports are structured by the courtroom discourse.
Secondly, they can be a result of wider journalistic efforts either from contacts with the police, or from interviewing people associated with the rape in some indirect way, either near the time of the offence, or the trial, or even, in a few cases, some time later.
Newspapers seldom initiate reports about specific sexual assaults themselves, but depend upon the police and courts.
Thirdly, newspapers report on parliamentary proceedings discussing changes in the law.
From these three major sources it can be seen that rape and sexual assault are very rarely the subject of investigative journalism outside of some judicial context.
Hence newspapers and the judiciary are more intimately interconnected on this topic than on many others which are the subject of journalistic interest.
The fourth type of information about sexual assault and rape, which is the only major source outside of a judicial context, is that of research by academics and activists.
As we shall see later these sources often receive short shrift in many of the papers.
The changing reporting of crimes of sexual violence
It is important to note that sexual violence, including rape, has a wider range of forms than is typically reported upon in the press or recognised as a crime.
The growing concern about marital rape exemplifies how some forms of serious sexual violence can be excluded from both the law and media coverage.
The media, in fact, are highly selective in their focus upon sexual violence.
The context of this book is the increase in the official reports of rape and other crimes of sexual violence and an increase in the newspaper reporting of such crimes.
In these circumstances we are interested in how the press reports these crimes and how this has been changing.
Are there any links between the increases in the two types of reporting?
What does it mean when rape and sexual violence are no longer quite so hidden away from the public view?
Will there be an increase in public debate which helps to reduce the rate of sex crimes?
Or does it simply increase women's fear of crime?
In policy terms we are interested in the regulation of the press reporting, how and why this has been done, and its effects, if any.
The newspaper studies
The newspapers
We have studied the reporting of rape and other crimes of sexual violence since 1951 and have samples of newspapers for 1951, 1961, 1971, 1978 and 1985.
This book will focus on the most recent set, that for 1985, mid-way through the Thatcher term.
However, we shall also discuss the changes which have occurred over these three and a half decades.
In all years they included a series of national newspapers; the Daily Mirror, The Times the News of the World the Sunday People and one local, the London Evening Standard .
In 1971 the Sun was added.
In 1985 the Star, Guardian, Observer, Mail on Sunday, Sunday Mirror, Coventry Evening Telegraph, Lancashire Evening Post, Lancaster Guardian and Middlesex Chronicle were added to the sample.
They fall into four main categories: popular dailies, quality dailies, national Sundays, and local papers.
The 1985 study was based on a reading of 3,015 newspapers.
For one complete year (1985) every item relating to sex crime was identified in the sixteen newspapers — four popular dailies, two ‘quality’ dailies, five national Sundays, three local evenings, and two local weeklies.
In order to engage in comparisons over time we were faced with a dilemma stemming from the change in the range of newspapers over this period.
In particular there has been a significant expansion of the ‘downmarket’ dailies.
If we used only the same newspapers then we would miss new developments which added to the range, while if we did add to the sample then we were not comparing like with like.
In order to deal with this we have done both, that is not only compared a strictly identical sample of newspapers, but also provided the full range of the newspaper selection for each sample year.
This chapter will examine the range of reporting for different types  of sex crimes in different types of newspapers.
It will also examine changes in the reporting of rape over three and a half decades.
The range and structure of newspaper reporting
There are several different moments in the judicial processing of sex crime that may be the subject of newspaper reports.
Each of the phases has a different type of coverage:
1 The search — the police hunt for an attacker will occur only under certain circumstances, when the police really believe that a crime was committed and, usually, that he is unknown to the victim.
In this type of reporting the newspapers typically focus upon the criminal and deviant character of the man.
2 The courtroom — there are three types of courtroom action:
The committal — this is a preliminary hearing in a magistrates' court and little information usually emerges at this stage.
The trial — if there is a contested case it will be heard before a jury.
In this stage the focus often shifts on to the victim and her conduct, since a typical defence of the accused man is that the woman consented.
Sentencing — here attention is both on the level of the sentence, whether it is considered lenient or harsh, and also sometimes on the judge's comments on the case.
3 Post-conviction — a few particularly notorious sex offenders will be reported in the press after imprisonment.
These are the most unusual and sensational cases.
Our study also examined press reporting of discussion about sex crimes, for instance around official reports and attempts to change the law.
These gave an opportunity to consider media reporting of sex crime outside the immediate context of sensational cases.
In our previous studies we focused on press reporting of rapes.
While that remains a central concern, in this book we have broadened our concern to include murders where there is a clear sexual element, and some other forms of sexual assault and crime.
In our comparisons over time we necessarily are restricted to press reporting of rape trials, but in the analysis of the mid-1980s the study is much broader.
In fact, at each stage of the criminal justice process, there are only a few cases which get both widespread and sustained coverage in both the national and local press.
At each stage there are only around half a dozen cases in any one year which are the focus of major interest which impinges upon the national press in a sustained manner.
Changes in rape trial reporting
Not only has the popular daily press, represented by the Daily Mirror and the Sun , shown a rapidly increasing interest in printing rape cases, but so has the ‘quality paper’,The Times .
During the early post-war period, the twenty-year period from 1951 to 1971, as evidenced by the years 1951, 1961 and 1971, there was little reporting of rape outside of the News of the World .
After the mid-1970s, however, there has been a growing surge of interest.
The most dramatic shift is between the years 1971 and 1978.
Now in the popular dailies there is, on average, a case a week.
Until recently the bulk of rape reports were, however, only to be found in the News of the World .
In the last few years this pattern has ceased as most papers carry these reports and, curiously, the News of the World has nearly stopped.
The change is dramatic, from seventy-two cases in 1978 to only two in 1985.
In the first twenty-year period, 1951 to 1971, the News of the World had carried the vast majority of the rape cases which were reported anywhere in the national press (despite being only a weekly paper).
This change can only be a result of conscious policy.
The type of reporting has also shifted.
In the earlier period the reports were much less explicit than now.
For instance, they rarely used the word ‘rape’ in 1951, only the horrible euphemism —‘carnal knowledge’of a woman.
Between 1951 and 1971 the likelihood of the court reports of rape cases gaining publicity in the national press largely rested on whether the case was reported in the News of the World .
In 1951 in four widely read newspapers — two national dailies (Daily Mirror and The Times ), the national Sunday (Sunday People ) and one evening paper (the London Evening Standard )— there were only two cases reported which were not also covered by the News of the World .
Similarly for 1961, there were only five cases, and for 1971, seven cases.
In contrast, the News of the World itself covered eighteen cases in 1951, thirty-five in 1961 and fifty-eight in 1971 which were not reported in the other four.
The News of the World had developed a distinctively titillating style of reporting rape which was matched only by the arrival of the restructured Sun which began to develop its present style in the early 1970s.
From the outset the Sun was equally titillating but with a different style from the News of the World .
The Sun made less use of the News of the World style of long reports which unfolded the plot of a sex crime in a ‘racy’ style, like a novelette.
However, in terms of increasing the chances of publicity in the national press, the rising of the Sun did not significantly alter the general picture.
It covered ten rape cases in 1971, but reported only three cases not covered in the other five newspapers.
What it did do, however, was to herald the potential use of sex crime allied to other explicitly sexual gossip, photographs of topless models and so on to become close to a ‘soft porn package’ which was its strategy in the ensuing circulation warfare.
This research by Soothill and Jack masked the amount of sex crime being reported in newspapers, for by concentrating entirely on cases which would appear as rape in the Criminal Statistics for the relevant year, this provided a narrow definition of sex crime.
Indeed, even cases of rape in the News of the World was a serious underestimate for this popular Sunday lived up to its name and rape cases were reported from all pans of the globe.
Each year there were a few sex crime trials which got particularly extensive publicity.
These were not necessarily rape trials.
Indeed, those reports with a murder together with explicit sexual activities, perhaps involving some son of celebrity, would be the ‘ideal’ ingredients to produce a national soap opera.
However, this research was specifically conducted in the mid-1970s with the then current concern about rape in mind, so other types of sex crimes were neglected.
The emphasis of the research mainly focused on the press reporting of the rape victim.
It was argued that when the woman was ‘named in a press report, this obviously dramatically widens the number who may point an accusing finger at the unfortunate victim — or at least the victim believes it will’.
In both 1951 and 1971, the same proportion (54 per cent) of the press reports actually named the victim.
Further, there was no invariable respect or reticence for age, whether young or old.
In 1951 the names of a 12-year-old girl as well as that of a 55-year-old woman were stated.
In 1961, there was a more restricted age-range of named victims, from 15 to 34 years; in 1971, from 12 to 60 years.
There was evidence that some had their names withheld due to a specific request by a magistrate, judge or, in one instance, by the victim's husband.
There were other cases where the name of the rape survivor was not disclosed in the first press report but a few weeks later, the name would suddenly appear in front of several million readers.
One report of committal proceedings noted that ‘the magistrate asked that the girl's name should not be disclosed’.
But at the trial at the assizes a few months later, the name and address of the girl were both disclosed.
Anonymity became one of the major issues of the 1970s legislation, but there is no doubt that the detail of much of the reporting of rape cases in the early 1970s became — and we would argue, has continued to be deliberately titillating.
It is difficult to estimate what kinds of dis-crediting remarks are likely to most upset rape survivors and deter others from reporting rape.
Indeed, this is likely to vary over time with changing social context.
Writing in the mid-1970s we suggested that ‘one suspects that, in 1951, it would be potentially more disturbing for the victim if the world knew she had been ‘intimate’ with her boyfriend than it would today.
By 1971, virginity was much less expected.
So questions of prior sexual experience take on a different meaning and emphasis over time.
However, the theme of attempting to discredit the woman in the witness box continues.
For instance, in one case the defence counsel tried to establish their client's case thus —‘[The defendant]said: ‘She was not raped at all .
She was an old scrubber.
She loved it when we got to the caravan, she jumped on the bed and said something like: ‘Come on then, who is going to satisfy me tonight?’
She seemed to enjoy it.’
Any woman in the early 1970s did not need to be very observant to notice that there were serious dangers of being discredited by name in the media.
From 1971 to 1978
The changes in the period 1971 to 1978 are particularly important since the sample years are either side of the 1976 Act which attempted to restrain press coverage of rape.
We considered the same six newspapers in both 1971 and 1978 (Sun, Daily Mirror, The Times, News of the World, Sunday People , and the London Evening Standard ).
Surprisingly, over this period the press reporting of rape dramatically increased, despite the indirect attempts to control it.
The percentage of all rape cases reported in our sample of newspapers increased from a steady 25 per cent over the two decades, 1951 to 1971, to very nearly 40 per cent in 1978.
Most of the newspapers — as Table 2.2 shows — dramatically increased their reporting of rape between 1971 and 1978, but particularly the Sun, Daily Mirror , and, rather surprisingly,The Times .
The Sun increased from ten court cases to thirty-two,Daily Mirror from  eight cases to twenty-six, and The Times from three cases to twenty-one.
The nature of the shift in The Times was particularly striking.
Not only was there little difference in the reporting of the cases compared with the popular press, but also The Times had become attracted to sensational headlines.
Headlines like RAPIST OF 16 WAS LIKE A VULTURE GOING IN FOR THE KILL and TOMBSTONE RAPIST LIKE A VULTURE? couple of popular dailies, but the first was from The Times and the second from the Sun .
The hope that the restriction imposed by the 1976 Act which limited defendants' rights to produce evidence in court of the rape survivor's past sexual relationships with persons other than the defendant would cause newspapers to lose interest in reporting rape cases was a hope that was totally misplaced.
We found, as has Adler, the loopholes that could be exploited —‘to state, or allege, that the victim was a prostitute was at least to imply past sexual relationships with other men.
Or the prosecution might inform the jury that ‘Miss R…was single and having regular sexual relations with her boyfriend’’.
The sexual relationship between the victim and accused was on occasions the focal point of the press coverage.
These loopholes remain despite the concern of some judges such as Mr Justice Boreham, who once said in judgment ‘I know a little about life and even if[the accused]had had intercourse with the girl before, he does not have the prescriptive right to it thereafter.
She has the right to say yea or nay, and if she says nay, that is the end of it’.
The character of a woman may be attacked in ways other than an explicit recounting of her past sexual relationships or, indeed, that she was having sexual relationships.
For instance,The Times informed us that the ‘unmarried office manager …kept her lunchtime appointment to have a contraceptive coil fitted’(our emphasis).
In strict legal terms, the letter of the 1976 law was being followed in  1978, but the Act had not produced the results in dampening down press publicity in the way that had been hoped.
However, beyond pointing to the dramatic increase in rape reports, we also began to speculate on the reasons for the shift by practically all the newspapers.
The press reporting of rape can be seen as part of the sexual titillation increasingly being employed to sell newspapers in a tight market.
We focused on the two newspapers owned by the same person, Rupert Murdoch, and which included the most rape reports — thirty-two in the Sun and seventy-two in the News of the World in which not one rape case in 1978 was covered by both newspapers.
The possibility of this happening by chance is so remote as to defy calculation.
However, when we argued ‘the marketing strategy is clear.
The Sun and the News of the World are, in effect, being sold as a package.
The reader will come to know that the rape cases he reads in his daily newspaper will not needlessly be repeated in the Sunday newspaper’, this caused outrage from Sir Larry Lamb.
Writing on behalf of News Group Newspapers Ltd, he denied that either the Sun or the News of the World ‘has anything so grand as a ‘marketing strategy’— whatever that is’.
He argued that the markets of these two newspapers ‘are very different, and the circulation overlap [is]in no way significant’.
However, even in the late 1970s we were convinced that ‘many newspapers were increasingly using the soft pornography of rape reports, and reports of other sex crimes, as a mechanism to sell newspapers.
Press reporting in 1985
The pattern of press reporting of rape trials is quite different in 1985 from the previous years we had studied — 1951, 1961, 1971 and 1978.
There has been an increase in the number of rape trials, and hence, even if a constant proportion were reported, an increase in the absolute number of such cases being reported in the press.
If we restrict the focus to the same five newspapers —The Mirror, The Times, News of the World, Sunday People and the London Evening Standard — and for the years 1971 and 1978 include the Sun , we see what appears to be a steady proportion of one-quarter of this growing number of trials reported, except for a temporary surge in 1978 to two-fifths.
Thus we see an increase between 1971 and 1978 falling back in 1985 to previous levels.
Table 2.2 shows a drop from 155 (in 1978) to 101 (in 1985).
Even when all the other newspapers in the 1985 study are added, including the local evenings and weeklies, there are still only a total of 154 rape cases mentioned in 1985.
However, since there are more rape trials today than before, the reader of newspapers would find an increase in the number of reports over the years.
The distribution of these reports across the range of newspapers is quite different from earlier years with very important consequences as to the likelihood of the ‘average reader’ seeing a rape report.
Further, the nature of the coverage has dramatically shifted.
Most coverage of rape trials now takes place in the daily popular press rather than the special interest paper of the News of the World .
This moves the reporting from the periphery of newspaper journalism to the centre, with a consequent increase in the readership and the normalisation of these sorts of reports.
In the three popular dailies, the Sun , the Star and the Daily Mirror , there is considerable coverage and, on average, there is approaching one rape court case reported each week in these newspapers.
For the Sun and the Daily Mirror , where it is possible to compare with the numbers in 1978, both show significant increases — the Sun from thirty-two to forty-nine and the Daily Mirror , even more, from twenty-six to forty-five.
In contrast there has been the almost total cessation of the reporting of rape trials by the News of the World , as described above (see Table 2.3).
In terms of the newspapers in the present study, the sudden stopping of the News of the World coverage explains the fall in the total of rape   cases covered between 1978 and 1985.
However, given the larger circulation figures of the newspapers which are now reporting rape, the actual number of readers of rape reports has increased.
Rape reports are no longer the diet of a specialised readership, but are now part of the ‘normal’, ‘everyday’ news for a large section of the population.
A few cases dominate this reporting, while just over one-half of the rape cases mentioned appeared only in one sample newspaper.
If we had included more papers in the sample the coverage might have appeared more dense, but nevertheless it is clear that it is a minority of unusual cases which get most press exposure.
Table 2.4 shows that only around a dozen cases are mentioned in more than four of the sixteen newspapers in the study.
If only six national newspapers (the Sun, Daily Mirror, Star, Daily Mail, The Times and Guardian ) are examined, there are just eighteen cases which get coverage in more than three of these newspapers.
Not all reporting of rape is of sensational cross-examination.
Some were very short descriptive items, perhaps just mentioning that a person (or persons) had appeared on a remand hearing in court.
In fact, extensive detail is an exception rather than the rule but, as we shall argue, these are particularly important exceptions.
The predominance of a small minority of cases is further illustrated if we use two further measures of the extent of the coverage in addition to the gross number of reports, that of the number of days and the number of pages in which each rape case is featured.
There is a high  correlation between the number of pages, number of days and the number of overall reports of particular cases, and these measures confirm the view that some cases predominate in the newspapers.
Three cases (out of 114) have one-third (32 per cent) of the total coverage of rape court cases in our newspapers, as Table 2.4 indicates.
Nine cases have over one-half (52 per cent) of the total coverage, while the remaining 105 cases contribute the other one-half.
The ‘top’ three cases each appear on between ten and fifteen days, while no case above the ‘top’five appears on more than three days.
We shall examine the nature of these accounts during the next two chapters.
Amount, range and type of coverage of sexual assaults
Rape trials have been the subject of this analysis of these changes over time so far.
In our recent study of papers in the mid-1980s we broadened the focus and examined not only rape but also other forms of sexual assault and not only reporting of trials but also other stages, including the search and post-conviction.
The older work, like most of the other studies in this field, focuses on the dramatic moment of the court trial and the distinctive crime of rape.
However, this is a narrow selection from press reporting of sex crime and runs the risk of perhaps exaggerating the degree of sensationalism in the papers.
In this study we deliberately broadened the scope of the reporting under scrutiny.
In the rest of this chapter we examine not the trial stage, but the one prior to that — the search.
In later chapters we focus on reporting at other stages of the process.
During 1985 there were 17 cases of sex murder, 188 cases of sexual assault, and 29 cases of minor sexual offences included in our study.
The category of sexual assault includes but is not restricted to rape.
A case is defined when it is reported as one alleged offender involved in one event or series of events; also it is regarded as one case where members of the same group are involved in one event or series of events.
Sex and murder
It is not easy to identify which murder cases have a definite sexual element.
Sometimes a murder enquiry will have been going on for some days before it emerges that there is a sexual element involved.
The police may withhold this information for ‘operational’ or forensic reasons.
In our sample we had seventeen cases where there was definitely a sexual element or the specific mention of the lack of such an element.
It is unusual for a sex murder case to get widespread coverage during the police investigation.
There were only four such murder cases  (discounting the M4 Rapist case, which we consider separately) where there was more than three days' coverage or where more than five newspapers included reports of the search.
One case which involved the murder of a 3-year-old girl received massive coverage over an eight-day period and then spasmodic coverage over the next seven weeks until a 27-year-old man was arrested and charged with the child's murder.
The other major case, which later separated into two, involved the murders of two boys aged 14 and 6, which obtained fairly intensive coverage over a five-day period in the popular dailies.
The only other case where there was the suggestion of an explicitly sexual motive and which had more than three days' coverage was the murder of a 9-year-old boy which was reported in two national newspapers — the Daily Mail (on three days); the Daily Mirror (on one day)— and much fuller coverage in the local newspaper, the Lancashire Evening Post .
Apart from these four cases — all involving children — the other murders where there was a sexually explicit motive were few and far between, mentioned in perhaps two or three newspapers over a couple of days at most.
This was a surprising finding for it was thought — with the image of the Yorkshire Ripper search in mind — that the police investigation of major sex murders would be a prime fodder for newspapers.
So apart from the M4 Rapist, there was not sustained or widespread coverage of sex murderers killing adult men or women in the sample year.
Perhaps such cases do not occur with the frequency one may so readily believe or that such cases do not get reported in the national press with the frequency that one might have expected; or alternatively, perhaps the police are much more successful in capturing the so-called sex maniacs than we sometimes are led to imagine.
Sexual assault
The total of 188 cases of sexual assault means that, if you were reading all the newspapers in the study, you would have at least one new case of sexual assault, usually by an unknown assailant, to read about every other day.
However, ordinary newspaper readers do not see such a vast array of newspapers and reading some newspapers rather than others gives a very different view of the extent and type of sex crimes in a nation.
There are ways of considering the coverage — its range, amount and nature.
The range of coverage indicates the number of newspapers which cover a particular case, while the amount focuses especially on the number of days that a case is mentioned.
The relationship between the two concepts of range and amount is perhaps more complex than one might expect, for some local cases get sustained coverage in local newspapers but not get a mention in he nationals, while, on the other  hand, some events get a mention over a large number of newspapers on one particular day but never get featured again.
The other issue, which is of much greater interest, is the nature of the coverage and will be considered in Chapters 3 and 4.
Range of coverage in newspapers
The majority (73 per cent) of sexual assaults were reported in only one newspaper in our sample, as shown in Table 2.5.
A further 13 per cent were covered by only two newspapers; 5 per cent were covered by three newspapers and 4 per cent by four newspapers.
The remaining nine cases (5 per cent) which attract the attention of more than four newspapers are of particular interest.
These are the cases of which every newspaper reader in the country is likely to see some mention.
These are the cases which are used to illustrate ‘the state of the nation’.
Fewer than one in twenty of sexual assault cases in the survey are covered by more than four newspapers.
Even among those cases mentioned in the media, widespread coverage of a particular sexual assault case before the offender is charged is a comparative rarity.
Every case appearing in the national press is likely to appear in some local newspaper.
Although we had only a very limited range of local newspapers, half (69) of the 138 cases which appeared in only one newspaper appeared only in the local newspapers.
This is a very high number of cases appearing only in local newspapers, especially because of the imbalance of our sample towards the national papers.
This is shown in Table 2.6, where the Coventry Evening Telegraph and Lancashire Evening Post illustrate the pattern which emerges with regard to local newspapers.
Of the fifty reports of sexual attacks featured in the Coventry Evening Telegraph , thirteen refer to cases which are well outside the catchment area of the newspaper and these are also mentioned in the national press.
Of the remaining thirty-seven falling within its wide catchment area, only one (3 per cent) is mentioned in a national newspaper.
Similarly, of the twenty-three reports of sexual attacks mentioned in the Lancashire Evening Post , six refer to cases which are well outside the catchment area and are among the cases occasioning a national interest.
Of the remaining seventeen falling within its catchment area, only three (i.e. 18 per cent of the local cases) are mentioned in a national newspaper.
The difference between the two local evening papers in the numbers of the local cases reaching the national dailies is probably a chance fluctuation.
However, combining the results suggests that approaching one in ten of local sexual attacks, which are mentioned in the local press, may also be mentioned in the national press.
While this figure is likely to have a fair range of variation according to the amount of crime in the catchment area of the newspaper and the general interest of the newspaper in reporting sex crime, it still gives some idea that it is only a small minority of local cases that get featured nationally.
Despite the obvious interest in the coverage by national newspapers, this puts into context where the bulk of sex crime reporting for the country as a whole actually takes place — in the local newspaper.
However, for the individual readers the impact of reading of reports of sex crime in the national press is likely to be more important in moulding their view of what is happening in the nation.
Table 2.6 shows that particular newspapers are more likely to include reports of sexual attack than others.
Among the nationals the Sun clearly predominates in mentions of attacks with over 50 per cent again as many cases as even its rival the Star .
Among the locals, some — in this case the Coventry Evening Telegraph — have many more reports than other local newspapers.
The amount of sustained coverage
The length of coverage is taken to be the number of days that a case is mentioned during the search stage.
Sustained coverage of a particular sexual attack is a rarity.
In the 118 cases mentioned in at least one national newspaper (70 were in only local papers), there were only 19 cases (16 per cent) where the coverage of the incident lasted more than one day, and only 8 where this lasted several days.
If a report appears in only one national newspaper then, as Table 2.7 shows, the incident will invariably be mentioned on one day only.
There is a linear relationship between amount and length of coverage so that the more newspapers which cover an incident, the greater likelihood that coverage will continue over several days.
During the course of the year there were only eight cases which got widespread coverage and sustained coverage of several days.
The majority of cases with sustained coverage involved young girls (including a couple of cases where the victim was under 10) who were usually alone and the focus of a single attack.
In one case there were two 13-year-old girls, who had been sexually assaulted and left for dead.
Attacks on adult women were featured in a sustained manner in the search stage in national newspapers only  when there had been attacks on several women apparently by the same offender — for instance, a special rape squad was set up when a ‘sex beast’ was believed to be responsible for a series of attacks on at least twenty-three women.
Local newspapers
There are significant differences between the local and national newspapers.
Of the seventy cases which were reported only in the local newspapers in the sample, there were six cases (9 per cent) where the coverage lasted more than one day.
Among the local cases, adult women are the majority and those living in their homes at the time of the attack particularly feature.
Nevertheless, the case of a 13-year-old being raped at knife-point in a Coventry churchyard received the most sustained coverage.
With artist's impressions and scores of posters aiding the hunt for the rapist, the 250 tip-offs did not lead to an arrest.
Combining both national and local newspapers, only around one in eight of sexual assault cases will be mentioned in the newspapers on more than one day prior to a charge being laid.
However, there are differences between popular national and local newspapers in both the  style of reporting and in the type of cases which routinely get sustained coverage.
Minor sexual offences
There is very little interest indeed in sexual offences prior to the court appearance unless they are sexual assaults or murders with a sexual component In the 3,015 newspapers considered in the study, only 29 of these residual sexual cases were identified.
Only two appeared in more than one newspaper — each appearing in both the Sun and the Star .
In fact, the Sun (eight items) and the Star (six items) continue to dominate in a sparse field.
The Daily Mail, Daily Mirror , and Sunday People each had three items, with just one item in the Sunday Mirror .
The ‘quality press’—The Times, Guardian and Observer — had no such cases.
Of the local evenings, only the London Evening Standard had one item.
However, the number of these cases in the local weekly,Middlesex Chronicle , shows that there are likely to be large variations among local newspapers in the amount of coverage of these residual sexual offences.
While these miscellaneous cases feature very rarely indeed, they can vary widely in the amount of impact they make.
On the one hand, the Daily Mirror story had the important ingredient of television stars and the alleged exploitation of children in their front-page exclusive story, headlined Stars in Child Porn Probe , while on the other hand, more routinely, there are the very brief items in the local newspapers where the local police use the newspaper like a bulletin board to warn the local neighbourhood about a local nuisance who insists upon exposing himself.
While indecent exposure is certainly the most frequent activity to be mentioned in this category, the rarity can be recognised when one notes that only ten cases were mentioned prior to a charge being laid.
In fact, half the cases appeared in one newspaper — the Middlesex Chronicle , a local weekly — while the remainder were in the nationals.
There is a dramatic contrast between reports of ‘flashers’ in national and local newspapers.
There was some similarity among the headlines where there was almost without exception an attempt at a catch-line.
The nationals (Freezing Flasher Slips Up; Flash Photo Freak; Birdie that Bugged a Golfer; Smart Anna and the Flasher; Horse Kicks Flasher ) reflected a greater effort at constructing titillating headlines than the local weekly (Revealing Story; Double Exposure; Sex Pest Sought; Indecent Man; Serious Offence ).
Porn and vice involving children
An important focus of reports of sexual assaults and sex murders tends to be on the sexual attacks upon children.
On two occasions reports on  porn and vice involving children were the main front-page story.
One front-page exclusive in the Daily Mirror reported that child porn photos involving two top television stars were uncovered in a police raid on a photographic studio.
Allegedly the photos showed sex acts between young girls and a man, and teenage boys with two other men.
Some of the girls pictured were thought to be as young as 6.
Interest in child porn video scandals was maintained with a front-page Sunday Mirror story, headlined Child Porn Video Shock .
In contrast to the glamour of television stars featured in the earlier story, this one focused on the alleged exploits of a family living in a council house in rural England.
The message is clear.
The problem is rampant at every level of society.
It became explicitly used as part of a campaign against the sexual abuse of children.
Sex offences as humour
Finally, there is a miscellaneous conglomeration of sexual offences which are used as filler items in popular newspapers.
The items fill one or two column inches and are meant to amuse; the sexual innuendoes abound and the implicit humour is of the seaside postcard variety.
However, the apparent trivia is also serious.
Cases sometimes tread uneasily between being trying to be funny and pointing to serious danger.
They also raise the question as to who is supposed to find them funny.
Conclusion
This examination of the range and extent of sex crime reporting shows both how pervasive sexual violence has become as a news item, and also how only a very small number of cases are selected as being ‘newsworthy’.
The examination of rape coverage over time shows in particular how this topic has left the narrow audience of the News of the World and has entered the popular dailies on a large scale.
Sex crime is both common, and yet the cases are highly selected.
Even at the search stage which was the focus of much of the analysis in this chapter the cases were highly selective.
The criteria for selection will be examined in Chapters 3 and 4, which look at the content of the reporting in more detail.
The different stages of the legal processing of sex criminals give rise to different forms of press reporting, which will be considered in separate chapters.
We shall start, in Chapter 3, with the hunt for an offender after a sex crime has been reported to the police.
This is the stage during which the press will focus on the supposed characteristics of the offender and their fantasies have free rein since there is no man  actually in custody.
The count procedure gives rise to a different focus by the press, which will be considered in Chapter 4.
Here the focus often, but not always, turns to the woman, since it is by attempting to discredit her that the majority of men accused of sex crimes try to save themselves.
Chapter 5 examines the treatment of sex offenders after conviction.
Here only a very few unusual men are retained in the public eye for prolonged periods.
Finally we discuss press reporting of attempts to change the situation, firstly, in Chapter 6, by research and official reports, and then in Chapter 7, by changing the law as it pertains to the legal processing of sex criminals.
Seeking out the sex fiend
There is one major theme central to the way that the popular national newspapers handle the coverage of sex offences — that of the seeking out of the sex fiend.
These papers show connections and links between incidents in a drive towards the search and subsequent identification of a ‘sex beast’.
The manifestation of the sex beast in florid form does not happen very often in the media, but the coverage is consistently geared up to sponsoring the arrival of the sex fiend on the national scene.
The national press differs substantially from the local press in this respect.
The local newspapers are dealing much more closely with the reality of rape, while the national ones are often displaying the fantasy of the ‘video nasty’ in real life.
The search and creation of the sex beast by the popular press is not usually a gross misrepresentation but rather a selective portrayal of specific facts.
The pre-occupation with the delineation of a sex beast tends to mask the general reality of sex crime.
This sets the tone of what the general public read about sex crime.
Certain cases dominate the coverage in the national press, and by using these cases it is possible to indicate how the images of sex beast are constantly being preferred to readers.
However, there are many other cases — just mentioned once or twice by one or two newspapers — which contribute in various ways to the development of the same kind of image.
In this chapter we go beyond the ‘finished product’ which is often portrayed in the major sexual assault searches and the cases of sex murder.
Here we look more closely at some of the building blocks in the creation of the sex beast or, more accurately, the way that suitable building material is being shaped for possible use if an opportunity occurs.
The interrelationship between the police investigation of a sex crime and the newspaper coverage is important here.
The contrast between the national and local newspapers is a useful starting-point.
While they have roughly similar numbers of reports on sex offences at the search stage, their approach is very different.
National newspapers cull their stories from all over the country — often, indeed, from all over the world.
In many respects they define what is of ‘national’ concern, while not having any specific geographical constituency to answer to.
In contrast, local newspapers do have a more or less defined constituency and, in consequence, split their efforts between giving a brief commentary on topical cases occurring outside their geographical area, and providing routine and sustained coverage on local cases.
The most significant difference at the search and investigation stage is that the national press will retain interest in a case only if there is scope for the construction of a sex fiend who continues to wreak havoc on a community.
Their efforts tend to be directed towards the construction of such a sex fiend.
In contrast, local newspapers tend to take cases much less selectively and on occasions will continue to maintain interest in a case which seems unconnected with any other.
The popular national newspapers have an interest in encouraging the notion that there are links between incidents of sexual assault.
The construction of a sex fiend helps to sell newspapers, for the sex beast does attract a certain sort of interest.
Further, in professional terms, the systematic focus on serious crime is probably the nearest that many of the journalists on the popular newspapers will get to what the quality press regard as investigative journalism.
Investigative journalism usually implies intensive and detailed study revealing the ‘dark under-belly’ of a subject already in the public domain or dragging a subject which has remained conveniently hidden from view into the public domain.
However, serious investigative journalism often provides a challenge to the official version of reality and the search for a major sex criminal is rarely like that.
The newspaper coverage may have contributed to bringing the crime into the public domain, but essentially the press and the police are using the same repertoire of scripts.
The role of the press is rarely condemnatory of the police and usually supportive of the official efforts to solve crime.
Nevertheless, the press often has a role in providing new ideas, maintaining the momentum and quite simply continuing to ask the questions.
It is investigative journalism of a very limited scope.
The police have an interest in the investigation of a sex crime developing in a particular way.
So, similarly to the press, the police can proclaim their interest in solving the alleged crime but, if they are unsuccessful, the development of a sex fiend theme will enable the police to maintain resources in a particular area of investigation.
Further, the sex fiend conforms to their view of real sex crime.
It has the thrill of the chase and is really the only acceptable variant in relation to sex crime from the ‘cops and robbers’ scenario which in the eyes of most police officers is what policing is really about.
There is, of course, a problem which must be confronted by both the police and the press if — after a brief time has elapsed — the crime remains unsolved and no further atrocities are being committed which can, even remotely, be connected with the original outrage.
The police do not maintain a highly expensive investigation, while the press — with no new dimensions emerging — consider the boredom factor of their readers.
It is at this comparatively early stage that the imperatives become clear.
The press's role is not to solve crime but to sell newspapers.
If an investigation is failing to produce results, it is, of course, not in the best interests of either police or press to maintain a high profile in such cases.
It is not helpful to either party for the image to be portrayed that the investigation in which the press and the police contributed, in both economic and emotional terms, has failed.
Their interests coalesce in ensuring that they are in harness in orchestrating the general momentum of the investigation of sex crime.
The process of identifying links between incidents is enormously complicated.
Some of the recent arguments in favour of involving computers in the task of investigating crime are that links or patterns which would otherwise have been missed or overlooked may be cap-tured.
However, in practice, computer procedures are likely to produce as many links which are potentially misleading as links which are helpful.
The extra and fruitless work which these new procedures often engender may remain worthwhile if some new but positive ‘leads’ are also found.
But there are particular problems if the media hear of new ‘leads’ suggesting connections which ultimately prove to be unhelpful.
The enthusiasm among the media for computer assistance in solving sex crime is understandable but worrying.
The links are at a very low level of explanation.
The media, for example, are very loath to consider that sex crime may be related to men's and women's position in society.
The wealth of feminist literature which theorises violence in society seems of little interest to either the police or the popular press.
The interest is not about violence in general, which may provide the context for individual atrocities.
The interest is simply focused on the few individuals who commit several serious atrocities.
Indeed, in the best of all possible media worlds, all rapes and sexual assaults would be committed by just a few sexual maniacs and the press could then help to orchestrate the national search against these declared aliens in our midst.
The focus of media coverage in the popular press is implicitly working towards this chimera.
Producing the links
Considerable attention is often given to trying to make sense of an incident.
In this respect the press are often one step ahead of the police  in making explicit some possible connections: ‘Although police are keeping an open mind, it seems likely the anonymous phone caller and the darkly-clothed assailant are the same man’(Daily Mail ).
Other rape survivors may come forward and the police may quite explicitly make the links: ‘a second woman has told police at York that she was raped near the city's university only 200 yards from the spot where a girl student was subjected to a brutal, 90-minute sex attack’(Daily Telegraph ).
This report goes on to say that the attacks each took place at about midnight and were twenty days apart.
The first woman didn't report her ordeal and immediately left the area.
She heard about the second attack only on her return.
It is finally stated in the report that the police believed the rapes were carried out by the same man, who is described quite fully.
On this occasion the publicity or discussion in the town had had the beneficial effect that the first victim recognised the matter was being taken seriously and so reported the earlier incident.
It is not unusual for publicity to generate interest and encourage witnesses and, indeed, other survivors of sexual attacks to come forward.
The police are sometimes concerned that they may not have the full information before them.
Police investigating sex attacks at knife-point on a 29-year-old Filipino woman said that they ‘believe there may have been earlier victims — but the women have been too ashamed to report the attacks’(Mail on Sunday ).
In a crime which had front-page headlines in the Star on consecutive days, the London Evening Standard noted that the police were ‘looking into similarities with the rape of a 10-year-old girl in Hemel Hempstead five months ago’.
On the next day the Star's extended coverage identified a probe into four other attacks in the area which ‘were being studied by police to see if there was a link’.
The evening newspapers, however, noted that a suspect was being questioned about the current crime, so there was no further speculation about possible links between the various attacks.
A specific sex beast had not emerged, but the assumption that the incidents had been linked remained.
Sometimes the possible link can be from much longer ago than a few months and here the memory is almost invariably an unsolved murder case.
The police officer dips into a repertoire of previous cases available for connections to be tested.
The front page headlines in the Star HUNT FOR A DRACULA FIEND: Bike ride pals are snatched resurrected sombre memories
Police have re-opened the file on missing cyclist April Fabb, whose bicycle was found under a hedge in Norfolk 15 years ago.
Her body has never been discovered.
Inspector Brian Butcher said: ‘It is the case that always springs to mind when children are  involved’.
Police will be going over the old ground to see if there is any link with this latest attack.
The above cases largely reflect police thinking.
While overt conflict between the press and the police is rarely evident, it is quite apparent that the press sometimes goes beyond what the police feel is appropriate speculation in particular cases.
The nuances are often quite subtle, but the following example shows how the press is trying to construct a sex maniac, while the police seem to be thinking more on the lines of an abductor without sexual assault necessarily being involved.
Under the heading Warning to mums over sex attacks,the Star pointed to two sex attacks on a housing estate.
It stated that ‘Detectives believe the attacks are linked and fear the sex fiend could strike again’.
In fact, the two separate incidents concerned a 3-year-old girl who was enticed into woods near her home and sexually assaulted and then soon afterwards, a 3-year-old boy who was abducted from a play area and driven off at high speed before being dumped a mile and a half away forty minutes later.
A police spokesperson explicitly stated that: ‘There is no evidence that the boy was sexually assaulted but both incidents are very serious’.
The Star quoted this statement and yet still referred to both incidents as ‘sex attacks’.
To portray a sex fiend, the press needs sex attacks.
Connections which appear subsequently to have been falsely conceived are rarely abrogated, but are usually just conveniently forgotten.
On a very few occasions, however, the police do make a point of denying links or connections which had been too easily assumed.
The police do not always allow useless speculation to grow when an obvious link may be misleading.
For example, in two cases the attackers pretended to be taxi-drivers, but it was stated that ‘police do not believe the assaults [on a 17-year-old girl and a woman aged 25]were linked’(Daily Mail ).
Similarly, in the report of ‘a sex beast nicknamed ‘The Acne Kid’’(Star ), who boasted to the victim that he had just been freed from prison and said: ‘I've served time for rape before’, speculation about this possible link was scotched quickly.
The newspaper reported that ‘detectives believe it was just a vicious taunt to terrify the girl’.
So while the search for links is pervasive in the coverage of sex attacks by popular newspapers, it is important to recognise that the demand is not totally inexorable.
Connections are established
The next stage occurs when everyone concerned with the case assumes that there are connections between various incidents even though the evidence may still be shaky.
The defining agencies are no longer seriously in doubt that there is a sex fiend in our midst.
There is now an expectancy effect created that any new atrocity is likely to be connected to the earlier ones.
The police often collaborate in producing an expectancy effect.
Allied to the belief that more problems are on the way is the belief that sex offenders tend to escalate their activities.
Whether this is generally true or not is not strictly relevant to attempts to heighten or maintain interest in a case.
For example, fears of escalation expressed by the police set the tone for the Star headline BABY-FACED SEX BEAST ‘SET TO KILL' —‘Detectives believe the same man carried out two earlier attacks and is becoming increasingly violent.
Detective Inspector Jack Rogers, who is leading the hunt for the man, said: ‘We must catch him before he kills someone’’.
Such reports in a popular newspaper endorse a general belief in escalation.
While the blatant sex fiend image is comparatively rare in the local press, readers of the national press are fed a steady diet of established sex fiends.
Under headlines such as ‘Fiend's third victim’(Daily Mirror ) and ‘Terror of tape bondage rapist’(Sun ), it was noted how ‘a sticky-tape sex-fiend has struck for the third time’ bringing ‘terror to a triangle of Hampshire towns’.
Headlines such as KIDNAPPING SEX BEAST STRIKES AGAIN (Star ) and Victim No 2 of the car park rapist (Sun ) tell of ‘ugly and brutal attacks’.
What is striking about many of these cases is that there is rarely further mention in the national press, but the sex fiend message has been amply conveyed.
Providing a label
There is a ready use of such global terms as ‘sex beast’, ‘sex monster’, ‘sex fiend’, and so on, but the next stage is the accolade of a specific label.
Here the unidentified sex attacker has moved into a new phase, with an identity created for him by the media, often assisted by the police.
Some are not fully fledged nicknames, but simply aides-mémoire to assist in locating a description, so the headline 'JACKSON-STYLE' SEX BEAST HUNT simply helps to identify a rapist described as having ‘a ‘powerful’ athletic build and Michael Jackson-style shoulder-length dark, crinkly hair’(Star ).
Of course, names are not necessarily the creation of the press or the police.
The quality press and the Daily Mail do not so readily create nicknames, although they are willing to use the existing currency —‘Yesterday, detectives were hunting a man locals call ‘the stranger from Devil's Wood’ ' (Daily Mail).
Generally, though, the media and the police seem more actively involved in proselytising a particular stereotype.
The derivation of a particular label is often quite obvious.
A Sunday Mirror exclusive  linked to the television Crimewatch programme focused on a powerful attacker who was nicknamed ‘Muscle Man’ by detectives hunting him.
Others are less clear without some explanation: an attacker was known as ‘the Bizarre Beast’ because of the strange clothing he wore, which included a gas mask and a dress (Star ); however, no explanation was needed why a sex fiend who struck near a university for the second time in four days was known as ‘The Balaclava Rapist’(Sun ).
Similarly the headline ‘ACNE KID’ RAPES GIRL IN WOODS (Star ) is self-explanatory.
Others, such as the sex fiend dubbed the ‘Shopping Bag Rapist’(Sun ), and the soft-spoken brute, known as the ‘Lonely Heart Rapist’, believed to be a loner who regularly visited clubs for the divorced and separated in the Home Counties (Sun ), do not have nicknames which provide instant headlines.
Nevertheless, there are plenty that do.
Symbolic links with previous fiends
The final accolade for the sex beast in the popular media is to be linked to earlier fiends.
Some of these legendary figures may be dead, so, for instance, the Yorkshire Ripper took up a mantle laid down by the original Ripper in the last century.
Others, such as Dracula, have their origins in successful stories.
Dracula is the tale told in journals and letters of the vampire Hungarian, Count Dracula.
The book by Bram Stoker and published at the end of the last century has sold over a million copies.
However, it is probably the various film versions and sequels that enable youngsters of today to make such connections.
Under a massive front-page headline,HUNT FOR DRACULA FIEND (Star ), the report indicated that a 13-year-old was able to tell detectives that her attacker ‘had short dark hair streaked with grey and deep-set eyes that made him ‘look a bit like Dracula’ '.
Curiously this striking image was used only by the Star , which maintained the nickname in subsequent reports —DRACULA SEX FIEND ‘STALKED HIS VICTIMS' .
In other cases, the previous reign of horror may have more recently ended and the name — or rather the nickname — will still be easily recalled by readers.
In the sample year (1985), Malcolm Fairley, known as ‘The Fox’, was sentenced at the end of February and immediately became a legendary sex beast to whom several subsequent reports explicitly referred.
Indeed, three days later the Fox clones began to emerge.
The three reports in the Daily Mail (Masked rapist attacks three women in flat); the Sun (RAPE FIEND IN FOX ‘COPY’); and the Star (BEAST HUNTED: WHITE-MASK RAPIST ATTACKS THREE GIRLS)show the varying ways that such cases are presented in the popular press.
The contrast is clear.
The Daily Mail does not make any reference to The Fox at all.
The Sun , in the title, the photograph of ‘the mask of fear’ and the body of the text, refers to the assaults as ‘a carbon copy of the brutal rapes carried out by pervert Malcolm Fairley, the so-called Fox, who was jailed for life last Tuesday’.
On this occasion the Star goes one stage further not only by stressing the similarities with The Fox but also by giving this new phenomenon an identity of his own —‘police have nicknamed him The White Fox’.
A week later it is evident that Fox-type gear was coming into common usage with no need to refer back to the specific case —‘a teenage girl was seized by two men wearing ‘fox-style’ balaclavas and raped at knife-point’(London Evening Standard ).
The Sun made the connection quite explicit —‘They were wearing balaclava helmets like the Fox rapist, who held the area in terror last summer, and skinhead-style Dr Marten boots’.
This report noted that this was the same area as terrorised by The FOX in the previous summer.
Again there is no further mention of this incident in the study.
Later in the year a case which appeared only in the Sun and The Times was unusual in that the police suggested that they had a particular suspect in mind.
Both newspapers noted that he had been nicknamed ‘The Teenage Fox’:
SCHOOLGIRL RAPED BY YOUNG ‘FOX'
A sex fiend dubbed the Teenage Fox has raped a 15-year-old girl at knife-point.
The attack is the second by the 17-year-old youth, and last night police — who believe they know his identity — warned he could strike again.
The rapist, who has been living rough in wooded, hilly countryside, grabbed his latest victim in a village near Chippenham, Wilts.
He had a Golden Labrador with him.
Police have been hunting him since he raped a girl of 11 at Warminster, Wilts, three weeks ago.
(Sun )
In the above case The Times mentioned that ‘the rapist has been leading a fox-style existence living rough in wooded countryside’, but within a few months it was clear, in yet another case, that it is the nickname itself which becomes crucial rather than any particular style of existence.
The opening sentence of the Sun report — under the headline Girl, 6, raped by ‘New Fox' — has the echo of the earlier report reproduced above —‘A savage sex fiend dubbed The New Fox was being hunted by police last night….’
The attacker committed the offence in the same area as ‘one of the major hunting grounds for the notorious Fox’.
However, there is  another reason for the assailant to be christened the ‘New Fox’ for the 6-year-old girl ‘told a woman detective last night how her attacker's car was littered with empty Fox's Glacier Mint wrappers, paper and carrier bags’.
This case provides the clearest indication of how the popular press may trade in deciding the appropriate nickname for a new case when the Star decided to focus special attention on this rape of a 6-year-old ‘He's been called The Beast, The Monster, the evil sex maniac….
We have named him the Redway Rapist’.
Variations may abound until a particular title sticks.
In another case around this time we can see how different newspapers use familiar but different tags to identify a particular ‘sex beast’.
According to the Star , he was known as the ‘Night Stalker’, while the Sunday People displays the headline,TERROR OF THE COPYCAT FOX .
The copycat evidence
We have focused on the evidence that demonstrates how the so-called Fox — jailed for life earlier in the year — continued to emerge in different guises during the rest of the year.
Sometimes it appeared that the police and the media were christening subsequent sex beasts as variants of The Fox, while, much more rarely, on other occasions it seemed to be the offender who took up the mantle.
In the next chapter on the court trials, we produce further evidence that suggests that the copycat phenomenon is a danger to which the media may be contributing.
Malcolm Fairley was the major sex criminal in the previous year whose exploits got widespread coverage at the search stage.
However, towards the end of the sample year there was the ‘M4 Rapist’, who received enormously detailed coverage about the way that he had trapped a woman driver on the motorway.
Within the same week as this report of the M4 rape, the Sun ran the headlines M4 COPYCAT FIEND GRABS GIRL: he attacks her like car rapist .
In the only report traced of this incident, the Sun reports that
police said the attacker probably planned to rape [the 14-year-old schoolgirl]in his car after reading about the ordeal of the motorway monster's victims.
A senior detective said: ‘We think it could be a copycat assault.
The description of the man doesn't fit that of the person wanted for the other attacks.’
Does the copycat phenomenon exist?
There is little doubt that the popular newspapers and the police embrace the copycat phenomenon with enthusiasm, so they may be misleading on many occasions with the supposed examples they sometimes put on display.
Sometimes, of course, there is really no link at all as we found with the ‘New Fox’ having a sweet tooth for Fox's Glacier Mints.
However, there is on other occasions a remarkable similarity of techniques, of clothes and of weapons.
How do they learn of the detail and, indeed, where do they learn the specific techniques?
It would be tempting to focus on ‘video nasties’, which are seen by some as the ready harbinger of many of our social ills.
The front-page of the Sun confidently stressed that The Fox ‘based his sickening crimes on hard-core videos hired from sex shops’.
However, the speed with which copycat phenomena sometimes appear gives no scope for video nasties being the link.
The concern about the unbalanced getting imageries for action from porn videos and television violence has not been matched by a concern that the popular newspapers may also be providing similar material.
Did the squalid detail of the atrocities of The Fox which the press featured so fully have no effect on the variety of Foxes spawned and featured so prominently over the next few months in the pages of these newspapers?
The enthusiasm with which the video nasties explanation as a crucial influence is embraced by many newspapers provokes three thoughts.
Firstly, attention to video nasties by the newspapers takes the attention off their own sensationalist coverage of sex offences.
Secondly, the same relationship to sex offending could be posited with regard to the reporting in popular newspapers as is adjudged with the supposed link to video nasties.
Thirdly, it draws attention away from more serious explanations of sex crime in terms of those aspects of social organisation and gender relations which encourage so many men to engage in sexually aggressive behaviour towards women.
The development of television coverage
While television coverage has not been monitored in the same way as the press in this study, there seems an increasing focus in television on sexual cases where there are thought to be many victims.
Not only does this occur on specific crime programmes, such as Crimewatch , but also more routinely on the national and regional news programmes.
To take one example, in November 1987 the North-West Regional News introduced by Stuart Hall had a long feature as their opening item:
Good evening to you.
There has been an important development in the hunt for a rapist suspected of attacking more than twenty women in the North-West.
Detectives are hoping that he may be trapped through a gold bracelet found at the scene of his latest crime.
Police in Cheshire and Greater Manchester have joined forces to investigate a series of attacks which span more than six years.
Paul Craven has more details….
Paul Craven noted how a series of attacks had stopped but…
Operation Osprey has now been set up to tackle a fresh wave…a team of detectives are trying to establish a concrete link between the cases [Craven is talking against a backcloth of computers].
If it is one man, then they believe he is white, aged between 25 and 35, well-built and may have a beard; his accent is that of North Manchester or South Lancashire.
The code-name, Osprey, has been chosen with care, a bird of prey which hunts in the early morning…
The words are quite carefully chosen.
The report does not insist that it is one man who has committed all the offences, but the implication is that is the case.
At present, regional news broadcasts have the tone of a modified sensationalist journalism.
With the increasing demand to attract larger audiences, it will be of interest whether television will shift down the road of creating the sex beast at every opportunity.
Conclusion
In this chapter we have traced the detailed mechanisms of the creation of the sex fiend in the press.
There is a highly selective process by which the press places certain stories in the public eye and not others.
While the local press reports many cases of sexual  assault with small factual stories, the popular national press generally pursues primarily those which fit its thesis of the sex fiend.
With the focus on the serious and the spectacular, there is a distorted picture of sexual assaults in which the spectacular multiple rapes are identified as the sum of sexual assaults.
They are not.
Among sexual assaults multiple rapes of strangers are almost certainly the exception rather than the rule.
The notion of the sex fiend presents a particular stereotype of sex crime which hinders the full understanding of the nature and range of sex offences.
Sex crime in court
Introduction
During the search stage of a sex crime hunt the focus of the press is usually on the violent man himself.
When he is caught it is his trial which is the next stage of the criminal justice system to attract media attention.
As a consequence the focus of the media's stories also changes.
Interest often shifts on to the woman, and the interaction between the sex criminal and his victim.
In order to defend the accused man his defence lawyers will often attempt to implicate the woman as an active participant rather than helpless victim.
In a rape case the typical defence argument is that the woman consented to intercourse, while in sex murder the defence may be that she provoked him.
In each case it is the woman and her conduct that the man's lawyers will try to put on trial.
The press reporting at this stage is thus quite different from that of the hunt.
The press often go beyond the courtroom to seek out other sexual actors for their stories.
Previous sexual partners of the accused man may be interviewed about the details of their sex life with him.
That is, the sexual conduct of women not present at the trial is dragged into the media's version of the event, the better to titillate the reader.
Sex and murder
In our study year there were forty-five murder trials reported from the courts where some sexual component was raised as an issue, even if to be denied.
In cases of sex murder the victim is not there to defend herself against accusations that her conduct was so dreadful as to excuse, at least partially, the man's killing her.
This is the ultimate occasion in which a man can attack a woman's reputation and conduct with impunity.
Unlike cases of rape or indecent assault, where the survivor's account of the episode often provides the point of departure and main focus of attention, the victim of a murder attack is dead.
It is rare that a  victim dies after giving an account of the interaction to an official authority.
What took place has to be reconstructed with the principal witness for the prosecution being unavailable.
The prosecution will give an account and the defence may challenge that account.
However, it often seems to be the case that the prosecution and the defence move quickly towards an agreement on what happened.
The interests of the prosecution to secure a conviction and the interests of the defence to ensure that the verdict is one of manslaughter rather than murder may on occasion coalesce, so that it often appears — in reading the newspapers that consensus rather than conflict between prosecution and defence is the general order of the day.
In brief, murder cases often lack the court interaction where two versions seriously clash.
In murder cases the victim's account remains missing.
In the literature there has been concern expressed how the dead victim may be blamed.
For example, Radford presents the killing of Jane Asher in which her husband was portrayed in court as a model husband and father, with his dead wife as a ‘two-timing flirt’.
In that case the judge passed a six months' suspended prison sentence, allowing the defendant to walk free from the court.
Lees argues that such ‘provocation’ is regularly used by some male defendants as a defence or mitigation for killing ‘their’wives and lovers.
Blaming the victim
However, the moral status of the victim is often portrayed as ambivalent in murder trials.
There are a range of behaviours and relationships which provide a variety of ways of blaming the victim.
Situations vary as to whether sexual relations are an expected component of the relationship.
In each of these situations the dead victim's reputation is often called into question.
Without chance of rebuttal, the victim both implicitly and explicitly was made to take some of the blame.
It was much more often the man's account, whether alive or dead, which gained prominence in the headlines reporting the case.
In the aftermath of a sensational trial, the popular papers sometimes unearthed persons not directly involved in the case to continue the titillation.
The former lovers of the men were often compromised in such stories, while the former male lovers of women are never similarly exposed.
We shall examine the different ways in which women can be blamed, according to the degree of intimacy and stability of the relationship they had with their killer.
Domestic murders
Domestic murders dominate and sexual aspects quite often emerge in such cases.
As there were more cases of the husband killing his wife  rather than vice versa, it is perhaps not surprising that his account often grabs the headlines and his wife's account is muted.
So, for example, a 44-year-old man maintained that sex taunts drove him to strangle his wife, which produced the headline SEX JIBE MADE ME A KILLER (Daily Mirror ).
The two newspapers reporting this case both focused on his claim that sex taunts from his 56-year-old wife over his impotency provoked him to strangle her with a flex.
In contrast, the prosecution alleged that he had murdered his wife so that he could bring his 17-year-old mistress to live in his house.
While the newspapers noted in the text that he was besotted with his 17-year-old mistress, the thrust of the message was that his wife was essentially to blame.
Men's unfaithfulness is rarely made the focus of a condemnatory press report during the trial, while women's infidelity as the cause of trouble often becomes a major theme.
Unfaithful husbands are the norm, while unfaithful wives excite no sympathy, just blame.
It is the cuckolded husband who kills who gets the sympathy.
In a manslaughter case in which the dead wife had had affairs with other men, Mr Justice Leonard said ‘[the defendant]deserved sympathy because his life had become miserable’.
A man who reacted violently when he saw his wife in a car with a bus driver, after his wife had refused him sex for six years, was told by the Recorder of London, Sir James Miskin QC: ‘You saw this man kissing your wife and understandably felt the misery of the situation.
I accept you had no intention of killing….
Any man who had to endure what you endured might have reacted in the same way ’(our emphasis).
There were only two cases reported where the wife killed her husband and a sexual relationship or activity was at issue.
Another involved a common-law relationship.
The contrast in the reporting of these cases is worth noting.
A local case which produced front-page headlines —‘Vicious schemer’ is jailed for life SHAM TEARS OF AN EVIL WIFE — described how a former Coventry man who had moved to become a licensee in a Yorkshire pub had been killed by his 32-year-old wife and her barman lover.
Described in court as a hard and callous woman who hated her husband, in this case there was no sympathy for the killer at all.
A policeman spoke of the popularity of the landlord —‘[He]was very well thought of, very popular at the pub.
All those we interviewed couldn't speak too highly of him’.
As she had pledged that she was innocent, she offered no account as to why she allegedly hated her husband.
In this case the victim is totally exonerated, for he is the innocent husband being killed by his wicked or evil wife.
In the other case, where a wife killed her husband, there was widespread coverage when a judge decided not to jail a 25-year-old civil servant who had shot her husband through the heart just a week after  their marriage.
He put her on probation for three years on condition she remained an in-patient at a psychiatric hospital.
The front-page story in the Star —JUDGE'S MERCY: WIFE KILLED KINKY COPPER Sordid facts of sex life kept secret — told how the judge deliberately drew a veil over the last days of the victim, informing the court that the defendant went berserk after being subjected to ‘abuse, violence and sexual perversions’.
After reading statements in the case, the judge went on: ‘I could hardly accept it until I saw things found in their house’.
However, the judge refused to read the statements in public:
There seems no reason to blacken anyone's name by going into details of their marriage.
One doesn't want to be seen to be covering anything up.
But it is encapsulated in the phrase that she was subjected to sadistic behaviour over a lengthy period of time which she accepted because she was in love with him.
On this occasion the judge was trying to protect the reputation of the female defendant, but the enthusiasm of the popular press could not so easily be quelled.
The Star , for example, had managed to locate their wedding photographer, who claimed that the day after the wedding ceremony the couple asked him to do some pictures with the woman ‘posing in sexy French underwear’.
After the verdict was given, the newspapers interviewed other women in the dead policeman's life who reported on his previous sexual conduct.
A named 40-year-old nurse who was said to be his previous girlfriend for seven years was reported as saying about her sex life with the man: ‘We had a good love life.
[The dead man]was a good lover.
It was robust at times, but there was never anything kinky about our relationship’ and that she did not think he was capable of what he had been accused.
The lengthy interview from a former girlfriend attempted to portray an alternative version which inevitably placed the dead man in a more favourable light.
This former lover seemed a willing participant in providing this story but of much more concern are the occasions when former associates, not directly associated with a sordid murder case, are resurrected by the press for exhibition.
This occurs in cases where there is no attempt to rehabilitate the reputation of the man, whether he be killer or killed.
The reputations of others who may not have been so willing to be identified are sacrificed in the quest for titillation.
A 23-year-old woman poured paraffin over her 38-year-old lover and set it alight as he lay bound hand and foot, and blindfolded, ‘wearing a pair of her open-crotch panties and nylon stockings’ on a mattress in their living-room.
The woman pleaded not guilty to his murder, but the Crown rejected her plea of guilty to manslaughter, so there was a  contested trial lasting several days, which was fully reported in the popular dailies.
Later the remarks of the sentencing judge perhaps indicated why the manslaughter charge was not originally accepted:
The method of killing which you employed was terrible indeed.
What you did went far beyond what can be acceptable to the rule of law.
[The named man]met his death at your hands in a manner which must be considered revolting by all right thinking people.
However, there was no attempt to exonerate the reputation of the dead man.
Indeed, it emerged that he had been convicted of killing the child of a former girlfriend and had assaulted the defendant and her 3-year-old daughter.
The sex-slave theme was maintained throughout unchallenged —SEX SLAVE BURNED HER LOVER ALIVE and KINKY LOVER BURNED ALIVE BY HIS BLONDE SEX SLAVE .
The text related her evidence:
I was not a woman any more.
I felt inferior…
I had pictures in my mind of all the sex fantasies we had been through….
I do not know why I did it.
I was not my normal self…
I felt very deeply for him.
I loved him….
He wanted me to be his slave — not the woman I am.
He made me dress in erotic underwear and to dress as his sex slave.
After being sentenced the sex-slave image remains, but she has now become a wronged mother (Daily Mail ) or mum (Sun ).
Even the Sun avoids the pejorative term, ‘girl’, for this 23-year-old woman whose reputation comes out unscathed from the media coverage —Brute was burned alive by mother who lived in fear SEX SLAVE JAILED FOR KILLING SADIST LOVER (Daily Mail );SEX-SLAVE MUM GETS 3 YEARS IN JAIL She burned kinky lover (Sun ).
In the aftermath of the trial, the Sun's report mentioned that the dead man had ‘boasted that he turned more than SIXTY young mums into his personal sex slaves’.
The Sun said that the man's death
delighted another of his victims, pretty [full name given]who suffered a three-month nightmare at his hands.
The monster was jailed in 1978 for cruelty to [named person]and her son [also named]two.
Jenny, now happily married, cried when she heard her torturer was dead and said: ‘I'm relieved I will never again feel my stomach churn when a man with his silhouette passes me in the street’.
This is, of course, titillating information for its readers, but we need to remember that this woman was now said to be happily married; her child would now be aged 10 and could be quite aware of a trial which was getting widespread coverage in the popular newspapers.
The Star's managed to trace many more previous victims than the solitary find of the Sun .
The Star quoted ‘five women [who]regret the day they accepted his advances’.
Each woman was identified with her full name and, in three cases, the naming of the town where the women were currently living.
It was stated that the 20-month-old child he killed twelve years earlier was a named woman's ‘illegitimate son’.
In contrast, despite its front-page headline —Sixty slaves in the kinky fiend's harem —Daily Mirror did not identify or feature the comments of any of his previous victims.
The desire for personal disclosure among the popular newspapers is not always universal.
Other sex murder trials
There were no trials where there was a steady boyfriend/girlfriend relationship, but an example of a more casual relationship indicates the extremely of the way that a girl could be held to blame for her own murder.
An account which remained unchallenged in the press reports was that a girl of 12 had ‘provoked’ her death by failing to reveal her age prior to sex play.
Headlined Youth murdered schoolgirl in stabbing frenzy (Lancashire Evening Post ) this involved a 17-year-old youth stabbing to death in a fit of temper a 12-year-old girl whom he knew.
The youth pleaded guilty to murdering the girl.
The court was told that he had killed the girl after taking part in sex play with her and then discovering that she was under age.
The defence counsel said the defendant had admitted losing his temper on finding out that the girl was under age.
Passing sentence, the judge said the fact that he had confessed would be a matter to be considered in his favour when consideration was given as to the time of his release back into the community.
Here the girl died, but on other occasions the message is sometimes that women's actions may have dire consequences for the fragile male, even though she herself may be unharmed.
A headline in the Sun more than hints where the blame should lie —GIRL'S LUSTFUL TOUCHES DROVE ME TO KILLING .
Here a jilted lover is said to have ‘snapped when he saw his girlfriend fondling a man's bottom in a pub.
He was so enraged that he blasted his love rival to death in front of the girl’.
The trial continued but the newspaper coverage did not.
The message had been made that the woman had caused the outburst and the tragic outcome.
The implicit sympathy for the killer given in the coverage of newspapers which are routinely advocating more severe sentencing strategies might be considered contradictory.
A further example of the assumption that women should be willing to provide sex for interested men seems implicit in the Sun headline —LANDLORD'S DEATH LUST FOR  GIRL Lodger shunned sex .
By suggesting that the ‘fun-loving’ woman lodger shunned or avoided sexual intercourse with the landlord begins to suggest that the ‘normal’occurrence is for women lodgers in such situations to allow sexual intercourse to take place.
Even the prosecuting counsel seemed sympathetic —‘Being so close to his desire without being able to fulfil his passion proved too much for him’.
‘Fun-loving’ in the report becomes almost synonymous with being generally available for sex.
Hence, she is considered to share the blame.
If female lodgers are regarded as ‘available’, it is also clear what the popular newspapers think of female hitch-hikers.
The prosecution alleged that a 37-year-old man had picked up a 29-year-old woman when she was hitch-hiking from London towards Oxford, and ‘went berserk’ when she rejected his sexual advances.
The headline in the London Evening Standard's report —I'm sorry, says man on murder charge — was transformed the next day into the more familiar story of girl hitch-hiker getting herself into trouble.
The focus was on the victim and not the assailant.
The Daily Mail headline —Greenham girl's ride to death — concentrated on the fact that this 29-year-old woman had been involved in the Greenham peace movement.
The headline neatly shifted the danger to being involved with the protest group and implicitly reversing the message of the Greenham woman by suggesting that their activities produce a ‘ride to death’.
The Sun's headline also focusing on the victim produces a different slant,for Hitch-girl ‘spurned sex' again hints that ‘hitch-girls’ are normally willing partners.
In the Sun's report, the accused was alleged to have told the police that he stripped the victim naked and cut off one of her breasts to make it look like ‘the work of a madman’.
There is no serious challenge to this account and the impression remains that he was not a ‘madman’ but a normal man who had met a hitch-hiker who unusually ‘spurned sex’.
It emerged after the trial that the dead woman was the daughter of one of Britain's top psychiatrists.
After the case he was asked by a reporter if he would offer advice to other hitch-hikers.
He said: ‘People will always hitch-hike.
I have given people lifts, and will continue to do so’.
Such a low-key comment is not what is required by the popular press at the conclusion of a traumatic trial.
The father's balanced sentiment was reported only in the Daily Mail .
We have shown that it is rare for the sex fiend image to be constructed at the trial stage.
In fact, a case where the image of sex fiend has been developed at the search stage is often over quickly at the trial stage.
The plea is often a guilty one.
In such cases the sex beast image is maintained by press coverage after the trial.
One would expect some cases to get widespread coverage, especially when there is serious re-offending after a previous life sentence.
For example, SEX KILLER GETS LIFE…
AGAIN related to a case  reported only in the Daily Mail .
In 1971 this offender had been given a ten-year sentence for attempting to rape a 69-year-old woman.
In 1978 he was given a life sentence for attacking a 72-year-old woman after breaking into her home, but this was reduced to eight years on appeal.
On the present occasion he was convicted of attempting to rape and then murdering an 81-year-old widow.
This case merited only a six-inch column in one newspaper, but probably failed to get widespread coverage on several grounds: the case was held outside London (in Manchester) and the case was not contested.
Nevertheless, the test of interest for the popular newspapers seems whether such a case has the potential for titillation rather than an outcry at such wickedness.
The potential for titillation regarding a freed rapist emerged in another case which had considerable coverage over a three-day period.
The front-page coverage on the first day of the trial —FREED RAPIST ‘CAME BACK TO KILL' (Daily Mirror )— revealed that a rapist had returned from jail after being released to murder his victim.
After a sex attack two years earlier he had said to the 40-year-old spinster that ‘If you call the police I'll kill you’.
He was alleged to have carried out his threat after being released on parole.
He denied the charge.
The prosecuting counsel said that nothing would be heard to criticise the victim's character, who was timid and nervous.
Despite the assurances of the prosecuting counsel, the next day the headlines certainly gave a different picture, although the newspapers do make it clear that it is the rapist's account —Zoe stripped as we talked, claims rapist (Daily Mail );RAPIST SAYS VICTIM ZOE STRIPPED OFF (Star).
The accused maintained that he had gone to her home to ask if she had received a letter of apology from him for his earlier crime.
He maintained they talked, and then the woman went upstairs, stripped, and lay on a bed.
When he was sentenced to life for killing his former rape victim, the main focus was on the release of the rapist:MP's fury as revenge murderer gets life WHY WAS THIS MONSTER FREED?
(Daily Mirror );Revenge threat was ignored BLUNDER THAT LED RAPIST TO KILL (on the front page of the Daily Mirror ).
The blunder was the apparent failure of detectives to inform the Parole Board that he had threatened to return to kill her.
The Home Office admitted that the West Yorkshire police's decision not to tell the Parole Board of his threat was ‘highly regrettable’.
The Daily Mail stressed that this failed to console the victim's distraught family, friends and workmates, her MP or the probation service, who were also not told of the killer's threat.
The MP demanding an inquiry said: ‘I am appalled that this man was given parole.
He should not have been allowed out under any circumstances.
There must never be a repeat of this horrendous case’.
After this type of cathartic outburst, no one seemed to reflect that this offender had a  determinate sentence and would be allowed out eventually.
The focus was on the parole decision; the early parole date simply brought forward a situation which would not have been averted.
It is only at this point that the newspaper reader learns that the rapist and the victim had been next door neighbours at the time of the original offence.
Further, while the rapist was in prison, the victim had applied to the housing department for a change of flat, but after discussions with a social worker, she apparently decided to stay put.
Of course, the ‘blunder’ banner makes an exciting headline, but there is no systematic attempt to consider where and what the blunder exactly was.
It was said in the Daily Mail that
the probation service held their own inquiry to see if they had made any mistakes.
West Yorkshire's chief probation officer said: ‘The baffling thing is, even with hindsight, we are still left wondering what more we could have done to stop this killing’.
The outrage eagerly orchestrated by the newspaper did not focus in a serious way on the needs and dangers facing rape survivors.
There was no attempt to inform the public whether there was a significant risk of this happening to others.
The message which most potential victims that is, all women — would have grasped by default from this case was that threats made by a rapist may not be empty ones.
Our discussion is not exhaustive of murders which involve a sexual relationship.
The revenge motive may be apparent.
In one case, a 36-year-old man was imprisoned for four years for the manslaughter of a 37-year-old craft teacher after he had discovered that his daughter was spending the night at the teacher's home, while an allegedly brutal husband was shot dead by the wife's father after she ‘fell into a nightmare of crime, violence and bizarre sex’.
The latter case found its way on the front page of the Sunday People under the headline BEAUTY QUEEN'S LIFE OF CRIME Terrorised wife's story .
This front page trailer of what is characterised as her ‘Bonnie and Clyde’ ordeal was continued with a double-page spread on the inside pages.
The theme of competent sexual performance is dominant, for
despite his string of conquests [he]had one big hang-up.
He was afraid of not measuring up as a lover and worried about his performance in bed.
‘He had an inferiority complex when it came to love-making’,[his wife revealed], ‘but it never killed his great sexual appetite’.
The physical violence on herself and on their baby son was vividly described.
Her account in effect exonerates her father, who was now starting a life sentence for shooting her husband.
Finally, the violence reached the point where she left and stayed in a refuge for battered women.
But she returned and eventually her husband was shot dead by  her father.
It is reported that police were satisfied that the wife acted under duress in the various crimes in which she got involved in.
Where the blame lay, in the case of the father who stabbed the teacher in a rage after discovering that his daughter was spending the night at the teacher's home, was made less clear.
The girl had claimed that she had been having an affair with the teacher for some months.
Later the trial judge lifted an order banning publication of the girl's claim that her father had sexually interfered with her.
The Sunday People continued in effect to challenge her claims:LIES!
LIES!
LIES!
A schoolgirl's ‘fantasies’ and the teacher who tried to help her .
The teacher's widow continued to deny that her husband had had sex with his killer's 15-year-old daughter, and the dead man's brother spoke of the ‘fantasies’ of the teenage schoolgirl.
The teacher's brother also said: ‘All he was trying to do was help.
He felt it was his duty to protect the girl if her claims against her father were right and just not a 1 5-year-old girl's fantasies’.
No further items were traced referring to this case and so the confusion was allowed to remain.
There were six cases where the relevance of homosexuality was evident.
It may simply be used as a taunt which is deemed provocative and so portrayed as one of several triggering actions for the killing.
For example, in a case —Sex slur drove man to lash out at bully who mocked him: Killer stepson's years of torment — where a bullying stepfather was killed by the stepson he had tormented for years, one of the taunts mentioned was the mocking of his desires to get on at college, calling him a ‘funny boy’.
Usually the detail in such details was minimal.
There was only one case where the homosexual activity leading to death was identified as part of a ‘kinky sex session’.
This case was covered only by the Sun , which had two reports under the headlines Gay ‘Killed with Chain' and DOG-CHAIN SEX KILLER JAILED .
In the first brief item the court heard that a 27-year-old chef had strangled a 25-year-old homosexual friend with a dog choke-chain after a ‘slave and master’ sex session.
It was said that they had met only hours earlier.
They had sniffed drugs and then the chain was used to heighten sexual excitement.
Similarly, the murder of a prostitute provided the only case where lesbianism was explicitly mentioned.
Child murder
At the search stage a child sex murder produced considerable coverage, but there was little or no sexual titillation employed during such trials.
In the year there were seven such cases where there were trials or remand hearings of which only one concerned a parent killing a child.
This latter case indicates how matters of sexual deviance can occur in newspaper reports after the trial.
The father was found guilty of the manslaughter of his baby daughter of three months.
During the trial there was no evidence of sexual abuse put forward.
As he began his jail sentence the Daily Mirror revealed details of his life:JEALOUS MONSTER WHO LIKED KINKY SEX .
It was clear from the reports that he was an insanely jealous man who, for example, ‘made [his wife]walk with her head down so she couldn't see the bulge in men's trousers’.
Two of the remand cases had featured earlier in the year at the search stage.
Newspapers sometimes appeared to be providing the rallying cry for future demonstration.
For example, in the Leoni Keating case, interest was maintained by reporting fully the reaction of the crowd to the accused's first appearance in court —CROWDS HURL EGGS AT LEONI CASE MAN: Mums scream ‘Hang him' (Sun );FURY OVER LEONI MAN (Star );WIVES’ FURY AT MAN IN LEONI CASE (Daily Mirror ).
They were described as ‘screaming women’ or ‘a screaming mob of women’, providing ‘a gauntlet of hate’’.
However, the general focus of the Sun and the Star was to use the occasion to emphasise the demand for the return of capital punishment —‘outside the hearing, mother of five, Mrs Sandra Daniels, founder of the pro-hanging CHILD organisation carried a banner reading: ‘Did Leoni die in vain?’’
On the day after the funeral of 3-year-old Leoni, the popular newspapers had another case to focus upon for their front page headlines:EVIL OLD MAN WHO KILLED KIRSTY GETS LIFE (Daily Mail );60 YEARS OF EVIL Kirsty's killer, 79, led a life of crime (Sun ).
The trial had been featured for the previous three days.
The fact that the 79-year-old man was the oldest man standing trial for murder this century was an extra ingredient of interest.
While most of the newspapers reported this feature, the Sun was the only newspaper to point out that ‘records show the only man older than him to face a murder charge was hanged in 1822 when he was 80’.
The exact nature of the sexual assaults was not described in the newspaper reports.
The exception was the Sun , which reported that the child's sexual organs had been cut in the attack upon her.
When the verdict was announced, the London Evening Standard itemised the catalogue of the killer's violent record stretching over sixty years.
The possible links with other unsolved child murders began to be explored.
This was the real reminder that this was a sex beast who had been caught.
When child killers appear in court, newspapers do seem to resist from giving many of the more gruesome details of the tragedy.
Certainly the child victims are not those whose reputations the newspapers would wish to question or challenge.
Other themes must emerge.
In the present case, the scope for widespread coverage was enhanced by linking the outcome with the demand for the death sentence.
The three popular  dailies took up this theme in their inside-page stories with almost identical headlines:Woman juror hits out at child killer, HOW CAN THEY LET THIS ANIMAL LIVE?
(Daily Mirror );HOW COULD THEY LET THIS ANIMAL LIVE?
Juror slams Kirsty killer (Star );TOO WICKED TO LIVE (Sun ).
Described as just one moving incident amid scenes of shock, revulsion and anger in the packed Old Bailey juryroom, this provides the focus on the sex beast and an interesting contrast.
Unlike the search stage, when florid images can be portrayed, there is more difficulty in the courtroom, when the sex beast is discovered to be someone ‘looking like a loving old grandfather,[being]taken to the cells’.
‘No’ sexual assault
In some situations the press reports explicitly mention that there is no sexual assault or activity involved.
These are interesting, for the explicit denial suggests that the scenario is one where a sexual connotation would ‘normally’ be expected.
However, the main point is that there is sometimes a general reluctance to confront the issue.
Whereas in the search stage the main task in the media reporting is the construction of the sex beast, at the trial stage — reflecting the activity within the courtroom — the delineation of the sex beast is often ruled or even avoided.
There are situations where the general expectation is that sex may have been the motive for a murderous assault.
However, if the prosecution does not raise it as a motive for murder the defence is unlikely to challenge this.
If the sexual motive is introduced by the defence, it is to justify the defendant's action.
The purpose of introducing the sexual motive is to try to lessen the enormity of the crime or to place the blame elsewhere.
Where the question of a sexual motive is avoided, either the defence recognise that their client could be disadvantaged by being typed as a sex maniac and the prosecution may realise that such a line of questioning may unnecessarily complicate a case, or there may seem little scope for placing the blame elsewhere.
For everyone there is a problem in understanding the nature of the crime when no motive can be identified.
In one case a
baby-faced double killer was jailed for life…without revealing why he murdered two pretty teenagers.
Detectives puzzling over a motive say the girls were not sexually assaulted.
And the former petty crook had no previous record for violence.
One senior detective said: ‘We'll probably never find out unless he decides to tell us’(Sun ).
The sentenced man had denied the killings, in which one victim had been strangled with her bra.
More usually, however, the denial of the sex motive is more readily accepted if there is an alternative explanation.
The following case is a reflection of the desire for neat classifications — rapist, robber, etc. — in both the courtroom and the media.
There is no place for mixed motives.
In the following example, the motives of someone who stabs his victim many times in her genital area are not discussed in public; indeed the sexual component is dismissed with the claim that the victim had not been indecently assaulted.
There is not the same desire (unlike the search stage) to portray the defendant as a sex maniac.
The headlines are reminiscent of an Agatha Christie title:Murder on the 9.02 (London Evening Standard );HORROR ON THE 9.02 (Star ).
The jury heard how a social worker was horrifically knifed to death on a late-night train.
The prosecution claimed that the murder victim was alone in a carriage when the defendant — aged 15 years at the time — confronted her, demanding money and brandishing a knife.
The situation is reconstructed but, of course, without any information being supplied by the victim:
with considerable courage, as you may think, she refused to hand over her money, whereupon there was a fight.
The defendant struck with the knife into her throat on the left-hand side just near the jugular vein, with such force that it severed the spinal cord, causing almost instant paralysis.
Thereafter, the defendant must have pulled down her pants and tights and stabbed her private parts a number of times.
The prosecuting counsel told the jury that there was no evidence that the victim had been indecently assaulted.
Afterwards, the dead woman's body was thrown from the train after it left Northampton station.
There is no further mention of the attack on her genital area in the newspapers.
This report of the prosecuting submission suggests that this was not indecent assault.
It demonstrates the dangers of various interpretations of the meaning of an act.
In this case the death of the victim prevents this account being challenged.
Her virtue in death, however, is assured.
With no sexual assault being claimed, the victim also remains inviolate.
Unusually, no blame is attached to her for the outcome.
Indeed her actions are applauded: ‘with considerable courage, as you may think, she refused to hand over her money’.
So, unlike the search stage, there is not the same desire to portray the defendant as a sex maniac.
It needs to be recognised that sometimes all parties (both dead and alive) may gain by avoiding the issue of whether the attack had the ingredient of a sexual assault.
It is only when no  sexual assault is alleged to have taken place that the victim seems clear of blame.
We have seen that in the media reporting at the stage of the trial a women's sexual conduct is often brought into question.
Evidence garnered by reporters either in the courtroom or by pursuit of previous lovers produces highly sexualised stories.
Typically the sexual conduct of a woman is an excuse, legitimising male violence ranging from the murder of a wife to the sexual assault of a girlfriend.
Some papers seek out extra salacious background.
In contrast sexual activity by men is rarely seen as problematic.
Rape
In order to understand the press reporting of rape trials we need to concentrate on the few cases which got enormous publicity in 1985.
As we discussed in Chapter 2 three cases (out of 114) had one-third of the total number of pages devoted to rape cases, while nine cases had over half.
We start with a brief summary of the nine cases which took most of the media coverage.
They are presented in the order of the amount of space devoted to each court case and the immediate aftermath.
Then we shall analyse the reasons the three most exceptional cases obtained so much coverage and the implications of this.
THE FOX'S REIGN OF TERROR ENDS IN JAIL FOR LIFE SIX TIMES
A 32-year-old man dubbed The Fox pleaded guilty to thirteen offences including rape, indecent assault on both men and women, and burglary.
Over a period of 150 days across five counties The Fox had preyed on women and some men in what was described as ‘an orgy of sex and violence’.
The reporting included interviews with his previous sexual partners.
BRIXTON GANG RAPE
Six teenagers who gang-raped two 16-year-old schoolgirls forty-five times contested the case and were found guilty.
The youths were black, a fact made clear by the relatively unusual use of photographs by the papers; the young women were white.
The youths attempted to defend themselves by claiming that the girls, who were returning from a pop concert, had consented.
13 PARATROOPERS CLEARED OF RAPING WRAC
Thirteen paratroopers were acquitted after a six-week trial for the gang rape of a 22-year-old woman soldier in their barracks.
Eight of the paratroopers were found guilty of indecently assaulting the woman soldier.
The men defended themselves by arguing that the woman had consented to sex frequently and had done so on this occasion also.
FIVE LIFE TERMS FOR SAVAGE RAPIST
A 39-year-old man admitted kidnapping two 13-year-old schoolgirls, raping one and indecently assaulting the other, before stabbing them with a three-foot-long ceremonial sword and leaving them for dead in the forest.
BIBLE SEX BEASTS JAILED FOR FIVE YEARS
Two men, aged 26 and 27, contested the case but were found guilty of rape and aiding and abetting each other on the sex attacks on a 21-year-old French woman, who told how the two burst into her room at a friend's flat while she was reading the Bible.
RAILWAY RAPE FIEND GETS SIX LIFE SENTENCES
A 35-year-old man pleaded guilty to the brutal rape of six women and the indecent assault of another four women in a sixteen-month period.
He dubbed himself ‘The Dragon’, but was known as the ‘Railway Rapist’ as he picked his victims at random as they travelled on trains, waited on platforms or as the walked close to railway stations.
SEX CASE TEACHER IS JAILED
A 36-year-old married teacher, who admitted having unlawful sex with a 15-year-old pupil on a sailing trip, was found guilty of raping the girl after a three-day trial.
He was jailed for eighteen months for unlawful sexual intercourse.
Whether the girl consented was crucial to the case.
EVIL PARENTS JAILED FOR RAPE
A man who admitted twice raping his 15-year-old daughter and indecently assaulting her teenage friend was jailed for six years.
His wife, who was alleged to have aided and abetted him on the second occasion was jailed for three years after a two-day trial.
BED-SIT RAPE FIEND GETS 16 YEARS
A 26-year-old man admitted to being the hooded rapist who terrorised women in a town's bed-sit area.
He was sentenced to twelve years for the rape, a maximum two years for the indecent assault and a further two years for the burglary.
These nine cases, which comprise over one-half of the press coverage of court cases of rape during the year, cover a multitude of situations.
The main charge was contested in four of the cases, while the accused admitted the offences in four others; in the remaining case, the father admitted the charge, while the mother contested the case.
In all four cases where there seemed to be some knowledge of the victim before the alleged offences were committed, the cases were contested by alleging the woman's consent.
These contested cases where there is considerable media coverage tend to be those where the defendant(s) can attempt a claim that the victim consented to intercourse.
In cases where there were guilty pleas the defendants had almost invariably committed offences on several different occasions, and hence a defence that all the women consented would not be credible.
The behaviour which characterised these latter cases would have called forth the notion of ‘sex beast’ or ‘sex monster’at the search stage.
In two of the three cases which attracted most publicity the issue of whether the women had consented was an important component in the case, though in one of these there was an additional racial theme in the identification of the accused as black.
The third case, in fact the largest, was one in which the man had been previously identified as a sex beast at the search stage.
Press reporting focused as much on the reports about other women who had had sex with him as it did on the events to which he pleaded guilty.
We shall examine each of these three in some detail.
The Fox
The case of Malcolm Fairley, known as ‘The Fox’, was the most widely reported court case of the year where the offence of rape was the main charge.
An example of the extent and character of the reporting is that of the Sun which, on the day after the trial, had seven pages (including a special four-page pull-out) devoted to the case.
There were eighty-eight photos or illustrations relating to this court case and the aftermath, virtually equalling the number found for all the other rape cases in the year.
The case was not contested, so the court proceedings were over in a day.
Most of the coverage of the case consisted of the popular newspapers displaying their ingenuity in getting his first wife, her mother, his mother, brothers, nephews, nieces, friends, and  neighbours to provide an account of the sex beast, especially his sexual habits.
It cannot be emphasised too strongly how unusual this case was.
Serial rapists are rare.
The statistically ‘typical’ rapist — the man who rapes one woman he knows — does not make it to front-page coverage, let alone fifty-nine pages across thirteen newspapers over ten days.
This one case took 13 per cent of the total coverage of rape trials.
In a sense the rarity of the case is obvious.
If it were not unusual, it would not be news.
Most rape is not news.
But anyone who gathers their information about rape only from the press would be seriously misled.
The themes in the coverage were: the number and nastiness of the attacks; how he did it in detail; his sex life; the causal effect of pornographic videos; the chase by the police.
The papers reported in endless detail the minutiae of the sex attacks.
These attacks included sexually assaulting an elderly woman during a burglary; heterosexual rape; rape of women when their husbands, brothers or boyfriends were watching; homosexual rape (for which he got five times as long a prison sentence as for heterosexual rape); as well as burglary.
The papers paid attention to the detail of the knives and sawn-off shot guns he used to threaten and wound his victims, the hood he used to disguise his appearance, his ‘lair’ and other related aspects of how he managed to get away with his exploits.
They reported in-depth information about his sex life that they gleaned from his first and current wives, their mothers, neighbours and any other informant.
The Sun carried this to the extreme with a four-page pull-out about the Savage Between the Sheets .
It is clear from the differential sentencing that the judge considered that the rape of the men was a particularly heinous aspect of the case.
He gave a ten-year prison sentence for this as opposed to two years for one of the rapes of women.
The newspapers also commented on this particular horror.
The letter of the law was observed in so far as none of the names of the actual raped women were mentioned.
However, the preservation of a rape survivor's anonymity needs more than the exclusion of the name.
A strip across the eyes of a photograph of a rape survivor and her boyfriend is unlikely to deter speculation.
Beyond the rape victims, the names of everybody else was disclosed, including the names of women who were indecently assaulted but not raped and the names of relatives of those whom The Fox had accosted.
There will be some who may initially enjoy the appearance of their name in national and local newspapers, though even they, initially unused to the implications of media publicity, may come to regret their decision.
However, others may be unhappy that their relationship with a now notorious ‘sex monster’ should be so flagrantly exposed.
In short, other lives — apart from the rape survivors themselves — may be damaged in the quest for sensational exposures.
For instance, the wife of The Fox undoubtedly suffered.
The Sun proclaimed Another Sun Exclusive under the headline FOX CASE WIFE IN MENTAL HOSPITAL and, despite the ‘exclusive’ tag, the Star ran essentially the same report on the same day under the headline A WIFE'S AGONY IN WAIT FOR FOX CASE .
The report told of how the wife of the man accused of The Fox sex crimes was being voluntarily treated in a psychiatric hospital.
Her mother was reported in the Star as saying: ‘It has all been too much for her.
The strain has been a terrible ordeal.
She has been tormented by what has happened.
No one can imagine what she and the children have gone through.’
It noted that the wife was in a Teesside hospital.
The brother of the alleged offender said: ‘We all feel sorry for his wife.
She has suffered more than anyone can know’.
The Sun ‘exclusive’ seemed to rely on ‘friends’for their reports on how the wife had been ‘shattered’.
The Sun identified the exact hospital and also mentioned how the wife had been living with her mother in a named town since her husband's arrest.
The Fox's previous wife is the focus of another set of stories.
Local evening papers described how he met his first wife, who is named: ‘pregnant, they married in a hurry’.
His first wife was interviewed, as was her mother, who talked much more extensively.
The next morning the national papers continued to dig into the background of The Fox, especially his sex life as revealed by his two wives.
The Sun had pages 1, 2, 4, 5, 15, 16, 17 and 18 given over to the story, while the others managed with only one or two pages fewer.
In the Star his two wives are purportedly writing on his sexual performance under the headline THE SEX LIFE OF THE FOX — By his two wives .
But this is quite clearly a pastiche by two journalists desperate to match the efforts of rival newspapers.
Certainly they have quotations from his first wife, which suggested that ‘Britain's most notorious sex fiend…was ‘useless in bed’’.
(The first wife is reported as being ‘happily married to a Durham miner’.)
For the same article the journalist evidently failed to get any juicy quotes from his present wife and despite the misleading by-line By his two wives , the material rests on the words of a named ‘neighbour in the tiny close of council houses’, who incidentally provides no information on his sex life but on his lack of neighbourliness: ‘He was not very neighbourly — he would always try to avoid speaking…’
The Sun went to more extreme lengths in their massive coverage, photographing Fairley's present wife under the caption ‘Georgina…sought psychiatric help’ and providing a pot-pourri of detail of how HORROR SENT HIS WIFE CRAZY .
Directly underneath was the tempter to move on to the special four-page pull-out section with the  banner headline SAVAGE IN MY BED .
His first wife — who is again named and identified as living happily in County Durham with her second husband and their 5-year-old daughter (both named)— is said to have ‘spoken bitterly last night about The Savage Between the Sheets’.
Intimate details about the relationship are supplemented by information from his first wife's 63-year-old mother, who is also named and photographed.
She stressed what a violent man he was during this first marriage: ‘But, after the break-up, Joan just wanted to forget him.’
The newspapers also sought out the previous victims of The Fox's sex attacks.
The housewife who had been sleeping quietly after a Bank Holiday party when The Fox struck was identified by name, age and location.
She had the ordeal of telling her story to both the Star and the Sun .
The Sun reported how, after slipping quietly into her bedroom, Fairley leapt on to the bed, held a kitchen knife to her throat and attacked her.
The thirteenth victim of The Fox was photographed on a beach with her skirt hitched up, arm-in-arm with her boyfriend; their eyes were masked out on the photograph, which was captioned'…rebuilding their romance’.
The opening paragraphs reported how
the pretty girl victim…four months after The Fox subjected her to a three-hour sex ordeal — and forced her brother and her boyfriend at gunpoint to perform degrading acts with her — the girl crawled into an airing cupboard in a bid to shut out the memories.
Across two pages her traumas are narrated in detail.
The report identified how she was forced to quit her secretarial job and how she suffered a breakdown.
The Sun noted the reality of the anonymity provision: ‘when the Press and TV spotlight turned on the village, the girl remained unnamed for legal reasons.
But everyone in the close knit village of Edlesborough knew who she was’.
The Star and the Daily Mail continued the search for female associates of The Fox with the headlines THE SAD MOTHER HE BETRAYED and THE MOTHER WHO CANNOT BELIEVE respectively.
The full name and address of this 74-year-old woman is supplied, as is that of his brother, an invalid, who stated that ‘We're all ashamed of what he has done.
We could sell his story but we could never make money from other people's suffering…’
Three days later, a front-page EXCLUSIVE in the Star headlined THE FOX'S LAIR — A COP'S HOME He lived with Pc during terror reign is about a named police constable (with a photograph of his house on the front page of the newspaper) who ‘let the evil sex monster lodge at his luxury four bedroom house.
But the friendly bobby never dreamed of Malcolm Fairley's true identity’.
The policeman's wife was Fairley's niece and the couple had put him up while Fairley was house  hunting in London.
The newspaper reported that the constable faced a major Scotland Yard inquiry about his job.
Apparently after weeks of anguish he had been told his job was safe.
The previous day he had started back to work, to be followed by this front-page exclusive.
Other women who had been the subject of The Fox's violence were described by the press.
A named and photographed woman who had apparently beaten off The Fox by biting him was a major story in one Sunday newspaper: ‘her courage saved her from becoming another of Fairley's rape victims’.
(Did they mean to imply that ‘courage’ would have saved the other women from being raped?)
A front-page EXCLUSIVE in the Sunday People —A monster goes back to his lair: RETURN OF THE FOX — in which the front-page photograph showed Fairley accompanied by police officers ‘back at this lair, showing police the scene of one of his evil deeds’.
This ritual of identification was used to preface a more titillating by-line:MY BEDROOM BATTLE WITH THE FOX Pages 23, 24 and 25 .
The Woman's Editor had managed to unearth yet another EXCLUSIVE under the headline MY BATTLE WITH THE FOX: A tap on my shoulder…a violent struggle, then I'm stabbed with my breadknife .
Another photographed and named victim who successfully resisted rape described her ordeal.
Her account concluded with her saying that
It's every woman's nightmare, of course, to wake up and find a man threatening to rape her.
I suppose if you'd asked me before all this happened, I'd have said I'd give in, but I was so angry.
I surprised myself how I acted.
Again the implication is that women can avoid rape through a display of courage when in reality other rather more fortuitous factors are much more important, as this woman actually recognised'.
Really I think it was James who saved me.
God knows why he woke up that night.
He never normally does…’
The News of the World provided its own EXCLUSIVE — FOX PUT HIS EVIL EYE ON ME: Niece tells of lonely lane terror in his car .
This report has the double ingredients of being about a person who was not only subject to the attentions of The Fox but also a relative.
The report included his (named) niece's account that Fairley had terrified her by his sexual advances to her in a car.
The focus of much of this reporting of ‘background’ is sex.
It includes both his two wives' voluntary sexual activity, and also his sex attacks on other women.
There is little serious exploration of the issues raised by the attacks.
The reporting of the crime is on the one hand an excuse for sexual titillation and on the other a misleading warning to  women as to the circumstances in which they will be raped and how to avoid it.
In the Fox case many people connected with the convicted man were hauled on to the national stage by the popular press.
Perhaps some may have enjoyed their brief flirtation with notoriety, some may even have gained financially, but others may regret the publicity, possibly suffering from poison-pen attacks brought about by the exposure by the press of names and addresses of those who were victims of sexual attacks (but not raped) by The Fox or who were unlucky enough to be associated by both, marriage or friendship to this man.
The most important point, however, is that this rapist, who got the most publicity, is the most unusual.
The serial rapist is not common, but a simple scanning of the newspapers for matters to do with rape would give a contrary impression.
Who or what is to blame for the production of this sex monster who terrorised five counties for nearly six months?
All the newspapers focused on the supposed link between pornographic videos and the sex attacks.
Fairley was considered to have been converted into a sex monster by viewing pornographic films.
The judge, Mr Justice Caulfield, described The Fox as ‘a casualty’ of evil pornographers and went on to say: ‘I am satisfied that you are a decadent advertisement for the evil pornographers.
They will want to forget you as one of their worst casualties’.
The local evening papers, first on the streets in reporting the case, proclaimed MONSTER BORN OUT OF BLUE VIDEOS .
A senior police officer was reported as saying that ‘we believe he was influenced by some blue videos he had seen’.
More specifically, it was suggested that a scene in a video nasty gave Fairley the idea of forcing the brother and boyfriend of a 17-year-old girl to perform group sex acts with her at gunpoint.
Terrified, they simulated the acts he ordered.
The next day the front page of the Sun took up the theme with enthusiasm:PORN LUST OF THE FOX (see Figure 4.1).
Michael Connell QC, defending, had focused on the video nasty theme, saying ‘This man is not completely to blame for his actions.
He was subject to influences for which he could not compensate’.
Fairley was said to be ‘merely carrying out repetitive actions, trying to imitate what he had seen on the video screen’.
Mr Justice Caulfield, after studying the medical reports, said ‘All these reports emphasise the relevance of pornography — every one!’
As Fairley was led from the dock of a packed courtroom, several newspapers reported how MPs were joining in condemning the growth of High Street sex shops and porn videos.
Tory MP Jill Knight, chairwoman of an all-party Commons committee on family and child protection, said: ‘I now hope the Government will take this lesson on board and act to control the availability of pornography.’
Similarly Mary Whitehouse was reported as saying: ‘However wicked he was, he is the product of a society we have  all helped to create.’
The Sun focused on hard-porn videos as providing the key, under the headline How a little softie turned into sadistic sex maniac .
The Star similarly emphasised the amazing transformation of Fairley in a half-page ‘think-piece’ entitled THE FOX: WHY HE DID IT Porn videos turned Fairley into a monster .
A spurious contrast effect is provided in the opening paragraph:
A QUIET, non-smoking teetotaller with a wife and three children was turned into a monster by the most disgusting hard-core pornography imaginable.
Malcolm Fairley was transformed into The Fox by the perverted images of hard-porn videos.
The Times made the suggested link their front-page headline —Porn videos turned ‘Fox’ into rapist — while the Daily Mail used this theme in their editorial of the day, as part of their continuing campaign against porn videos.
A few days later the Sunday People followed up with a similar theme in the Voice of the People column, ending a long and forceful editorial with an impassioned plea:
The Government is trying to control the porn trade.
Hard porn is legally banned, but still available ‘under the counter’.
Soft porn is being licensed but too slowly.
The victims of The Fox have suffered terribly.
But from their suffering, we should all have learned how vital it is to beat the menace of video violence.
However, the newspapers themselves produce evidence which refutes this interpretation.
Fairley had long been violent and sexually aggressive.
An adjoining report on the same page of the Sun as the video hypothesis, based on an interview with the mother of Fairley's first wife under the headline HE MADE HER LIFE HELL , described how Fairley ‘was violent towards [his first wife]physically and sexually.
She was always a mass of bruises.
When he started going out with other women, she refused him sex.
But he would just force her.’
The Sun report on The Savage in my Bed about his first wife also makes it clear that Fairley was violent and sexually abusive to his first wife and, indeed, that this was a major factor in why she left him.
That is, Fairley was violent and sexually abusive before he established his collection of video nasties.
The notion that the video alone is the problem is not only simplistic, but also not supported by the facts of this case.
Deeper social inequalities  underlie much of the generation of sexually aggressive macho behaviour in men, but the newspapers side-stepped any analysis of these.
However, this is not to deny that pornographic videos may well have a damaging effect.
While we have stressed the aftermath of the court case when all his actual weapons and masks were displayed, the details of the case were described vividly in the previous year as the offences occurred.
We have  indicated in Chapter 3 how the search for the sex fiend is a source of considerable news coverage.
Furthermore, the police themselves are involved in the creation of myths and legends which can help to titillate the public and no doubt excite the imagination of potential imitators.
Nicknames and the sordid detail of sexual atrocities may provide the scope for imitation.
Potential rapists are as likely to read popular newspapers as to view porn videos.
Three days after The Fox was jailed for life, the same judge, Mr Justice Caulfield, sentenced a 24-year-old man for raping a 19-year-old nurse.
He was described as ‘a copycat rapist who had claimed to be the dreaded sex fiend nicknamed The Fox’(Sun ).
The Daily Mirror headline was Fox copycat gets 10 years , while the Star similarly mentioned that the rapist imitated The Fox.
The judge is not reported as making any speculation as to the source of this knowledge, which is obviously from the newspapers themselves.
There were no hard-porn videos available on the activities of The Fox at the time this new offender was committing his offence, only the soft-porn reporting of the popular newspapers, which were describing the atrocities with such vivid detail as they occurred.
This link is deliberately or unwittingly overlooked, as is the more serious and general issue of the making of rapists into exciting anti-heros and stars by the press.
The Brixton Gang Rape
In the second most reported rape trial of the year, six youths were accused of the gang rape of two schoolgirls.
The case was contested, ending in the conviction of the young men, and the trial and sentencing reported at length.
The main themes which appeared to make the case newsworthy were firstly, a gang rape; secondly, a racial theme, since the newspapers clearly identified the rapists as black and the girls as white in both words and pictures; thirdly, controversy over the sentencing being ‘too light’; fourthly, controversy as to whether the girls could be held to have contributed to their own rape by being out at night.
The first three were pulled together to create an image of rampaging black gangs raping white girls and being treated too leniently.
Again the first point has to be that the rapes were unusual.
Most rape is done by individual men, not gangs, and by a man to a woman he knows, not a total stranger; most rape does not involve weapons and is intra-not inter-racial, in that black men usually rape black women and white men rape white women, while rape across racial groups is unusual.
The case quite clearly pulls upon the same set of socially constructed fears that Hall and his colleagues analyse as the creation of the black mugger in Policing the Crisis .
In the case of the Brixton gang, the prolific use of photographs of the  accused after conviction seems to be to emphasise that these were black youths.
Thirty-five (one-third) of the visual representations (photographs, drawings, etc.) identified in the total series of 114 rape cases referred to the Brixton gang (most of the remaining two-thirds were about The Fox).
It does seem that photographs of black convicted rapists appear proportionately more often than those of white rapists.
In fact, in the Brixton gang trial, the racial and class overtones of the case were often quite evident.
The mother of one of the teenage victims said that ‘although many Press reports had treated the case as a racial attack, the court had not taken that attitude and she felt that was correct’.
The length of the sentences generated a related controversy which was reported extensively by the press.
This ‘campaign’ was led by MPs (including the Labour MP Jack Ashley and the Conservative MPs Nicholas Winterton, Terry Dicks and Peter Bruinvels), the mother of one of the girls and the newspapers themselves.
This issue made the front page on the Daily Mail as well as its editorial.
The woman columnist at the Star argued that the judge as a man had no real understanding of what the girls had suffered and had unjustifiably let the youths off lightly with seven-year and three-year prison sentences.
The view that rapists should be treated more severely was repeated in the editorial in the Sunday People under the headline GET TOUGH WITH RAPISTS .
The universal outrage at the behaviour of the young men did not prevent the press publishing details of the cross-examination of the girls.
The case was contested by the youths, who claimed that the girls had agreed to ‘leisurely sex’.
In court the young women were cross-examined at length and accounts of this published in the press.
However, it seems most unlikely that from the media coverage any readers would have disbelieved the accounts of the two teenage girls, especially given the number of men involved.
The two schoolgirls were raped at knife-point in a deserted Brixton garage forty-five times by a gang of youths, after attempting to return home by bus from a pop concert.
When the victims were allowed to flee, they went straight to the police.
In this context of the numbers of men, the use of weapons and the multiple attacks, it would be unlikely that a conviction would not have occurred, even without the racial theme.
The press reported in detail the ordeal which rape survivors must undergo in the court situation —GIRL WEEPS AFTER 90-MINUTE RAPE QUIZ — when one of the girls broke down in court during questioning.
It is a cautionary tale for all women reading this widely covered case to appreciate what is the reality of the experience, even in a case where few are likely to believe the defendants' accounts.
Nevertheless, in what most people would regard as an obvious case of rape, the victims had to suffer a traumatic experience in court and have their  humiliating experiences reported to millions.
Despite the hard line taken by the press about the rapists, they were not above sexualising the raped girls.
One of them was repeatedly referred to as ‘blonde’, as a ‘pretty school girl’ and indeed as a ‘blue-eyed blonde’in the Sun and a ‘pretty blonde’in the Daily Mirror .
A further controversy was over whether the girls could be considered to have brought the rape on themselves by being out at night.
While the defence claim that the girls had consented was not taken seriously by the newspapers, the reports did often imply that the girls had behaved irresponsibly.
They suggested that by being out at night the young women had contributed in some way to their own rapes, even though they were merely returning by bus to their homes.
Both the prosecuting counsel and the police appeared to hold this view.
Whether or not this was a reasonable position was one of the debates within the newspaper coverage.
That is, the press reports were exploring the boundary of legitimate behaviour by women.
Could women go out at night without courting rape?
The coverage by the columnists diverged from that in the main news stories on this question.
Anne Robinson, columnist of the Daily Mirror , forcefully made her point:
DISTURBING THREAT TO LIBERTY
‘It would have been much better if those girls had been tucked up at home in bed,’ said prosecuting counsel in the Brixton rape trial….
‘It was not wise for these two young girls to be out so late,’ said the detective inspector in charge of the case.
Well I find these comments worrying.
Because, whether intentional or not, both these men come close to implying the girls were partly to blame.
And we are coming dangerously near to admitting total defeat if we lamely accept the solution to street violence is for women to forego their liberty and put themselves under virtual night-time house arrest.
The issue of anonymity necessarily resurfaces.
Although the recent tightening of the anonymity provision for the rape survivor will probably curtail the practice of photographing the victim's residence, the Brixton gang case showed how difficult the problem of anonymity is.
The mother of one of the victims maintained that although the girls were referred to in court only by their first names to protect them from reprisals, she was particularly worried that people in the court's public gallery knew who the girl was.
She went on to say that ‘Everybody knows exactly who she is….
We are very concerned about the  repercussions.
‘It was later reported that the family had decided to leave the area.
Furthermore, the mothers and other relatives of the rapists had received threatening and abusive letters, including one from the National Front, and one letter threatening to rape the daughter of the rapist's mother.
The Brixton Gang Rape case produced several complaints to the Press Council which upheld most but not all of the complaints.
The Paratroopers
In the Paratroopers’ case thirty men were arrested and thirteen paratroopers were actually charged with the rape of a member of the Women's Royal Army Corps.
The trial lasted twenty-five days, during which the 22-year-old woman stated that she was held down, raped several times and assaulted with a broom.
The paratroopers claimed that she had consented to everything.
The woman had been smuggled into the barracks under a coat.
The court considered it was relevant to discover that she had spent the day drinking more than twelve pints of lager and cider along with two bottles of wine, and had sexual intercourse with a soldier during the afternoon.
In the barracks she apparently agreed to have sex with one man but then was surrounded by paratroopers chanting: ‘Get them down, you Zulu warrior.
Get them down you Zulu chief.’
She is said to have told the soldiers: ‘What, only three of you?
I can take five.’
In court she said she was just being sarcastic.
Afterwards she was forced to walk back to her own barracks on a freezing winter night, naked but for an anorak round her shoulders.
There she told officers that she had been stripped, raped and abused by the men of the First Battalion.
She said she had not complained at the paratroopers' barracks because she knew she would be in trouble for being out of bounds.
Only one of the paratroopers expressed any regret, telling the police: ‘It started as a joke.
I am ashamed of myself.
We behaved like animals.’
The case received enormous coverage and the popular press made much use of the opportunity to reveal the titillating detail from the court interaction.
The reporting of the paratroopers' case focused on events which were intrinsic to the court process.
It demonstrated all the concerns which have been made by Edwards, Adler, and Temkin in relation to rape trials about the bias of the proceedings against the woman.
Some headlines indicate how all the newspapers made great use of the detail which was emerging during the court trial:Jury told WRAC ‘was sexually experienced' (Times );The Big ‘Un's sex sessions (Daily Mirror );I AM THE BIG ‘UN: Para ‘gang-rape’ girl tells of her sex urge (Sun );MY ROMP WITH AN UNKNOWN SOLDIER (Star );Five to satisfy Big ‘Un (Daily Mirror );Paras case girl ‘was sex maniac' (The Times ); and so on.
Anyone reading of the trial would appreciate the ordeal of the rape victim in court as she ‘sobbed continuously as she was cross-examined by counsel for the men….’
It is difficult to imagine a more thorough mauling in court than the WRAC experienced.
Everything about her past sexual experience was brought out.
No one seemed to question its relevance to the issue in hand.
This twenty-five-day trial was probably the most talked about for many years.
The essential question was whether or not every woman is protected by the law in every situation.
Or, as the prosecuting counsel said ‘It is not the law…that if a girl crosses the threshold of the barracks she is fair game’.
All the paratroopers were cleared of rape.
The judge, an ex-RAF flying officer brought out of retirement for the trial, told the men: ‘I take into account that none of this would have happened if the girl had not gone to your barracks for sex.
It was a ‘jolly joke’ which went too far and ended in serious indecent assault, he said.
(Some of the men were found guilty of indecent assault.)
The front page of the Daily Mirror headlined Judge jails six sex case Paras…then asks HAVE I GOT IT RIGHT?
I'll do my best…but tomorrow half of England will think I have got it wrong.
This conundrum puzzled Daily Mirror columnist, Marje Proops, who produced an excellent summary of the issues of sexual assault:
EVERY WOMAN'S RIGHT
I AM as confused about this horrendous case as everyone else must be.
Certainly the judge appeared to be confused.
What did he mean when he said half of England will think he got it wrong?
Maybe he thought men, making up roughly half the population, would reckon that the poor, wretched girl, labelled so cruelly ‘The Big ‘Un’, got what she asked for, exactly what she deserved, when 13 soldiers indecently assaulted her.
Or perhaps Sir Peter was contemplating the reactions of the other half of the population, the female half.
Hopefully they would feel compassion for this victim of sexual abuse.
Though I wouldn't bet on women's whole-hearted support for their pathetic sister.
I've often heard women enhancing the well-known reaction to a sexually victimised woman: ‘Well she asked for it, didn't she?
She put herself about.
She's obviously a slag, no better than she ought to be.’
I have news for men.
And for those few women who parrot their words.
Sexual abuse and violation Or a woman's body is unforgivable and totally unacceptable in any civilised society.
Rape is entry into a woman's body without her consent.
Whether or not she's a slag.
Or a prostitute.
Or she led on men.
Or asked for it.
The final and ultimate privacy of her body is a woman's inalienable right.
Let every judge and every man take notice.
Little more was said about the case except that several days later, the Sunday Mirror gave the sad outcome of the victim's ordeal:HOSPITAL AGONY OF THE BIG ‘UN .
A friend indicated that the Army had seemed at first to understand when the WRAC driver said she feared other Paratroopers would victimise her for ‘squealing’ on their pals.
However, her needs were totally ignored in that she was given a new posting to Aldershot — home of the Parachute Regiment.
A hospital spokesman said she would be kept in for observation while doctors decided on the best treatment for her.
This case clearly had a traumatic effect on the victim but, just as importantly, the message from the widespread media coverage conveyed to all potential victims was essentially not a pleasant one.
Whatever had been achieved by the 1976 Act, it had made little impact on this case except for the removal of her name from the media.
This case covers perhaps in classic form the problematic use of a woman's previous sexual history in determining the outcome of a rape trial.
Despite multiple accused, the woman's prior sexual experience is used to disqualify her claims that she was raped.
Interestingly it is precisely this issue which put the story on the front page after days and days of inside-page coverage.
The issue had become one of public, political concern, not a minor issue of sensational titillating journalism.
We have focused on these three cases not because they are necessarily representative of rape cases but — because of their quite massive coverage — they set the tone of how the media reports rape.
These are the cases which are known to everyone.
Indecent assault
There was a total of ninety-eight court cases which appeared in the sample newspapers during the year.
Forty cases involved offences between males and fifty-eight cases of males assaulting females.
As Table 4.1 shows, two-thirds of the cases of each kind of offence  appeared in only one newspaper.
In fact, there were only six cases which attracted the attention of more than three newspapers.
A similar number of both kinds of assaults appeared in the national newspapers.
Twice the number of indecent assault on females were noted in the local newspapers, but this still remains a disproportionately small proportion of the total number of such offences.
In fact, the chances of getting national publicity are quite low, though the likelihood of being mentioned in the local newspapers is higher.
The Sun covers more cases compared with the other popular dailies.
Its total is almost matched by the Star in terms of its interest in assaults on males, while the Daily Mirror matches the Star in mentioning sexual assaults on females.
Two of the local evening papers have similar numbers of cases involving assaults on males and females.
In contrast, reports in the Lancashire Evening Post focus almost invariably on indecent assault on females (see Table 4.2).
This provides the evidence for possible regional variation in the focus of particular newspapers.
It is comparatively rare for these kinds of cases to get widespread coverage across many newspapers, and even more unusual for these cases to receive sustained coverage.
Among the assaults on males, it was only the two acquittal cases where the media coverage lasted more than a single day.
The cases where there is the most sustained coverage are  acquittals and yet obtaining an acquittal for this group of offences is a comparatively rare phenomenon, both as a proportion of cases reported in newspapers and what actually happens in the court.
The low proportion with an acquittal outcome probably reflects that the vast majority of these cases involve a guilty plea.
There is a similar distortion compared with reality among the indecent assaults against females.
Just as there was a marginally higher proportion of cases against females to receive widespread coverage, a higher proportion also received sustained coverage.
Eleven cases were identified where the media coverage lasted more than one day.
Of these, eight involved mentions in the national newspapers, so while the number of mentions in the national press of assaults against females is similar to those against males, there is a much greater likelihood of the female assault cases getting longer media coverage.
This is likely to be related to the fact that a higher proportion of these cases are contested.
Indeed, four of the eleven cases which got sustained coverage resulted in an acquittal.
A further four cases, mentioned on only one day, also had an acquittal outcome.
While there was no record of the outcome in eight of the cases, seventeen men received prison sentences of two years or more and one other was sent to a psychiatric hospital.
Again this is a distortion of what is generally happening in the courts, where sentences are lighter than  this average, so newspaper readers have contrasting images of many acquittals and many long sentences.
Sexual assaults on males
Men abusing positions of trust by sexually assaulting teenage boys in their charge was the main focus of the reports on male sexual assault of males.
The assaulters' occupations produced the headlines.
The following headlines are from different cases but the occupational theme remains the same:Headmaster cuddled boys (Star );Sex shame of a head (Daily Mirror );SEX SHAME TEACHER IS SENT TO PRISON Assault on his boys (Sun );Teacher in sex case to appeal (Middlesex Chronicle );SEX SIR'S SHAME (Sun );A TEACHER'S EVIL LUST He took sex snaps of kids (Star );Teacher accused (Star );Child sex offender given job in school (Daily Mail );KIDDIES POSE IN PORN SHAME: 15 years of sex snaps (Sun );SEX SHAME OF A HOSTEL CHIEF (Star );Child expert jailed for sex assaults (Daily Mail );Mercy for a vicar (Star );Choirmaster's shame (Daily Mail );MINISTER IN SEX CASE FACES SACK (Star );TV churchman's sex with sailor (Sun );A vicar shamed (Star );Kinky cop's secret shame (Daily Mirror ).
Others may be in positions of trust not directly derived from full-time occupation, such as scout masters —SCOUT LEADER'S CAMPING SHAME (Star )— as well as those in less formal and less-easily recognisable roles; the headline Sex shame of ‘uncle' (Daily Mirror ) and text (‘a mild-mannered clerk known by schoolboy train fans as Uncle Roland…took boys in the Rail Riders’ Club on trips in Britain and Europe’) shows how some offenders had eased into positions of trust with youngsters.
In fact, around one-half of the cases can be identified solely from the headlines as persons abusing their positions of trust.
Of the remainder, there are others where the abuse of trust is clearly evident but from the general text rather than the headline.
For example, the art teacher who had a four-year affair with a pupil or two prison officers accused of sexual offences involving inmates.
Even where there was not direct evidence of a breach of trust, the occupation would suggest to the newspaper reader that this is a crime of the middle class, such as‘a civil servant who admitted inciting a child to commit an act of gross indecency….’
The greater authority of the aggressor male perpetrator is further emphasised by the fact that, of the assaults against males, those coming to the notice of the newspapers largely concerned a much older set of defendants than the usual run of offenders coming before the courts.
Indeed, there were only nine men aged under 30 and these included a  group of four aircraftsmen appearing on a court martial accused of assaulting some young cadets at a summer camp.
The age of the victim was not always clear, but about one in eight of the cases involved children under the age of 10.
However, the general pattern was men in their early or later middle age being charged for committing offences against teenage boys and then quite of ten receiving sizeable prison sentences.
However, the main focus of the interest of the national popular press was on the individual tales of the downfall of the professional middle class.
The other sizeable group of offences reported on is where the case involves someone well known (e.g. Bronski pop man fined for sex offence or more frequently there is either fame by association (e.g. GAY-SEX SHAME OF ESTHER'S ‘BROTHER' , where the inverted commas in the headline indicate the rather more tenuous link with television star Esther Rantzen than the headline immediately suggests), or the actor who was said to make £12,000 a year from impersonating Prince Charles, or someone who sounds from the headline to be well known (e.g. CASTRATE ME SAYS GAY OPERA SINGER: He preyed on children.
The one case where a contested trial was covered by a range of newspapers indicated how the popular press focus on the potential fall of the near-famous and the introduction of gratuitous detail to titillate.
The fact that it emerged he was a retired civil servant was an additional bonus.
This case involved the 74-year-old ‘soccer superfan’ known for the Union Jack waistcoat and John Bull costume he sported at international matches.
He faced two charges of indecently assaulting two boys, aged 12 and 13.
The Sun reminded its readers that ‘it was his flag which helped cover topless streaker Erika Rowe [sic ]after she ran on to the turf at Twickenham during a rugby international in 1982’.
The case opened a month later and was widely reported in both national and local newspapers.
It was alleged that he touched the boys' genitals, put his arm around them and kissed them on the lips.
On the second day of the trial the local evening papers could announce that Mascot is cleared of sex charges .
The court had been told that the boys made up stories after the accused had thrown them out of his home for stealing cigarettes.
The newspapers had headlines which clearly gave the outcome of the case:MR.
SOCCER IS CLEARED IN SEX CASE ‘Grudge boys made up story' (Star );SEX CASE JOHN BULL CLEARED (Sun );FOOTBALL MASCOT IS CLEARED (Daily Mirror ).
The theme of sex fiend is very rarely evident in these cases.
Largely the element of gratuitous violence is also missing.
However, the violence and sex-fiend theme does emerge on a few occasions.
The most serious examples were headlined Sex fiend twice buried boy alive (Daily Mail ) and SCHOOLBOYS NIGHTMARE BURIED  ALIVE by a sex-mad grave-digger (Daily Mirror ).
The situation came close to manslaughter, and by its overt violence and the occupation of the assailant it is an exception.
Generally indecent assault and gross indecency cases against males reported in the national press are not characterised by overt violence, but point to the dangers of the persuasive powers of people in positions of trust taking sexual advantage.
In contrast to the national newspapers, where particular themes, such as the abuse of professional trust, are usually evident, the local newspapers include cases which are much more simply the product of routine court reporting.
There is a less specific focus on middle-class occupations.
The following are fairly typical:Diaries told of assaults on children (in which the court heard that ‘an unemployed kitchen porter from Leamington kept diaries setting out details of indecent assaults he committed on young children’) or Jail for man who lured boys to factory .
Assaults against females
In reports of assaults on women and girls there was always just one person accused.
However, there was a considerable range of victims; in 40 per cent of the cases reported, more than one victim was involved.
Approximately one-quarter of the cases involved girls aged under 10, one-quarter involving girls aged between 10 and 12, one-quarter involving girls as teenagers up to the age of 18 and the remaining one-quarter of the cases involved adult women.
Of the cases where the outcome was known, seven resulted in acquittals.
The victims' ages of these acquittal cases were 3; 11; 11 and 12; 13; 16; 21 and 27; 28; 29.
So, although the numbers are small, a pattern emerges.
A higher proportion of cases result in acquittal as the ages of the victims rises.
This is probably a function of a higher proportion of guilty pleas being put forward when the victims are younger: something akin to plea bargaining is almost certainly taking place.
The contested cases — which tend to attract more extended coverage — are very particular types of cases.
As with the indecent assaults on males, the predominant feature of these reports is that they are concerned with men abusing their positions of trust rather than being some unknown sex beasts who are assaulting victims not known to them prior to the offence.
The headlines often reflect this focus on the alleged offender's occupation, but not quite to the same extent as in the attacks on males.
In fact, nearly one-third of the reports identify the person's occupation in the headline.
Again there is the range from formal positions of trust, particularly teachers (e.g. TEACHER ACCUSED; HEAD IN DOCK ) and ministers of the church (e.g. PARSON ON SEX CHARGES; PRIEST IN SEX  CASE ).
The teacher may be self-employed, but still the profession rather than any other detail is what is of primary interest (SHAME OF A KINKY SIR ).
The jackpot for the popular press comes when the defendant is both a teacher and a priest, although this does not come across in the headline (e.g. SHAME OF KINKY HEAD, 55 ) Other professions also feature, which did not occur in the male assault cases (e.g. DOCTOR JAILED FOR SEX ASSAULTS; DENTIST FONDLES GIRLS ).
People attached to the church in a voluntary capacity are in a quasi-professional position (e.g. SUNDAY SCHOOL BEAST'S SHAME; PERVERT RAN CLUB FOR KIDS ).
Other occupations which deal directly with the public feature (e.g. SEXY PRANKS OF A PC ON PATROL ).
Occupations can feature predominantly, even where the victim is not in the person's charge (e.g. SEX OFFENCES OF FORMER M15 MAN; TOWN CRIER'S SEX ATTACK ON GIRL, 9; MARINE IN BED WITH TOT, 3; MARKET MANAGER IN INDECENCY CASE ).
The only front-page item in this series was headlined ROYAL COP'S SEX WITH A GIRL 14,which again stressed the high-profile occupation.
In the body of the text, it may also be revealed that the person is in some position which may give opportunities for taking advantage of children, such as a registered foster-parent, a holiday-camp entertainer, a landlord who placed ads offering single mothers a home at his seaside lodging-house, a coach-driver who took a party of thirty-four primary school children.
However, the coach-driver case was an example of a case not reported directly but taken up in Paul Foot's column, after the relatives of the victims had made a protest to him about the sentences and the lack of publicity of the case.
Essentially the case involved a youth leader of the Red Cross, who admitted joining the Red Cross to bring him closer to young girls, whom he had been abusing for thirty years.
It provides an example where the relatives of victims are concerned about the lack of publicity.
As with the indecent assaults on males, there were few headlines which dwelt on the theme of sex fiends and sex beasts.
In fact, there were only five which displayed these kinds of stereotypes: e.g. NEW ATTACK BY FREED SEX PEST; VILLAGE IN FEAR OVER SEX BEAST; CHILD SEX BEAST JAILED; GIRLS' BEDROOM SEX PEST; PERVERT RAN CLUB FOR KIDS .
It was comparatively rare for cases of assaults against females to receive sustained coverage and, indeed, there were only three cases where at least one newspaper covered the case on three or more separate days.
There are two exceptions: one case involving a barrister and an actress received widespread national coverage and were named.
The other case which received sustained coverage was mentioned on three consecutive trial days in the local Lancashire Evening Post that shows  a different pattern, but is probably much more representative of local coverage where a particular case provokes some general interest.
Many people in a locality will follow and talk about such a trial.
The case involved an alleged sexual attack by an 18-year-old young man on a 16-year-old schoolgirl as she was walking home in the early hours after a night out in the town.
It was reported that the judge specifically ordered that the girl should not be named.
The newspaper complied with this request.
The first day's report — headlined Terror of girl's assault — described the girl's evidence as ‘she wept in the witness box’.
The seriousness of the alleged attack was described: ‘her clothing was stained with blood, and she suffered grazes, bruises and cuts…
‘. The report concluded with the girl denying suggestions from the defence that ‘she was a willing sexual partner, and made-up the story because of fears about her parent's reaction’.
The next day's headline —Youth denies sex attack — told how the teenager maintained that he took the schoolgirl behind a shop for a goodnight kiss, alleging that the girl consented to his advances.
He stressed that he never intended to have sex with her and said he never used force or inflicted injury on the girl.
The report ended with the defence telling the jury it would be very dangerous to record a conviction on the uncorroborated evidence of the girl.
The third day's headline —Teenager cleared of sex attack — provided the news of the outcome of the case.
The young man was found not guilty of indecently assaulting the 16-year-old schoolgirl by the jury after a three-hour retirement.
The report ended with the information that the judge had told the jury that it would be very dangerous to record a conviction without independent support for the girl's story.
The outcome of many of the contested cases with regard to both rape and sexual assault allegations goes beyond an acquittal of the accused.
The verdicts are implicitly defining what is appropriate behaviour for women and suggesting that they do not have much of a safeguard if they stray into areas regarded as ‘male territory’ whether it be a barracks room or a street late at night.
Any hopes that women will eventually feel safe wherever they go is not being helped by the publicity given to such cases.
Women's limited space is being clearly marked out.
Females as sexual assailants
There were only two cases mentioned in the media where a charge of indecent assault involved an older female technically assaulting a girl under 16.
One was reported in a national newspaper and one in a local newspaper.
Both involved lesbian relationships and are fairly cautious.
In one case, it was said that ‘it was the 15-year-old girl who was the dominant partner in the relationship’ with a 28-year-old woman  separated from her husband, while in the other case ‘a pretty 15-year-old schoolgirl skipped lessons to have a lesbian love affair’; however the defence counsel said that her mother had told police she thought there was nothing wrong with a lesbian relationship and ‘if it had not been for the age of the young lady, none of us would be here today’.
In contrast, the media enjoyed the opportunity to report cases of mature women being charged with indecent offences against under-age boys.
In all six cases it was indicated that sexual intercourse had taken place.
In five of the six cases the main focus of the headline was on the woman's marital status:Church wife's boy lover; Young wife's sexy games; Sex in Jacuzzi for wife and lover, aged 12; A ‘sex mad’ wife's schoolboy lovers; A wife's ten boy lovers .
The Sun's front-page headline of NURSE HAD SEX WITH A BOY, 14 endorses the respectability of these women.
The 24-year-old buxom blonde who ‘gave her favours freely to young village schoolboys’ was told by Mr Justice Sheldon, ‘If a man had behaved in the same way with girls of this age he would have ended up with a long prison sentence’.
In another case, the boy's father said:
She should have been sent to prison.
Women have been campaigning for equality for a long time.
She should have been treated in the same way that an older man would be dealt with for corrupting a young girl.
Females as teenage temptresses
There were twenty-four cases identified where the main charge was unlawful sexual intercourse with a girl under 16.
The cases received quite full reports but, with two exceptions, only one or two of the popular dailies reported a particular case.
The first exception was a case extensively reported, probably because of the description of the seduction during a black magic ceremony.
On this occasion the 24-year-old occult fanatic was cleared of the charge because he claimed he was misinformed of her age at the time of the offence.
(The only other case in this category where the charges were dropped or the defendants acquitted involved a 47-year-old police sergeant accused of having unlawful sex with his babysitter, but the charges were dropped after the prosecution heard that the pair were now married.)
The black magic case was the only one where there was a follow-up to the court case.
Three other young women involved in his life told of ‘his bizarre sexual appetites’ to a Sunday newspaper.
The other case which gained even more extensive coverage, including the front page in some newspapers, involved a headmaster eventually jailed for eighteen months for having  sexual intercourse with a pupil aged 14.
This case followed a couple of weeks after the extensive coverage given to the case where a teacher was accused of raping a 15-year-old pupil but who was eventually jailed for unlawful sexual intercourse.
The amount of coverage given to the sexual transgressions of members of the teaching profession suggests that there was the hidden agenda at work of denigrating the professionalism of teachers at a time when they were in industrial conflict with their employers.
However, an interesting feature of this case is how the prosecution likened the girl to a ‘Lolita’.
Essentially girls under 16 involved in these cases divided into ‘Lolitas’ or virgins.
The behaviour of ‘Lolitas’ would be characterised as that of ‘whores’among adult women.
Because the issue is not one of consent with under-age sex, evidence of their sexual precociousness and previous sexual experience cannot be used to imply consent as happens with adult females.
The newspaper reports, however, serve a different function and illustrate the dangers of young teenage temptresses.
Men are portrayed as being powerless:CB LOLITA, 13, HAD SEX ON THE SLIDE (‘A girl of 13 had sex on a kiddies' playground slide with a young man she contacted over CB radio, a court heard yesterday’);Bedtime antics of a ‘latter-day Lolita’(‘A 13-year-old girl…described as a ‘latter-day Lolita’ went to bed with one man…and then swapped him for another in the same room’);Girl, 15, tempted her mother's man (‘She had made propositions to him three times which he resisted before succumbing’);Sex-case man goes to jail (Defence counsel claimed ‘the initiative in the sexual relationship came from the girl’); CABBlE'S TEEN SEX SESSIONS (‘Taxi driver…found the cheeky advances of a teenage Lolita hard to resist’);CHOIRMASTER AND GIRL, 15 (‘I was tempted and that's all’);Girl gave rapist sex lesson (‘A 14-year-old girl put out a challenge to a convicted rapist….
She said she could ‘show him a thing or two’’).
Six months later, the same newspaper produced a similar story from the same magistrates' court:‘COME TO BED’ PLEA BY GIRL, 15 (‘A saucy schoolgirl sent a sexy message to prisoner [NAME STATED].
She invited him to become her lover’).
The spectre of false accusations is another theme that is paraded as another hostage to the deviousness of the female sex:
Five schoolboys took turns to have sex with a 15-year-old girl….
But she later told her parents the boys had raped her and they were quizzed by police for several days before the girl confessed to lying.
RAPE LIE OF LOLITA LOVER (‘A father of Two…was held and questioned for 24 hours before the girl confessed she had lied about being raped’).
The remaining items tended to be of the titillating  variety of which a teenagers' Christmas party is fairly typical:‘8-in-a bed’ sex romp .
In contrast, there was only one case where the seduction of the under-age girl is quite explicit —A couple seduced virgin, 15 — but even here there was a ‘blonde wife’ aiding and abetting her husband in a kinky sex session.
In conclusion, according to the papers it's women who are the problem, not men.
The woman is either the temptress or is lying about her consent.
If these claims fail, others who should be protecting her interests will tell her that she contributed to the situation by being in male territory.
On the other hand, if a mature woman is sexually assaulted by a stranger in daylight or at home, then she has not been raped by a man but a monster.
The media's search for the monster has been completed and the future safely of innocent women can be celebrated.
Anonymity
The Press Council strongly encourages anonymity in sexual assault cases, although unlike rape cases they are not covered by the 1976 Act, and so it is something of a test of the voluntary code.
Of the ninety-eight cases, there were only four cases where the victim was named.
This is a remarkably small number of cases and needs further examination.
In fact, in one of these cases which we discuss below it was not altogether clear whether there was a charge of indecent assault although the sexual connotations were quite apparent.
While there a large number of cases where the victims are juveniles, there are many others where the newspapers would be allowed by law to identify the victim.
Anyway, the only victims named were a man aged 26 and three women aged 39, 35 and 29 years respectively.
With that few number named, one reaction might be to suggest that it is not an area where there needs to be much concern raised.
However, the cases where the victim is named tend to be the cases which attract widespread or sustained coverage (or both).
In other words, these are the cases where there is the greatest public impact, so, while a small minority, these high-profile cases will tend to be used by the public as indicators of what is normally the outcome.
For this reason we need to examine these four cases further.
The named male was the recipient of a homosexual assault.
This 26-year-old married businessman was beaten up, burned and sexually assaulted by a torture gang ‘and the six-man gang tried to tear out their victim's toenails with pliers — then ripped off adhesive tape they had stuck to his genitals…
‘. In another occasion of indecent assault whereby a drunken soccer fan ‘put his hand up the British Airway girl's skirt after she tried to subdue him and a group of pals who were on the duty-frees’(Star )— both the Star and the Sun avoided naming the  air hostess.
However, the Daily Mail — which had made a strong point about not naming rape victims, even in civil cases (see Chapter 7) named the woman on successive days with a large photograph of her on the second day:I'm jetting away from it all .
She was reported as seeing it as a serious matter and thought the fine by the court was not enough: ‘I'd have chopped his hand off if I'd had the chance’.
We do not know whether she was embarrassed at being named — probably not in this case, one suspects — and there is little doubt that her views of this behaviour came over more vividly without the cloak of anonymity.
The third named victim was a woman lawyer in a case which was traced in the Daily Mail (on three days) and its sister-newspaper, the London Evening Standard (once).
The offender, a Moroccan international footballer, was sentenced to five years' imprisonment for grievous bodily harm.
Headlined Spare my life…rape me , she told the Old Bailey court ‘He said ‘I'm going to kill you’.
I believed him absolutely.
I felt I could not breathe and murmured as best I could ‘Take me’.
I invited him to rape me to try to save my life’.
Fortunately, a passer-by heard her screams and the attacker fled.
She was reported as saying that the trial had taught her one important lesson as a barrister — how the victim feels — and called for changes in the law which would give greater protection to victims.
The final case where the victim was named is of a different order from the others.
It is one where the clear purpose of extensive coverage was titillation.
It was mentioned in all four popular newspapers, but only in the Star was the trial mentioned on three separate days.
The trial resulted in an acquittal.
Not only was the victim named, but also her photograph was shown at least four times.
Two of the photos showed her posing in a bikini with the caption, ‘Bikini girl’[name staled]…she fled half naked from X's [defendant named]flat shouting ‘rape’‘.
The outcome was reported thus: ‘a wealthy bullion dealer who patiently courted an out-of-work actress for five years without having sex was cleared yesterday of molesting her’.
There are various nuances in the newspaper reports.
The Daily Mirror's report focused on a variation of the false accusation thesis under the headline FANTASY ROLE OF ‘RAPE’ ACTRESS .
The defence story was emphasised that she
had been starved of film parts and wanted to dramatise herself, the Old Bailey was told.
So when [named defendant], 41, made sexual overtures for the first time during their five-year friendship she went to a neighbour and cried rape.
The Star's fuller reports gave a vivid illustration of two starkly contrasting versions of the same incident.
The victim claimed that the Canadian bullion dealer had ‘slapped her, pinned her to the floor and ripped off her trousers’.
The Star's report on the day of the verdict — accompanying two photographs of the victim and one of the alleged assailant — indicated the extent of her distress after the case:
WHITE-HOT FURY OF SNOW QUEEN I'm branded a liar, says ‘no sex’[name given].
SEXY actress [name given]stormed from a courtroom yesterday after being dubbed ‘a cross between the Snow Queen and Greta Garbo….
It's a travesty of justice.
I have been made out to be a liar but I am determined people will know the truth.
However, the Sun's italicised section in the body of its report —‘he had wooed her five years with champagne and romantic meals, getting just a kiss on the cheek in return ’— provides the clear message of what allegedly out-of-work actresses are expected to give tycoons who make that son of trouble.
Cases of this kind are few indeed, but they are exactly the cases which are read widely by everyone, including future victims of sexual assault.
Not only do such cases provide — like other contested cases — public evidence of what is regarded as appropriate behaviour, but also the public humiliation of a named victim will not go unnoticed.
Identification can be made without a name actually being given.
Sometimes a judge is noted as intervening in requesting certain kinds of identification not to be made.
This happens more often in indecent assault cases than other sex crimes.
By intervening in this way, one can reasonably assume that this request can be regarded as making an exception to the general rules — implicit or explicit — of identification.
In one case which involved a ‘brilliant’ public school master from ‘the top North London school’’, the judge ordered the school not to be identified.
Such an order occurred in another case where the judge again requested that the school should not be identified, and the nature of the school was not clear from the report.
In other cases involving schools but where there was no report of any request by the judge, coverage split fairly evenly between occasions when the school was named and those where it was not.
Clearly this is an area where guidelines are needed, for it seems unreasonable that certain well-connected institutions can expect to reap the benefits of anonymity in the press, while others have to suffer whatever effects adverse publicly brings.
Conclusion
There are several themes which occur repeatedly in the reporting of the courtroom stage of sex crime processing.
Firstly, there is the culpability of the woman.
This is especially pronounced in cases of sex murder and of rape.
The woman's sexuality is presented as provoking a violent  sexual response in the man.
This occurred in those cases of sex murder where the supposed infidelity of the woman was the excuse the man used to justify killing his former wife or lover.
It also occurred in the case of the Paratroopers, who were acquitted of the rape charge (though not all were acquitted of all sexual offences) after a woman soldier had entered the men's barracks alone.
The second major issue is that the theme of the sex fiend is much less marked than in the earlier search stage of the criminal investigation.
It is present in some cases, most spectacularly in that of The Fox, though even here it is mixed with the sex lives of the women he knew.
The major focus has often, but not always, shifted away from the male aggressor to the ‘failings’ of the woman in protecting herself.
The third major point is that the reporting of the trials marks out the boundaries of ‘acceptable’ behaviour not only by gender, but also by class, race and age.
The media accounts are replaced with racialised people, with photographs to lend emphasis to the text where the rapists are black.
They make constant reference to the class; location and age of the attacker and victim.
The construction of the black man as rapist has a long racist history.
A final point is that the explanatory import of the reporting is such as to back trivial and conservative ‘solutions’.
For instance, most of the press was more interested in video nasties as a cause of rape than in deeper structural explanations.