

Utilitarianism
1.
We are concerned with three main questions in this work: Do moral judgements possess objective truth or  falsehood ?
Is there a rational means of testing their acceptability?
Is this means calculated to bring congruence on ethical matters among those who use it properly?
A theory which, in its classic form, gives a pretty positive answer to at least the first two of these questions is utilitarianism.
This is the doctrine — to put it roughly — that actions are right or wrong according as to whether they increase or decrease the amount of happiness in the world.
Such judgements are supposed to be true or false in a fairly straightforward way, and to be testable by empirical enquiry or perhaps appeal to the common experience of the human race.
In answer to the third question, the utilitarian might suggest that there is at least as great a tendency to convergence on these bases as pertains to any of the social sciences (which may not be saying much).
The utilitarian need not insist that these are the correct answers for all uses of ethical language or types of moral judgement.
He may prefer only to claim that they apply once ethical language and judgement are understood in the way he recommends.
Thus he may admit that words like ‘right’ and ‘wrong’can be, and often are, understood in a non-utilitarian fashion, perhaps simply to express ill considered emotions in statements incapable of rational testing or of being true or false.
This, however, seems to him the condemnation of such uses of the words and such forms of moral judgement.
As against the chaos, or alternatively the uncritical archaism, of such moral thought, he recommends that we tidy up our ethical language so that the words have a firm utilitarian sense.
They are then used to  support recommendations concerning the organization of society and personal conduct resting on straight matters of fact, or at least the best available opinion on matters of fact, of the one kind around which clear minded people can expect to rally as a basis for human cooperation.
If the utilitarian looks at it in this way, he takes it as a criterion for an acceptable use of ethical words, and way of understanding moral judgement, that it should give them a factual content which is the only one which it is sensible to expect people in general to endorse as a sensible guide to acceptable conduct.
Thus Jeremy Bentham, the great legal and social reformer, said that when interpreted according to the principle of utility ‘the words ought , and right and wrong , and others of that stamp, have a meaning: when otherwise, they have none’(Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation , Chapter One, ∘10).
Bentham (1748–1832) is properly regarded as the founder of utilitarianism.
Although various thinkers before him had formulated much the same basic principle of utility as basic to ethics none had used it so systematically as the basis for rethinking all moral and social arrangements.
It will be well, therefore, to start with his version of it.
According to this principle, as Bentham understands it, the ideal method for determining whether an individual's action, or a legislative enactment, is right or wrong would be through evaluation of its total tendency to promote happiness, on the one hand, and to promote unhappiness on the other; if the former predominates the action is right, if the latter it is wrong.
To clarify this, Bentham lists seven so-called dimensions of pleasure and pain:(1) intensity;(2) duration;(3) certainty or uncertainty;(4) propinquity or remoteness;(5) fecundity;(6) purity;(7) extent.
Of these (1),(2) and (3) are those of prime importance.
If we knew all the pleasures and pains liable to be produced by an action, and could assign a degree of intensity, a duration, and a probability (represented as a fraction of one) to each, then the multiplication of these by each other, treating pleasure as a positive and pain as a negative quantity, would give the total positive or negative value of the action's consequences, and it would be a good or right act if the result was positive, bad or wrong if it was negative.
Duration and probability, at least considered in the abstract, are relatively straightforward, but what is a pleasure's or pain's degree of intensity?
The answer is that it is simply the degree of an experience's pleasantness or painfulness taken at a moment, or its average pleasantness or painfulness over a period.
If we conceive of the least pleasant experience which is still a pleasure, then one way of quantifying its intensity would be by characterising the number of times more pleasant a pleasure is at a particular moment than that.
Perhaps the slightest pleasure of which I can conceive is that of sucking a boiled sweet.
Then listening to Beethoven's fifth symphony, well performed, and when one is in the mood to enjoy it, might be — let us say, on the average, taken moment by moment — one thousand times more pleasurable.
Similarly, we should evaluate pains as so many times worse than a minimal pain.
Of the other dimensions, purity, in Bentham's special sense, means the chance of a pleasure not leading to pains, or a pain not leading to pleasures, while the fecundity is the extent to which a pleasure breeds or leads to other pleasures or a pain to other pains.
The idea is that we may know that some pleasures or pains have a generally high or low degree of purity or fecundity without its being practicable on a particular occasion to specify and evaluate specifically the precise further pleasures or pains which are likely to ensue from them.
Thus the pleasures of heroin can be dismissed summarily as counting against, rather than for, the action of taking heroin, if we can say that it is a highly impure pleasure (liable to lead to much wretchedness later).
Extent is the number of people who will have the pleasures or pains, and it will be invoked when we are thinking in terms of some average effect on persons affected rather than of named individuals.
As for propinquity it seems that he included this mainly because his theory of value was closely linked with his theory of motivation, and it is psychologically true that we are more influenced by thoughts of the more immediate than the more remote future.
It seems better not to include it as a criterion of value, once it is clearly distinguished from probability.
We are not only to include pleasures and pains liable to be produced by an action in estimating its rightness or wrongness, but pleasures and pains liable to be prevented by it.
Pains prevented, given a value in accordance with the same dimensions  of intensity, duration, probability, extent count along with pleasures produced, in favour of an action, while pleasures prevented, count along with the pains produced, against it.
Many have thought it an objectionable feature of utilitarianism, in its classic formulations, that pleasure and pain are supposedly set off against each other in this simple way.
This seems particularly objectionable when pleasures and pains prevented come into account, for one may well think it worse in an action to produce pain than merely to hinder a corresponding amount of pleasure occurring.
However, it is a problem to find an alternative approach.
It will not do to adopt a so-called negative utilitarianism, once advocated by Karl Popper, for which all that matters is the prevention of pain.
That seems to favour mass killing of all who are liable to feel pain at all.
It is no real objection to Bentham that we can only look for an approximation to the truth about these matters of pleasure and pain.
It would be a more serious objection if there were no real truth there at all to which we can hope our judgements may approximate.
There are at least two reasons for thinking this may be so.
First, it appears that there may be no truth as to how many times more pleasant or painful one experience is than another.
Second, there may be no one truth as to what is probable and to what extent.
Moreover, there are difficulties in knowing how to relate different sorts of probabilities such as those which concern the degree of credit to be given to a judgement and those which are of a statistical nature.
There are, however, some indications that Bentham did not think there was a precise truth to these matters, but that a certain free play left by the facts did not matter too much in practice.
2.
Sometimes Bentham is represented as having held a significantly different view from that just described, according to which an action which it is right for me to do at any moment is either one which produces a greater surplus of pleasure over pain than any alternative action then open to me (in which case it is the one right action) or produces as great a surplus as any alternative (in which case it is a right action), while all actions not thus right are wrong.
We may call this the rigorist interpretation or version of utilitarianism.
The requirement implied in this formulation, that I am always  morally obliged to do the best I can, is accepted as reasonable by some commentators, while it is thought of as unreasonably demanding by others.
(Samuel Scheffler has recently examined this matter in an especially interesting way.)
Take, by way of example, a devoted nurse who is quite exceptionally sensitive to patients' needs.
Her nursing activity would be right on our first less rigoristic formulation of the Benthamite view, for it does good by way of lessening pain and promoting pleasure and either does no harm at all, or none that is significant.
However, on the second, more rigorist, view, her action would turn out to be wrong, should it be true that with even more effort she could have relieved still more suffering, or caused just a little more happiness (without countervailing harm).
This implication of rigorism seems a bit absurd.
It is sometimes thought that rigorism can take adequate account of what seems troubling here by recognizing that if we ask too much of ourselves we damage our power to do good by becoming worn out or embittered.
But it remains problematic whether the utilitarian should condemn as wrong all actions which are not the very best, or equal best.
In favour of rigorism, there is the apparent reasonableness of saying that if one fails to do all one can to promote happiness (and, in particular, to reduce suffering) one has not done the best one could do, and that must be wrong.
To allow people to comfort themselves that less than the best (or equal best) is good enough, is, it may be said, just a recipe for idle complacency.
Against rigorism, is the sense that it is rather absurd to lump all who are not utilitarian saints with actual wrongdoers.
Actually, the debate between rigorism and our original less rigorist version of utilitarianism has a morally earnest character alien to Bentham.
However, the issue is a lively one today, since some contemporary utilitarians adopt a highly rigorist outlook (arguing, for example, that not to have done all one personally might to feed the starving in far off places is as bad as murder) which other moral philosophers see as the reductio ad absurdum of utilitarianism.
(See GLOVER and SINGER.)
Since Bentham's position is usually assumed to be rigorist, it is worth pointing out that his main formulations, such as we have described above, seem to be non-rigorist.
Undoubtedly, he would think an action the better the more it augmented happiness, but it seems that it is  only wrong, for him, if it actually augments unhappiness.
However, one feature of his formulations does suggest the rigorist view.
For we have seen that the bad consequences of an action are supposed to consist not just in pain, but also in loss of pleasure, and the good consequences of an action consist not just in pleasure, but in pain prevented.
He is bound to say this, indeed, for if we considered only the positive consequences of an action, and not those which would have occurred if it had not been done, one could not count in the suffering which an action prevented in its favour, which would be absurd.
However, once started on this track it may seem difficult to keep clear of rigorism, for it is unclear how the good one might have done but did not can be discounted from the things prevented by what one did instead.
It seems reasonable, however, to distinguish between two different types of thing which might or would have happened if the agent had not done an action.
First, there are things which might or would have happened as consequences of some other action which he might have done instead.
Secondly there are things which would have occurred, if he had not acted thus, but not as consequences of some alternative action of his.
One can then say that it is only things of the second sort which count as things his action prevented, when one is calculating its good and bad effects, and thus distinguish Bentham's criterion of rightness and wrongness from a rigorist one.
It stands as the view that an action is wrong if its consequences, in terms of pain promoted and pleasure prevented, outweigh its consequences in terms of pleasure promoted and pain prevented, and that other actions are right, even if not the best possible.
Yet this formulation still has an implication which Bentham would not really have accepted.
It implies that if one achieves a desirable end (in terms, say, of pain prevented) but at a greater cost of suffering than was necessary for it, one's act was right, though not the best, even if one could have achieved that end by a less drastic means.
This goes against Bentham's insistence that one must always use the means least costly in terms of distress caused.
To meet this point I think one must say that Bentham's view was, in effect, that a right action must not only do more good than harm,but must also be such that neither the particular  good it does, nor any other comparable good which might have substituted for it, could have been achieved at less cost in terms of harm done .
That utilitarianism needs some such additional clause to be in the intended spirit of Bentham is beyond doubt.
However, the addition is almost as problematic as it is important.
Consider the dispute over fox hunting and suppose it agreed that the pleasure of men, hounds and perhaps horses, outweigh the pain of the fox.
Or consider, similarly, the cruelty of the Roman cirrus and suppose that there are enough happy spectators to outweigh the pain of the victims.
Surely Bentham would want to say that they should have sought their pleasure in other ways which would, in fact, have been equivalent, but it is quite a problem to say what is meant by ‘equivalent’ here.
Still, without returning on our tracks and urging the rigorist position (that one must always do as much good as possible), there must be some kind of requirement that one do as little harm as possible, in terms of actual pain (though not perhaps in terms of pleasure prevented) in order to achieve the good one does.
This formulation still allows it to be a justifiable ground for causing pain that it will promote a ‘greater’ pleasure, when no equivalent pleasure can be obtained otherwise.
One may well object to this, but perhaps not on grounds which can be called Benthamite.
However, a theory which was recognizably utilitarian in spirit might seek to give priority in some way to the prevention of suffering over that of the promotion of happiness.
3.
Bentham combined his utilitarian ethical theory with a hedonistic psychological theory according to which each of us necessarily seeks to maximise his own happiness.
This is usually thought a highly problematic combination.
What point has an ethical directive to pursue the general happiness addressed to beings who will necessarily seek only their own?
This is not a problem for most contemporary utilitarians since they usually hold no such psychological theory.
But whatever difficulties attach to Bentham's particular position, an ethical outlook which, like that of some more recent utilitarians, is not associated with some theory of human motivation is also somewhat unsatisfactory.
Surely an ethical theory is not much use  without some view as to what may induce humans to live by it.
So it will be worth while considering briefly how Bentham saw the relation between ethics and psychology.
When someone does something we can ask (1) what he actually did;(2) what he intended to do;(3) what his motive was.
What he actually did was right or wrong according to the criteria we have discussed, while his intention was right or wrong, on Bentham's view, according as to whether his action would have been right or wrong if things had turned out as he expected.
His motive is the kind of pleasure for himself (or pain avoided) at which he was ultimately aiming.
Bentham tries to show that on no useful classification of motives can one divide them into those which are always good or bad.
Take, for example, the motive of becoming rich or winning admiration.
This is neither good nor bad in itself, it is simply a normal bit of human psychology, operating more or less strongly in different people.
To regard motives themselves as good or bad is idle; they are simply the raw material of human psychology with which the legislator or social engineer must deal.
The important thing is to create a society in which the motives people actually have will operate so as to generate good intentions, such as will normally produce good actions, that is, ones which augment happiness.
But what part does the moralist, as opposed to the legislator or social engineer, play in Bentham's scheme?
Curiously he comes out as another kind of social engineer who tries to show people that granted their fundamental motives (to obtain a range of pleasures and avoid a range of pains) they will do best to act rightly (in terms of the general happiness).
But what if it is untrue that this is so?
Then the moralist had better keep quiet on the matter, while turning to the social engineer to modify the social situation so that‘moral goodness’ becomes ‘the best policy’.
Thus many usual sorts of moral concern are simply absent from Bentham.
People are what they are, but some acts are good, others bad, and legislators, reformers and ‘moralists’ should aim at organizing society so that human beings as they really are find themselves in circumstances where they tend to do the former.
This obviously poses the problem.
what motivates the moralists, social engineers, and legislators, who must be Bentham's main intended audience?
Bentham's views on this shifted.
Originally he thought of his main audience as consisting in enlightened rulers who happened to have power and who with sufficient for themselves already, sought their main further pleasure in seeking the happiness of their subjects.
His mature view is of more interest to us today.
It was something like this.
We virtually all take some pleasure in the pleasure of others and find pain in their suffering.
Where we are not dealing solely with our own affairs but forming general preferences as to the kind of society we would like to live in, the main pleasures and pains we are concerned with are precisely these pleasures and pains of sympathy.
Thus at that level we regard the social arrangements and the general customs of society, from the point of view of, so to speak, benevolent part time social engineers, that is in terms of their effects on the general happiness, and become a suitable audience to be energised towards social reform by Benthamite recommendations.
As such, and also for most of us as being personally advantageous, we will put a high premium on democratic institutions.
4.
The next great utilitarian thinker was J.S. Mill (1806–73), who attempted to improve on Bentham's utilitarianism in various ways.
Mill's most famous innovation lay in his claim that quality of pleasure counts as well as quantity.
Suppose that one is choosing between two actions, both of which produce either no pain or the same amount, while one produces more pleasure.
Bentham would say that the one which produces more pleasure is the better action, but Mill would say that it need not be, if the quality of the pleasure which is lesser in amount is sufficiently much higher in quality.
(See his Utilitarianism chapter one.)
Mill does not discuss whether pains as well as pleasures differ in quality in an ethically significant way.
It seems likely he would have said they did.
He might, for example(having been somewhat high minded) have thought of the distress of a guilty conscience as worse than a quantitatively equal amount of physical pain.
If so, an immense difference would arise in decisions on right and wrong between Bentham and Mill.
So it would seem, at least.
Yet there is some difficulty in knowing whether Mill really meant to say anything very different from Bentham.
If one takes ‘amount’ as referring to duration and  extent (number of people affected), perhaps together with probability and proximity, Bentham certainly does not think that all that matters is amount, since this would be to forget intensity, which seems to mean simply the extent to which it is actually liked moment by moment.
(It certainly does not mean any kind of degree of physical excitement.)
Similarly, when Mill tries to explain how we can decide which is qualitatively the better of two pleasures, his actual answer is more or less that the higher pleasure is the one which is actually more liked by those in a position to compare them.
So it is possible that the difference between Mill and Bentham here is merely apparent.
However, Mill is usually understood as holding that there may be two pleasures of which the less pleasant is the better in virtue of its higher quality, and that it is then morally more important to promote it than the other.
Generations of philosophers have said that this is to abandon ethical hedonism, in a way which is quite inconsistent with Mill's avowed intentions.
If one experience can be better than another without being pleasanter, does it not follow that there is something determining value besides pleasure?
This seems a fairly devastating criticism.
But Mill may have meant something rather different, namely that, although all pleasures are, in themselves, and apart from their effects, good, and all pains, with a similar qualification, bad, they are pleasant and painful, and hence possessed of value or disvalue, in incommensurable ways.
Thus in choosing between two alternative sets of pleasure one cannot necessarily decide which is preferable by an arithmetical calculation, nor could one necessarily do so even if one was omniscient.
Bentham's ideal calculation of the moral quality of an act presupposes that of any two pleasures the one is a definite number of times more pleasurable at any one moment than the other.
Thus the average momentary pleasure, say, of hearing Parsifal on a certain occasion must be a definite number of times more or less pleasant than that of a particular episode of sucking a boiled sweet.
This does seem rather ridiculous.
Nor does it seem sufficient merely to qualify it by admitting a certain element of free play in the facts.
This suggests that what Mill may have meant in saying that one pleasure is of higher quality than another is that it may be pleasanter without there being a quantifiable relation between them, in terms of which there must  be some amount of the second which is as worth while, in hedonic terms, as the first.
The reasonableness of bringing some element of quality into even a strictly hedonistic system may be brought out by the following thought experiment.
Suppose that we identify, or biological engineers construct, a slug like creature which, throughout its life, experiences a low level of pleasure consisting in an inarticulate feeling of humdrum comfort.
Suppose also that it is somehow possible to place it in a space capsule in which it can survive, so far as can be seen, for ever, without any external aid.
To construct this capsule is, however, immensely expensive.
Suppose, next, that a catastrophe, which will wipe out life on this planet, threatens, and can only be prevented by an expenditure the same as would be needed for that capsule for the slug.
A utilitarian dictator can either spend the resources he has at his disposal for developing the slug capsule or on saving life on this earth.
He is a Benthamite and he reasons as follows.
If I save life on this planet, it will only be saved for ten thousand years.
(Let us take it that he is right in this.)
If I let life on this planet die out and send the slug into space, then, since it will exist for ever, the quantity of pleasure it will enjoy will eventually outweigh all the pleasures enjoyed on this earth for ten thousand years.
This would be the only possible course for a strict Benthamite.
Even if life on this planet were, for the next ten thousand years, to be pretty joyful, on the whole, the infinite number of low level moments of slug pleasure will be more valuable.
If you do not like the idea of an infinite number you must still recognize that there must be some number of moments of slug pleasure which would outweigh any finite amount of joy on the earth.
So perhaps Mill's claim is that the pleasurableness of life is all that matters but that this cannot always be so well promoted by increasing the quantity of low level pleasure as by obtaining lesser amounts of high quality pleasure.
Doubtless this means the end of straight arithmetical calculation, but it may still make sense to speak of informed judgements as to which patterns of pleasurable experience form more pleasurable lives.
5.
The next major utilitarian thinker was Henry Sidgwick (1838–1900).
His utilitarianism gains by being associated with a firm rejection of hedonistic psychology.
However, matters are  complicated by his endorsement of the basic rationality, as opposed to psychological necessity, of egoism, which he sees as in conflict with the equal rationality of the concern with the general happiness required by utilitarian ethics.
A question which still greatly puzzles utilitarian thinkers, on which Sidgwick seems to have been the first to touch, is whether the utilitarian goal is the maximisation of total or of average welfare.
(See BAYLES 2, and PARFIT.)
Sidgwick himself settles without much ado for total welfare.
(SIDGWICK p. 415.)
(His approach is quantitative, for he firmly rejects Mill's problematic introduction of quality into the equation.)
This has the implication that it is better to produce a sufficiently large population with low average happiness than a smaller one with high average happiness, since that way (with a sufficiently large population) the ‘amount’ of happiness will be larger.
Indeed, so long as total pleasure just outweighs total pain an ever increasing population is likely to be a more effective way of increasing happiness than making life better for each individual.
Many have thought this absurd and have concluded that the goal should be the increase of average happiness.
However, this suggests that it might be a good thing to prevent anyone being born who would be less than maximally happy (on average, throughout his life) since he would be lowering the average happiness by his existence.
This seems even more paradoxical.
There are genuine problems here as to how the utilitarian should view large scale government policies affecting population size.
However, if our policies once allow for the possibility of the human race existing for ever, or into the indefinite future, one can take average happiness over all future time as the effective goal, even from the totalistic point of view, since the contribution to quantity of happiness from population size will anyway be maximal.
(Cf.
ATTFIELD p. 128.)
Many attempts have been made to find a version of utilitarianism which avoids the oddities both of straight totalistic utilitarianism and straight average utilitarianism but none seems to be really satisfactory.
(See especially PARFIT.)
Another question raised by Sidgwick still inspires lively debate.
May it sometimes be better, from a utilitarian point of view, that people should not think as utilitarians? perhaps it is best for the general happiness that people should believe that a certain  obligation to keep promises holds independently of its effects on happiness?
Sidgwick even floats the idea that the person who sees the truth of utilitarianism might, as a utilitarian, think it best to keep some aspects of his doctrine secret.
Rather similar to this apparent endorsement of insincerity is the distinction he draws between qualities of character the praise of which is useful and qualities of character which are useful themselves.
Only the first is praiseworthy for the utilitarian, since praise is essentially itself an act to be judged as good or harmful.
Thus we should only praise conduct which needs to be stimulated in this way, even though other (perhaps more selfish) conduct which will be done anyway is itself good or better.
For Sidgwick and for some modern utilitarians (such as J.J.C. Smart) recognition of this reduces conflict between utilitarianism and ordinary moral common sense, but for others it is a symptom of a kind of bad faith which is endemic to utilitarianism.
Finally, it is to be noted that Sidgwick holds that a kind of intuition, not capable of empirical or discursive proof, is needed to support utilitarianism.
The statement that the actions we ought to do are those which promote the general happiness would be useless if it meant nothing more than that they do promote it, and that something more can only be given by an intuition.
(Sidgwick thus avoids the naturalistic fallacy to be considered in the next chapter.)
6.
Appeal to intuition is uncongenial to most utilitarians.
We can find the beginnings of an alternative defence of utilitarianism, not turning merely on a question begging appeal to the meaning of ethical words, in Bentham.
He contends, in effect, that ethical statements do indeed do something more or different than merely state facts, even facts about the effects of actions on the general happiness, for they pick out actions for approval or disapproval.
Nonetheless, guidance of our approval and disapproval by the principle of utility is the only serious option for those who wish to base them on ascertainable facts to which we can all come to attach the same kind of importance.
(Mill is much less clear on this.)
Modern utilitarians who are disinclined to appeal to intuition sometimes adopt an attitudinist view of ethical judgement, of the sort we shall examine in our third chapter.
According to this, ethical propositions do not say something which can be either true or false in the sense of reporting or misreporting how things really are in some realm of values (though we can call them ‘true’ or ‘false’to signal our agreement or disagreement).
Rather, they express some ‘attitude’ of the speaker, such as some ultimate preference about how we should behave or society be organized, and invite the hearer to adopt it too.
A utilitarian who holds this ‘attitudinist’ view will see utilitarianism as the expression of a fundamental attitude in favour of a certain way of reaching decisions.
He will not suppose that there is any possibility of proving that the principle of utility is true in any strong sense, but will put it forward as a guide to life which he endorses and, as a philosopher, seeks to make precise and free of confusion.
He may think also that it has a basic appeal to human nature, which means most others will accept it too once their minds are cleared of confusion and superstition.
A philosopher who has advocated utilitarianism in this spirit is J.J.C. Smart.
A utilitarian of this sort holds that once we have adopted a fundamentally utilitarian standpoint all specific ethical questions become factual and can be approached empirically.
However, if people challenge the basic principle of utility one cannot say that they are mistaken in any kind of factual way, or that they are necessarily irrational.
It may simply be a fundamental divergence of attitude.
7.
A form of attitudinism which has been worked out with especial thoroughness is the prescriptivism of R.M. Hare.
For him, the essential meaning of the key ethical terms lies in two features, universalisability and prescriptiveness.
They are prescriptive in the sense that their role is to prescribe (which means much the same as recommend) some particular sort of conduct.
Thus ethical statements cannot be true or false in a basic way, any more than a command can be.
However, ethical words are also universalisable.
It is linguistically unacceptable to apply them except on grounds which would always lead to further application of them in all similar cases.
It follows that I am not using language properly if I say that you ought to do something, unless I hold by some universal principle from which this prescription follows and all other implications of which I would be prepared  to endorse, most notably those which would prescribe under certain circumstances that I do something.
When he first advocated these ideas Hare largely went along with the view of most attitudinists that a correct account of the meaning of ethical language has no definite implications as to what moral views one should take.
But in successive writings Hare has gradually worked around to seeing the account of the very meaning of ethical language which he regards as correct as offering a kind of proof of  utilitarianism .
(See HARE 1,2,3.)
For, so he elaborately argues, one cannot, if one really thinks it through, accept the total set of prescriptions implied by any universal ethical rules except those which attach weight, in proportion to their strength, to the desirability of satisfying the desires which everyone affected by an action would have if they possessed proper prudence.
This is because I can always ask ‘Would I still prescribe that action if it was I who had that desire?’
The idea is that one does not really accept a universal rule unless an imaginative attempt to put oneself in the place of everyone affected still leaves one happy with it, for only so does one accept the prescription that the action should be done in that case in which it would be oneself rather than the other who was in such a place.
8.
The upshot is a version of what is known as preference utilitarianism, for which what counts in favour of an act is not that it promotes a kind of experience known as pleasure or prevents a kind of experience called pain, but that it provides people with what they would prefer to have and prevents their having what they would prefer not to have.
Such considerations as the following are widely thought to favour preference over the older hedonistic utilitarianism.
(1) The fact that someone prefers X to Y, as shown in their behaviour, is empirically ascertainable in a way in which the greater intensity or duration, or even very existence, of a private feeling of pleasure or pain is not.
It is also supposed that comparison between welfare gained or lost for different people is, though still difficult, less intractably so, if what is in question are not qualities of feeling but the satisfactions of behaviourally manifested preferences.
(2) Then again it is regarded as doubtful whether there really is a specific quality of pleasure, and even of  pain, which covers all experiences that people either want to have or avoid, and it is thought obviously desirable that people should have experiences they want rather than those with a certain quality.
(3) Even if the nature of these qualities of pleasure and pain are themselves unproblematic, it is said that what people want (or want to avoid) is not necessarily any kind of private experience, but just as often objective states of affairs in the public world, and it is thought no less reasonable to take account of wants of this sort than those for private experiences.
To me these supposed advantages of preference utilitarianism seem spurious.
(1) Doubtless a person's behaviour in choosing between alternatives is observable in a way in which his felt satisfaction or dissatisfaction is not.
However, if preferences are understood merely as patterns of physical behaviour which tend towards certain results, then there would be no more moral reason for satisfying them than for assisting a computer carry out its programme when this was something undesired by any conscious being.
Only if it is taken for granted that the preference behaviour is that of a conscious subject, does it, of itself, provide a reason for promoting the preferred end,— it would not matter in the least if there was no conscious individual there to mind about anything.
But once granted that we have adequate ground for interpreting people's preferences as those of conscious beings, it is not clear why it should be denied that we have adequate clues as to whether they have pleasant or unpleasant experiences under various circumstances and for some judgements about the degree of the pleasure or pain involved which allow interpersonal comparisons.
(2) The denial that there is some one and the same quality of pleasantness and another of painfulness which mark all those experiences which it is desirable to promote or prevent is a more forceful objection to Benthamite utilitarianism.
Preference utilitarianism is right to try to get away from this idea.
It risks, however, giving the impression that what matters is not the quality of life as we each experience it in our individual consciousness, but simply what takes place in some objective world — which seems a betrayal of the whole point of utilitarianism.
Perhaps Mill's qualitative utilitarianism points towards a better alternative to the view that pleasure and pain  are simply some kind of uniform sensation of which we want respectively, as much and as little as possible.
We can surely think of pleasure and pain as referring to felt qualities of experience without denying that these qualities are of radically different kinds.
(3) The third consideration supposedly favouring preference utilitarianism was that we may desire things other than experiences for ourselves.
Once we reject psychological egoistic hedonism we have virtually admitted this fact.
I may prefer that people should not be malicious about me behind my back, even if I am not to know or even be affected by it, and that certain deathbed wishes of mine be carried out without supposing I will persist to be affected by them.
Moreover, I have preferences regarding the happiness of others which are not concerned with them merely as means to certain feelings for myself.
With such facts in mind, the preference utilitarian may suggest that our aim should be not just that people should somehow have as much subjective experience as possible of the kinds they most prefer, but that as much as possible of what they would like to have happen should happen.
But this suggestion is full of difficulties.
It seems to imply, for one thing, that if someone has very strong preferences about what happens beyond his own person he thereby renders it important that certain things be done or left undone which have little or nothing to do with his personal life.
Indeed, this influence can extend beyond the grave, when he will not even know (let us assume) whether things are working out as he preferred.
9.
Another variant of utilitarianism which commanded a good deal of support in fairly recent times was rule as opposed to act utilitarianism.
(See TOULMIN, LYONS and BAYLES 1.)
For the traditional ‘act’ utilitarianism acts are right because they maximise (or at least increase) welfare, while for rule utilitarianism rules are morally binding because general adherence to them maximises, or would maximise, welfare, individual acts being right or wrong in virtue of their conformity to such rules.
Rules are, indeed, important for act utilitarianism, too, and not only as rules of thumb, but rather as felicific habits; still, the effects on people, s inclination to stick with generally felicific rules is simply a consequence of an individual act to be weighed along with all of  its other consequences.
For rule utilitarianism, in contrast, once a rule is shown to be felicific, it is established as something to be obeyed, unless perhaps in very special cases, and is not to be considered merely as one factor to be weighed against others.
Thus granted institution of a rule against murder is in general felicific, we should abide by it even when individual calculation of the results of a particular murder might show it to be beneficent.
Rule utilitarianism is often advocated, on grounds of fairness, as necessary to counter the excuses of the ‘free rider’ who does not bother to stick to a moral rule because enough others are doing so to produce its benefits.
The usual objection to rule utilitarianism is that if the sole point of a rule is to promote happiness it seems only sensible to jettison it when more happiness is gained thereby.
On the face of it, this criticism carries the day against any rule utilitarianism which is genuinely distinguishable from act utilitarianism.
The issue is complicated, however, by the variety of forms which rule utilitarianism can take.
[LYONS, SCHEFFLER.]
10.
Utilitarianism has been both vigorously defended and attacked in the last few decades.
Many think that in spite of strenuous efforts by Mill, utilitarianism cannot really do justice to the concept of justice.
Another important criticism, associated especially with Bernard Williams, is that utilitarianism ignores the real significance which life has for mature human beings.
For each of us (it is said) our lives are given sense by certain projects, whether it be that of being a certain sort of person, or of achieving something in such fields as the political, or cultural, or in our personal relations.
For the person with these projects the forwarding of them has an importance to which utilitarianism cannot do justice, for it must regard them as simply among the many preferences of which as many as possible are to be satisfied.
In a sense the real utilitarian only has one project he takes seriously, the satisfaction of preferences or desires (whatever they are for) or, in the older version, the maximisation of happiness.
Yet if one takes what one does with one's life seriously, one cannot simply throw one's own most serious projects into the melting pot of desires and preferences along with everyone else's.
Suppose that I am committed to an ideal of conserving areas of  natural beauty or variegated wild life in my country.
If I am serious, I cannot simply see the preservation of the countryside as a desire of a few people like myself, to be weighed in the balance against the desires of others for holidays abroad, when it comes to deciding on whether a new airport should be built in some place of outstanding beauty.
A similar objection to utilitarianism urged by Williams, Alasdair MacIntyre and others is that utilitarianism goes with a manipulative approach to human life.
It is said to be the philosophy of government administrators, dangerous in their hands, corrupting treated as the basis of private morality.
Then it is also objected that utilitarian thinking, which has reached its apotheosis in modern cost benefit analysis, regards all values as commensurable, and therefore thinks of every harm as something which can be compensated for, reaching, it is felt, particularly repellent extremes when the value of a human life is calculated as something to be set against the goods achieved by a motorway or by economy in safety precautions at a factory.
These objections deserve to be taken seriously.
However, one will do well to reflect on the following remark of Bentham (of which some of the second part of this work might be seen as an endorsement).
When a man attempts to combat the principle of utility, it is with reasons drawn, without his being aware of it, from that very principle itself.
His arguments, if they prove anything, prove not that the principle is wrong , but that, according to the applications he supposes to be made of it, it is misapplied .
Principles of Morals and Legislation Chapter 1.
Intuitionism: Moore's Ideal Utilitarianism and Ross's Theory of Duty
1.
For a long time after its publication in 1903 G.Moore's Principia Ethica was the most influential work of moral philosophy in English.
More recent moral philosophy exhibits a certain boredom with Moore's approach.
Nonetheless, it is an outstanding work and especially relevant to the present enquiry.
For Moore the ‘science’ of ethics is concerned with the property or quality good — with what it is, with what possesses it, and with how to produce as much of what possesses it as possible.
(He allows from time to time that it is also concerned with the quality,bad , but bad takes a decidedly second place in his discussions.)
Moore contended that most moralists have confused three questions.
(1)
What is the quality of good?
What is that quality which good things have in common?
(2)
What things, or main sorts of things, possess this property?
(3)
What are the most effective means of promoting the good , that is, the stock of things which possess the quality good?
Since goodness is a matter of degree, the extent to which one has promoted the good is a function both of the number of good things produced or things made good and of the degree of goodness to which they are raised.
Let us begin with his efforts to clear up the confusion of questions 2 and 3.
Things are often called good on account of their good effects.
It is an old theme that this runs to an infinite regress unless some things are ‘good in themselves’.
Thus the sense of ‘good’ which is fundamental for ethics is that in which it can be expanded to ‘good in itself’.
We may observe in passing that while it seems obvious enough in the abstract that we should distinguish between what is good in itself and what is good as a means, more is at stake here than conceptual clarity.
Rather few human activities seem to have their main point merely in themselves.
This is true, in particular, of most of what we call work .
The activities which seem most obviously to have their point in themselves are what we regard as typically leisure activities — art, playing games, joking.
Thus there is a tendency, if we once accept a sharp distinction between good as means and good as end, to see the point of life in those leisure activities, or at least in activities which stand apart from the main work of the world, such as high culture and very private personal relations.
Moore's own views, as we shall see, are fully in line with this.
Now while it may be difficult to gainsay the claim that these are the things on which it would be most worth spending time if there was ever no further need to struggle for the basics of human survival and comfort, life seems to be trivialised if culture and personal relations are held up as the be all and end all of what really matters.
Some wariness is in order, then, about accepting this distinction as no more than uncontentious conceptual clarification.
This is a point to which I shall be returning.
The tendency of moral philosophers, thinks Moore, is to rush into the third question, without having dealt with the first two.
and without distinguishing the special nature of each.
Ethics is normally thought of as dealing with questions of action, asking how we ought to act, what it is, in various circumstances, our duty to do, and how we can know it.
As Moore sees it, questions as to what we ought to do are questions as to which actions are good, indeed best, as means.
He thinks that we will never deal intelligently with these questions if we confuse them with questions about what is good in itself.
2.
Let us now turn to Moore's first question: What is the property or quality which the word ‘good’, taken in its most fundamental sense, denotes?
Moore's view is that it is a simple and therefore  indefinable property.
Some things have it, and others lack it, and the things which have it have it in different degrees.
(Note, however, that ‘better’ covers less bad, or being good as opposed to being bad, as well as degree of goodness.)
Moore insists that the statement that good is indefinable is not about the word ‘good’ but about the notion or object it denotes.
Moreover, the word ‘notion’ is not meant to suggest that he is talking of an idea in our minds; he is concerned rather with that actual feature of good things which is picked out by the word ‘good’.
However, subsequent thinkers have often seen his claim as in effect about the meaning of the word ‘good’ and Moore himself at times expresses himself thus.
Perhaps the conflict is not as great as all that.
Moore would surely grant that there is an indefinability of the word which follows from the fact that what it labels is indefinable, while those who treat it as a statement about a word see it as turning upon what the word is supposed to stand for.
Thus it is often convenient to treat it as the claim that no complex synonym can be provided which brings out the meaning of ‘good’ as say ‘parent's brother’brings out the meaning of ‘uncle’.
In saying that good is indefinable Moore compares it with yellow .
He says that both are simple notions or objects without parts, contrasting them in this with the object horse which has parts,(head, hooves, tail etc) which can be mentioned in explaining the nature of this object.
This is rather confusing.
The point is surely that the properties of being good and being yellow are not complex properties as being a horse is, which is (we may take him to be supposing) a matter of having a whole lot of simpler properties, such as having a certain sort of head, a certain sort of tail, and so forth.
It seems misleading to express this in terms of a universal object horse which, like individual horses, has such parts as a head, a tail, and so forth.
Moore's way of putting it might be defended on the basis of a realist view of universals for which individual horses are horses because they participate in a universal object horse , and do so in virtue of the fact that they have parts participating in universal objects which are parts of the universal object horse and related to each other in ways which participate in the universal relations linking part to whole in the universal object.
In contrast, an  object would participate in the universal object goodness or yellowness without having to have parts which participate in some universal parts of that universal object.
In terms of this position Moore could say that the object or universal horse is made up of parts to which the parts of an individual horse correspond, while the object or universal good is not made up of parts to which the parts of an individual good thing correspond.
It is thus something like the universal yellow which pervades a yellow object without requiring any particular arrangement of individual parts.
(For Moore yellow is simply the quality we immediately apprehend in sight, not its physical basis.)
There are, however, ways in which the analogy breaks down, for while a yellow object is yellow in every visible part, a good object is not necessarily good in every discernible part.
Moore might well have presented his claim that good, in contrast to horse and various other universals, is simple, as the statement that it is a quality, for there is a sense in which all the universals most naturally called qualities are simple in contrast to other universals, such as forms (e.g. shapes) or structures (e.g.the way in which an army is organized).
3.
Moore has a famous argument in favour of the simplicity and indefinability of good.
Consider any complex property which someone is tempted to identify with good.
Does not this inclination arise from his believing in the goodness, the worth, of what has this property and from his belief that its goodness is an important ethical truth?
However, if good and this property are simply the same thing, then the judgement that what has this property is good is just a tautology, and cannot serve as the kind of important value judgement it is meant to be.
It has sometimes been claimed, for example, that ‘good’ means tending to promote the survival of the human species .
Evidently those who make the suggestion hold that things which promote the survival of the species are good, and that no others are, and that it is important to recognize this.
But this could not be so if calling these things ‘good’ were just to reiterate that they promote the survival of the species.
No one thinks it an important proposition that what promotes survival of the human species promotes survival of the human species.
But those who offer to define ‘good’ in this way do think it important to insist  that what promotes this survival is good.
Thus they are implicitly recognizing that ‘good’ cannot just mean promoting human survival .
How could it be of ethical significance that the word ‘good’, considered just as a sound, is used in a certain way?
Ascribing goodness to this tendency must be saying something further about it.
It has been suggested that Moore's argument, if just, would count against all definition in which an expression s meaning is explained by some more complex expression [FRANKENA].
But that is not so.
You can define ‘uncle’ as meaning parent's brother precisely because you recognize that it is not an important truth that someone's uncle is always his parent's brother.
Its only interest lies in elucidating English usage.
Moore is not denying that such elucidation is sometimes needed and possible, but bringing home to us that this is never what is going on when all things with a certain complex property are said to be good.
Such claims always have a point which goes well beyond instruction in English usage.
Moore says that those who try to identify good with some complex property are committing what he calls the naturalistic fallacy.
He so calls it because the properties with which people committing this fallacy typically identify good are natural properties.
It is, however, committed equally by someone who identifies good with a supernatural property, such as tending to save the soul.
(That it is good to save the soul, if it is, is not just a tautology, but an ethical judgement.)
The fallacy is committed equally if we identify good with some simple natural property, with pleasure, for example.
If everything which is pleasurable is good that is a significant ethical truth, not a statement about the meaning of a word, or the tautology that whatever is pleasant is pleasant.
Moore's account of what he means by a natural property is none too clear, but in effect it means something like detectable by the senses or by scientific instruments .
He claims that it is never a mere tautology that what has some such property is good, but always a substantial claim in ethics.
This can be established ad hominem to anyone who makes such an identification, for it is always done by people who attach importance to the claim that what has the natural property in question is good.
Is the fallacy bound to be present whenever anyone says  anything at all of the sort ‘good is…’, meaning to offer a definition?
Moore's view seems to be that the only non-fallacious cases are those where we are given merely some obvious synonym for the most basic sense of ‘good’, like ‘intrinsically valuable’.
But he does come rather near making the rather empty point that it must be wrong to identify good with anything different from itself.
His reply would be perhaps that the proof of the pudding is in the particular cases.
Wherever it is thought important to claim that things of a certain sort are good, being of that sort cannot be what ‘good’ means (what the property good is).
That permits rather trivial definitions of good such as‘good is what is intrinsically valuable’, but rules out all more interesting definitions.
Sometimes Moore identifies good with ought to exist for its own sake .
This rather dents the claim that good is completely simple.
However, it does not affect the force of his reasons for saying that all definitions of good in natural or metaphysical terms are wrong headed.
4.
In Principia Ethica (p. 41) Moore implies that what makes good a non-natural quality is that it could not exist by itself in time, as other properties could.
(See also p. 124.)
The idea is that properties of an object, such as the shape and colour of a thing, could, in principle, exist on their own (’ in time' — as opposed to in some more Platonic way) apart from anything else, whereas good does not have the same possibility of existing as an independent object.
Moore himself said later that there was little to be said in favour of this account.
(SCHILPP p. 582.)
The best account of what Moore thought so special about good is in an article called ‘The Conception of Intrinsic Value’ in his Philosophical Studies .
Although he does not speak there of properties as being natural or not, his account of the sense in which for him there is such a thing as intrinsic value does, I think, serve as an account of what he was getting at in regarding good as non-natural.
He says there that the intrinsic value,(such as the goodness or badness ) of an object is peculiar in that (a) it depend , on the intrinsic nature of the object, while (b) it is not one of the object's intrinsic properties.
His rather tortuous explanation seems to come to this.
The intrinsic nature of a thing is the whole  detailed character which it would share with anything else exactly like it, so far as that character is entirely a matter of what the thing is like, so to speak, within its own boundaries, while its intrinsic properties are the various discriminable elements of its intrinsic nature.
Thus the intrinsic value of something follows from its intrinsic nature, so that nothing exactly like it could be of a different intrinsic value, while yet it is not one of the features one could properly list in indicating what something else would have to be like to be just like this thing.
Thus yellow and roundness might be intrinsic properties of a yellow ball as being among the properties in virtue of the possession of which another ball might be exactly like it.
The intrinsic value of the ball, in contrast — say its beauty — would follow from the intrinsic nature made up of such properties but not itself be part of that in virtue of which two balls might be exactly alike.
(As examples of properties which are neither intrinsic properties nor intrinsic values, consider those of being in a certain house or evoking pleasure in an observer.)
As an illustration, consider a state of mind, which Moore would certainly think intrinsically bad, consisting in some precise form of enjoyment of a specific piece of sadistic pornography.
Moore's view would be, I take it, that someone might know exactly what that state of mind was like, either by personal experience or imagination, without recognizing that it was bad, as he could not without taking in all those properties by sharing which another state of mind would be just like it.
Its badness, therefore, would not belong to its intrinsic nature and not be one of its intrinsic properties.
Yet he would hold that there could not be another state of mind just like it, without this being bad in just the same way and degree.
So its badness would follow necessarily from its intrinsic nature.
An example of something similarly intrinsically good might be a feeling of deep awe at the sight of a magnificent cathedral.
Anyone who imagined that precise experience would know its full intrinsic nature but they might or might not realize that this was a good experience.
These examples should bring home the great difference that   there is for Moore between intrinsic good and bad and anything of the nature of pleasure or pain.
One could not know what an experience was like without knowing whether it was pleasurable or not, but one could know what it was like without recognizing its value, even though this follows necessarily from its being like just what it was.
I suggest, then, that the alleged non-naturalness of good and bad consists in their being properties of things which follow from what the things are like but which do not contribute to things being like what they are like.
It is an important implication of this that they are never a matter of how the things which have them are related to other things.
(In speaking of what a thing is like in this sense, one is not referring to its relation of resemblance to other things, only of that in it which could be the basis of such resemblance.)
Moore's terminology is complicated by the fact that he allows the possibility of properties which are not natural, without being non-natural in the special sense in which value properties are.
For he distinguishes natural objects and properties — components of physical nature and the minds of organisms existing in it — from some present allegedly only in metaphysical realms postulated by certain philosophers.
In these metaphysical realms things would have intrinsic natures and relational properties which would contrast with their intrinsic values just as in nature.
Examples might be the distinguishing features of God or of so-called noumenal selves.
The naturalistic fallacy is committed by the equation of intrinsic value with intrinsic properties and relational properties at the metaphysical, as much as at the natural, level.
5.
The fact that, for Moore, the value of a thing follows necessarily from its intrinsic nature, from what it is like, makes it a little misleading to say, as is often done, that it is supposed to be always an open question whether something characterised in terms of its natural, or metaphysical, properties is good or not, and that this is his chief reason for regarding good as indefinable.
That is too suggestive of positions for which there is no kind of necessary connection between a thing's natural character and its value.
For Moore, in contrast, the intrinsic nature of a thing settles.
without anyone having any choice in the matter, what  value a thing possesses.
(Of course, ‘things here includes preeminently human experiences.)
Moore suggests that recognition of this may open our minds to the possibility that there is a plurality of goods.
So long as we think that good must be identical with some one natural property we cannot but suppose that all good things have some such property in common.
This explains why so many philosophers have supported theoretical hedonism.
If one picks out some of the chief things which are good, one may find that the one thing they seem to have in common is that they are pleasurable experiences.
Since one thinks that there must be something in common to all good things one may then conclude that it must be pleasure.
But if one rids oneself of the idea that there need be any thing in common to good things, other than that they are good, one will be ready to recognize that there may be other good things which do not involve pleasure, that some things which involve pleasure may be good rather than bad, and that relative goodness need not be proportional to relative pleasurableness.
It is not, indeed, ruled out by the logic of the naturalistic fallacy that degree of goodness and degree of pleasurableness might coincide, it is just that once one is free of the fallacy one will no longer see any reason to hold this.
Moore contends that if, having freed ourselves from the naturalistic fallacy, we ask what are the chief good things known to us, we will conclude that they are personal affection and the enjoyment of beautiful objects.
They are not the only good things, but they are much the best, at least among good things of which we know.
It is of the very nature of the case that there can be no proof of this.
It is simply what presents itself to Moose as the truth when he reflects as carefully as he can, and what he therefore expects to present itself likewise to others.
6.
Still, Moore does have a kind of ethical methodology.
It has two main features.
First, he holds that we should recognize that valuable things may be organic unities; second, he recommends a method of isolation.
According to the principle of organic unities, the value of a whole does not have to be the same as the sum of the values of its parts.
Where it is different, Moore calls the whole in question an organic unity.
Thus if we have a whole W, made up of parts X  and Y then we cannot assume that the value of W is the value of X added to the value of Y, for W may be an organic unity.
After all, no one would think that the beauty of an object is simply the sum of the beauties of its parts.
If it were, breaking a beautiful statue would be harmless provided one kept the parts.
Moore's idea is that if W, which is made up of X and Y, exists, then the distinct values of X and Y, exist, so that the values of X and Y are certainly won to the universe, but that there is also another value, that of W as a whole, which could be positive or negative.
Then the value of the whole W (the value it has, as Moore puts it,on the whole) consists of the value of W as a whole plus the value of X plus the value of Y. According as to whether the value of W as a whole is positive, negative or nil the value of W, on the whole, may be greater, less, or the same as the value of the sum of its parts.
(When I speak of the value of the whole, I mean what Moore calls its value on the whole, that is the values of its parts plus its value as a whole.)
There is nothing very mysterious about this.
for a whole, W, to exist it is not normally enough merely that its parts exist, rather it is required that they exist in a certain arrangement, in a certain set of relations to each other.
Thus when W, composed of parts X and Y, exists, something exists besides X and Y, and it is not surprising that it should have its own fresh value.
However, the matter is more complicated than Moore acknowledges.
for, after all, there is some difficulty in knowing what is meant by the sum of the values of the parts of something.
What, after all, do we mean by the parts of a thing?
A thing could be regarded as made up of parts in different ways, according to how we divide it mentally.
Is it certain that if we divide it in alternative ways, and attach a value to the parts in each case, the sum will always be the same?
If not, then the notion of the sum of the value of the parts is not clear cut, and it is similarly not clear cut what is involved in the value of the whole not being the same as this sum.
England, Scotland and Wales, and each of their counties or regions, are all parts of Britain, but it would be odd, in summing up the values of the parts of Britain, to include both the values of Scotland, and that of Lothian region.
However that may be, let us look at Moore's principle at work in one of his examples.
He says that the consciousness of a  beautiful object is a thing of great intrinsic value while the sum of the value of the two great parts which make it up —(1) consciousness (2) the beautiful object — is not very great (Principia Ethica p. 28).
Moore does, indeed, somewhat notoriously, think that a beautiful object has some value in its own right, apart from consciousness of it, but he believes that this is slight as is also the value of mere consciousness apart from its objects.
(One may well hold that such mere consciousness is an impossibility, but Moore treats it as making sense.)
But is the consciousness of a beautiful object properly conceived as consisting in two distinct things, consciousness and the object, standing in a certain relation (of the one being directed at the other) which makes no difference to what each of them is in itself?
Does not their coming into this relation modify or add to the character of either of them?
Can, for example, consciousness avoid being somehow enriched by a pervasive quality, which could not possibly have occurred except as a quality of just such a state of consciousness, when it becomes consciousness of a beautiful object, instead of consciousness of something else, or ‘mere consciousness’?
If so, may not this quality have a value of its own needing to be counted in when summing the value of the parts and may it not be this value (rather than the value of the whole as a whole) which adds to the value of the whole?
Until such questions are satisfactorily answered, evaluation of the principle of organic unities remains problematic.
My point is not that we might count the relations between parts as themselves parts — though this is not necessarily mistaken — but that the relations into which the parts enter in making up the whole affect their character and value so that they do not necessarily have the same value as they would have had out of that whole.
In that case, the sum of the values of the parts of a thing should not be equated with the sum of the values they would have had outside that whole.
From this it would follow that the principle of organic unities has no clear meaning.
Moore, indeed, dismisses as incoherent the idea that the parts of a thing may have characteristics they could not have had apart from that whole.
He notes that a whole with parts of which this was true would be an organic unity in a sense different from his, a sense, however, which he thinks nonsensical.
I shall speak of the organic unities which Moore dismisses as nonsensical as ‘organic wholes’ to distinguish them from ‘organic unities’in Moore's sense.
The reasons Moore gives for thinking that there cannot be organic wholes are not very compelling.
So unless we are entirely convinced that there are no such organic wholes, we should remain open to the possibility that some of Moore's organic unities are really organic wholes.
They would perhaps be organic unities too in a sense close to Moore's but the way in which the value of the whole was not composed of the values of the parts will be different.
Since their parts (or at least some of them) can only exist as parts of just such a whole, no definite sense can be attached to a contrast between the sum of the values of their parts and their value on the whole.
Consider someone's total state of consciousness at a particular moment, comprising various perceptual experiences, thoughts, imaginings, feelings and so forth.
It seems clear that the value of the whole state of consciousness is not properly regarded as the sum of the value of its parts.
Moore's view is that this is because, although each individual component of the total consciousness has its own value, one which it could retain in other contexts, the consciousness as a whole has a further value.
But if a total consciousness is an organic whole, then some or all of these parts could not exist in the same character in another different sort of whole.
In that case the reason the whole has a value other than the sum of the values of its parts, considered as capable of   existing unaltered in other wholes, may be that it is a radical mistake to think of them as capable of so doing.
Some have thought that the life of a society can have a value greater than the sum of the values of the lives of the individuals composing it.
Moore, who did not place much value upon a society as a whole, might not have agreed, but his general principles allow it as a possibility.
But may this not be because a society is an organic whole and the members could not live these lives except in it?
If so, we can allow that in some sense the value of the society is a matter of the values actualised in the distinct lives, while insisting that these values could only be actualised within just such a society.
This seems a more satisfactory way of looking at the possibility that a society may be an organic unity than Moore's principles allow.
The principle of organic unities is wielded as yet another weapon against hedonism.
Moore grants that all very great goods are organic unities which have pleasure as a part.
It is true of these wholes that if they remained otherwise the same, except that the pleasure was removed, they would only have at most a slight value.
The hedonist's mistake is to assume that if X + Y has 100 degrees of goodness and X without Y has 10 degrees of goodness that Y possesses 90 degrees of goodness.
But if X + Y is an organic unity then the fact that it has 100 degrees of value may be because it has 90 degrees of value as a whole while Y has none.
So Y may have no worth in itself and yet contribute 90 degrees of value to X + Y, as being necessary to its existence as a whole.
It is not a mere means to X + Y, since it is a part of it, but still the 90 degrees of value are not its value.
Moore claims that this is precisely the role played by pleasure in all very great goods with which we are familiar.
Moore even allows that it is a plausible, though mistaken, supposition that all good things include pleasure.
Thinking this to be the case one might infer that pleasure was the only good thing.
For if one supposes that all good things become valueless if you remove the pleasure, one may infer that all the value must lie in the pleasure.
But this would be a faulty inference since the following is quite possible: X has no goodness, Y has little or no goodness, but X + Y has very great goodness.
7.
Moore's approach only makes sense in the context of his belief  that any proper thing can be conceived independently of any larger context in which it may figure.
This becomes still more apparent when one turns to his other main methodological principle,the method of isolation .
According to this, we can best assess the intrinsic value of something if we ask how good or bad a thing it would be if it existed in complete isolation.
By doing this, we separate off everything which counts for or against it in virtue of its effects, or alternatively, its contribution to the formation of certain wholes.
This does seem very reasonable initially.
What could be more sensible than the suggestion that the best way of evaluating a thing for its very own self, and not for its effects or its contribution to the value of larger wholes, is to consider what value it would possess if it existed in complete isolation?
Consider how this method might be used to test the value of an Arts education .
Those who argue about this (about how much should be spent on Arts faculties in universities, for example) tend to debate whether it does or does not help the economy, help people to do various jobs, and so forth .
The spirit of Moore's approach to such matters is salutary.
It implies that we should decide first whether we are considering its value as a means or its value in itself.
The usual sort of discussion seems to concern its value as a means.
But we cannot deal with this without asking ourselves what the results of a university education are supposed to be and what degree of intrinsic value pertains to them.
The answer may turn out to be that the main results of university education for which intrinsic value can reasonably be claimed — such as the activity of critical thought — are included as main elements in the educational process itself, so that it is pointless to go on putting essential questions off by starting with questions about the value of the results of an Arts education.
It will be better to leave that question, together perhaps with questions about the value of larger totalities of activity of which such university education is a part, until after we have considered what value it has in its own right.
This will alert us to the error in assuming that the sole way of justifying spending money on courses in the Arts must lie in claims about their utility for ends beyond themselves.
But how can we decide how far an Arts education is good in itself?
Moore's method of isolation bids us try to conceive a  sample of such education in entire isolation.
How on earth are we to do this?
Perhaps we might try to think of an ideal university tutorial in an Arts subject as though it were a little world in isolation from everything else.
We may then ask whether such a tutorial, perhaps taking place between angels with no past or future, summoned into existence fur just this purpose, would be a good thing , and if so, how good?
This may seem a proper approach to a proper question, and yet it has an air of the ludicrous.
Does it really make sense to conceive of a tutorial existing in isolation?
Does the state of affairs include the existence of the tutor's big toe or not?
Presumably it could exist without that, but if you pare away everything which there is equal reason to pare away, you are left with something very strange.
The truth is, surely, that we can form no reasonable conception of anything called education existing on its own with the kind of value we may like to ascribe to education in the real world.
So Moore's method can hardly allow us to attach any intrinsic value to education at all; its value must be that of a means to other things or perhaps as an element in some larger whole of value.
Yet education is very much the sort of thing you might expect Moore's principles to display as worth while in its own right rather than merely as a means to, or even component of, other things.
However, among the things which we tend to think of as good there are some few things which are more easily conceived in abstraction from any larger social or natural context and we will expect Moore's method of isolation to reveal these as the main bearers of intrinsic goodness.
In contrast, the more experiences and activities are such that we find it hard to make sense of them existing or occurring in isolation, the more difficult it will be, on Moore's principles, to find anything of real inherent value in them.
These expectations are fulfilled when we find that the chief things for which Moore claims great intrinsic value are personal friendship and the appreciation of beautiful objects.
An alternative very different conclusion which some might draw from the method of isolation is that only some vast whole like that of planet earth and all life on it at large can have intrinsic value.
For it might be argued that nothing smaller can be  imagined existing in isolation.
We might even decide that only the universe as a whole has value.
But Moore assumes we can ascribe inherent value to smaller units of reality and indeed this may be a necessary presupposition for the kind of calculations on the basis of which he thinks we should decide what is most worth doing.
That these implications of Moore's methodology seem strange might only show that it can guide us to unexpected ethical truths.
However, if one feels that they are too strange one will wish to look carefully at some of the assumptions behind it, such as the denial of organic wholes.
8.
Let us now consider more closely the main positive conclusion Moore reaches by application of his two principles, namely that personal affection and the contemplation of beautiful objects are by far the two most important good things of which we know.
He contends that these seem to be the only things which are really very good when imagined in isolation.
And we may well agree  that there is little else that one can imagine existing alone and being of any great value.
We may agree also that their value is no mere summation of the values of their component parts, whatever precisely we take their parts to be.
Consider the variety of ways in which humans spend their time and ask which of them would have value if they occurred, miraculously, in a kind of vacuum.
Most work in which humans engage with some personal satisfaction would seem emptied of all point thereby.
The activities of politicians, of journalists, of doctors, of nurses, of postmen, of miners, of builders, of fishermen, of farmers, of salesmen, of advertisers, all seem to have their point and justification in results which lie beyond them.
It is difficult to form any clear conception of what these activities would be like if undertaken in isolation but so far as one can form such a conception it is of something essentially futile.
What, for example, would the activity of a postman doing his work in a vacuum be?
To imagine an activity in isolation presumably means imagining, so to speak, the minimum bit of reality which would have to exist for the activity to go on.
So perhaps to imagine the postman's work in isolation is to imagine him walking down a street posting letters, or at least sealed  envelopes, but imagining the houses as mere facades, with no rooms or people behind.
If the postman worked in such a situation he would be insane.
Perhaps, however, we must think of the postman as having a seemingly well founded belief that he is delivering letters to real people.
For what we should be doing is taking a bit of the real world and imagining it existing while the rest is blocked off, and the activities of a postman in the real world involve this sort of belief.
To get the activity in isolation you have to think of someone suddenly coming into existence with just enough of a world around him so that what he does and believes is just what the postman does and believes in the real world, but without any real environment.
But surely the activity of a postman in such a void would be utterly futile and valueless.
It may be said that this is not imagining the activity of a postman at all.
For such activity can, as a matter of logic, only occur in a real country with a real postal system allowing epistolary communication between businesses, friends, relatives, parent and child, husband and wife, MP and constituent, etc, etc.
But in that case the very idea of the postman's work occurring in isolation is incoherent since, as a matter of logic, it cannot be separated off from a whole range of activities beyond itself.
So either one cannot imagine postal activity in isolation, because it is conceptually bound up with so much else, or one can imagine it as the futile activity of a deluded loner.
In neither case, does the activity of a postman emerge as something which could be good if it existed in isolation.
Try now the activity of nursing.
You have to think of a nurse tending a sick person in a bed, though there is no real world outside the hospital ward.
I am supposing we can include the patient as a real conscious person as ‘part’ of the nursing activity.
If one cannot, one gets a deluded loner nursing a dummy.
But even as it is, you get something rather odd.
The patient has no destiny beyond whatever duration is required to get an episode of nursing, and she has no real past, nor does the nurse.
Now such a little human episode, if the patient is not in serious pain.
and the nurse enjoys her work, could have some value as a little stretch of human relationship, but all that really pertained to it as nursing would be futile, since the point of nursing is normally to return the patient to a healthy life in the world outside.
(Even  nursing of the terminally sick relates to the significance of death as the end of a complete human life, not just to the final days in hospital.)
Thus nursing and postal delivery both seem things which would lose all, or almost all, their value in isolation.
They must, therefore, be dismissed as not being good in themselves, or not to any considerable degree.
Their point lies outside them.
But is there anything which can be imagined as existing in isolation and as possessing great value in such a case?
Well, if anything can, it seems to be Moore's two great goods.
One can imagine someone in a room looking at a beautiful painting, drinking in the details and the way in which they combine to constitute the lovely whole, and there being nothing beyond this observer and the object of his contemplation.
Or one can imagine an experience of beautiful music existing in a void.
Moreover, to imagine these does seem to be to imagine something with quite strong positive value.
The same goes for personal affection.
One can imagine two people enjoying themselves affectionately together, and nothing else existing except the barest background to physical existence.
At least one can make more sense of this than in our first two cases.
By avoiding any practical direction to what they do together, one avoids the futility of the nursing situation where nothing exists beyond the hospital.
Are there no other types of thing for which Moore might have claimed a similar high value in isolation?
What of mathematical thinking?
What of artistic creation as opposed to contemplation?
What of a game of chess or a game of cricket (without spectators)?
However, even if he had added these, the list was bound to be short.
Many leisure activities would hardly figure because we can only value them as ways of relaxing from engagement in what really matters.
To satisfy Moore's requirements an activity has somehow on the one hand really to somehow matter, and on the other hand not to do so on account of anything ordinarily thought of as of practical use.
Thus Moore's methodology points inevitably to his main ethical conclusion, which is that nothing, or at least very little, is to any great degree good except for cases of personal affection and the enjoyment of beautiful objects and that everything in life which does not come under these heads has  barely any value apart from whatever it may have as a means of promoting these great goods.
Thus the point of the lives of those who are mainly engaged in politics, nursing, mining and so forth is to keep a society going in which personal love and the enjoyment of beauty can flourish.
So far as their work goes it has point only as a mean to these.
Lovers and connoisseurs, on the other hand, are the ultimate point of civilization.
It is reported that an Oxford don, was asked, in the 1914 war, why he did not volunteer for the defence of civilization.
‘I am the civilization for which they are fighting,’ he replied.
In the same way lovers and connoisseurs of beauty are what everyone else is, or ought to be working for, on Moore's scheme.
I suggest that both the strength and the weakness of Moore's positive ethical views stem mainly from his method of isolation.
For, first, this method springs from Moore's awareness of an important truth, namely that if we see the point of everything in its being a means to something else we empty the world of value.
The thinking of politicians for whom education is only important if it helps boost the national economy, and this is important because it helps people enjoy what they want, and this is important because it encourages consumption and thus industry, either goes round in a vicious circle or takes off on an interminable regress.
If anything is worth while in life at all, some things must be good in and by themselves.
But second, it nonetheless distorts our conception of human life.
Seeing value in activities only in so far as we can conceive them retaining it when cut off from the main tides of human affairs, leads to a kind of preciosity and detachment from what excites most human beings which is ultimately impoverishing.
How ethical theory might do justice to both these points remains to be seen.
9.
The main moral upshot of Moore's ethics is a certain view as to what is really worth while in human life.
Yet Moore did not think value could only occur in relation to human experience.
This was not because he had any interest in values realized in animal life, but because he believed that some degree of goodness pertained to things or states of affairs which do not involve consciousness of any kind.
There is a famous passage in which he invites us to  acknowledge that it would be better that a world of which no one would ever be conscious should contain beautiful objects than that it should contain ugly objects.
The appeal of this lies, I suggest, in the fact that if we imagine a beautiful object, we cannot help thinking it good that there should be such a thing.
The dubious part of the claim lies in Moore's belief that beautiful objects with their beauty and the qualities which make them beautiful, could exist without any consciousness of them.
To me it seems that beauty, and indeed the qualities and forms which give rise to beauty, only exist for a consciousness.
The objection to Moore is not so much that beauty, without consciousness of it, would not be good as that beauty, without consciousness of it, would be impossible.
However, Moore's claim deserves to be taken seriously by those who think that the objects we perceive exist just as we perceive them when unobserved.
Yet I am puzzled as to whether that would mean that we should leave our radios on, so long as the music coming from them is beautiful, in order that our rooms be filled with beauty even in our absence.
Although he holds that value can be realized in the absence of consciousness, Moore does not believe that situations not involving consciousness can be very good.
Or rather, he holds that all the great goods of which we know involve consciousness; there may conceivably be others of which we are ignorant.
Certainly personal affection and the admiring contemplation of beautiful objects involve consciousness, although it would be a mistake to think that there is no more to their value than comes simply from the kind of consciousness involved.
The enjoyment of beauty is, in a sense, the more basic of Moore's two great goods.
For personal affection, insofar as it is good, consists mainly in the admiring contemplation of good states of another person, and these must either themselves be instances of personal affection, requiring good states of someone else for their object, or be instances of the love of beauty.
Sooner or later therefore the goodness of personal affection depends upon the existence of someone's appreciation of some object's beauty.
10.
What becomes of the rightness and wrongness of actions, and of duty, on this scheme?
These, for Moore, have little or no  intrinsic value, and their investigation belongs to the practical branch of ethics concerned with which among possible actions will have the best consequences, rather than to the more fundamental enquiry into the nature of the intrinsically better and worse which it presupposes.
For, according to Moore, to say that an action would be right is to say that the total results of doing it would be at least as good as would be those of doing any alternative.
To say that it is a duty to do it is to say that its consequences would be better than those which would ensue from any alternative.
When there is more than one right act it is one's duty to do one of them, though not one in particular.
Thus Moore's position on the rightness and wrongness of actions is a form of rigoristic utilitarianism in which effects in terms of intrinsic good and bad replace effects in terms of pleasure and pain.
It is often known as ideal or agathistic utilitarianism.
Moore gives some interesting twists to usual utilitarian themes.
He puts great emphasis on the difficulties of prediction, and urges that where there are rules to which people do in fact adhere for the most part, and which help maintain the social stability required for any kind of good to flourish, we are likely to come nearest to doing what is objectively right (in terms of its actual consequences) if we also stick to the rules, but that where the rules, however useful they would be if generally obeyed, are widely flouted we should make a direct judgement of what will have the best consequences.
Where there are no established rules to guide decision we must make a direct judgement as to what will have the best consequences, concentrating on the more immediate and those we are personally most motivated to promote, as the remote future is highly unpredictable and we are unlikely to do much to promote what is not personally inviting.
These however are directives as to what is likely to be the right action; the actually right action is that which will actually, not merely probably, have the best consequences.
We may note that although Moore thinks that in some sense what one should do is what looks most likely to be one's duty in the sense of that which will produce the best consequences, it is unclear what meaning he can ascribe to this ‘should’.
He cannot equate it with ‘ought’ since, according to him, to speak of what one ought to do is simply to speak of what will have the best  consequences.
Some philosophers have distinguished between our ‘subjective’ and ‘objective’duty, and said that our subjective duty is to do what we think most likely to be our objective duty.
(’ Subjective' here has nothing to do with ethical subjectivism; it is generally supposed that the existence of this subjective obligation is an objective fact.)
However, even with this distinction, there is some difficulty in capturing the imperatival force of the ‘should’ in an ethical system in which intrinsic value is the only basic ethical concept.
What is strikingly different in Moore's treatment of practical ethics from that of the classical utilitarians is the lack of any reforming zeal.
This goes with the tendency to concentrate discussion on the intrinsically good, rather than the intrinsically bad.
He does, indeed, say something about the latter.
Pain, or at least the consciousness of pain (for Moore professes to distinguish these), is said to be very bad, but the main other things which he regards as bad are the enjoyment of ugly things, and the dislike of beautiful things!
There is no suggestion that the primary ethical task is to relieve the immense weight of human suffering.
11.
For quite some time after publication of Principia Ethica , its type of ethical intuitionism seems to have been the dominating moral philosophy in Britain, though not in America.
Main intuitionists included C.D. Broad, W.D.
Ross, A.C. Ewing.
Most ethical intuitionists came to think that what the doctrine of the naturalistic fallacy established was not so much that good is indefinable as that ethical expressions are either indefinable or only satisfactorily definable in terms which involve some other distinctively ethical expression.
They held that there is a limited set of fundamental ethical terms, such as good, bad, right, wrong, ought, duty , such that you cannot explain what one of them amounts to except either by appealing to intuition of some simple non-natural property, or relation, to which it refers or by defining it by way of some other ethical term of which this is true.
The main debate was as to which of these ethical expressions were most basic.
One view was that they form a kind of virtuous circle of equally basic expressions definable in terms of each other.
This idea has its problems.
One might well think that a word cannot both label a property or a relation revealed to intuition and its meaning be a construct out of the meanings of other expressions.
However, it seems possible that several of these words should label distinct properties or relations which however are necessarily related to each other in ways which the definitions articulate.
(Similarly geometrical shapes or relations may be interdefinable in terms of their necessary relations and yet each, in principle, be displayable to ‘spatial intuition’.)
W.D.
Ross, for one, fully endorsed the doctrine of the naturalistic fallacy, but he held that it was a bad mistake on Moore's part to define such expressions as ‘right’, ‘wrong’, ‘ought’’ obligatory' by way of‘good’.
for Moore, to say that an act was right was to say that no alternative action would produce better consequences, while to say that it was ‘a duty’ or ‘obligatory’was to say that it would produce the best consequences possible.
Ross objects that Moore himself was guilty of confusing a contestable moral judgement in favour of his ideal utilitarian position with an account of the meaning of an ethical expression in much the same way as were those who committed the naturalistic fallacy by offering naturalistic or metaphysical definitions of ‘good’.
Just as there is a substantial move from saying ‘This is a pleasant experience’ to saying ‘This is a good thing’, so there is a substantial move from saying ‘This act will produce the best consequences’to saying ‘I ought to do this act’.
To see the reasonableness of Ross's claim one need only consider a case of which Ross made much, that of the duty of promise keeping.
Surely someone can meaningfully say ‘I ought to do this, because I promised, even though better consequences would ensue from my doing something else which would involve breaking the promise.’
An ideal utilitarian like Moore may claim to have the moral insight that promise keeping is only right or obligatory, where one cannot do better or as well by breaking the promise (taking general account of effects on human trust into account) but he cannot claim that this insight is merely into how words are properly used.
Moreover, just as Moore thought that freedom from the naturalistic fallacy made one more ready to recognize that there is a plurality of basically different sorts of good thing, so Ross thought that freedom from this wrong definition of right and duty in terms of good made one ready to recognize that there is a plurality of grounds of obligation, of which the obligation to produce good and reduce bad is just one, or rather two, for he thinks the duty to prevent bad a distinct, and usually more stringent, duty than to produce good.
For Ross obligatoriness or rightness, as a property of possible actions, is the most basic ethical property or relation.
He held that there were a variety of different rightness-making properties.
We recognize by moral intuition that certain ‘natural’ properties of an action will make it obligatory.
The non-natural characteristic of obligatoriness is ‘supervenient’ upon each of these natural characteristics.
It arises out of them but is quite distinct.
Right-making or obligatoriness-making characteristics include that of being the keeping of a promise, being a case of truth telling, of gratitude, or reducing bad or evil, of promoting good, of promoting knowledge.
Thus Ross echoes earlier rationalist moralists who held that the basic general principles of duty are self-evident and necessary truths revealed to rational intuition.
A standard objection to such views is that these general principles often clash one with one another as necessary truths could not.
Sidgwick, for example, argued thus that the typical duties recognized by common sense could not be self evident and necessary since the clashes between them needed to be resolved by appeal to a more fundamental principle, that of the principle of utility, and that it was therefore this alone which possessed such a status.
To meet such objections Ross developed a very useful concept which has become part of the regular stock in trade of moral philosophers, the concept of a prima facie duty.
One can say (he held) that it is absolutely true that a certain characteristic always gives rise to the property of prima facie obligatoriness.
An act which has this characteristic is a prima facie duty.
However, if there are one or more alternative acts which also possess some characteristic which similarly gives rise to prima facie obligatoriness, then only one of them can be all-things-considered obligatory.
In order to be all-things-considered obligatory a prima facie obligatory act must not be incompatible with some more stringent prima facie obligatory act.
As to which is the more stringent obligation in a situation in which more than one   applies, that is for intuitive assessment in the light of all that can be known about the particular circumstances of the case.
Thus intuition comes in twice, firstly to tell us general truths to the effect that certain natural characteristics bestow prima facie obligatoriness, and secondly to tell us which of various alternative acts is more stringently obligatory.
In both cases, however, we are intuiting the necessary determination of ethical characteristics by ‘natural’ characteristics.
Even when we are balancing one consideration against another in a quite particular case, to decide which of two conflicting prima facie obligations is the more stringent, we are trying to reach such an intuition, but the wealth of detail which determines the relative degrees of stringency in this case will make it inexpressible in a formula mechanically applicable to other cases.
A superficially similar case may differ from this one in some subtle matter of detail the relevance of which we will only recognize when we encounter it in the concrete.
The prima facie duties Ross recognizes include the duty to maximise good, and the usually more stringent duty to minimise bad or evil.
Good and evil are understood, just as with Moore, as non-natural characteristics whose presence in things is revealed to intuition.
However, the duties to promote good and minimise evil may sometimes be outweighed by other duties, such as that of keeping a promise or a duty of gratitude, which in the particular circumstances are more stringent.
It does seem that Ross's view is (as he claimed) very much that of the man in the street (or at least in the streets with which Ross was familiar).
Indeed, Ross thinks the moral philosopher must take the deliverances of common morality as his basic data (as Moore, in spite of his much proclaimed faith in ‘common sense’ did not) though this is because it rests on intuitions of necessary truth.
True, the moralities of many societies are defective, but this springs either from defective factual information or from the limited extent to which people have begun to engage with certain issues in a truly moral way.
As the human mind matures the same basic insights will impose themselves on all.
Ross's view that duty is not totally determined by consequences is usually called the deontic position, and is contrasted with consequentialist positions of which hedonistic and ideal utilitarianism are the chief examples.
Ross is probably right that his is the  more common sense view, but it may still strike us as extremely odd that it could ever be one's duty not to do what which would certainly have the best results.
The answers offered by intuitionist philosophers such as Moore and Ross to the three questions about ethical propositions listed in the introduction are clear.
Ethical propositions are objectively true or false.
The true ones tell us what possesses, or leads to what possesses, certain uniquely ethical properties.
There is a rational means of deciding whether to accept them or not.
For Moore this is, in the case of propositions about what is intrinsically good or bad, a matter of applying the method of isolation, guided by respect for the principle of organic unities, and discovering what suggests itself to intuition, while for judgements of intrinsic good and bad.
For Ross the most important method is that of testing ethical principles by reflective intuition.
If, like Moore and Ross, you think that intuition, in their sense, is a form of rational insight, there is no reason not to regard this as a rational method.
Finally, so far as the question of convergence goes, Moore insists that there is no guarantee of it.
If our intuitions differ, one of us at least is wrong, but we may be unable to find out which.
However, although he says this, partly to emphasise that the truth of the matter is quite independent of the question whether we know it, it would seem reasonable to expect that, if there is a real truth here into which we might have rational insight, careful attention to just what is at issue will bring about convergence.
This, indeed, seems to be what one would expect from the point of view of intuitionist philosophers in general.
The Attitude Theory of Ethics and Some Related Theories
1.
Moore's claim that definitions of ethical expressions in naturalistic terms commit the ‘naturalistic fallacy’ long continued to be a main influence on moral philosophy in the English speaking world.
But quite soon different conclusions were drawn from this than Moore's.
Moore and other intuitionists thought that, since the most basic sorts of ethical statement did not say anything true or false about matters of natural or empirical fact, they must say something true or false about some special ethical non-natural fact.
By the 1940's it was becoming more usual to conclude rather that their distinctive role was quite other than that of saying anything factual at all.
This thesis is sometimes called non-cognitivism.
This expression covers emotivism, of which C.L. Stevenson and A.J. Ayer are the best known exponents, and the prescriptivism of R.M. Hare.
The latter received some notice in chapter one (and will be discussed briefly again in chapter five); in this chapter I shall be concerned primarily with the position of Stevenson, whose Ethics and Language is the fullest statement of the doctrine.
Although Stevenson's main work,Ethics and Language , is supposed to be well known, it is an under-rated and often misrepresented work, accounts of which in books on moral philosophy are often little more than parodies.
However, in my   opinion, the best parts of it are those which present not so much the strictly emotivist thesis as a more general attitudinist thesis which is more convincing when detached from the former.
Emotivism claims that the distinctive meaning of ethical words lies in their power (in virtue of our early linguistic conditioning) to stimulate emotions and attitudes in a hearer, and vent them on the part of the speaker.
This thesis about the meaning of ethical words is presented against the background of a causal theory of meaning in general.
According to this, the meaning of words and statements lies in the psychological states (including long standing dispositions) which they combine to produce in hearers and to be caused by in speakers.
Words have descriptive meaning insofar as their causal connection is with the psychological states known as beliefs, and emotive meaning insofar as their causal connection is primarily with attitudes.
‘It is raining’ is typically caused by and causes the belief that it is raining, and therefore has primarily descriptive meaning.
In contrast to this, according to the emotivist thesis, the typical cause and effect of a statement like ‘Personal affection is a great good’ is not any kind of genuine belief, which could be true or false, but an emotional attitude of favouring personal affection, which each of us may find ourselves either sharing or otherwise, but which we cannot properly call true or false; it therefore has primarily an emotive rather than a descriptive meaning.
Likewise the word ‘good’ serves primarily to determine the sorts of attitude sentences are causally associated with, while the word ‘cat’serves primarily to determine the sorts of belief with which statements are causally associated.
They thus contrast as words one of which has primarily emotive, the other of which has primarily descriptive, meaning.
There are various grounds for dissatisfaction with these notions.
It seems doubtful, for one thing, whether we are conditioned so that words have this kind of direct causal power over us.
Surely if someone says ‘The earth is flat’ that does not even begin to cause a belief to that effect in me, nor does someone saying ‘Cruelty is a good thing’even begin to cause approval of cruelty in me.
It is much more satisfactory to say that these statements show what the speaker believes or feels, if he is speaking sincerely and correctly.
and invite the hearer to an exchange of views in which he will agree with him or otherwise in belief or attitude.
Where a statement does cause the relevant  belief or attitude in a hearer, it is because he has some reason to think the speaker's beliefs on that topic are likely to be true, or his attitudes ones he is likely to find, on enquiry, reason to share, rather than because the mere words have any great hold over him.
Another reason for rejecting this causal theory of meaning is that when one asks what is meant by a statement one is normally concerned to know what a reasonable speaker is saying in uttering it.
What the actual or even likely or standard effects of his saying this would be on a hearer, himself included, has little to do with what a reasonable speaker means in saying something.
For the speaker cannot settle what he means by settling on the effects it will produce as he can settle what he is setting out to mean in saying it.
Suppose one asks whether a speaker is using ‘good’ in an ethical sense or not.
The answer cannot be given by considering whether in the context of utterance it is likely to produce attitudes of some distinctively ethical sort, rather than some non-ethical attitudes or perhaps beliefs.
Nor can it be a matter of the effects he intends to cause in hearers, for one may say something with a definite meaning, with all sorts of different such intentions, and, in any case, the causal theory as advanced by Stevenson is concerned with the actual causal potency of language, not with what is intended.
It may seem more plausible to identify the meaning with the belief or attitude of the speaker which caused it.
However, one cannot satisfactorily identify the question what a speaker meant in saying something with the question what caused his utterance.
If the speaker is lying, for instance, it may be that what caused his utterance was something quite opposed to belief in what he meant to say, or a favourable attitude towards what his utterance was meant to commend.
In general, the actual psychological causation of an utterance may be related to all sorts of different degrees of endorsement in one's actual beliefs and attitudes of what one is meaning to say.
True, we should distinguish between what a particular speaker means and what his statement means.
If I use a word incorrectly what I mean will not be what my statement means.
However, the two must not be contrasted too sharply.
The meaning of a statement seems to be roughly what the speaker should have meant by it and this must in most cases  be what the speaker does mean by it.
But what he does mean by it cannot be identified, at least in any simple way, with the actual beliefs or attitudes which caused it.
Doubtless words do sometimes have emotive effects, and some ethical words may have fairly standard such effects in certain communities.
Equally, emotional attitudes may figure as standard causes of certain sorts of utterance.
The tendency to have such causes and effects can be called emotive meaning, if one likes.
But it is a mistake, surely, to think of emotive meaning as a form of meaning in that most important sense of meaning in which we ask what someone meant by saying something, or what he would have meant if he had been speaking properly.
In order to have what seems the best of Stevenson's thought before us, I shall now develop an attitude theory of ethics, largely based on his work (though also drawing on that of A.J. Ayer), in which the strictly emotivist thesis is dropped and the concept of emotive meaning gives way to one of valuational meaning.
I shall ascribe it to an imaginary person whom I shall call the attitudinist.
2.
The attitudinist begins with some reflections on the meaning of straight factual statements.
(By a statement he means roughly a declarative sentence as used, or as it might be used, on some particular occasion, so that indicator words like ‘I’’ this' and ‘now’are given a definite reference.)
He says that they express beliefs.
Thus the statement ‘It is raining’ expresses the speaker's belief that it is raining and the statement ‘Bertrand Russell was a writer of short stories’expresses the speaker's belief that Bertrand Russell was a writer of short stories.
In virtue of expressing the belief that it is raining the statement ‘It is raining says or asserts that it is raining.
One might say that it claims that it's presently raining is a real state of affairs.
One could also say more impersonally that the statement ‘It is raining’ expresses the belief, not merely the speaker's belief, that it is raining.
That makes it clearer that someone else who assents to (or dissents from) the statement is expressing their belief (or disbelief) that it is raining.
If one's companion says (a little artificially)‘Quite so’(perhaps ‘Quite so, what of it?’) she is expressing her belief that it is raining.
In short, related to a factual statement is a certain belief of which both those who utter  it and those who assent to it express or exhibit their acceptance.
To say that a factual statement expresses a belief is not necessarily to imply that the speaker, or the hearer who assents to it, really has that belief.
They may only be pretending.
It is simply a rule of the language, or rather it follows from its basic rules, that one speaks misleadingly if one utters or assents to that statement without having that belief.
When a statement expresses a belief, it does not say that the speaker (or one who assents to it) has that belief.
To assert that the knave of hearts was the person who stole the tarts is not to assert that one believes that it was he who stole them.
When someone says ‘It was the knave of hearts who stole the tarts’ I agree with him or not according as to whether I believe that it was the knave of hearts who stole them, not according as to whether I believe that he believes that it was the knave.
One could say that the sentence ‘It was the knave of hearts who stole the tarts’ puts the state of affairs of its having been the knave of hearts who stole the tarts upon the mat for discussion.
We are invited to consider whether it is a real state of affairs.
It does not put upon the mat (not at least in the same direct way) the state of affairs of anyone believing that it was the knave who stole them.
If ‘it is raining’ expresses the belief that it is raining, but says not that I, the speaker, have that belief, but simply that it is raining, it would appear that it differs in meaning from ‘I believe that it is raining’.
Moreover, it would appear that the difference is that the latter sentence expresses my belief that I have the belief that it is raining, and says that I have the belief that it is raining, and does not express the belief that it is raining or say that it is raining.
This would be so if ‘I believe that it is raining, were a psychological statement about myself.
(perhaps one should say that as such a psychological statement it would express my awareness that I have the belief rather than my belief that I have the belief , since belief is not quite the right word in this context, but let us leave such qualifications to be understood.)
It the statement is taken in this way, a hearer should assent to it only if he believes that I have the belief.
He need not concern himself with whether it is actually raining.
Statements opening ‘I believe that…’ are probably on occasion used in this way.
One might be asked to report upon  one's beliefs to a psychologist or sociologist, interested in current opinion on matters biological, and say ‘I believe that natural selection does not adequately account for the evolution of animal life’.
One would then not be saying that natural selection does not adequately account for the evolution of animal life but that one has a certain belief to the effect that it does not do so.
Of course, if one has the belief one would indeed be prepared to say that it does not adequately account for the evolution of animal life, but that is not what one is saying here and now.
However, although it is possible to use statements opening ‘I believe that…’ to make a psychological report, that is not their only or their most usual use.
For usually they say, rather tentatively, that things are as specified in the wording which follows.
Thus if I say ‘I believe it is raining’ I am usually saying, rather tentatively, that it is raining.
What I am expressing is a tentative belief that it is raining, not the belief (or awareness of the fact) that I believe that it is raining.
Perhaps it oversimplifies the situation to treat these as two quite different uses of such expressions as ‘I believe that seems, rather, that it is built into the meaning of ‘I believe that…’ that it hovers between expressing tentative belief that what is specified by the following wording is so, and expressing belief or awareness that the speaker believes that it is so.
For our purposes, however, no harm will be done if we distinguish two uses of ‘I believe that…’. one in which it expresses the tentative belief that what is specified by the following wording is so, the other in which it expresses the belief or awareness that the speaker has the belief.
The first could be called the modal use, because it has the same kind of force as the modal use, ‘probably’, and the second the psychological use because it makes a statement about one's own psychological state of belief.
This distinction will have some importance when we consider the grounds on which the attitudinist distinguishes his position from that of ethical subjectivism.
The attitudinist now asks us to consider whether there may not be sentences which express, in the sense of ‘express’ in which factual statements express beliefs, something other than beliefs.
Two initially promising examples are interrogative; and imperative sentences.
Perhaps the sentence ‘Is it raining?’ expresses the state  of wondering whether it is raining, and the sentence ‘Shut the window, please’expresses the state of wishing the hearer to shut the window.
It sounds promising to say that these sentences stand to wonderings and wishes very much as factual statements stand to beliefs.
However, it seems that the relation is not quite the same, for there is no comparable way in which a hearer can express the same wonder or wish by assenting to the sentence as uttered by the speaker.
‘Shut the window, please’ is said in a situation where the speaker rather expects the hearer to act so as to fulfil a certain sort of wish of his, if he indicates that he has it by an imperative sentence.
It would be inept, rude, insubordinate, or whatever, simply to say ‘I agree’ or nod to show that one also wished that the window was shut.
There are somewhat similar ways in which it would be odd to express assent to a question to show that one shared the speaker's wondering.
So if imperatives and interrogatives express wishes and wonderings it is in a somewhat different sense.
3.
It seems, then, that sentences which are not declarative cannot express anything in the sense in which factual statements do.
That leaves open the possibility, however, that some declarative sentences or statements are not factual and express something other than beliefs.
The proposal of the attitude theory of ethics is that there is; another class of declarative statements which express so-called attitudes, in just the sense in which straight declarative factual statements express beliefs.
By an attitude is meant any way of being in favour of or of disfavouring (of being against) something.
The most significant attitudes are those which either involve, or consist in, the kind of serious wishes that certain things should be done or left undone, which, in appropriate circumstances, will produce actual actions directed to that end.
The attitudinist calls statements which express attitudes rather than beliefs value statements and be thinks of ethical statements as a more or less vaguely delimited subclass of these.
Actual attitude theorists have on the whole taken rather lightly the task of distinguishing the particular kinds of attitudes expressed by those value statements which are distinctively ethical.
One suggestion is this.
The attitudes expressed by value statements are all ways of favouring or disfavouring things which we would  like to see shared.
They contrast with such attitudes as we are content to leave as our own merely personal inclinations and which are therefore not given the dignity of expression in a statement.
However, not all attitudes expressed in value statements have the requisite stridency to be called moral.
These more strident attitudes expressed in properly speaking ethical statements are ways of being in favour of or against types of behaviour with a degree of force which makes us wish disfavoured actions discouraged by some kind of social sanction.
This social sanction will be, in the first place, some kind of social ostracism or discomfort; it may or may not be wished that it be associated with a legal penalty.
Another possibility is that we call statements expressing attitudes with this particular sort of stridency moral statements and allow as ethical all statements which express attitudes towards conduct of a certain special seriousness and pervasiveness in their influence on one's own behaviour and such as one would like to find widely shared, but not necessarily to have supported by a social sanction.
However that may be, we must now note that value statements in general, and ethical statements in particular , are distinguished by the attitudinist into two types.
There are those which, like ‘Stealing is wrong’, express a pure attitude, without any admixture of belief.
Of course, my attitude may stem from my having certain beliefs, but these beliefs are not part of what is actually expressed by the sentence, and do not pertain to that which someone else must share with me, in order for it to be logically proper for him to assent to my sentence.
There are others which express an attitude towards some thing or state of affairs the existence of which is stated, or at least implied, and which therefore also express a belief in its existence.
‘It was wrong of you to steal that money’ is of this latter kind.
However, even though it expresses my belief that you did steal the money, the distinctively ethical role of the sentence is to express my attitude of disfavour towards you for this act.
The great contrast, according to this moral philosophy, between beliefs and attitudes is that beliefs can be true or false, while attitudes cannot be.
If someone believes that it is raining, or that the knave stole the tarts, there is either a state of affairs such as he believes in or there is not, and his belief, and the  statement which expresses it, is true or false; accordingly.
When a sentence expresses an attitude or a wish it cannot be true or false in this sense, for wishes and attitudes cannot be true or false as beliefs can.
Wishes can of course be fulfilled or remain unfulfilled and things may or may not be as people with certain attitudes would like, but it would be thoroughly misleading to speak of truth or falsehood here.
Beliefs are acceptable or not according as to whether they succeed in their goal of conforming to reality and receive credit or discredit for this by being called true or false.
The acceptability of wishes and attitudes is not based upon such conformity, though of course they normally lead to the effort to produce it.
The attitudinist will admit, indeed, that there is a weak sense of true' and ‘false’, in which they merely register agreement or disagreement, and in which it is quite legitimate to use them to express agreement or disagreement in attitude with an ethical statement.
But we are mistaken if this leads us to suppose that there is any question of truth or falsehood here in the sense of conformity to fact.
4.
It is important to realize that when the speaker uses an ethical statement to express an attitude, the hearer who agrees or dissents is not agreeing to, or dissenting from, any claim to the effect that the speaker has the attitude.
Rather, he is expressing his own agreement or disagreement in attitude, and to agree or disagree in attitude is not to agree or disagree about an attitude.
This is implied in saying that the original statement expressed an attitude, and not a belief about an attitude.
It is on the basis of the distinction between statements which express attitudes and those which state that one has an attitude that the attitudinist thinks his theory significantly different from ethical subjectivism as usually understood.
for by this is usually meant the thesis that ethical statements are reports upon, statements about, one's own feelings or attitudes.
If so, an ethical statement made by me would be true, and could not reasonably be challenged by others, if I have the feelings in question.
Certainly they might have different feelings.
and could report upon them in their own ethical statements, but they could not object to my ethical statements as I meant them, if I have the relevant feelings.
But for attitudinism an ethical statement does  not state any fact at all, not even the fact that the speaker has a certain attitude; rather it expresses an attitude, something, so it is contended, which is very different.
Just as ‘Prostitution is on the increase’ is quite distinct in meaning from ‘I believe that prostitution is on the increase’, at least when this latter is taken as a psychological statement rather than as a modally qualified form of ‘Prostitution is on the increase’, so ‘Prostitution is wrong’is quite different in meaning from ‘I disapprove of prostitution at least when this is taken as a psychological statement.
It could only be assimilated to it if ‘I disapprove of prostitution’ were treated as a tentative way of saying that prostitution is wrong, that is, as a tentative expression of an attitude against prostitution rather than as an expression of one's awareness of one's own disapproval of it.
The distinction between subjectivism and attitudinism may seem a mere verbal subtlety.
However, though it may not be; as great as has sometimes been maintained there is a genuine difference.
For one thing, the attitudinist view escapes an objection to subjectivism made by Moore that if when I say an action is bad I report my negative feelings towards it, and when you say it is good you report your positive feelings towards it, then there is no disagreement between us (since we will probably both agree that the other has the feelings he reports) which Moore thought an absurdity.
Stevenson commented on this that we disagree in attitude, but not (necessarily) in belief, and in any case, for attitudinism, since the two statements express opposite attitudes, they are incompatible in much the same way as that in which statements which express opposite beliefs are.
More generally one can say that for attitudinism ethical statements invite the hearer (or perhaps the speaker when in discourse with himself) to express his agreement or disagreement in attitude, or perhaps join in a shared attempt to arrive at some stable and better based attitude, towards what is in question, and that this is quite a different matter from any discussion concerning the   psychological state, of approving or disapproving, on either the speaker's or hearer's part.
5.
Although (according to attitudinism) ethical statements express attitudes rather than beliefs they are in many ways quite comparable to factual statements which express beliefs.
They express a certain mental stance to the world which others are invited to accept or reject just as do factual statements, and as mere imperatives, exclamations and interrogatives cannot.
Moreover (as we shall see shortly) they can enter into standard logical relations with factual statements.
However, there is a disanalogy in one respect.
If I say ‘Prostitution is on the increase’ I express my belief that it is on the increase, but what I put upon the mat for discussion is not my holding the belief, but rather the state of affairs, which I hold to be actual, but which others may not, of prostitution being on the increase.
What do I similarly put upon the mat for discussion when I say ‘Prostitution is immoral’?
A verbal answer, which will do as part of the Language game of ordinary life, is that I put the immorality of prostitution upon the mat in a way quite comparable to putting its increase on the mat.
However, for the present attitudinism there is no state of affairs, which may be real or unreal, of prostitution being immoral, as there is a state of affairs, which may be real or unreal, of its being on the increase.
It is sometimes supposed that if this is so, there can be no rationality in ethics.
For is not rationality concerned with assessing evidence for claims to the effect that certain states of affairs exist?
But if there are no such things as ethical states of affairs, then there can be no question of evidence for them.
Stevenson himself goes along with this view to a far greater extent than seems appropriate.
For, with some qualifications which do not much affect the main point, he suggests that when we give reasons for an ethical statement we are typically making factual claims acceptance of which we hope will cause others to have the attitude it expresses and he distinguishes this sharply from the case where one statement gives some kind of logical or rational support to another.
(He does not even make any special point about the dishonesty which there would seem to be in doing this when acceptance of those claims is not the cause of one's own attitude — to do so would be, from his point of view, to play  the moralist rather than the philosopher who should simply describe ethical discourse.)
Of course, if we make factual claims in support of an ethical statement, then these can be evaluated rationally, by way of induction and abduction.
Thus so far as difficulty in settling for ourselves, or agreeing with others, on the right answer to an ethical question turns on disagreement or doubt about factual matters, agreement on which would cause settled or agreed ethical attitudes, there is a place for reason in ethics.
However, wherever there is hesitancy or opposition in ethical attitude which is not rooted in hesitancy or disagreement in belief, in the sense that no amount of factual certainty or agreement would cause the final ascendancy of one definite attitude, Stevenson thinks that the ethical question cannot be resolved rationally.
What remains is a possible non-rational resolution of the question, which may consist in one side to a dispute stimulating a change of attitude in the other by a moving use of emotive language, or one aspect of one s personality achieving dominance over another.
Still, it is also quite possible that hesitancy or disagreement may persist without one side of the dispute or one aspect of one's personality being more rational than another, or in possession of any deeper insight into truth.
Yet there are indications of the approach to ethical questions which, from Stevenson's point of view, would be the most rational.
It is essentially a matter of looking into all the factual issues which one believes likely to affect one's attitudes on the issue, or which are likely to affect the attitudes of those debating it with one.
One then lets the influence of the beliefs on all these matters at which one arrives play upon oneself and/or others, until this causes settled, and with good fortune agreed, attitudes to emerge in all concerned.
However, this good fortune cannot be guaranteed and human psychology may be such that we are doomed to permanent hesitancy or disagreement, a fact with which each will have to cope from the perspective of his own attitudes.
This attempt to be influenced by the maximum of factual knowledge is in a sense a rational way of trying to answer ethical questions (this being perhaps the Stevensonian answer to the second question raised in the introduction), but it offers no guarantee of congruence.
Thus our third question is answered negatively.
But if this is to be called a rational method, it is so, from Stevenson's point of view, mainly because it consists in letting one's attitudes be moulded by rational factual beliefs.
There is no step which he is prepared to call rational from the factual supporting reasons for an ethical conclusion, to that conclusion.
The beliefs cause the attitudes in as non-rational a way as that in which wind drives sails.
Stevenson is also anxious that we should not dismiss with contempt the more completely non-rational aspects of ethical discussion in which we affect each other 's ethical attitudes by the use of emotive language or influence each other 's emotions in other ways which do not require the mediation of rationally based changes in belief.
Admittedly, he says that he is describing ethical discussion as it is, rather than as it ought to be.
To say what it ought to be would be to express attitudes of his own, which he does not regard as the task of the kind of philosopher like himself who is, in his professional work, trying to understand ethical discussion rather than to participate in it.
However, he does indicate that he would not approve of attempts to make ethical debate entirely a rational affair even to the extent that that is possible.
But surely Stevenson greatly underestimates the place which the attitude theory can allow for rationality in ethics of much the same sort as is thought desirable in science, history or philosophy.
For to that great extent to which such rationality is a matter of seeking for logical consistency, and for some more general coherence in the total spread of one's opinions, it can have full play in ethical thought, conceived along attitudinist lines.
All that is missing is reasoning of an inductive or abductive sort (in the parts of ethical thought which cannot be hived off as ‘factual’) and even for this there is a kind of substitute.
Certainly the attitudinist can allow deductive reasoning full sway in ethics, since attitudes can be logically inconsistent one with another just as much as can beliefs.
Just as two beliefs can be such that they cannot both be true, so two attitudes can involve wishes that cannot both be realized.
Disfavouring abortion in all cases is inconsistent with favouring it in some, since there are circumstances in which these attitudes will prompt attempts to permit and to prevent the very same act.
Consider simple example of the power of deductive reasoning in ethics.
Let us suppose that an acquaintance has said that Smith  acted wrongly in telling a fairly minor lie in order to promote his career, and suppose that a little later he himself tells a fairly minor lie in order to promote his career.
On finding his lie out, one challenges him, and asks whether he thinks he acted wrongly, and he denies this, excusing himself on the grounds that no one was much harmed.
One then reminds him of the Smith case, and asks whether he still thinks that Smith was wrong.
The chances are that he will see his inconsistency and revise his moral views, either exonerating Smith or condemning himself.
If he does not, he has in effect accepted at one time the proposition (the matter put upon the mat)‘Telling even a minor lie to advance one's career is always wrong, even though it harms no one’ and at another time ‘Telling a minor lie, which harms no one , in order to advance one's career is not always wrong’.
If he refuses to admit subsequently that on one of these occasions his moral judgement was mistaken, he is certainly contradicting himself and thus being irrational.
It may be suggested that he may simply qualify somewhat and say that it is wrong for others to tell such lies and not for him, and that there is no purely logical inconsistency here.
Even so the qualification has been imposed by deductive reasoning.
Besides, few would be prepared consciously to adopt this attitude, and would be concerned to square their final position with maintenance of an attitude less partial to themselves.
It may be asked what there is to stop people adopting inconsistent attitudes.
If one asks why it is bad to hold logically inconsistent factual beliefs, the most obvious part of the answer is that if one does so, one guarantees that one will have a false belief within this area of one's thought.
Since the whole point of belief is to be true, logical inconsistency in belief defeats the aim of belief.
It appears that logical inconsistency as between ethical beliefs (which, according to the attitudinist, are really attitudes) cannot be condemned on these grounds, since there is no truth (in the deep sense in which truth is a genuine thing to be pursued) in the offing.
However, one can say that a logically inconsistent set of attitudes bears the inevitable seeds of emotional disharmony within the individual and is likely to make effective action impossible by promoting patterns of behaviour which prevent each others' successful issue.
If one really disfavours all lying, one will disfavour one's own lying, and if this  is combined with an attitude of favouring one's own lying in certain cases, one will at once favour and disfavour certain possible lines of action on one's own part.
This will cause emotional disharmony and make it difficult to act effectively in any way at all.
Doesn't this conflict with the basic aim of emotion, and action, of reaching a general stance in and towards the world with which one can be content, just as inconsistency in belief conflicts with the basic aim of belief, namely truth?
Perhaps it will be suggested that there is an incoherence in setting out to have partly false beliefs, but that there is no similar incoherence in setting out to have emotional conflict and even a certain amount of chaos in one's behaviour.
As against this, it may be said that it is psychologically impossible (or perhaps impossible in some stronger logical sense) to retain either beliefs or attitudes of which the inconsistency has become manifest to one.
However that may be, it is, surely, part of the very meaning of being rational that one tries to organise one's mental stance towards the world so that it is consistent and comprehensive, consistent in that its elements do not frustrate each other, comprehensive in that it covers one's stance to as wide as possible a range of phenomena.
The mental stance the rational person seeks to organize in this way includes both beliefs and attitudes.
Beliefs are inconsistent when they cannot both be true, attitudes are inconsistent when there are circumstances in which they cannot (in the same sense of ‘cannot’) both be fully actualised in feeling and action.
Attitude, then, can be inconsistent with attitude, and ethical statement with ethical statement.
But what of attitude with belief, and ethical with factual statement?
Well, certainly an ethical proposition which incorporates or presupposes a factual claim can be inconsistent with a factual statement.
‘He was wrong to steal that money’ is logically inconsistent with ‘He did not steal the money’.
However, according to the attitudinist, nothing merely factual can be formally inconsistent with a pure ethical statement like ‘It would be wrong to steal that money’.
In this intuitionism and attitudinism are at one.
Both insist on a strong fact/value distinction, according to which there are pure ethical statements which are logically independent of all factual statements.
The reason for this, according to the attitudinist, is  the distinction between belief, which sets out to represent how things are, and attitude, which is rather a matter of how one wishes (not merely idly, but in a way which can produce appropriate action) them to be.
However, that is not in the least to deny the importance and validity of concatenated pieces of reasoning in which both factual and ethical premisses combine.
The typical case is one in which a factual statement points out that a situation is one of the kind in which an ethical statement asserts that a certain obligation holds, that is, one in which it has expressed the wish that people should act in a certain way or meet the disfavour of others.
If the attitudinist can make sense of deductive reasoning as applied to ethical statements, it seems that he can make sense of the embedding of ethical sentences in complex sentences where the attitude they would express on their own is, so to speak, held in reserve.
Consider the following discourse.
‘If polygamists are bad men, Solomon was a bad man.
But, as our faith assures us, Solomon was not a bad man.
Therefore, polygamists are not, at least in all cases, bad men.’
The antecedent and consequent of the first sentence do not, in this context, function to express disapproval either of polygamists or of Solomon.
However, for the attitudinist, they function in a perfectly intelligible way in a discourse which explores relations of consistency and inconsistency between various possible and actual attitudes.
This is important, because it is sometimes given as an objection to attitude theories that they cannot make sense of subordinate ethical clauses.
Even this one example suggests that this objection has little to it.
Perhaps it has more force against emotivism than against the attitudinism I have described.
Stevenson himself thought that it was only in virtue of a descriptive meaning, which ethical sentences typically had as well as their emotive meaning, that they could function in this sort of context.
He may have ceded too much even on his own theory, but certainly there is no problem here for attitudinism divorced from emotivism.’
However, when it is thought that attitudinism renders ethics irrational, the usual point is that ethical conclusions cannot be inferred in any rational manner from premisses which are purely factual.
That means that they cannot be supported, or more importantly tested, by observation.
However much you pile up facts about the world in order to support an ethical case, you cannot get an ethical conclusion unless you take some ethical premiss for granted, in a way which usually just begs the question against those with whom you disagree.
Thus if people are trying to decide whether the use of human foetuses for experimentation, and perhaps their deliberate production for this purpose, is morally acceptable, no amount of factual knowledge will settle the matter of itself.
If it seems that things could be finally settled by deciding whether a foetus is a person, this can only be because ‘person’ is used to ascribe a moral status rather than merely to   describe.
(’ Metaphysical' facts about the presence of a soul would be equally incapable of closing the matter ethically.)
Attitudinist and intuitionist agree that this could only be denied through the naturalistic fallacy.
Of course, intuitionists and emotivists disagree about the availability of ‘rational intuition’(guided by such principles as that of organic unities) but so far as the relation between the merely factual and the ethical goes they are at one.
Yet this is only the corollary of the view that there is a sharp distinction between ethical and factual claims, and hardly justifies calling either theory irrationalist.
Perhaps the charge that attitudinism makes ethics peculiarly irrational is merely a way of saying that it denies that there is such a thing as objective ethical truth.
However, it is better to distinguish the issue of objective truth from that of rationality.
Rationality can very properly be specified not in terms exclusively of methods supposed to lead to truth but more generally in terms of methods for reaching a consistent and comprehensive stance towards the world as it really is, something perfectly possible in ethical thought as the attitudinist describes it.
It is, indeed, an implication of attitudinism that induction and abduction cannot be invoked in support of ethical statements as they can in support of factual ones.
However, even if induction and abduction are not available here, something quite similar is, namely the moving tentatively to general conclusions on the basis of one's responses to particular cases, and the testing of general conclusions by how acceptable one finds, in practice, the responses to particular situations which they dictate.
I am gesturing here towards the so called method of reflective equilibrium whereby general ethical principles and particular ethical judgements, as they arise fairly spontaneously, are each reconsidered until a consistent position is found with which one can live.
(See RAWLS p. 48 et ff.)
Thus in general it seems a mistake to see attitudinism as the enemy of reason in ethics.
6.
It is time now to consider more precisely what the attitudinist says about the actual meaning of typically ethical words, like ‘good’’ ought'’right' and ‘wrong’.
Let us say that the meaning of a statement is cognitive if and only if there is a certain belief such that one is speaking either insincerely or incorrectly if one makes that statement or assents  to it as uttered by another without having that belief.
And let us say that the meaning of a statement is valuational if and only if there is a certain attitude to which it is related just as a cognitive statement is related to a certain belief.
It should be emphasised that the ‘correctly’ which is negated by ‘incorrectly’in the above means with linguistic propriety .
One speaks with linguistic propriety and sincerity when saying ‘it will rain this afternoon’ if and only if one believes it will; the truth of the matter has nothing to do with it.
The distinction between cognitive and valuational meaning follows naturally from our account of the way in which statements express beliefs or attitudes.
(I talk of ‘valuational’ rather than evaluative meaning, as it seems improper to capture ‘evaluative’for some special theory.
No one would deny that statements about what is good are evaluative.)
It will be clear that — according to the theory I am expounding — the meaning of the more basic sort of ethical statement is valuational rather than cognitive.
However, the theory allows that a statement can express both a belief and an attitude.
For example, ‘He is a wicked old man’ expresses both the belief that he is an old man and some kind of disapproval of him.
It should be noted, however, that a statement like ‘If you do that, you will be acting wrongly’ has a purely valuational meaning.
It expresses one's readiness to have a certain attitude to the person named by ‘you’ if he acts in a certain way, and in a broad sense this readiness is itself an attitude.
We can now say that the meaning of an individual word is valuational to the extent that its prime role is to make the statements in which it occurs express certain attitudes, and that it is descriptive if its prime role is to specify the content either of the belief or of the attitude which sentences in which it occurs express.
By the content of an attitude is meant what it is an attitude towards, while the content of a belief is the state of affairs the reality of which it affirms.
The main thesis of the attitudinist theory of ethics can now be expressed as the claim that the most general ethical words have a primarily valuational meaning, while to be properly ethical at all, a word must have a meaning which is partly valuational.
Thus    ‘good’, ‘bad’, ‘ought;, ‘right’, ‘wrong’ have primarily valuational meanings, at least in a properly ethical use of them, while words like ‘brave’, ‘lazy’, ‘rude’, ‘selfish’, ‘considerate’, and so forth which have a much more settled descriptive meaning, have a partly valuational meaning.
It need not be insisted that all valuational statements and words are functioning ethically, for there may be non-ethical attitudes.
In the case of words which combine a fairly definite descriptive meaning with a valuational meaning it is rather a puzzle to say what correct linguistic usage bids one do, if one recognizes that something answers to the descriptive meaning, but does not have the attitude towards it which the word expresses in virtue of its ‘value charge’, as one might put it.
Take the word ‘loyal’ and consider someone who deplores the kind of character it indicates.
Does he say of someone who does not have this character that he is ‘not loyal’, in order to express lack of approval of him, or does he say that he is loyal, but seek to negate the usual valuational meaning of the word, by inserting some adverb like ‘deplorably’ before it?
We need hardly answer this — it depends upon circumstances.
The important thing to note is that such words will only have a value charge as part of their standard meaning, if the users of the language mostly have a certain shared attitude to what answers to the descriptive meaning.
Thus the person who faces this problem is, in the nature of the case, unusual.
The value charge of such a word reflects the mores of the language users, and they may be unaware that it has two distinguishable components to its meaning.
The reflective analyst of language, however, will see that words are playing this double role and how their meaning thereby incorporates the specific values of just one possible type of society.
It is sometimes said that if one wishes to reject such values one must do so by rejecting the very concepts incorporated in such words, and cannot do this merely by applying their negation.
It is   also sometimes supposed that their existence shows that the strong fact/value distinction made by attitudinists and intuitionists is misconceived and that in our language, as it stands, factual premisses can logically imply evaluative conclusions.
Thus a true statement of the facts of the case can logically imply a statement ascribing the ethical predicate ‘dishonest’ to someone.
However, the attitudinist will say that the only real deduction is at the descriptive level, and that the distinctively ethical part of the conclusion springs from the value charge of the word which expresses an attitude from which one can disassociate oneself without being in the least irrational.
Within the limits of his unsatisfactory emotivist position Stevenson deals with all this very effectively in what he calls his ‘second pattern of analysis’ of ethical words and the same main points can be made in terms of valuational and descriptive meaning.
A related point requiring emphasis is that much of what one is inclined to regard as the mere ‘facts of the case’ are often ‘institutional’facts our recognition of which is itself partly the adoption of an attitude.
It has been suggested that non-cognitive theories of ethics do best with those ethical words such as‘good’ and ‘ought’which are most plausibly represented as purely valuational, while cognitivist theories (which take moral knowledge and truth seriously) do best with words such as ‘brave’’loyal' and so forth (LOVIBOND).
This seems wrong.
It would be true at most of a certain sort of naturalistic cognitive theory, for it is certainly not true of Moore's cognitivism.
Moreover, Stevenson's theory, and the attitudinism sketched above, are at their most convincing in their treatment of value charged descriptive words, among which indeed even such words as ‘good’ can be counted when we are concerned with the meaning that they have in a homogeneous society.
(A suggestion made by Alasdair MacIntyre that emotivism is promising only as an account of the use of ethical words in a society lacking shared values could not reasonably be extended to the attitudinism I have described.)
I have already suggested that Moore's doctrine of the naturalistic fallacy is one of the inspirations for attitudinism.
That is why attitudinists are sometimes rather oddly lumped together with intuitionists as non-naturalists, in spite of the fact that Stevenson.
who saw himself as bringing ethics down to earth, called his view a form of ethical naturalism.
Whatever the right  labels, the attitudinist agrees that no properly ethical expression can be adequately defined in purely naturalistic or even metaphysical terms but offers what he thinks a better explanation of this fact than the invocation of non-natural properties, namely that such definitions ignore valuational or emotive meaning.
This is thought a better explanation both because it avoids the metaphysical extravagance of non-natural properties, and because it clarifies the relation between moral judgement and action.
For if ‘good’ is the label for a property rather than the expression of an impulse why should noting its presence have anything more essential to do with an inclination to promote it, than noting that a wall-paper is blue has to do with choosing it?
But although the attitudinist agrees with the intuitionist that the meaning of ethical words cannot be exhaustively analysed in naturalistic or metaphysical terms he takes a more positive view of the kinds of definition which Moore was so concerned to refute, for he sees them as examples of a particular type of definition, which has a legitimate place in discourse.
Stevenson christened them ‘persuasive definitions’.
Such a definition takes a word with a certain valuational meaning, and rather vague descriptive meaning, and broadens, narrows or shifts the descriptive meaning so that the emotions expressed by the valuational meaning are directed at more or less substantially different targets.
Thus I may define ‘propaganda’, which usually has an unfavourable valuational meaning, so that it refers to any vigorous attempt to change people's outlook.
As a result various things, such as missionary work, now fall under a word which directs disfavour at them.
There is much that is illuminating in Stevenson's treatment of persuasive definitions, especially if we disentangle the essential points from the unsatisfactory notion of emotive meaning.
What he tends to ignore, however, is what one might call value charged definitions which do not function as persuasive devices for modifying attitudes but serve simply to formulate, and perhaps   endorse, combinations of descriptive and valuational meaning in ordinary usage which reflect widely shared attitudes.
In any fairly homogeneous society the meaning of even such basic valuational words as ‘right’ and ‘wrong’can only be given in such value charged definitions, which point to the society's shared values.
In that society the rightness or wrongness of an action does in a sense simply follow from the facts of the case, but only because its language incorporates values which the attitudinist will see as rationally detachable from beliefs of a genuinely factual nature.
As will lie seen later, I do not myself go all the way with the attitudinist theory of ethics.
But it has real merits, illuminating much that other theories leave obscure.
As for the role it ascribes to reason, Stevenson himself played this down unnecessarily.
Properly developed, it gives reason, conceived as the quest for coherence, comprehensiveness and sensitivity to reality, almost as great a role as it can play anywhere.
What it does, however, suppose absent in ethical deliberation is any actual truth of the matter at which it aims.
Here it distinguishes it from factual enquiry, at least as that is conceived by those with a robust sense that there is a way things really are in the world.
It may see this as meaning that reason has less hope of producing convergence in ethics than on factual matters.
It should be noted that the attitudinist theory of ethics operates at a rather different level from a theory such as utilitarianism.
Utilitarianism is a properly ethical theory, inasmuch as it puts forward the basics of a moral position, while emotivism belongs to what is sometimes called meta-ethics which professes to explain the nature of what is going on when an ethical or moral view is advocated.
(We saw in Chapter One how some thinkers have advocated utilitarianism in a consciously attitudinist spirit.)
At one time the question was much debated whether meta-ethics can or ought to be neutral as between ethical theories, or indeed whether the two should be distinguished at all.
The truth seems to be that this question itself cannot be answered in a way which is neutral between different positions in meta-ethics and ethics and is hardly worth discussing in the abstract.
For that reason I shall not attempt some neat separation of the ethical theories which I discuss into these two classes.
7.
I conclude with some remarks about various points of view in  moral philosophy which bear on the claims of the attitude theory.
(1) There is a tradition in Austrian and German philosophy which maintains that just as a judgement can be true or false, so can an emotional attitude be correct or incorrect.
Moral philosophers who hold this sort of view are wont to agree with the attitudinist that moral judgements, or value judgements on which they are based, express emotional attitudes, but will insist that these can be correct or incorrect in quite as objective a way as that in which judgements can be true or false.
Chief representatives of this view are Brentano and Meinong.
The attitudinist would say that calling an emotional attitude correct or incorrect is simply expressing a higher order emotional attitude towards it.
(2) Modern critics of an attitude theory have often argued, not unconvincingly, that the methods of reasoning used in support of ethical views, or of trying to reach agreement on them by a fair minded exchange of views between reasonable persons, neither need be, nor commonly are, different from those used in factual matters.
A good exponent of this approach is Renford Bambrough.
This seems a fair point to make against some of Stevenson's and Ayer's contentions, but the attitudinist, as I have characterised him, in this chapter, would acknowledge Bambrough's points, yet still think it important to insist on the fundamental difference between trying to decide what is the case and trying to decide what one would wish to be (and will try to make) the case and on associating ethical claims with the latter.
(3) There is a modern attempt to defend what is called objectivism in ethics which turns on viewing both facts and values as essentially social constructs which are what they are because they are either what society drills us into accepting or what exceptional individuals can persuade us follow from the procedures we have been drilled into accepting as correct.
A subtle exponent of this approach is Sabina Lovibond.
Stevenson would certainly respond by insisting that however much our conception of the world is socially determined, and even if there is no level of brute fact which is just how things are, there is still all the difference between a socially agreed mode of representing actual or expected, but not necessarily welcomed, reality, and an effort to decide on what to favour and what disfavour in this reality.
(4) A view which has evoked a fair amount of discussion is ‘the  error theory of ethics’ put forward by J.L. Mackie.
A brief discussion of it will lead naturally also to some remarks on some views; bout ethics put forward quite recently by John McDowell.
Mackie distinguishes four types of view on the status of value and obligations,(1) non-naturalist objectivism,(2) attitudinism,(3) modern naturalism,(4) error theory, and comments on them somewhat as follows.
The first view makes values and obligations part of the fabric of the world.
However, if they are to play their required role for ethical thinking.
these values have to have an intrinsically prescriptive character, so that to know them is necessarily to have the will affected in a certain way.
Attitudinism directly relates ethics to the will, but it neglects the phenomenological fact that we think of values and obligations as something actually there.
A certain sort of modern naturalism takes ethical expressions as standing for various natural or empirical features of the real world.
(One well known exponent of such a naturalism is Philippa Foot.)
These are ones in which humans take a special interest.
However, this neglects the categorical or unconditional prescriptivity which we think pertains to values, for it makes the relevance of ethical truths to us turn on contingent facts about the will.
Mackie's own theory of ethics is (or includes) an ‘error theory’.
We ordinarily think of values and obligations being really there, but we also think of them as intrinsically prescriptive. that is, such that one who knows them must be affected conatively in an appropriate way.
Mackie thinks the idea that there could be such inherently prescriptive properties and relations, which are part of the genuine fabric of the world.
too queer and incoherent to be true.
So he concludes that ordinary moral judgements express the erroneous view that there are objective features of the world which intrinsically (and not merely because, as a matter of contingent fact, we respond to them in certain ways) require something of us.
Thus Mackie is what he calls a ‘moral sceptic’, though he is in favour of continuing to live in the light of moral values and obligations which we acknowledge as a human invention or construction serving widely shared human purposes.
John McDowell has challenged Mackie's assumption that a genuinely objective feature of the world must be something whose thereness in the world has nothing to do with human  responses to it.
He notes that Mackie compares values to colours, and describes both as things which are normally thought of as existing independently (and which conceivably might have done so) but which a reasonable scientific view of the world exhibits as not really there.
McDowell objects that we should not think of what is really there in the world as something whose thereness has nothing to do with our responses to it.
In fact, he claims, colours present themselves as what they truly are, features of the world which are intrinsically to do with how we see them.
The case is quite similar with values, which present themselves as real features present in the world which are intrinsically to do with how we respond to them.
To recognize the value present in a situation (he urges) is not merely to have an attitude which someone else who conceives the ‘factual character’ of the situation in exactly the same way might lack, but to conceive it in a particular kind of way which could not be duplicated in someone not thus drawn to it.
But that is only a reason for saying that the value is not really there in the world if we presuppose a scientistic view of reality for which it is of itself necessarily ‘motivationally inert’ and cognizable in a manner which has nothing essentially to do with being attracted or repelled by it.
The real world of ‘scientism’ which could be characterised in terms having nothing to do with our particular ways of responding to it is a myth, with which it is quite inept to confuse the real ‘real world’.
The position I shall be advocating in part two has certain affinities with aspects of each of these views, yet each seems unsatisfactory as it stands.
I quite agree with Mackie that colour presents itself as being as much part of the fabric of the world as, say, shape and that much the same is true of value, and also agree that they seem therefore initially intelligible as being there in a manner not intrinsically bound up with our responses to them.
He is surely also right that philosophical reflection gives adequate ground for denying that colour and value can be there independently of the consciousness of them.
But this is only a ground for drawing a strong contrast between them and ‘primary qualities’ like shape, for those who, like Mackie, take a strong realist line about the latter which I find unacceptable.
But even without challenging such realism, I would argue that values, by being made dependent on consciousness, do not cease  to be part of the fabric of the world.
For consciousness is itself part of that fabric, and, or so I shall argue in Part Two, the value features which are found there are real properties of certain experiences (and indeed of the physical and social environment in our personal versions of it) which have an intrinsic prescriptivity.
However, I shall partially echo Mackie in insisting that many values are only there as part of a shared social construction.
Still, even these, to whatever extent they are not merely believed in, but have come to be actually felt in the world as we experience it, will thereby have their place in the real fabric of the world, which must certainly include all personal or socially shared versions of it.
McDowell's excessively subtle thesis teeters on the brink of the view that ‘This is red’ means ‘This looks red to standard observers’and ‘This is good’means ‘This appeals in such and such a way to a normal person’.
However, he rejects this view on the ground that although the redness of a red object is not something which merely happens to look red to us, since a redness which did not look red would not be redness, nonetheless ‘red’ does not mean ‘looks red’since only one who understands ‘red’can know what ‘looks red’means.
Thus redness, rather than merely looking red, is basic but its being there is bound up in a way which is manifest from the start with how it looks to us.
Similarly the value of something is intrinsically bound up with the way in which someone who recognizes it is drawn to it, or repelled by it if the value is negative, but is not merely a disposition to attract or repel, for we cannot be thus attracted or repelled except by recognizing (or at least seeming to recognize) a value
I agree with McDowell that ‘red’ is more basic than ‘looks red’, but would explain this in a way which is nearer to Mackie's outlook.
‘Red’, in the most basic sense, refers to a quality whose true locus is only in the perceptual fields of beings such as ourselves, but which in our most basic conceptualisations of the world we think of as being present more stably in a real world the character of which can clash with the world as immediately presented.
Thus we fabricate a deeper sense of being red in which an object is red only if it is red in a stable fashion in the perceptual fields of all observers and which is therefore treated as part of the real world which exists independently of us.
In contrast with this fabricated ‘real’ redness the redness which immediately appears and from which the whole conception of red is obtained is downgraded to something which pertains only to how things look to us.
I shall be suggesting in Part Two that the basic idea of ‘good’ and ‘bad’, and of all value, arises similarly from what feels good or bad to us, and that here again this good and bad which is demoted to the role of what only feels so is ultimately the value which is really there in the world, besides which the good and bad of our social construction of reality is only a kind of useful fiction.
When I develop that thesis it will be seen that I agree with McDowell as to the intrinsic attractiveness or repulsiveness of value qualities.
However, I will not, as McDowell comes too near doing, assimilate the recognition of the existence of a value with the being appropriately drawn to it.
I will contend rather that the judgement that it is there has a necessary effect upon how we are inclined to act.
In this respect my position will amount to thinking that there are intrinsically prescriptive features to reality, but this will not be done by blurring the distinction between judgements about how the world is characterised and the ways in which we respond to it, as with McDowell.
Value properties, for me, are really there in the world quite apart from a valuer's responses to it, but have a necessary effect on the will of him who knows of them.
These value properties are, indeed, only really there in the world insofar as they qualify states of, or immediate presentations to, consciousness, since they consist in the various ways in which things feel good or bad to sentient beings.
The extent, however, to which that marks them off from what are typically thought of as more ‘objective’ features of the world in which we live depends on how far one thinks that has a character independent of any form of sentient experience.
Some Great Historical Moralists
In this chapter I shall be considering some of the great historical Western moral philosophers of the past, confining myself, however, to the period of modern philosophy, which is usually conceived of as starting in the seventeenth century.
(I regret the omission of ancient philosophy, but that could not be decently treated without doubling the historical part of this book.)
The treatment will be unavoidably brief.
It should serve the purpose, however, of providing a sense or a reminder of something of the range of alternative answers there are to questions about the rational foundations of ethics.
Spinoza
Baruch or Benedict Spinoza (1632–77) attempts to give ethics an unequivocally rational foundation.
He puts forward an ethic consisting of habits of mind and of behaviour to which he thinks one will inevitably move to the extent that one has rational insight into the human situation and is under the control of that rational part of one's nature which gives one unity as a personality.
In some respects his ethics is a representative in the ‘modern’ world of the same type of approach as was taken by Plato and Aristotle.
For Spinoza the good life is (in effect) one in which human beings fulfil their essential natures.
It is true that Spinoza is famous for having denied the existence of final causes in nature in the sense in which Aristotle believed in them, that is purposes for which each thing existed.
However, his view that each thing has an essence and that all its active behaviour is to be explained by its inbuilt conatus or striving to preserve its own essence has a strong Aristotelian flavour.
What he is mainly  denying when he denies that there are final causes in nature is that the existence of each individual sort of thing is to be explained by its serving some cause beyond it, in particular some kind of human interest.
For he is above all concerned to deny that the point of the universe is somehow to serve human interests.
Rather it is a spiritual (as well as physical) unity which simply is what it is, and in which human beings exist as what they are, without itself having a point beyond itself or the things within it having a point beyond themselves.
This is no time to go into further consideration of how Spinoza's view of the world may relate to the Aristotelian.
I simply note that in some respects we are, by dealing with Spinoza, covering a type of ethics which our neglect of ancient philosophy might otherwise have led us to omit.
This seems to be true in spite of the fact that Spinoza was very much of a generation which was concerned to dissociate itself from the Greek inheritance, and indeed he represents something of a fresh injection of Jewish moral feeling into the main Christian current of Western thought.
His thought also has elements of the Stoicism of Athens and later of Rome.
Spinoza's ethics is closely related to his metaphysical views.
Indeed, the essential statements both of his metaphysics and of his ethics are presented in one work called simply Ethics (Ethica in the original Latin in which it was written).
Spinoza was a Dutch Jew of Portuguese descent.
He was excommunicated in his early manhood from his synagogue on account of his unorthodox opinions.
Later he became associated with a Christian denomination known as the Collegiants.
His metaphysics is pantheistic.
Nature and God are identified, and are conceived as an infinite reality which exists both as an all comprehensive mind and as an infinitely extended physical system, and in other ways unknown to us, all these being different aspects of one and the same single reality.
Our bodies are elements in this infinite physical system and our minds are elements in the all-comprehensive mind, and thus aspects of one and the same individual fragment of the total divine reality.
Each individual fragment of the total reality has an individual essence and its behaviour is entirely explicable as its effort to keep itself in being in as full a fashion as its environment allows.
More strictly, this effort is simply that essence itself which precisely is its effort to keep itself in existence in its own  distinctive way.
Thus human beings, animals, plants, and all other genuine units in the world, on whatever scale, struggle each to exist in its own way, this, on the one side, being a matter of a certain physical individual having an inbuilt tendency to operate, so far as is possible, to preserve itself, in its distinctive form, and on the other hand, of the corresponding mind having an inbuilt tendency to preserve its particular form of experience.
Each human being strives to keep himself or herself going in their own particular character, but being made up of parts, those parts which have any kind of individuality also try to keep themselves going.
Thus are we victims of various sorts of obsession when certain parts of ourselves seek to preserve themselves even at the expense of the whole personality.
So far as the whole personality does not fall victim to the pressures either of the external environment or what one might call the internal environment of its own parts — in the form of various lusts and obsessions — it achieves its only conceivable goal, that of prosperous possession, in the fullest manner, of its own nature.
This may sound like a purely mechanical process in which the most powerful essence wins, without there being any room for ethical or indeed any other decision.
But we now have to reckon with the fact that the peculiar essence of a human being is rationality, that is, each human essence is some particular form of rationality.
(Some of what Spinoza says would imply that every unit, even a plant or atom, is on its mental side a particular sort of rationality.
It is the quest to think of that peculiar essence of which its physical nature is the more or less full actualisation.
However, although this is in a manner so, ‘rationality’ in a more usual sense refers to the particular sort of rationality distinctive of human beings, by which they participate in their own way in the ultimate rationality of the universe.)
As a particular form of rationality a human being, considered as a total personality, is above all an effort to think things out by having a firm conception of its own nature, as this exists in the physical world, and of what will assist this nature to keep in existence.
This effort to keep a clear conception of its own nature before it is the mental side of the human psyche when it genuinely acts in the world and is not merely subject to external or internal forces.
Thus the main task of childhood is to achieve a sense of its own distinctive personal identity and to do what will  reinforce it.
(This reference to the task of childhood is rather my own effort to develop Spinoza's own richly fruitful but rather abstract ideas in more concrete terms than a direct report upon what he says — the same goes for some other of my remarks.)
This essentially rational nature of the human essence explains why thought — such thought as Spinoza tries to express in his work — can influence our behaviour, so that we are guided by conceptions of good and evil.
‘Good’ in this context means what promotes our distinctive mode of being and ‘evil’what hinders it.
If we think that there is any objective or independent good or evil in the world, we are mistaken.
Ultimately the universe in its totality is in some sense perfect, as also are its elements understood as required by the overall nature of that totality, but from the point of view of us who struggle within it things are called good or bad (or by some such words) according as to whether they promote our particular struggle to actualise our own nature.
The fact that a particular sort of rationality is of our very essence explains why rational thinking can lead us to ethical self control.
We simply cannot form a clear and distinct idea of the fact that something is conducive or inimical to the actualisation of our essences without this influencing our behaviour towards or away from it.
There are plenty of interfering factors but these are inevitably to some extent weakened by a rational understanding of them, at least when this engages appropriately with our basic conatus (or effort to preserve our own nature) and thereby acquires the requisite emotional power.
Part of what we are striving for as a necessity of our being is simply survival in physical and mental health.
Simply to live in the world performing one's proper biological and mental functions, eating, engaging in physically healthy activities, appreciating the beauties of nature and of art, trying to understand the way things work, developing one's skills is joyous   and an end in itself.
When this is not enjoyed it is because our own essential nature is frustrated in its enjoyment of itself through physical or mental disease or by physical or social circumstances.
Spinoza offers us no magical solution to these problems.
Hard thinking and research may aid us individually, and eventually as a species, to counter some of these problems.
Yet we must also simply learn to accept our status as mere fragments of total nature who cannot help sometimes being overcome by forces we cannot control, whether of a physical or of a psychological nature, or by  the assaults of irrational men.
Thus we must strike a fine balance between simply learning to put up with things through realizing the inevitable limitations on satisfaction in the life of a finite creature, and between vigorous efforts to put the situation right.
However, even if things go badly, so long as we survive as partly rational creatures we should always be able to find some satisfaction in understanding our situation and doing what reason points to as the most effective way of dealing with it.
True, at death our essence is finally overcome so far as its actualisation in space and time goes, but as long as we live we can go on realizing it in as full a form as circumstances allow.
(Spinoza did, indeed, conceive of us as possessing a very mysterious kind of immortality as eternal elements in the divine consciousness, but he insists strongly that this has no bearings on how we should conceive the good life.)
Spinoza was revolutionary in thinking of mental illness as the main cause of human suffering and in challenging the distinction between mental illness and vice.
For him all vices are forms of mental illness, for vicious action is always a matter of submission to impulses which are seeking their own satisfaction at the expense of the satisfaction of the whole.
Spinoza holds that the more we understand why we have these impulses, as also why certain sorts of thought overwhelm us with depression, the more we will get on top of them.
When we form a clear and distinct idea of the irrational sides of our nature, they are transformed and become in a soberer form part of the patterned plan of our life.
(He is often regarded as having anticipated elements of psycho-analysis in what he said on this.)
Thus a large part of Spinoza's message is that the point of life is simply to develop one's own powers and enjoy their exercise.
However, he does see the life of one who really understands his  situation as giving a central place to what he calls ‘the intellectual love of God’.
Essentially this is a matter of love for the total cosmic reality of which we are a part as something whose magnificence transcends our own puny being, and gratitude to it for having brought us forth in the heart of it.
The more fully we have developed ourselves the more cause for such gratitude we will have, and the more we understand the cosmos, particularly by grasping the true nature of detailed parts of it and their place in the total scheme, the more we will appreciate the sheer wonderfulness of it, and arrive at a kind of mystical adoration of it.
Where does this leave the more ordinary requirements of morality?
If our one inevitable aim is the enjoyment of our own powers (an enjoyment which reaches its highest level in a sense of oneness with the cosmos as a whole) what becomes of our duties to others, of keeping contracts, of helping the needy, of unselfishness in daily life, and so forth?
Spinoza harks back to ancient philosophy, and away from the Christian tradition, in seeing the virtues which ethics seeks to inculcate as essentially the qualities we require if we are to have personally fulfilled lives.
Thus courage and temperance, are conceived not as a restriction on our freedom but as requirements for its full development.
But this is true also, according to Spinoza, of virtues which are specified primarily in terms of concern with the well being of others.
This is because men cannot properly develop their powers except in co-operation and friendship with others, and because the true goods of human life, those which we need for our own personal fulfilment, are not goods in some limited supply for which we must compete, but ones which each can the better enjoy, the more others are enjoying them.
Thus if my main concern is to have a vast stock of personal possessions and control over the lives of others, I can doubtless only have them at the expense of others.
These, however, are not goods which will give real satisfaction.
The kind of satisfaction which can be anxiety-free is that in which my own creative powers and understanding of the world around me are at a maximum and this is satisfaction which the individual can only achieve as part of a community of persons directed at these ends.
For example, musical and philosophical skill — as opposed to the external rewards of reaching the ‘top’ in a musical or academic  career, a kind of achievement which, if given central importance in our lives, will yield no abiding satisfaction, beset as we will be by worry as to what others are or are not thinking of us — can only be developed by an individual in a propitious environment where many co-operate in working at them.
Essentially, then, Spinoza supposes that the moral virtues, and life in accordance with the demands of a sensible morality, provide both the essential background, and a large part of the content, of a human life in which each of us lives their own personal life to the full.
Some pleasure denying elements of conventional or religious morality are simply to be rejected as resting on superstition.
(Spinoza was opposed to the more life denying aspects of the Calvinism of his time.)
The kind of morality which Spinoza recommends is one which guides us on how we may live out our lives in the fullest possible exercise of our personal urges and abilities.
As such, it must help us bring the chaos of our rival impulses under the control of the personality as a whole, in the pursuit of its quest for comprehensive and balanced fulfilment, and towards an effective recognition of the fact that such fulfilment requires harmonious, caring, co-operative and stable relations with others.
But what if there is someone whose own fulfilment is simply not best promoted by this sort of relationship with others?
Or what if studied departures from concern for others are occasionally required in the interests of one's own fulfilment?
Spinoza says that it is no mere accident that this is never so, but that it is built into the essential nature of human beings that they need these relations with others for the achievement of personal fulfilment.
(If there are people beyond realizing this, they are beyond the influence of any rational ethic and not among those to whom this can be addressed.)
Many think it a fatal weakness in any such attempt to base morality upon egoism that this answer is false.
Perhaps Spinoza could have strengthened it in various ways, by saying that people cannot on odd occasions deliberately act out of the character they try to give their lives, without destroying that character, and that for the rational person the character of a life which includes good relations with other people at large is essential for personal fulfilment.
Whether it is possible or desirable to try to give ethics an egoistic basis in this way must be discussed later.
It should be emphasised, however, that although in a sense Spinoza recommends the ethical precepts he endorses to each of us as what we will accept if we act with a view to our own best interest, these best interests are conceived in a way which is very far removed from the goals of what is commonly called egoism.
For the best interests are essentially those of a full and developed personality to which caring relationships with others are integral.
What is forceful in Spinoza's approach is his belief that it is mere empty verbiage to recommend conduct to people unless this engages with their real motivations.
This seems eminently reasonable, quite apart from its association with the Spinozist idea that all motivation is the attempt of a personal essence to keep itself in actuality in the fullest possible way.
It will be seen that there are strong elements of an attitude theory of ethics in Spinoza.
However, Spinoza, as a moralist, appeals to no merely emotive power of ethical words, nor even to facts which might serve as contingent causes of the ethical attitudes he is expressing.
Rather does he base his recommendations (which, in general, are in line with the basic directives of Christianity and Judaism) on the fact (as he believes it to be) that a man who thinks adequately on the matter will see them as pointing out the means to his own deepest heart's desire of personally fulfilled living.
Eighteenth-century British moralists
Many of the most penetrating discussions of the foundations of morality are to be found among eighteenth-century British moral philosophers.
The background to much of this discussion lies in the seventeenth-century English political philosopher, Thomas Hobbes (1588–1679).
Hobbes had had a considerable influence on Spinoza.
However, although both advanced their ethical and political ideas on the basis of the basic urge of each man to seek his own survival and welfare, Hobbes derives his from a much less lofty view of man's basic aims.
Spinoza was, in any case, little attended to by the moralists of this period.
He was reviled as a so-called atheist but otherwise his thought received little attention, only becoming a main force in philosophy when it was  rediscovered by German philosophers in the nineteenth century.
Hobbes's thought, in contrast, was both well known and widely regarded as in need of refutation on account of its low view of man.
Hobbes thought of men as having one over-riding aim, that of sheer survival.
He saw the state as; rising from an explicit or implicit contract among men to put themselves under; single sovereign (which could be a parliament rather than a king) which would establish peace among them.
The essential reason for obeying the sovereign power was that keeping it in power was inevitably better for the security of each than the chaos of civil war, or a society without government.
(Hobbes's thought was eminently practical in the time of the English civil war.)
Moral principles are essentially either those rules by which men must abide if they are to unite under; sovereign power, or those which the sovereign power imposes.
The reasons for obeying these moral rules are egoistic, that to disobey them is to forward the perils of social chaos, or to risk punishment.
This seemed unsatisfactory to most of the moral philosophers of the l8th century.
They disliked this egoistic conception of man, and they suspected that egoistic motives might not be sufficient to underpin morality.
One of the most powerful of these thinkers was Francis Hutcheson (1694–1746).
He believed that there was a great fund of benevolent feeling in man which could often counteract his egoism, and that man also possessed a moral sense, to which benevolence appeared with a special and attractive quality of moral goodness.
This moral goodness was not exactly out there as an actual property of the benevolent feelings and actions which presented themselves to an observer as possessing it.
Rather, the moral goodness was really the power to produce a certain sort of pleasing sensation in the observer.
But a quality which is really a power to produce feelings or sensations in an observer is in its way a perfectly real and objective quality.
That is, after all, just what, according to the dominant philosophy of Hutcheson's time (that of John Locke) such so-called secondary qualities as colour, sound and smell are.
They are not there apart from an observer, they are rather the tendency of objects to produce certain sensations in one.
As to which sorts of things will produce these sensations, that has been settled for us by nature (ultimately God) in such a way that normal men will  inevitably agree as to the colour and smell of things.
Thus these qualities have a kind of objectivity, or at least inter-subjective validity.
The same goes for moral qualities, such as the goodness of benevolence.
All normal men find that the same sort of actions and feelings, basically the various forms of benevolence, possess this quality.
Although Hutcheson thought of himself as defending the reality of moral distinctions, and the genuineness of a morally good benevolence which was not egoistically based, other thinkers were not happy with his treatment.
They thought it unsatisfactory to say that moral qualities are distinguished by sense or feeling rather than by reason.
For after all it is a contingent matter what will produce certain feeling, in us.
God might have annexed colour sensations to the kind of light reaching our eyes in; quite different way from that which he has done, so that the very same things (in their real nature) which are red to us might have been blue, and vice versa, or we might have experienced, quite different range of colours in the same physical situations.
If moral qualities have the same status as colours, it follows that God might have made hatred morally good, and benevolence morally bad, by attaching different sensations of the moral sense to them.
There would have been no sense in which men with such a moral sense would have been mistaken, would not have known the real moral truth.
But benevolence, according to these rationalist moral philosophers, is good in a much more ultimate way than this.
So also are various other qualities of mind and principles of action, for, in the opinion of these thinkers.
Hutcheson over-simplified and distorted the truth by treating benevolence as the one moral desideratum.
That which is good or bad morally is so with a necessity which is apparent to reason just as are fundamental truths of mathematics.
These things could not possibly have been otherwise, and even God is subject to these necessities.
God's own moral sentiments are correct because, as the perfect being, he has perfect insight into what is independently morally good and bad, right and wrong.
The most brilliant proponent of this rationalist position was Richard price (1723–91), whose viewpoint is somewhat similar to that of W.D.
Ross.
The contrast between the view that moral distinctions are detected by sense and feeling and the view that they are revealed  as necessary truth to reason was a central theme in the moral philosophy of David Hume (1711–76), whose philosophy is recognized as empiricism brought more or less to perfection.
Hume held that moral distinctions must be revealed to sense, feeling or emotion, not reason, because only emotion can prompt to action as evidently moral thinking does.
Reason, whether as insight into necessary relations between ideas, as in mathematics, or in the form of inductively based prediction of consequences, simply reveals the means to achieving what emotionally one wants to achieve.
Moreover, Hume famously insisted, there is a prima facie gap between any assertion as to what is the case and any assertion as to what ought to be done, and this is best understood as the gap between reason's detection of how things are and passion's emotional response to their being so.
Ignoring the gap between is and ought is committing very much what we have seen Moore and other intuitionists describing as the naturalistic fallacy.
However, Hume's way of explaining the gap was not that of the intuitionists, but rather that of the emotivists.
For the strongest plank of the attitude theory of ethics lies precisely in the claim that if ethical propositions merely report some special kind of fact, then the special relation between moral judgement and action is inexplicable.
Hume's complex moral philosophy cannot simply be equated with emotivism, but it has much in common with it.
A main difference is that Hume, like Hutcheson, was confident that the basic moral attitudes or feelings of men would be uniform once they agreed on the facts of a situation.
So although in a sense one's moral judgements indicate simply one's personal emotional response to a situation, in making one's response stable by further enquiry into the details of a situation, and by further reflection, one is not only stabilising one's own feelings but moving towards the way of feeling about the situation on which men in general would converge.
(Hume adumbrates here an idea developed later by Adam Smith (1723–90) that the moral qualities of action are a matter of how an ideal detached but sympathetic observer would feel about them.)
Thus Hume does not sharply distinguish between interpreting moral judgements as expressing one's own feelings, stating one's own feelings, and suggesting how men in general would feel about a situation if they knew enough.
Hume gives an elaborate account of the psychology of moral  feeling.
Virtues are essentially qualities of character which are useful or agreeable either to the agent or others.
That we react with positive moral emotion to such qualities of character, even when they are not useful to us, turns on a mechanism of sympathy, or the tendency to fall into the feelings of others.
In this connection Hume propounds a kind of utilitarianism for which the good is essentially the useful, in terms of promoting human happiness.
However, to talk of its goodness is not to talk merely of its utility but to report upon or express or predict emotional responses thereto.
Hume's moral philosophy is mainly a development, on an effectively non-theistic basis, of Hutcheson's and Hutcheson had already advocated a kind of utilitarianism, for in identifying moral goodness with benevolence, he had seen the goodness of a man as essentially the amount of happiness he produced divided by his opportunities.
However, Hume thought that qualities other than benevolence were virtuous if they produced the feeling of approval.
Such qualities include not only those which are naturally useful or agreeable but also what he described as the artificial virtues, in particular justice.
These are habits of conformity to rules which have developed by a kind of convention or tacit understanding, based on general recognition of the utility of establishing and retaining them.
The main difference between the utilitarianism of Hutcheson and Hume, and that of Bentham, is that for the former it figured mainly as an account of our actual moral feelings, whereas for the latter it was not only this but even more the basis of a critique of current morality.
Joseph Butler
An especially impressive moral philosophy of this period was that developed by Joseph Butler (1692–1752), later Bishop of Durham, in a series of sermons.
Butler gave what have often been considered decisive arguments against the doctrine of psychological hedonism.
He contended that pleasure could only arise from the satisfaction of an impulse and that therefore there could be no pleasure, and no possibility of satisfying a desire for pleasure, unless there were impulses towards things other than pleasure.
Thus we get pleasure from such different things as food  and fame.
because we have a direct desire for these things.
Besides the particular passions or impulses directed at objects other than pleasure, a human being has; more general desire that he should enjoy as much pleasure or happiness as possible, during his life as a whole, which is as much as to say, a desire that the totality of his impulse; directed at objects other than his own pleasure should receive as much satisfaction as possible.
This more general desire is called self love or prudence.
It once being realized that one can desire things other than pleasure, there is no reason to fudge the fact that people evidently have, to some extent, a desire for the happiness of others, whether of people in general or of particular people.
This is called benevolence, more especially so when it takes the broad form of a wish for the happiness of others in general.
Basic impulses towards such things as food, drink, warmth and sex are called particular passions by Butler, and stand in contrast to self love (or prudence) and benevolence which are the desire to have a maximal balanced satisfaction of the particular passions either in ourselves or in others.
(However, benevolence is sometimes classified rather as a particular passion.)
Butler insists that a particular passion, like that for some particular food, say an apple pie, is not directed at self at all, but at some external object, such as the pie.
This seems a little misleading, for one's impulse finds satisfaction not merely in the existence of the pie but in the eating of it.
Butler sometimes talks of a passion as directed at one's ‘having’ its object, but it seems more satisfactory to say that particular passions are directed at occurrences, and that the basic one cannot be directed; t the occurrence of pleasure for oneself since this always stems from having something occur one wished to do so.
He can then argue that once one has advanced beyond the superstition that all desire is for oneself having pleasure, one has no reason of principle for denying the apparent fact that some desire is directed at occurrences not involving oneself at all, but rather the welfare of others.
Butler's famous refutation of egoism is hardly conclusive.
For one thing he certainly over-states it when he says that pleasure always comes from satisfaction of an antecedent desire for something other than pleasure.
A baby surely finds pleasure in being tickled without having first desired it, and we may similarly  enjoy a sudden glow of warm sunshine on our back which we had not sought.
And the view should not be ruled out too summarily that all our desires grow up from the fact that certain things have been found immediately pleasurable.
Moreover, even if particular impulses are not mainly directed at pleasure, the typical ones do seem to be directed at the occurrence of certain states of ourselves, so that even if not hedonistic they are egoistic.
Besides which, butler's argument really moves at the level of phenomenology only, as an account of the conscious character of desire, and hardly takes on the idea of someone like Spinoza that all activity at a deeper level is a manifestation of the organism's disposition to preserve and enhance its own being.
Nonetheless, Butler showed that there is little justification for taking egoistic hedonism, or even an egoistic psychology which is not hedonistic, as based on obvious fact, and that the initial presumption must be that concern for the welfare of others is what it seems, the direct wish for their welfare.
In his more positive ethical viewpoint Butler tries to give sense to the old opinion that one should live according to nature.
This is obviously a wrong maxim, he points out, if it simply commends doing what one is most inclined to do.
However, it can be understood as recommending that one live in such; way that the various aspects of one's being are given the same degree of power as they have of innate authority.
He points out that even the proponent of a purely egoistic view of life effectively acknowledges that different aspects of our being have different degrees of authority.
We think it against nature if someone so lacks prudence that they involve themselves in great foreseen evil for the sake of satisfying some fairly trifling present impulse.
Even the egoist sees that it is unnatural (however common) to let a particular desire weigh against the judgement of self love as to one's best long term welfare.
Thus he recognizes that it is built into our nature that self love has authority, and therefore should have control, over particular impulses.
In the light of that recognition, he cannot dismiss as mere fantasy the sense we all have that it would be an unnatural organization of our nature if some slight personal desire was given its head against benevolent concern with some major aspect of the welfare of others.
Hume was to say that it was not against reason to prefer the destruction of the world to the least  uneasiness in one's little finger; it would simply be rather bizarre and repellent to normal feeling.
For Butler, however, it would defy relations of relative authority, between our different psychological components, which are essential to our human nature.
Thus we have particular impulses and two higher level organizing principles of self love and benevolence.
It is often quite appropriate to act on particular impulses but it is against nature to let these have their head against the opposition of the higher principles, or not to let these higher impulses remain upon the lookout for trouble.
But what if the higher order impulses conflict?
Butler believes that there is a further principle of our nature, conscience, which has a still higher degree of authority, and which will judge between all the lower levels of our being, including self love and benevolence.
Butler feels confident that, although self love, benevolence and conscience are distinct components of our nature, properly operative on different occasions, they would, when properly enlightened as to facts, give the same directives.
This is partly a matter of religious faith concerning the world to come.
However, Butler argues (rather effectively) that the belief that they are often in conflict, even in this world, is a mistake.
He stresses in particular that enlightened self love itself will realize that too much love of self, and too little of others, stands in the way of happiness.
A question not very satisfactorily treated is as to what aspect of our being recognizes that there are these different degrees of authority, and what sort of reality authority is.
An emotivist will think that Butler is merely expressing and inviting an attitude whereby we favour this sort of system of self control, while an intuitionist will think that there is tacit appeal to an intuition as to what ought to be.
Perhaps Butler's position is essentially that of such an intuitionist.
But one can still ask what part of our being it is which makes the judgement as to where the authority lies.
Butler's view is that it is conscience, which.
he also equates with rationality, understood both as the faculty of discerning what is right, and the disposition to act in accordance therewith.
However, it hardly seems satisfactory to say that it is conscience which tells us that conscience should be at the controls, for presumably self love would say the same of itself if given its head.
It might have been better for Butler to have set reason apart from the whole hierarchy of conscience, self love, benevolence, and particular passions and allotted it the role of ascribing different degrees of authority to each, that is, of saying how they ought to relate to each other mutually.
Then conscience would not so much be a faculty of intuiting truths as a God-given power within us which — if put in control — will steer us in a particular direction, when it comes to choosing between ourselves and others.
Another approach would be to say that it is I , not some part of me called ‘reason’, which sees that this is how the system of my impulses should be organized.
However, this is on the way to casting doubt on Butler's whole tendency to divide the person, along lines rather similar to Plato's, into different faculties.
Butler's subtle moral philosophy represents the quiet wisdom of the Anglican church at its best, and has much to commend it even when detached from any doctrinal Christianity.
The sermons in which it is presented are arguably the finest contribution to moral philosophy in English.
Kant
Kant's moral philosophy is sharply opposed to the moral sense approach of Hutcheson and Hume.
It has something in common with the rationalism of Richard Price, but provides a kind of general formula for testing the morality of actions as price (and later Ross) did not.
Hume and Kant (1724–1804) are two towering giants of philosophy and our brief indications of their positions on morality — which must tear them from their systems as a whole — may irritate the knowledgeable, but with the space at my disposal and the particular purpose of supplying background to Part Two of this work, the only alternative was to ignore them altogether.
In our brief consideration of Kant's moral philosophy, it may be helpful to begin by distinguishing three different sorts of questions — of which the following are chief examples.
(1) Are we under any moral obligations — or, otherwise put, are we subject to a binding moral law?
How can we know whether we are or not?
(2) Supposing that there is such a moral law and that we are  under moral obligations, what is their content?
How can we determine what is and what is not obligatory?
In short, what is the mark of the moral as opposed to the immoral?
(3) What is it for someone to act with a view to his moral obligations?
What is it to act on the basis of moral, as opposed to non-moral, considerations?
The main interest of Kant's ethics lies in his answers to the second and third sort of question.
However, while for many philosophers, especially in the present century, these are two different sorts of question, for Kant they are essentially one.
For he does not allow that there can be someone who genuinely asks himself what he should do in a moral way, but whose answer is in terms of what is only one of various logically coherent moralities.
Such questions are worth distinguishing, however, because there are moral philosophers today who think that Kant effectively answered the third correctly, but that he offers no sufficient answer to the second.
A chief example of these moral philosophers is R.M. Hare.
Kant answers the first questions by contending that we cannot strictly speaking know that there is such a moral law.
We can, however, have a reasonable faith that there is, based on the realization that without it all moral thought is a complete illusion.
Doubts as to even the possible reality of such a law, arising from an excessively empiricist conception of the possibilities of being, prove unreasonable in the light of the establishable fact that both the every day world in which we live, and we ourselves, are only appearances of a realm of things in themselves whose true nature is hidden from us. for this opens the possibility that what we are in ourselves is essentially rational beings, belonging to a society of rational beings, while what we are as appearances is sensory beings.
In view of that, we can recognize the possibility that as rational beings we fall under a system of law which we have somehow ourselves brought into being, and that it is our task while appearing to exist in the sensory world to live according to that law, in spite of the fact that what we appear to be is simply animals driven by sensory desire.
The possibility that we belong to such a so-called noumenal realm (that is, a realm of things in themselves) in our true being, also suggests dimly how it can be possible that ultimately we are free agents, who can cause ourselves to act according to the moral law, whatever the  pressures upon us, in spite of the fact that at the level of appearance we are simply parts of the natural order of cause and effect, and as such merely animals impelled by our instinctive desires
Supposing then that there is such a moral law, what is its content?
The first thing to realize is that it must consist in categorical imperatives, which are to be distinguished from hypothetical imperatives.
A hypothetical imperative tells me that, as a rational being, I must do such and such if I desire to obtain a certain upshot, because it is the essential means to that upshot, and he who wills the end must will the means.
Thus the doctor who tells me to take a drug, if I wish to recover from a sickness, is expressing a hypothetical imperative.
In contrast, a categorical imperative bids me, as a rational being, do such and such, whatever my desires may happen to be, because doing so is essential to living up to my status as a rational being.
As such, I will realize that I must do it, whether I wish to or not.
The first thing to realize (in Kant's opinion) about moral action is that it is action done out of respect for duty as such, that is for a system of categorical imperatives recognised as binding on every rational agent whatever his desires and feelings happen to be.
In this connection Kant is somewhat notorious for sometimes seeming to think it better to help those in need out of a sheer sense of duty, without feeling any sympathy for them, than with feelings of loving kindness.
He certainly holds that as long as my action is prompted by mere feeling, or by a judgement as to what will best satisfy my desires, I am not in sight of moral living.
Even if such feelings and judgements are not disreputable in themselves, they must be under the firm guidance of respect for sheer duty.
Most philosophical systems of ethics, and most popular moralizing, are radically flawed because they recommend morality to us either as what it is in our own best ultimate interests to do, or alternatively try to promote it by appeal to our feelings, for example feelings of compassion, or (like Hutcheson) by reference to some kind of moral sentiment which just happens to be part of human nature.
These theories make morality heteronomous , that is, a system of principles whose validation lies outside itself, as opposed to autonomous that is , valid of its own nature.
But how can I know what the categorical imperatives binding  on me are?
The answer is that in a certain sense there is only one categorical imperative, and all other categorical imperatives are applications of this.
This basic categorical imperative bids me only act on such a maxim as I can will should become a universal law to which all rational agents conform their behaviour.
The maxim on which I act at any moment is the personal rule which is guiding my behaviour — for Kant it is of the essence of voluntary action that there is such a maxim in every case.
The verbal expression of a maxim will be something like: ‘In circumstances of such and such a sort I shall act thus’, and I act immorally unless I can will that all agents should guide their behaviour by a corresponding maxim directed at themselves.
That the categorical imperative bids me act in a particular way follows from the impossibility of avoiding the action without acting on a maxim I cannot thus will universalised.
That I cannot may have either of two causes.
It may be that the state of affairs in which everyone (as opposed to just some people) is guided by such a maxim is an impossibility, or it may be that it is in some way a thing that no individual can wish for.
Kant thinks, for example, that one who breaks a promise, because it is going to land him in personal difficulties to keep it, cannot will that everyone would break their promises in these circumstances, for the situation in which no one kept promises which it turned out in the least difficult or vexatious to keep is an impossibility.
This is because there could be no institution of promising in a society in which this was the deliberate practice.
An example of the other kind is the obligation to help those in need.
It would be possible to have a society in which it was everyone's personal rule to refuse all help to the needy, but as someone who might be needy myself I cannot truly will that all should turn their back upon me in such a situation.
Although Kant has little respect for most previous moral philosophies, he has immense respect for the untutored moral insight (if not practice) of the ordinary man.
In spite of all that has been said by popular moralists, along the lines of honesty being the best policy, everyone really knows implicitly that it is by this test of universalisability that one should determine what one ought to do.
It is also how one must determine whether others have acted well or not, so far as externals go, though how far they have acted well in a proper inward sense, that is, how far  they have been truly guided by the categorical imperative, rather than by the calculations of self interest, is hidden away in the depths of their being, hidden perhaps even from themselves.
Thus Kant's moral philosophy has the merit of mainly being concerned with illuminating how each of us should decide what to do himself, rather than with advising him how to judge others.
Kant gives several alternative formulations of the basic principle of the categorical imperative, which he believes have the same essential content but present different aspects of it to our thought.
The other main formulation is the rule of acting in such a way that you treat humanity, whether in your own person or in the person of any other, never simply as a means, but always at the same time as an end.
That every person is an end in himself or herself is related to the fact that the only thing which is good without qualification and in all circumstances is a good will, something which everyone has the potential to be , whatever talents or gifts of fortune they may or may not possess.
It is in virtue of this potential that people matter in a way in which no thing , or mere animal , can do.
This hardly looks the same principle, but the connection lies in the fact that for Kant the sense in which every person is an end is that each is a rational agent who, as such, should be conceived as potentially cooperating with me in settling upon and living by universal principles of behaviour taken as binding on all rational agents.
(Indeed at the level of ultimate reality we have perhaps already agreed upon such a system as our guide within the phenomenal realm.)
Thus if I break a promise for my own convenience, I fail to treat the person to whom I made it as an end in himself, for I can hardly expect him to endorse a principle of action which allows him to be treated thus.
Many feel a certain warmth for Kant's idea that the only thing which is good without qualification and in all circumstances is a good will, without accepting that a good will is one concerned only with the performance of duty for duty's sake.
They may feel that a good will can take the form of seeking to relieve suffering out of sheer compassion, without thought of duty, or of a direction of intent upon ‘the good, the true, and the beautiful’ in whatever concrete shapes they present themselves as realizable.
Kant's approach to ethics is like utilitarianism (at least in certain versions) in just one way.
It professes to offer a rational  decision procedure for testing the morality of actions, possessed of some kind of objective status, which means that it is irrational to reject it.
It is, however, most unlike utilitarianism in almost all other respects.
Indeed, utilitarianism and Kant's ethic of duty for duty's sake are usually seen as the two great extremes of moral theory, the line between them representing a continuum on which most moral philosophies with a positive theory of what is right and wrong can be placed.
Utilitarianism is often thought of as challenging us to rethink the ethics of the common sense of our society.
Kant does not think he is putting forward a doctrine on the basis of which ordinary morality can be criticised, but that he has formulated the principles by which all good people implicitly know they should, and in their hearts do, judge their conduct.
In spite of the unlikeness of Kant's approach and that of utilitarianism, one of the foremost moral philosophers of our time, R.M. Hare, has developed a moral philosophy which is something of a synthesis of them.
In his earlier work Hare seemed to believe that there were alternative moral stances to the world, each of which might be equally rational, though we may quite properly condemn some of them from the perspective of the morality which we ourselves advocate.
Hare then held that one was not, so to speak, in the arena of moral debate at all, unless one's moral judgements were based on considerations one was prepared to universalise (in a sense close to Kant's).
However, different people might without illogicality be prepared to universalise quite different considerations, so that there could be alternative moral views, each equally a moral view, even if some of them were, from our point of view, immoral.
But gradually, as I noted in Chapter One, he came to think that one cannot universalise judgements coherently, without this amounting to the development of a universal sympathy with the desires of all affected by one's action.
For one has to recognize that if one had their desires one would not accept principles which rode roughshod over their satisfaction, and this implies that one should not accept them at all, since one cannot universalise them to that hypothetical situation in which one would be forced to reject them.
So one must take into account the effects of one's actions on the satisfaction or dissatisfaction of the desires of all those affected, along the lines of preference utilitarianism.
When Hare speaks of universalisability he refers to the  requirement that one be prepared to support one's ethical judgements by precepts couched in completely general terms.
This serves somewhat to clarify a point not made explicitly by Kant, but clearly intended, namely that in universalising one's maxim, one must purge it not only of the word ‘I’ understood as referring to one's own particular self, but of proper names, and so forth, referring to one's particular acquaintances.
If I act on the maxim that I will not do things which will hurt Mary's feelings, that is not universalised simply because I will that all should avoid hurting Mary's feelings.
To be universalised it must be transformed into some such principle as that no one should hurt the feelings of another person, in such and such generally describable circumstances.
However, many philosophers today would probably go along more with Hare's original position and say that although Kant may well have answered the third sort of question (page 98) well, he has not adequately answered the second (still less, it would generally be thought, the first).
The most he has done has shown what it is to approach things from a moral point of view, he has not shown that only one particular sort of maxim can coherently be universalised in each case.
One of the earliest objections to Kant lies in his combining an objective view of ethics with the view that morality is properly expressed in imperatives.
It is not as though his position is remotely like that of modern emotivists who have compared ethical statements with imperatives (and Hare's ethics differs most from Kant's where it comes nearest to emotivism).
For Kant there is an objective moral order.
But how can imperatives function as anything other than instructions directed at others (perhaps also himself) by an individual with status as a commander?
Perhaps some sense can be made of regarding hypothetical imperatives as objectively true, since they can be taken as statements about what needs to be done to achieve something, but how can there be a categorical imperative, with no one to command it?
True, Kant thinks that if morality is ultimately valid it is because we have somehow settled on these imperatives ourselves at the noumenal level, but to this — apart from the dubiousness of the metaphysics — it is likely to be objected that if the imperatives spring from myself it is quite proper for me to rescind them when convenient.