

ELITE THEORY
The term ‘elite’ originally meant and in many contexts still means, the best, the excellent, the noble, or the crème de la crème .
The concept began to be widely used in the social sciences early in this century after it was adopted as a central idea by the Italian theorists Gaetano Mosca and Vilfredo Pareto.
Mosca asserted that in all societies ‘two classes of people appear — a class that rules and a class that is ruled’(1939, p. 50).
Pareto defined an elite at its simplest as those individuals who have the highest indices of excellence in any particular activity, whether it be train-robbing, fishing, political science, or big business.
But he also sub-divided these manifold elites into a governing elite , composed of all leaders who directly or indirectly play a part in ruling the society, and a non-governing elite who make up the remainder of the elites (1935, vol. 3, pp. 1422 — 4).
At times Pareto and Mosca both described elite rule as the dominance of those best at governing over the non-elite or masses, but in practice they quickly dropped the assumption that the governing elite is always a genuine aristocracy (the rule of the best).
Governing elites are usually differentiated into military, religious, and commercial aristocracies.
And the social base of a governing elite can be open or closed, but is always susceptible to challenge or to displacement by a counter-elite: ‘History is the graveyard of aristocracies’(Pareto, 1966, p. 249).
In the contemporary social sciences the term ‘elite’ is now generally applied to functional or occupational groups which have high status in a society, for whatever reason (Bottomore, 1964, p. 14).
Sometimes elite is used only as a synonym for leaders.
Sometimes the concept has connotations of exploitative leadership, as in Lasswell's famous definition: ‘The study of politics is the study of influence and the influential…
The influential are those who get the most of what there is to get…
Those who get the most are elite , the rest are mass’(1936, p. 13).
4.1 Origins and development
Elitism is the belief that government by a small ruling group is normatively desirable, a claim which has ancient antecedents in political philosophy.
In Plato's The Republic Thrasymachus asserts that force is the foundation of the state and statesmanship.
Under pressure from Socrates Thrasymachus concedes the importance of skill and knowledge in winning consent for the rulers, but refuses to admit that the rulers govern in the interests of the ruled.
The wielding of government power is nothing more than the art of imposing one's will.
Plato's characterization of Thrasymachus inaugurates the tradition of ‘political realism’ in Western political philosophy.
But the same themes are also present in Kautilya's Arthashastra , the most famous work of ancient Indian political philosophy.
‘Political realism’ received its most notorious restatement in the Renaissance period in Machiavelli's The Prince , which emphatically calls attention to the role of force and fraud in gaining and governing states.
Political realists are characteristically pessimistic about human nature and contemptuous of those political theories which value the self-government of the masses.
From Plato's ‘noble lie’ to Mosca's ‘political formula’realists have stressed that manipulation or deception is the counterpart of coercion in explaining the foundation and stability of regimes.
In pre-industrial societies philosophers generally asserted that a clear division of labour in political affairs was unavoidable and beneficial.
Most Greek, Roman, Catholic, Chinese and Indian philosophers agreed that an aristocracy should monopolize political rule, perhaps subject to certain moral or religious constraints.
Whether the aristocracy's rule should take monarchic or republican forms was a matter of some contention.
So were the arguments used to justify aristocracy, which ranged from the claim that it was natural (Aristotle) to arguments based upon the wisdom of having a specialized governing group in a caste society (Plato, Confucius and Hindu political thinkers).
Theories of how elites rose to power and later degenerated were also pervasive in ancient and medieval philosophies.
Plato gave an account of how aristocratic government declines, while the Islamic political philosopher Ibn Khaldun analysed empirically the cycles of decay and renewal amongst the political elites of Northern Africa in the fourteenth century (Lacoste, 1984).
Classical elite theory
Modern elite theory differs from its antecedents in aristocratic and normative elitism because it puts forward an empirical picture of the way human societies operate which is not closely linked to a particular view of the way social arrangements should be organized.
The classical elite theorists, Mosca, Pareto and Michels, all made strong claims to have established a scientific theory proving that government by a small elite over the rest of society is inevitable.
Their immediate targets were twofold.
First, classical elitists claimed that Marxist theory, which pervaded most European socialist parties by the 1890s, was a flawed and limited explanation of the persistence of domination in human societies.
Second, against the prevailing liberal optimism of their time, they argued that the transition to an industrialized society with a system of representative democracy could not fundamentally alter the stratification of society into a ruling elite and a mass.
Social mobility and elite circulation might increase, and the ruling group might become more heterogeneous, but government must remain oligarchic.
Classical elitists regarded Marxism as a religious faith, a prophylactic for the downtrodden proletariat which wrongly attributes all previous systems of elite rule to economic forces, and which ignores the inescapable evidence that organizational logic and the psychological dependence of a mass of citizens on leadership makes ineluctable some such structure of domination.
The universal presence of a ruling class is among ‘the constant facts and tendencies…found in all political organisms…apparent to the most casual eye’(Mosca, 1939, p. 50).
‘The history of all societies, past and future, is the history of its ruling classes…there will always be a ruling class and therefore exploitation.
This is the anti-socialist, specifically anti-Marxist bent of the elitist theory as it unfolds in the last decade of the nineteenth century’(Meisel, 1958, p. 10).
The Marxist claim that a socialist revolution will inaugurate a classless society, an end to all forms of domination and the withering away of the state is just another myth of popular control, propagated by an emerging counter-elite, the leadership of the new industrial working class.
Any Marxist revolution would simply generate a new ruling class: ‘The socialists might conquer, but not socialism, which would perish in the moment of its adherents’ triumph' (Michels, 1959, p. 391).
One of the most potent anti-Marxist arguments in classical elite theory was the ‘iron law of oligarchy’, which Michels developed from an empirical investigation of the socialist mass parties during the early 1900s.
His 1911 book Political Parties argued that these organizations supposedly committed to ushering in democratic organization in fact showed all the essential characteristics of bureaucratic organizations, and a separation between leaders and led every bit as pronounced as that prevailing in industry or state agencies.
Using ideas from then fashionable ‘crowd psychology’, Michels claimed that any mass of citizens is psychologically incapable of handling complex decisions.
Masses need leaders who can stir them out of apathy and organize them, but once organized they defer to leaders and accord them steadily greater levels of discretion to pursue their own rather than mass interests.
The socialist parties' elite groups and the rank and file members had increasingly diverged in their social background, incomes, interests and capabilities.
The large size and complex organization of mass parties create the need for leaders with expertise, stability in tenure of  office, and specialized task-management.
This organizational logic further increases the discretion which leaders enjoy to direct organizational activities towards their own purposes, even if this shift means betraying the rank and file's interests.
A socialist society will greatly exaggerate these tendencies: ‘The heads of a communist or collective republic would control the will of others more tyrannically than ever’(Mosca, 1939, p. 286).
However, classical elitists initially agreed with Marxists that liberal democracy was a sham which masked the ascendancy of a new elite of industrial capitalists, the bourgeoisie.
Theorists of representative government are simply apologists for the bourgeoisie: ‘We need not linger on the fiction of ‘popular representation’— poppycock grinds no flour' was Pareto's withering remark.
Elites, including representative elites, are imposed on society, not proposed by society.
Pareto and Mosca positively relished emphasizing the importance of force and manipulation (imposed consent) in political rule.
Classical elite theorists' simultaneous attacks on Marxism and liberal democracy meant that their doctrines were taken up enthusiastically by European fascist ideologues during the 1920s and 1930s.
Some critics argue that elite theorists were especially prominent in those West European countries, such as Italy and Germany, where liberal democracy was only weakly and recently established (Lukács, 1948).
Others allege that the elite theorists justified direct action by the masses outside parliamentary or legal channels, and encouraged an irrational doctrine of total subordination to the leader, two prominent components of fascist ideology (Mannheim, 1936, p. 119).
These arguments are given credibility by Pareto's ambiguous reaction to the rise of Italian fascism, and by Michels' conversion from a socialist syndicalist espousing the use of a general strike before the First World War to an enthusiastic apologist for fascism in the 1920s (Beetham, 1977).
However, Mosca in later life came to recognize the virtues of representative politics, which he had mocked in his youth.
The Ruling Class assumed that any industrial society is composed of multiple social forces, which a stable ruling  class must be able to assimilate.
Liberal representative systems ensure an open, competitive ruling class.
Hence they permit a greater range of interests to be accommodated and help prevent the emergence of an over-centralized bureaucratic tyranny.
A single ruling class will still emerge, but a plurality of interests can make themselves felt within it.
Democratic elitism
Building on Mosca's later thinking, another version of elite theory evolved in the work of Max Weber and Joseph Schumpeter.
‘Democratic elitism’ synthesizes some of the key elements of elite theory and pluralism, and seeks to provide a realistic picture of how representative democracies operate, stripped of the normative optimism which colours many liberal accounts.
Two elements of their arguments have had enduring significance: the compatibility of bureaucracy and democracy, and the stress on elite competition.
Writing from the 1890s through into the 1920s, Max Weber throughout his work was concerned to explain the emergence of a dominant system of rational — legal administration inside large-scale businesses and government agencies.
He termed this new pattern of systematized organization ‘bureaucracy’, and argued that it must progressively supplant all rival systems of administration in a modern society because of its technical superiority in tackling problems and marshalling large-scale activity in a purposeful way.
Modern bureaucracies had also developed partly as a result of democratic tendencies in the political sphere.
They expressed the triumph of legal equality and state authority over the privileges of the landed aristocracy.
Despite some apparent affinities between this organizational argument and the stress on oligarchy in classical elite theory, Weber's ideas progressively diverged.
He became increasingly concerned that the monarchical regime of Kaiser Wilhelm II, which committed Germany to the First World War, was over-dominated by military and bureaucratic interests at the expense of the national interest.
In his 1917 work Parliament and Government in a Reconstructed Germany Weber argued that liberal representative government  and elite theory could be reconciled.
Without in any way disavowing his previous stress on bureaucracies as essential to the administration of a modern state, Weber nonetheless concluded that the will of parliamentary elites could and should be imposed upon them.
In political systems where decisive political leadership was not generated, such as Imperial Germany after the death of Bismarck, power and decision-making flowed towards public bureaucracies, with disastrous consequences.
Bureaucrats make bad leaders because they are indoctrinated to accept authority, so any period of their ascendancy produces conservative, unimaginative and unbalanced leadership.
Bureaucrats make good second-in-commands but poor generals.
In addition, under bureaucratic hegemony the state machinery tends to be colonized by outside interests, preventing government from being directed towards a genuine ‘national interest’.
Since bureaucracy cannot be smashed or dispensed with, contrary to the Marxists' utopian claims, it is essential to provide dynamic, indeed charismatic, political leadership to supervise the bureaucratic machine.
Only a strong working parliament on what Weber took to be the British model, working in committees which make policy and supervise bureaucrats, could generate strong leaders who prove their mettle in parliamentary and electoral combat.
If charismatic political leaders can be inculcated and socialized into democratic values, then public bureaucracies can be subordinated to the elites generated by party competition, creating the only feasible approximation to a genuine representative democracy.
The mechanisms by which political elites can be held responsive to majority views in systems of representative government were further explored in Joseph Schumpeter's Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy (1944), which defined democracy as ‘an institutional arrangement for arriving at political decisions in which individuals acquire the power to decide by means of a competitive struggle for the people's vote’.
Liberal democracy is simply a method of government which requires two or more groups of political leaders to compete for mass electoral endorsement.
Democracy is not liberty, equality, participation or an output satisfactory to all  the people.
It is simply a method of filtering political inputs to produce elite pluralism (Aron, 1950) rather than mono-elite domination.
In the post-war period, both Weber and Schumpeter's ideas considerably influenced pluralist theory, as we noted above (pp. 51 — 3), so much so that their fundamental acceptance of elite theory patterns of argument was often ignored or lost sight of.
However, there are a number of post-war schools of thought which lie in a direct line of descent and which continue a distinctive democratic elitist pattern of argument.
Modern organization theory developed Weber's ideas, exploring hierarchy, domination, and indoctrination in bureaucracies and complex organization (March and Simon, 1958; Perrow, 1979).
In the 1970s corporatist theory developed to explain how governments seek to integrate business and labour union elites into complex forms of policy-making, such as the management of inflation and unemployment or the promotion of a ‘national interest’ in economic markets against overseas competition.
Corporatist theory opened up another area in which democratic elitism queried standard pluralist reasoning about an open and competitive interest group universe (see pp. 129 — 30).
In corporatist reasoning elites collude and collaborate rather than compete.
Radical elite theory
When elite theory crossed the Atlantic to North America during the 1920s, it was transformed in a rather unexpected way.
From its European origins as a liberal anti-Marxist theory, picked up in practical politics mainly by parties and movements of the right, elite theory metamorphosed in the United States into a radical/left-leaning critique of pluralism.
The absence of a major socialist bloc in North America left an unoccupied anti-pluralist niche into which elite theory began to fit as early as the 1930s.
A key staging post between classical and radical elite theory was the ex-Trotskyist James Burnham's 1941 tract The Managerial Revolution .
Like Pareto, Burnham argued that Marxism was the self-serving ideology of an insurgent working class elite.
But he also drew on the experience of European fascism, and the American New Deal  era, to suggest that a new managerial elite was in the process of assuming control across all contemporary political systems.
Within large corporations control had ebbed away from entrepreneurial owners of capital to business managers who administered the companies on behalf of largely inactive shareholders.
Within government, power had passed from charismatic political leaders to committee men.
New Deal America, Fascist Italy and the Communist Soviet Union alike demonstrated the convergence of power into the hands of a new organization-based elite, faceless and impersonal.
Whilst Burnham used elite theory to romanticize the passing of entrepreneurial capitalism, an explicitly left-wing use of the terminology of elite theory emerged from some of the earliest studies of urban politics undertaken by US sociologists.
Starting with research on small towns in the mid-1930s and moving on to larger cities in the next decade, successive community studies analysed political processes as one aspect of the social life of the locality, and concluded that only a handful of people were influential in setting major decisions (the Lynds, 1937; Warner, 1943).
Floyd Hunter (1953) crystallized the use of elite concepts to debunk pluralist myths about open and democratically controlled city politics.
Using systematic research techniques, he claimed to uncover a stratified pyramid of power in American cities whose apex was in the hands of business and social elites outside the formal structures of local political institutions.
Hunter's approach inaugurated a wide-ranging debate about ‘community power structures’ between elite theorists and pluralists which rumbled on for the next two decades.
At a national level another major empirical sociologist, C. Wright Mills, developed the concept of a ‘power elite’: a triumvirate of leadership groups drawn from big business, the military and the political cliques surrounding the US President.
Mills (1956) argued that the power elite controls the key ‘history-making’ decisions in America, leaving a wide range of less salient domestic issues to be tackled in the ‘middle levels of power’, such as Congress and the state governments.
Both the power elite literature and the elite theory community power studies were solidly based upon democratic, even participatory, values.
Classical elite theorists had sought to  show that liberal democracy was a utopian ideal incapable of realization.
By contrast, radical elite theory attacks pluralism (and democratic elitism as well) for disguising the degree to which existing arrangements do not implement feasible ideals of direct control by citizens over decisions affecting their lives.
4.2 Methods and values
Given its pattern of development, we consider elite theory's methodological approach under two main headings: its claims to have developed a scientific research method and its focus on power and domination.
We then briefly review the values associated with elite theory.
Scientific knowledge of society
Like pluralists and most new-right authors, elite theorists adhere to a positivist view of social science.
Mosca and Pareto both claimed that their conclusions were based on direct empirical research, and followed a well specified methodology quite distinct from the loose theoretical analysis practised by contemporary Marxists or the trusting juridical focus on institutional appearances employed by advocates of liberal democracy.
They fervently believed that social phenomena could be analysed with the methods of the natural sciences, which enjoyed great prestige in the last decades of the nineteenth century.
Mosca argued that mathematics and physics were the best paradigms for a science of politics (1939, p. 4), while Pareto was enthusiastic about geometry and the physical sciences.
Elite theorists tried to formulate universal laws which applied to all political systems, such as Michels' iron law of oligarchy — an empirical universal law based upon constant features of human psychology and the logic of organization.
Similarly, behind the surface variations in constitutions, personnel and character of different political regimes, they detected a universal cyclical struggle in which elites rise, degenerate and are displaced in their turn.
‘It is probable that this cruel game will continue  without end’(Michels, 1959, p. 408).
Pareto and Mosca ransacked history for multiple examples of this ‘natural’ cycle in operation, claiming that the accumulated weight of evidence refuted Marxist claims that there could ever be a classless society and liberals' optimism that power could ever be meaningfully dispersed under popular control by establishing representative government.
Their method was inductive and was therefore controversial: laws based on evidence from the past cannot rule out a priori the occurrence of a radically different future.
In practice classical elite theorists' determinist belief in the inevitability of oligarchy became as total as Marx's faith in the dialectical development of history towards communism.
Nor did the classical elitists provide easily testable propositions, or systematic empirical refutations of Marxism compatible with rigorous positivism.
Many of their propositions seem to critics to be so vague that they are almost tautologous.
To allege that a distinction between rulers and ruled always exists in large and complex societies does not really say very much beyond the fact (which is not disputed, except by certain anarchists) that such societies cannot be run by everyone simultaneously.
Questions about the size of the elite, the degree of concentration of social power in their hands, and about the ways in which they are recruited seem more salient and contentious.
Here classical elite theorists proved hard to pin down, specifying the ruling elite in different ways which they made little attempt to operationalize in empirical work.
Only Michels among the classical theorists undertook very systematic research, and even work by post-war writers such as Mills was criticized by pluralists as unsystematic and impressionistic.
Elite theorists performed better in attacking Marx's theory of history as the dialectic of successive economic systems or modes of production (see p. 205).
Against such mono-causal explanations, they insisted that major social changes originate from a diversity of influences, including the exercise of political leadership or military force (Schumpeter), culture (Weber), or the psychological characteristics of differently recruited elites (Pareto).
Weber strongly criticized Marx's attempt to explain all social cleavages as the product of  economically based class structures and struggles.
He argued that societies are stratified in addition by status differences, and by party or political differences.
Many status rankings are not based upon economic positions but upon traditional, hereditary, religious, or other differences — as in the caste system, which is more important in stratifying Indian society than economic classes.
Later elite theorists, often disillusioned ex-Marxists, also argued that private ownership of the means of production was not the basis of economic class formation in either pre-industrial societies or the industrialized state-socialist societies (Wittfogel, 1957; Burnham, 1941).
The distinctive emphasis then in all elite theory accounts is on multiple causation in social development — the influence of a diversity of factors such as economic change and property relations, religions and ideological systems, political and military leadership, technological change, environmental or even wholly fortuitous factors.
Weber shared the classical elitists' hopes for developing a systematic social science, but he did not agree that natural science methods could be simply transposed to explain social action or behaviour, since a plausible account of actors' motives is required for completeness (Runcimann, 1972).
An adequate explanation must both make clear what an action means to the participants, and how far the same outcome would result if different people were placed in the same context.
Generalizations explain nothing unless we understand the meaning of people's actions, and unless we recognize that in each unique historical event different selections of social influences will be at work.
Social science explanation will always remain probabilistic and uncertain, or ‘unproven’ by natural science criteria.
But generalizations can be aided by constructing what Weber termed ideal types , mental constructs which specify the theoretically significant aspects of phenomena.
The concept of ideal types remains controversial and quite difficult to grasp.
The ‘ideal’ label refers to the existence of the types only as ideas or mental constructs, not to their desirability.
The ‘type’ component refers to the construction by the analyst of a typology or set of categories for classifying phenomena.
The ‘types’ are not ‘typical’in the sense of representing the average of a set of empirically  related phenomena.
‘Individual’ ideal types refer to theoretically selected, distinct, unique (that is, individual) classes of phenomena, such as the concepts of bureaucracy, capitalism, and the state.
‘Generic’ ideal types are categorizations of empirical phenomena universally present in social action, though in varying degrees, such as goal-oriented action.
Weber argued that the use of ideal types is indispensable in social science.
Concepts such as‘capitalism’, ‘liberal democracy’, or ‘the state’ are all ideal types, because we know that there are infinitely many differences between actual liberal democratic states in capitalist countries such as the USA, the UK or France.
Ideal types are constructs which make empirical generalization and comparison possible.
They accentuate certain empirical phenomena and impose analytic coherence upon selected features of reality.
Precisely because they make no claim to be accurate descriptions of the social world, they are not directly testable.
The usefulness of any ideal type should be gauged from the contribution it makes to simplifying complex realities, allowing social scientists to derive more precise and testable hypotheses, which can then be checked empirically.
However, even then it is not the ideal type which is confirmed or falsified, just the particular operationalization of the ideal type chosen by the analyst.
Power and domination
For elite theorists power is a universal feature of human existence (Lasswell, 1936; Parkin, 1979; Wrong, 1979).
Political realists insist also that power is an inherently unequal relationship, comprising an attempt by one person or group to secure compliance from or enforce dependence upon another person or group (Lukes, 1974).
Weber defined power as ‘the probability that one actor within a social relationship will be in a position to carry out his own will despite resistance, regardless of the basis upon which this probability rests’(Weber 1968, Vol. 1, p. 53).
Power cannot be consensual because, where people's interests diverge, ‘consent’ is the product of the exercise of power, whether  exercised through force or manipulation in the present or past.
Elite theorists argue that most social relations are suffused with the exercise of power, even though many social conflicts and exchanges seem to be constructed on a different basis.
Elites always try to rationalize their rule, both to themselves and to maintain the masses in a quiescent condition, using ‘political formulae ’ or other modes of self-justification (Mosca, 1939; Weber, 1968).
Authority is simply the useful mask of power, as are all justifications and legitimations of elite rule based upon the presumed or manipulated consent of the ruled.
Ruling classes ‘do not justify their power solely by de facto possession of it, but try to find a moral and legal basis for it’(Mosca, 1939, p. 70).
Pareto was more convinced that authority is simply a matter of fraud rather than self-justification by the elite.
The critical problem with these perspectives is that elite theorists cannot easily justify their specification of what is in the interests of the powerless.
In any long-standing power relationship the person or group losing each conflict must have interests which are suppressed, and either do not appear in the public realm or quickly founder for lack of support when they do materialize.
How can we know what people's interests are if they do not act on them because they are induced or coerced not to?
Some elite theorists believe that the masses have repressed interests even if they do not express them in observable forums.
Slaves mumble, workers grumble and students mutter.
Even if these groups do not overtly express their grievances, they may have latent interests which are being repressed.
Apparent indifference, quiescence and apathy might be the product of subjection to power which they feel too constrained to object to, and indeed which they may not even recognize.
Authors who recognize the significance of manipulation, indoctrination, or ‘conditioned power’(Galbraith, 1985) believe that people may make mistakes in deciding what are their interests, and accept definitions of their interests foisted upon them by the powerful.
Nonetheless, elite theorists are reluctant to ascribe interests to people on some kind of ‘objective’ basis, independently of what people say they want.
Such an attempt  presupposes knowledge of a world where people are free of power relations, a world which would not be  recognizably human, since power is basic to the human condition (Wrong, 1979).
So imputing ‘real’ interests to people is a power strategem like other power strategems.
A related fundamental problem for empirical work in the elite theory tradition is the difficulty of demonstrating that a power relationship exists.
If A has power over B, then A can get B to do something which she would not otherwise do.
But in a continuous power relationship ‘what B would otherwise do’ definitionally never occurs.
We observe only outcomes of what we presume is the exercise of power, and are forced into conjecturing what would have occurred if power had not been exercised.
If we couple this difficulty with elite theory's stress upon rigorously specified methodology and empirical research, a dilemma appears.
American elite theorists especially proclaimed their commitment to a positivist method, but found it difficult to follow through with appropriate empirical accounts of the exercise of power (Lasswell, 1936; Lasswell and Kaplan, 1950; Hunter, 1953; Mills, 1956; Domhoff, 1976).
The chief way out of this difficulty has been for empirical studies to focus on surrogates for power, rather than directly on the exercise of power itself.
In particular, there is now a very developed elite theory tradition of analysing the social backgrounds and interconnections of different elite groups, using evidence of how these personnel are recruited, where they live, and who they meet with, as surrogate indicators for how they act, and interact, what their values are, and how cohesive they are as a group (Rustow, 1966).
These studies draw a quantitative portrait of ministers, legislators, bureaucrats, businessmen, trade union or party officials.
They establish correlations and infer causal relations between the social status of these groups and their political power.
Selecting which leadership groups to include poses problems.
Either a study focuses upon the formally defined incumbents of leadership roles in large organizations, or it must somehow identify the real power holders behind the careful façades built by constitutions or organization charts — which seems to assume that the power of the real elite is known in advance  of undertaking the empirical research (Mills, 1956, pp. 366 — 7).
Mills, for example, objected to the theory of a ruling class on the grounds that it was a ‘badly loaded phrase’ which presupposed what should be established empirically: that an economically dominant business class also controlled political decision-making.
Sophisticated elite theorists do not jump from correlations linking the social backgrounds and formal political power of an elite to causal assumptions that their background or network of contacts determines their behaviour.
Particularly in dealing with civil service officials or elected political leaders there are obvious objections to assuming that their class origins and educational backgrounds decisively shape their political attitudes, and that their social origins and political attitudes jointly determine their policy-making behaviour (Meier, 1975).
Government agencies and political or parliamentary arenas may be powerful socializing forces in their own right.
Pluralists and some Marxists expect such institutions to indoctrinate policy-influentials with the need to perform their organizationally defined roles.
Some modern sample-based studies have successfully explored the relations between social origins, attitudes and behaviour.
For example, Putnam's (1977) study of administrative elites in Western Europe showed significant correlations between administrators' educational backgrounds and their disposition towards technocratic attitudes.
But in older elite studies ‘To know who the power wielding individuals are is thought to be sufficient; it is a secondary matter to inquire into how they use their power.
That they will do so in their own interest is (considered) self-evident, and the nature of that interest is inferred from the status which they occupy’(Bendix and Lipset, 1957, p. 85).
A second way of trying to study surrogate variables for the direct exercise of power was developed by elite community power studies in the 1950s and 1960s.
This ‘reputational’ methodology asked ‘expert’panels of well informed local people to select the ‘real’or the ‘top’leaders out of a list of civic leaders in important local organizations.
In his study of Atlanta in Georgia, Hunter (1953) established that the top ten leaders sifted out in this manner all knew each other well, nominated each other to key committees, were often businessmen holding plural and interlocking directorships of companies, and regularly played a role in major city decisions and state politics.
Pluralist critics complained that panels of interviewees are not asked to specify the areas in which powerful leaders are reputed to be influential, that the reputational method is heavily dependent upon the selections of panels, and that a reputation for being powerful is not the same thing as direct evidence of success in getting your way over other people's opposition (Dahl, 1958; Polsby, 1980).
The most vigorous counterattack on pluralists' methodological criticisms came from a group of ‘neo-elitist’ authors in the 1960s.
They highlighted two defects in pluralists' insistence on studying actual decision-making and observable political conflicts.
In the neo-elitist view it is important to study not just how the issues which become major political conflicts are resolved, but also which issues never make the political agenda at all or are prevented from reaching any decision when they do emerge as issues.
Hence non-decision making must be part of the research agenda into community power.
A leading pluralist exponent, Nelson Polsby, ‘is guilty…of the same fault he himself has found with elitist methodology…
He accepts as issues what are reputed to be issues.
As a result his findings are fore-ordained’(Bachrach and Baratz, 1962, p. 949).
Values
The development of elite theory from classical accounts, through democratic elitism and radical elite theory (see pp. 137 — 45), also implied a migration of the approach across  the right — left political spectrum.
Although elite theorists have agreed upon the importance of empirically tested research, and their ability to carry it out in a value-free way, in fact this stream of analysis has always been associated with authors who take strong value positions.
But the approach is not tied to any one cluster of political or moral values.
Pareto and the early Mosca believed that the disparity between liberal democratic ideals and political practice could not be, and should not be, overcome.
Weber and Schumpeter argued that the disparities between liberal democratic ideals and values can be by-passed, and that the feasible levels of popular control are realized in representative government.
The radical elite theorists emphasized that popular participation is perfectly feasible, but collusion between elite groups prevents it from being established.
Some left-wing accounts of liberal corporatism see it as enhancing the economic and political bargaining power of labour by comparison with its economic disorganization under competitive capitalism or its political regimentation under state socialism (Crouch 1975, 1982).
More conservative views of the ‘corporate bias’ in liberal democracies (Middlemas, 1979) are happy to see such arrangements integrate and discipline the working class, but disturbed if labour movements are better able to redistribute income in their favour or to create disruption in economic life.
These contrasting values and political allegiances demonstrate the lack of any necessary correspondence between elite methodology, state theory and political values.
The choice of subjects to study — systems of domination, collusion and exclusion — may be value-laden; but given the wide-ranging dispositions of elite studies, it seems best characterized as the favoured method of anti-utopian ‘realists’, whether of the left, right or centre.
4.3 Input politics
Elite theorists rarely construct their own analysis of input processes from a blank canvas; rather, they set up a pluralist (or Marxist) story, frequently a straw man, which they proceed to contrast with the darker side of liberal democratic  politics (and the impossibility of seriously reforming it).
The limitations of electoral and party competition are emphasized.
The extensive, systematic and ‘unalterable’ inequalities between different groups' economic muscle and political influence are exposed.
The oligarchic character of parties, unions and other supposed channels of communication between citizens and government leaders is asserted.
Finally, the comparatively hollow character of liberal democratic politics, where control of the ‘big’ decisions has moved from legislatures or sub-national governments into closed executives insulated from democratic controls, is used to put the nail in the pluralist coffin.
The limitations of party competition
Schumpeter's redefinition of democracy as a method has been extremely influential.
Pluralists have even tried to adapt Schumpeter's account, but have neglected his strong elitist account of input politics.
Schumpeter stressed, for example, that unless a social grievance is taken up and incorporated into party political debate by politicians, then it may well lie dormant for decades — no matter how strongly most citizens feel about the issue.
The masses just do not have the information or expertise to interpret social problems, let alone to propose solutions for them.
They are prone to the ‘herd instinct’, and politicians can easily lead them by the nose.
Dahrendorf (1959, p. 293) expresses Schumpeter's ideas well:
Schumpeter also thought that politicians have more influence over voters than most post-war pluralists have conceded.
His pluralist imitators argued that ‘responsible’ party elites used their limited powers to shape voters' opinion primarily to preserve the stability of liberal democracies.
For example, most politicians do not employ the kinds of rabble-rousing tactics or populist appeals used by the Mazis in Weimar Germany, Senator Joe McCarthy in the USA during the 1950s, or the neo-fascist right in contemporary Western Europe.
While these devices might win one election by dramatically increasing electoral turnout, the new voters mobilized by such appeals could only be the least politically informed citizens, and the most susceptible to authoritarian views.
Hence most politicians collude to exclude racist views, religious bigotry, or persecution of unpopular minorities from inclusion in party competition; for although ‘following the crowd’ in this way wins temporary votes, it also incorporates potent sources of instability into liberal democratic politics.
However, elite collusion can and does entail far more than agreement on the ‘rules of the game’.
Like Michels, Schumpeter thought that parties are internally oligarchic, and the autonomy of party elites permits them to collaborate against the expressed interests of party members.
He emphasized the constant danger represented by fake or rigged competition between politicians who agree on almost all key aspects of public policy.
There is no reason to be optimistic that elections provide citizens with a real and reliable choice of policies.
The quality of the democratic elites is critical.
Everything depends upon the background, character, temperament, and honesty of presidential candidates in the USA, or of party leaders elsewhere.
Hence it is vitally important that the recruitment of elites into parties or primary races should be competitive and open.
Contemporary elite theorists have argued that these conditions are not remotely met in liberal democracies.
In the USA the absence of a socialist party, the weakness and declining influence of the trade unions in electoral politics, and the enormous costs of political campaigning have meant that throughout the post-war period access to money has been a critical determinant of how politicians are selected (Bretton, 1980; Drew, 1983).
Candidates for a seat in the Senate, let alone for the presidency or vice-presidency, have to be both wealthy individuals in their own right and able to tap substantial sources of campaign finance from companies or the social elite.
Hence American voters have a choice between  rival sets of plutocrats.
As Gore Vidal once remarked on TV, ‘America has one-party, the Property Party, although it has two wings, the Republican and Democratic’.
Those of modest personal means or unable to command corporate finance are unlikely even to enter primary races, let alone sustain a campaign through a gruelling eighteen months of campaigning for the party nomination.
There have been attempts since the 1970s to limit the money which US parties spend campaigning, to outlaw very large donations, and to top up money raised from small contributors with state funding.
Similar strategies have been pursued in most Western European and Australasian democracies for a longer period, notably in the UK, where limits on what parties can spend in local constituencies are remarkably stringent.
Yet the system remains defective, with no limits at all on what British parties can spend on national campaigns, or on the size of donations they can receive.
Communist, socialist or social democratic parties linked to trade union movements have commonly been limited in their zeal to curb company donations to right-wing parties by their own command of substantial financial resources.
This labour movement link-up provides a key safeguard against the rise of alternative progressive parties (such as the Green movements in Europe) which are dependent on individual contributors.
In most liberal democracies, however, political finance is important chiefly in the final stage of national elections, where voters are choosing between party leaderships.
The USA remains exceptional in the overwhelming importance of political finance in the leadership selection process within parties.
Limitations on media competition
There is a second and more important way in which corporate organizations and wealthy individuals use financial muscle to weaken electoral competition, namely, their ownership and control of the mass media.
The liberal theory of the press (see pp. 37 — 41) vests substantial discretionary power in private proprietors to campaign to change public perceptions of issues, or to foreclose discussion of threatening social  topics.
This capability is vastly extended where, as in the USA, private ownership extends to the major TV networks and most radio outlets, with only a vestigial public service network or regulation.
Where governments directly run media channels or closely regulate private owners (for example, over TV or radio channel licences), the linkages between media corporations and political leaders are considerable.
Where political parties alternate in power, government controls induce bi-partisanship in media companies' and professionals' attitudes.
This bi-partisanship is perfectly consistent with a rigorous exclusion of issues or ‘minority’ views seen as threatening by the established political elites.
Private ownership of the mass media is the norm, and elite theorists dispute the optimistic expectation that competition rules out collusion between media owners and political leaders.
The dynamics of competition for viewers, readers or listeners provide no guarantee against the suppression of issues.
Media companies may operate tacit or explicit collusion just as easily as politicians.
The set-up costs for mass media channels are often bid up by media corporations using oligopolistic tactics to exclude new entrants to competition.
Readership or audience numbers are no longer as crucial for the profitability of newspapers, TV channels, or radio stations as in earlier periods.
Because advertising revenue is now critical, a paper or TV channel catering successfully for the views of the poor or the unemployed would soon go bankrupt, whereas those meeting the minority tastes of the wealthy remain financially sound.
Consequently in many liberal democracies there are far fewer socialist or radical mass media outlets than left-wing voting strength in the electorate might suggest (Harrop, 1984).
The continued, indeed increasing, level of corporate interest in owning newspapers and TV channels characteristic of the entire post-war period reflects the continuing ‘clout’ which media outlets have in determining the selection of politicians and the issues which form the fabric of electoral debate.
In many liberal democracies there has been a reaction against the old elitism of party bosses and closed caucuses in selecting political leaders, particularly in more liberal or left-orientated  parties.
In the USA far more states now hold party primaries than at the start of the post-war period, and the sequence of primary results is increasingly the key determinant of presidential candidate selection.
Similarly in Britain all the major parties changed their voting procedures in the 1960s and 1970s either to democratize leadership succession for the first time (in the Conservative party) or to broaden the franchise used to select leaders away from MPs to include party organizations outside Parliament (in the case of Labour and the Liberals).
Increasingly, candidates for political leadership have seen the balance of advantage swing away from those who control organizational resources towards those with ‘media recognition’— a public profile calculated to secure them appropriate media coverage with the new mass selectorate that chooses presidential candidates or party leaders.
A new kind of ‘star’ system has been created, and with this trend the political power of mass media controllers and operatives grows apace.
The product of collusion between politicians and mass media controllers to exclude threatening issues from the scope of effective electoral competition has been termed the ‘mobilization of bias ’(Schattschneider, 1960).
Some issues are organized into political controversy and debate, while others are organized out.
Schattschneider's analogy is that of a fight between two people.
At first sight the outcome may seem to depend on which of the combatants is the stronger or more skilled.
In practice, as a crowd gathers to watch, success may go to the combatant who manages to engage the onlookers', sympathies on his/her side to mobilize others into fighting alongside him/her.
In any liberal democracy a mobilization of bias is cumulatively created by the outcomes of political and social conflicts.
Victors accumulate new resources for use in future battles.
The scope of debate is limited or shifted over time in particular directions, but always in a direction which consolidates power into more permanent forms, which in time may become almost invisible to citizens, accepted as uncontroversial, ‘natural’ features of the landscape.
Limitations on collective action
Elite theorists for a long time countered pluralist optimism about the interest group process by citing case studies of less savoury interest group campaigns, such as the setting up of a commercial TV channel in Britain or industrial regulation in the USA (Prewitt and Stone, 1973).
Elite theorists argue that there are gross inequalities of political influence between interest groups; that many mass-based groups promoting issues or views which threaten established elites are excluded from influence; and that there are many groups not organized at all, or only episodically able to make their voices heard.
Schattschneider (1960) remarked acidly that the flaw in the pluralist heaven is that the chorus sings with an upper class accent.
He implied conversely that the whispers of the poor are barely audible in the forums of liberal democracies.
Analysis of those groups successful in the lobbying of the American Congress in the 1950s demonstrated the strength of his arguments.
Theoretical rigour for these observations was provided by the American economist Mancur Olson in his key 1965 text,The Logic of Collective Action .
Olson adopted a public choice methodology but used it to produce striking anti-pluralist criticisms in the tradition of elite theory.
His key targets were writers such as Truman, who often suggested that when any group of people shares a common interest they will automatically or normally be able to organize themselves to achieve common goals: ‘no group, no important common interest’.
Olson argued that in fact collective action is remarkably difficult to secure for some groups.
He assumes that citizens are rational, selfish actors.
When it comes to joining groups, they weigh up the personal benefits they might receive from the existence of a successful group protecting the interest they share with others.
They multiply this benefit by the likelihood that their personal contribution to the interest group will determine its success or continued existence.
Finally they examine the membership costs in joining the group and supporting its activities.
If the benefits they will receive, multiplied by the likelihood of their personal contribution making the decisive difference, exceed the costs  of joining, then they sign up.
If costs exceed benefits multiplied by the probability that their contribution will be decisive, they will remain inactive.
Olson assumed that interest groups are primarily organized to secure ‘public goods’, i.e. collective benefits or indivisible products available to all relevant people.
One of the defining characteristics of a public good is non-eccludability : once the benefit is produced, it is accessible to everyone, however much or little they contributed to the result.
For example, a general wage increase in a factory will be passed on to everyone, whether they backed the union campaign which secured it or remained inactive during a period of industrial militancy.
Given that groups produce public goods, it is always possible to ‘free-ride’, taking the benefits of group activity without incurring the costs of joining.
Obviously if the group is small, its chances of success may be badly damaged by one individual not joining.
Similarly, if there are few other group members, they are more likely to notice free-riders and to make life ‘uncomfortable’ for them.
Even in a larger group, so long as a few actors stand to benefit disproportionately from the group's success, then it may be worth their while to bear the costs of collective action, although less-involved people will free-ride.
For example, in an industry with a few large and many small firms, the large firms may support a trade association to lobby for industry-wide benefits because they get large benefits from it, even though the small firms also benefit from its success without joining.
But in a large group where all actors stand to gain more or less equally from the group's success, it can be very hard indeed to organize any collective action.
Every actor knows that whether or not collective benefits will be secured is not going to be influenced by his personal contribution.
If some choose to free-ride, the group will be just as likely to succeed in their efforts.
Moreover, with so many potential members, it is easier for someone to free-ride without being noticed or subjected to any kind of social sanction by those who do join.
With every actor reasoning in the same way, however, no narrowly rational person will participate.
Instead all will  decide to free-ride on other people's efforts.
The consequence of their separate decisions is that the interest group will not form, will fail to recruit sufficient members, or will fail to enlist support for its activities.
Interestingly, the existence of collective action problems of this kind bears little or no relation to the preference intensities of the actors.
People can feel very strongly about an issue and yet still confront acute problems in mobilizing an interest group to advance their common interests.
So how do interest groups come into existence as often as they do?
Olson suggests that organizations capable of pursuing collective goals often exist because they can control ‘selective incentives’.
These incentives consist simply of private goods, benefits which can be restricted solely to those who have joined the group and denied to non-members.
They can consist of rewards (usually equivalent to commercial services) which are supplied to group members by its central organization.
For example, most trade unions started out as organizations which delivered a range of material benefits, such as insurance against unemployment or sickness.
As some of these private functions of unions have been taken over by welfare state agencies, unions have taken on other roles — especially representing their members in legal or industrial tribunals in claims over redundancy, discrimination, and negligence.
Groups may also be able to create important costs which can be used as ‘negative selective incentives’.
For example, the sanctions against non-members have played an important part in sustaining trade unions through difficult conflicts with employers: ‘scab’ labourers and strike-breakers have a hard time.
Avoiding these coercive sanctions provides a reason for people to stop being free-riders and join the union.
As selective incentives are only available to group members, they are not estimated in the way in which collective benefits are.
The probability that they will not be received is 1 unless you join, when the probability that they will be received is also 1.
If a group can put together a package of private goods sufficient to offset the costs of joining and supporting its activities, then an organization can form.
The organizational elite will be able to use the selective incentives to achieve  broader, collective goods.
Thus, although interest groups may look as if they are organized chiefly for public goods, in practice they are sustained by their ability to deliver selective incentives to their members which make joining worthwhile.
Collective action rides ‘piggyback’ on the satisfaction of private needs.
There is thus no basis for expecting interest groups to be internally democratic.
Olson assigns a key role to interest group leaders, whom he sees as practical entrepreneurial figures, interested in making a success of their group because of the material benefits it will bring.
The iron law of oligarchy has its foundations in the logic of collective action.
Group leaders are not ‘mission-committed’ to the group's success, but rather want to maximize membership and the achievement of collective benefits for members because it expands their own patronage, power and prestige.
To be successful, entrepreneurs need to be able to identify unmet private needs and preferences which an interest group can fulfil, and then work to extend the group's ‘bread and butter’ activities so as to achieve public goods bonuses for their membership.
Leadership skills tend to be in short supply, and so potential group members are highly dependent on the leaders who can help them overcome collective action problems which would otherwise condemn them to remain disorganized.
The members of an organization always face the three options of exit, voice and loyalty (Hirschman, 1970).
The costs of exit (leaving) are the loss of private services from the organization and the hostility of the remaining members.
The costs of voice (participation) are high, and are normally only worth incurring if the supply of a particular good is controlled by a single organization and the leadership is incompetent.
Consequently rational members of organizations are more likely to stay loyal and inactive than to be vocal participants.
The interest group universe predicted by Olson is markedly different from pluralist expectations.
Some groups able to overcome free-riding by arranging selective incentives for their members will be powerfully organized to achieve their goals.
Their memberships are large relative to the stock of potential group members; leadership control and flexibility in  manoeuvre is high; and participation in decision-making  by rank-and-file members is normally low.
Groups with a relatively small potential membership, or where some members can bear the costs of organization better than others, are highly mobilized.
By contrast, groups with a large potential membership but unable to develop selective incentives of their own remain ‘latent’, crippled by free-riding, disorganized and capable of only feeble collective action on their own behalf.
These inequalities are likely to be permanent.
They may well be cumulative, since poorer groups can less easily afford to bear any organization costs, whereas the wealthy can meet similar costs easily.
Over time the interest group universe will be very stable, with none of the free-wheeling alliances and rapid organizational growth and declines expected by pluralists.
Government attitudes towards interest groups must also differ sharply, for public officials are keenly aware that groups are ‘by-products’ of the ability to develop selective incentives.
Hence the pattern of group organization bears little or no relation to the distribution of intense or apathetic preferences among voters.
It would be foolish for politicians to accept interest group claims or activity at face value, since the signals from organized groups do not represent any kind of reliable picture of underlying citizen views.
Accordingly public policy-makers characteristically follow one of two strategies.
First, they may pick and choose among organized groups those with which they are keen to associate for political reasons, giving them consultation rights and access to decisions at an early stage.
Having created ‘insider’ groups for their own purposes, political leaders and state officials can more or less ignore ‘outsider’groups.
For example, in the UK it is commonly argued that Labour governments give a special role in public policy-making to the trade unions (with whom the party is closely associated), whilst excluding business interest groups from comparable influence.
Under Conservative administrations the unions are persona non grata — their interests may be legislated against and their protests and strike actions ignored — whereas business interest groups may find themselves with special influence over public policy.
Alternatively, policy-making elites may choose to co-opt organized interest groups into compliance with government  policies as far as possible by creating sham ‘corporatist’ institutions and ideologies.
They assert the importance of ‘full consultation with all interested parties’ before new policies are enacted, and maintain a public rhetoric about accessible government.
In practice policy elites are aware that there are other social interests not represented in decision-making, and that the inequalities of existing interest group mobilization are hardly correlated at all with the underlying feelings of citizens.
However, it is quicker, more convenient, and produces social control more economically, to deal with a small number of organization leaders than to seek to achieve a dialogue directly with citizens.
Group leaders can easily be bought off in some way, and once co-opted can usually deliver a quiescent membership in support of the status quo.
4.4 State organization
All elite theorists define the state organizationally as a compulsory institution which successfully maintains a monopoly of legitimate force within a given territory.
‘The modern state is a compulsory association which organizes domination’(Gerth and Mills (ed.), 1948, p. 82).
At a minimum, state elites must maintain this domination against potential internal and external challengers, be able to make binding rules for state sub-organizations and groups and institutions in the society, and be able to enforce and manage those rules — through police, judicial and administrative regulation.
Elite theory accounts of state organization are developed and detailed, and we first review five aspects where the approach has made a distinctive contribution: the role of political leaderships in liberal democracies, the predominance of bureaucracies in shaping policy-making, the reasons for fragmentation (or centralization) of governmental tiers and sectors, the role of law, and the strong policy connections between government activities and major economic interests.
Following these sections, we examine some major internal divergences between three broad elite theory images of the liberal democratic state.
The role of political leadership
Elite theorists have always been fascinated by the phenomenon of political leadership, an orientation already reflected in their accounts of modern input politics which accord a primary role to political entrepreneurs in building up lobby groups or social movements, and to party leaders in shaping the development of mass ‘public opinion’.
Within government, political leaders play four roles, highlighted by elite theorists: as symbolic actors, as personnel for the ‘power elite’, as ‘political’ directors, and as crisis decision-makers.
The symbolic roles of political leaders preoccupied Pareto and Mosca, who characterized them in a persistently cynical way as outright manipulation or fraud, simple tricks essential to the maintenance of elite control over the mass.
Weber took a more dispassionate approach.
Some political leaders possess a ‘charismatic’ authority, based on the ascription of special personal qualities to them (Weber, 1968, Vol. 1, pp. 245 — 51, 266 — 71).
This non-rationalist basis for eliciting support Weber saw as counterposed to the traditional legitimacy of established authority figures, or to the rational — legal authority formalized in bureaucratic systems and based on their superior technical ability.
Charismatic political leadership of course occurred widely in pre-democratic societies.
In the modern period by no means all (or even a majority) of political leaders can be seen as basing their appeal on charismatic qualities, although such an appeal often distinguishes powerful political leaders from more routine politicians.
Weber favoured presidential-style government because it encouraged the ratification of charisma by the masses, and enhanced the prospects of electing leaders who would disturb the routinized bureaucratic operations of modern states.
Many of the skills associated with leadership in democratic systems are concerned with the ‘symbolic uses of politics’(Edelman, 1964).
In particular, the myth of top-level political control over state decision-making is one which it is vital for incumbent presidents or premiers to maintain in order to reassure the mass public that someone is ‘running the show’, and that ‘the show’ is still capable of being run coherently.
The demands of party competition mean that alternative political leaderships will sustain the popular belief that full leadership control is feasible, even while impugning the current incumbents' realization of this potential.
Finally, the mass media also have an interest in keeping alive this potent myth, for it allows them to present political events to voters — consumers in simplified and personalized narrative forms which can be readily understood.
In these elite theory accounts, then, political leadership principally consists of maintaining an impression of public control over the state apparatus as a whole, and developing slogans or political formulae useful in mobilizing voter or interest group support.
Because successive political elites import political commitments into office with them, they do create a distinctive ‘atmosphere’ for policy-making inside the state apparatus — a set of values and a terminology for expressing them which has to be widely adopted by other personnel, such as bureaucratic agencies.
But this influence is often very diffuse, appearing to fulfil leaders' campaign promises or obligations to interest groups in very symbolic ways, whilst the underlying configuration of policy-making and policy outputs is scarcely affected.
Whilst not denying the symbolic role of leaders, radical elite theorists are more concerned to establish that behind the diversity of official power holders in every liberal democracy there is a defacto centralization of ‘real’ decision-making power in the hands of a core executive: the locus of the power elite .
C. Wright Mills (1956) placed the US Presidency at the centre of three closely interconnecting elite groupings: the corporate rich (from whose ranks most presidential candidates come); the military hierarchy (for whom the President is commander-in-chief); and the presidential staffs themselves, where senior career civil servants intermingle with corporate executives and political campaign assistants brought into Washington by the successful candidate's electoral machine.
Elsewhere, even in non-presidential systems, elite theorists argue that the core executive's role has expanded and its power has been streamlined and concentrated into fewer political leaders and their immediate staffs.
Collegial forms of control (such as the  British Cabinet) have generally been displaced by the monocratic dominance of a single premier (Benn, 1981).
The characteristic feature of power elite rule in liberal democracies is its selectiveness.
While many run-of-the-mill domestic issues may be left open for policy debate and political influence to decide, in every liberal democratic country the core executive monopolizes major issues such as defence and foreign policy resolution, or critical economic decisions (the dark or secret side of the state).
For example, in Britain successive Conservative and Labour prime ministers from 1948 though to 1979 developed the British nuclear deterrent in virtually complete secrecy, with no parliamentary or media discussion until decisions were accomplished facts, and even without disclosing decisions made to most of their fellow Cabinet ministers (Freedman, 1980).
Some democratic elite theorists have argued that a much wider group of elected political leaders play political or policy direction roles than the power elite conception implies.
In their view party leaders and presidents can effectively shape a much broader span of decisions in an open way which advances the representative quality of government.
The use of strategies such as‘party penetration’, where politically chosen personnel are appointed to key organizational positions to prevent any frustration of party policy by unsympathetic or parochial bureaucrats, is only one example.
Such a strategy can also provide ideological uniformity in tackling government problems across different departments, and foster a clan -like cohesion across national government, which organization theorists emphasize facilitates policy co-ordination in non-routine operations (Ouchi, 1980).
Elected ministers need assistants to project their ideological flanks, as in the French system of cabinets , where a minister is surrounded by a policy staff of politically chosen personnel.
Political and policy specialists from outside the formal career civil service dominate the top levels of American public administration (Heclo, 1977), and are increasingly evident in Canadian, Western European, and Australasian public administration.
The SPD-led coalition governments in West Germany used Aussenseiter in order to integrate politics and administration in the persons of strategically sited officials  (Mayntz and Scharpf 1975 pp. 85 — 6).
The French and Greek socialists' electoral victories in 1981 saw de facto administrative purges and the attempted integration of party policy specialists within the new ministries.
The Greek governing party, PASOK, went as far as to create a ‘Green Guard’ around the Premier Papandreou.
Throughout the current century Swedish central government has been deliberately divided into two segments for the purpose of political penetration.
Small policy-making ministries staffed by politically motivated civil servants are separated from administrative boards charged with more routine implementation matters (Anton, 1980).
These examples are all attempts by political parties of the left to penetrate state organizations to ensure ideologically correct and coherent policy co-ordination.
However, such practices are also common on the political right.
The Reagan administrations from 1980 have been marked by a continuous push to get politically committed bureau heads to entrench new-right ideas deep in the middle-level operations of the US federal bureaucracy (Nathan, 1985).
The final role for political leaderships, which all elite theory accounts acknowledge, is crisis decision-making .
Political or policy crises are periods of intensive activity, when major decisions have to be made in conditions of acute uncertainty, under pressing deadlines, and where the potential consequences of making the ‘wrong’ decision are very threatening.
Almost by definition, crises are periods when the normally routinized operations of the bureaucracy are insufficient or cannot be relied on, when decisions have to be quickly pushed up through the chain of command, and where unusually large and direct role in controlling policy implementation has to be taken by political leaders.
The ‘micro-management’ of military foreign policy crises by US presidents, during the Cuba blockade in 1963 (Allison 1971) or during the abortive military rescue bid to free hostages trapped in Iran in 1979, are good examples of how national political figures are drawn into the details of implementation because of the sensitivity of the decision-making.
Crises often mark turning points in overall patterns of policy development, because the consequences of alternative decisions can be  momentous.
So even a very episodic role for political leaders assumes a wider significance, given that elected political leaders cannot pass the buck for crisis decisions to any alternative source of authority in a liberal democracy.
Running through elite theory accounts of political leadership roles there are then two contrasting themes.
First, those who stress the symbolic role of leaders, or the concentration of power over a few absolutely critical decisions in the hands of a power elite, view leadership as a zero-sum game.
Leaders exploit the led, buying off political discontent with sham activity, or centralizing real power in inaccessible, secret, even conspiratorial forums remote from any electoral control.
Second, some writers (mainly democratic elitist) emphasize instead that political leaders can control permanent administrators, and stress the unavoidable administrative imperative to have crisis decisions handled by an elected core executive.
They view political leadership as a positive-sum game, a necessary source of legitimacy, co-ordination, guidance on policy values, and innovation in a liberal democratic society.
Political leadership is a co-operative rather than an exploitive activity.
Leaders may personally benefit more than the led but all share in the spin-offs from competent leadership.
The bureaucratization of government
This difference of approach is even clearer in elite theory accounts of bureaucracies and their increased policy roles within the modern extended state.
For all their claim to have established the organizational bases of minority rule, classical elite theorists never really went beyond the ‘iron law of oligarchy’ in explaining bureaucratization.
Consequently modern elite theory bifurcates between an account which follows the democratic elitist line initiated by Weber and a radical elite theory account which adopts a much more critical approach to administrative power.
Democratic elitist accounts follow Weber's definition of bureaucracy as an organization distinguished by a clear body of internal rules and a very developed specialization of roles.
This model provides the conventional wisdom of public  administration in liberal democracies.
Authority in a modern bureaucracy is hierarchical, running in a direct chain of command from superordinate to subordinate.
It is impersonal, and its rules are founded and followed upon a rational legal mode of legitimation.
Decisions must be made by the methodical application of rules to particular cases, not upon any private motivations.
Officials are recruited on merit criteria.
Weber explained the bureaucratization of the state as part of the ‘rationalization of the world’, the triumph of instrumental over value rationality (Jacoby, 1973; Mommsen, 1974).
So long as political elites are capable of providing policy leadership, the roles and behaviour of public agency administrators are simple.
They are implementors.
Politicians make decisions, bureaucrats administer them.
In Western Europe the distinction between politics and administration is built into certain languages (Aberbach et al .,
1981, p. 4).
In the USA a strong politics — administration dichotomy has been more controversial.
Wilson (1887), Goodnow (1900) and other American progressives deliberately imported European norms of meritocratic recruitment and impartial administration in the early twentieth century as part of a planned assault upon the ‘spoils system’, especially in city politics.
In the Weberian ideal the civil servant is an automaton, an infinitely pliable administrative chameleon, who serves his or her political masters faithfully (within the law).
Weber actually recognized that the distinction between politics and administration cannot withstand philosophical scrutiny: ‘Every problem no matter how technical it might seem, can assume political significance and its solution can be decisively influenced by political considerations’(Diamant, 1963, p. 85).
But asking bureaucrats to try to separate out the factual premises of decisions from the ethical premises which are properly the reserve of politicians is still desirable.
Early administrative theories developing within the democratic elitist view simply extended this basic conception.
For any particular political objective, administrators can break down all the consequences which will flow from alternative modes of implementing it, mapping out a decision tree and attaching costs, benefits and probabilities to each  possible outcome.
In this model rational policy-making is simply the selection of that alternative which delivers the greatest benefits net of costs (from the elite's perspective), a conception known variously as ‘optimal’ decision-making (Arrow, 1951), ‘comprehensive unbounded rationality’(Simon, 1957a), or ‘synoptic’decision-making (Lindblom, 1977).
The state can be conveniently thought of as a rational, unitary decision-maker (Allison, 1971, p. 32) which has one set of specified goals, one set of perceived options, and a single estimate of the consequences which follow from each alternative available to it.
The activity of state officials constitutes what the elite has chosen as its solution.
If state officials perform a particular action, the elite must have had a goal which that action helps.
Political scientists should analyse details of the behaviour and statements of officials to infer backwards to the value-maximizing choice of the relevant elite.
In these accounts bureaucracy can and should be a hyper-efficient organizational format for designing and executing policies, exemplifying an ideal of perfect or frictionless administration (Hood, 1976).
In the post-war period some democratic elitists detected a major flaw in this notion of bureaucratic rationality.
Two of the characteristics of Weber's ideal type — authority and expertise — are essentially incompatible, since expertise is based upon technical competence, and authority upon the bureaucrat's legal powers (Parsons 1947, p. 58).
The two kinds of authority create an administrative dilemma, especially as the role of expertise increases in modern government:
State bureaucracies cannot remain completely subordinate to political control, as the democratic elitist model requires, without some sacrifice of expertise and specialized division of labour, which is a major rationale for instituting bureaucratic organization.
Some classical organization theorists argued in favour of maintaining the authority principle even in conflict with expertise, so as to preserve the ‘unity of command’ essential to democratically accountable administration (Gulick, 1937).
Post-war organization theory develops the democratic elitist account to accord a much more substantive policy role to administrative elites.
A key element here is ‘the principle of bounded rationality (which) lies at the very core of organization theory, and at the core, as well, of any ‘theory of action’ that purports to treat of human behaviour in complex organizations' (Simon, 1957b, p. 200).
Negatively this principle denies that comprehensive rationality is possible, because it requires information processing and computation capacities only possible of God rather than mortals (Simon 1957a, p. 3).
There are restrictive physical and psychological limits to human abilities to predict options, process relevant information, and solve problems, which make comprehensive rationality impossible.
These constraints lead decision-makers to deviate considerably from the comprehensive rationality model, but in six ways which add up to a positive theory of decision-making.
First, problems are so complex that they are normally factored , or split up into separate problems, each of which can potentially be tackled by a sub-organization.
Problem factoring is the rationale for organization; organization permits factoring and thus facilitates the management of problems.
Administrative structures tend to mirror the problems which that organization encounters routinely; each sub-organization has responsibility for different factors or problems.
Second, the criteria adopted for a good decision are satisficing not maximizing rules .
Policy-makers cannot maximize because they do not have the requisite information; instead they satisfice, that is, choose a course of action which is good enough to meet their desires.
Organizations do not search for the best mushroom on the prairie if they have an  hour in which to find it; they choose the first mushroom which satisfies their aspiration level.
Similarly economic policy-makers in the UK and the USA choose policies which satisfy their aspiration levels; they cannot ‘fine tune’ the economy because they have neither the information nor the theory to do so (Mosely, 1984).
Third, decision-making is characterized by limited search .
Not all alternatives are looked at, rather those most familiar to decision-makers or deviating least from existing practice are examined first, in order to cut down the information and transition costs associated with more radical changes.
Fourth, decisions are made in sequence rather than according to a grand plan, because the series of searches crucially affects outcomes and because each time a search is concluded another problem is attended to.
The totality of sequential decisions will not be a planned and coherent intended whole.
Sequential attention to goals allows organizations to resolve conflicts: ‘Just as a political organization is likely to resolve conflicting pressures to ‘go left’ and ‘go right’by first doing one and then the other, the business firm is likely to resolve conflicting pressures to ‘smooth production’and ‘satisfy consumers’by first doing one and then the other' (Cyert and March, 1963, p. 118).
Fifth, the desire to avoid uncertainty and make matters predictable leads organizational elites to try to absorb the uncertainty of the environments in which they operate.
For example, they might negotiate with other organizations in society, or with other states to routinize what was previously uncertain, Sixth, a more internal response is to develop ‘programmes’, ‘repertoires’, and standing operating procedures , all of which are devices to enable organizations to embody their past experiences of problems (organizational learning).
Problems are categorized in elaborate ways and rules devised to determine how the organization should respond to the arrival of any new problem falling into one or another of the existing categories.
All these devices make the response predictable but inflexible, an especially worrying trait in crises when standard operating procedures are not appropriate.
Radical elite theorists regard Weberian, or organization theory, conceptions of bureaucracy as ideological.
They do  not dispute that high level administrators are largely engaged in co-ordination or in the (apparently) factual and scientific legitimation of the laws and policies made by the liberal democratic state.
But they see policy-level bureaucrats as either directly controlled by an external business elite or as acting in an implicitly biased way to defend the social interests of people with similar backgrounds, incomes and interests to themselves.
Higher level administrators are the relatives and friends of business and social elites.
They come from similarly privileged backgrounds (Subramaniam, 1967; Aberbach et al .,
1981).
By virtue of socialization in the ‘best’ private schools they are assured access to the approved universities which stamp them as potential cadres of the ruling class (Kellner and Crowther-Hunt, 1980).
Top administrators in many countries are also selected on the basis of educational credentials which are not apparently ‘relevant’ for the tasks they are to perform but which serve chiefly to exclude more uncouth potential rivals.
Elite cadres are selected by their predecessors from the same educational institutions: the old boy network (Sedgemore, 1980; Benn, 1981).
Higher administrators are also seen as dominant within the political directorate of the liberal democratic state.
They outstay, outnumber and invariably outmanoeuvre the elected and less intellectually endowed political elite, should the latter even contemplate acting against the ‘powers that be’.
Administrative elites form part of a cohesive, co-ordinated and self-conscious vanguard of social or business elites where their real interests and loyalties lie.
In France the process by which the administrative and business elites give one another interesting employment is called pantouflage which literally means jumping in and out of one another 's trousers (Birnbaum, 1981).
In America recalcitrant administrators who implement the regulation of industry with excessive enthusiasm are noticed, and quickly purchased for private sector employment if they are exceptionally meritorious.
In Britain a lifetime administrative career can still be crowned after retirement by a company directorship or a job advising how best to influence one's erstwhile colleagues.
More revisionist radical elite theorists have an alternative  concept, ‘technocracy’, to describe administrative elites who operate primarily in their own interests, or according to their own professional norms, rather than being beholden to outside elites.
Technocrats exercise power based upon applied scientific knowledge (natural or social sciences) which is qualitatively different from that traditionally possessed by administrative elites, such as knowledge of law, or the ‘generalist’ skills claimed by classically educated administrators in the eccentric British case.
Technocracy is described by a prophet of the counter-culture as ‘that society in which those who govern justify themselves by appeal to technical experts who, in turn, justify themselves by appeal to scientific forms of knowledge’(Roszack, 1969, pp. 7 — 8).
Administrators with a natural science background are much more likely to display a technocratic mentality than those trained in the social sciences (Putnam, 1977, p. 404).
The ‘technocratic mentality’ comprises several strands, each given varying emphasis by different authors (Putnam 1977, pp. 384 — 8).
The belief that technics must replace politics makes technocrats sceptical about and even hostile towards politicians and political institutions.
These latently anti-parliamentary attitudes also extend to the openness and equality of political democracy, since voters do not always recognize or defer adequately to expertise.
Social and political conflict at best is erroneous, and at worst contrived.
In policy analysis technocrats are pragmatic, and opposed to ideological or moralizing argument.
Since technocratic values are strongly oriented towards technological progress, economic growth and the intensification of production, they are unsympathetic towards any form of social justice which implies a brake on rates of social development.
Technocrats are ‘statists’ who consider that state policies are available to manage all social problems, although in selecting solutions they may lean to the right (favouring market management and abhorring the inefficiencies of state socialism) or to the left (deploring the waste of social resources under capitalism).
However, at a departmental or agency level technocrats are typically organizational and policy imperialists, ever ready to promote the expansion of their budgets, the restructuring of state organization in their favour, the pursuit of professional  fashions, or the creation of new state and society clienteles.
Technocrats co-ordinate the modern state.
They write the programmes, devise the repertoires and set up standard operating procedures without which the financial, welfare, military and economic management tasks of government would not be administratively feasible.
External political control by elected politicians becomes more difficult.
Attempts to set up party penetration of administration without expertise are ineffective, weakening political co-ordination.
On the other hand, if parties use their own politicized technocrats to get more of a grip on some sectors of public policy, they must still defer to technocratic interests, and co-ordination across sectors is difficult to achieve.
Unlike conventional bureaucrats, whose managerial skills are capable of being duplicated, technocrats cannot be purged or replaced easily, nor can scientific — professional viewpoints be altered from outside.
Elected governments largely have to work with the nuclear scientists, engineers, surgeons and even the accountants they inherit, implying the domination of individual policy sectors by specialist administrative cadres, and the neglect of issues which span across multiple policy arenas.
Centralization and fragmentation in state structures
Weber and later organization theorists shared the common assumption that a single hierarchical ordering of the state's organizations is an ineluctable but generally desirable feature of the modern state.
Centralization and bureaucratization were historically closely linked to the growth of a monetized economy, which provided the fiscal resources for the rise of absolutist states in seventeenth- and eighteenth-century Europe.
In turn, the new monarchs tried to build up an economically prosperous bourgeoisie to increase tax revenues and to prevent any reversion to feudal conflicts which would fragment the nation — state.
By paving the way for a national free market, absolutism fostered capitalism.
Bureaucratization and centralization were also tied to the growth of liberal democracy and socialism in intended and unintended ways.
The opening of administrative posts to meritocratic recruitment and the strong emphasis upon the rule of law in  constitutional regimes strengthened the legitimacy of central government.
Socialism, understood as movements against the capitalist market, stimulated the introduction of central government welfare programmes to buy off discontent, as in Bismarck's Germany.
Weber believed that despite their best intentions socialists controlling state power would only further the dictatorship of the official rather than the dictatorship of the proletariat.
The novel administrative tasks of industrialized and competing nation — states — public education, public welfare, urbanization — all create powerful pressures for centralization and bureaucratization, none of which would lessen or disappear under socialist governments.
Democratic elitists have not therefore been surprised by the expanding role of central governments in unitary systems and of federal governments in federations, nor by the loss of functions, discretion and financial independence amongst provincial and local governments.
The logic of party competition, regular electoral successes by socialist and social democratic parties, rational administration and the control it gives party elites over the state machine have all contributed to the degree of centralization in liberal democracies.
National government tasks have expanded sharply in wartime conditions, and the growth of welfare state and macro-economic management tasks all place a premium on policy-making at the most inclusive and best resourced level.
Federalism did not prevent the same trends occurring in the United States, especially under Roosevelt's New Deal — demonstrating the increasing irrelevance of the distinction between federal and unitary states in an era which generates overwhelming pressures towards a more centralized state.
Nonetheless, democratic elitists emphasize that centralization of resource distribution and even policy control has developed in parallel with a continuing (and for a long time expanding) role for sub-national governments as agents of policy implementation.
Modern organization theory stresses that political and administrative elites must decentralize policy implementation into sub-organizations with their own problem zones, rather than simply expand central government departments into vast line agencies with direct control over all administration.
As a result these sub-organizations develop  their own repertoires, standard operating procedures and specialized ways of attending to problems.
Not all problems are routine or predictable; especially in crises, problems cannot be routinely factored.
If they could, organizational design would always match the requirements for rational decision-making, as in the machine model.
However, in the real world problems cut across the legal and administrative jurisdictions of state sub-organizations.
For example, health management problems overlap with social security management, which overlaps with economic management, which overlaps with local government management, which etc.
…These circumstances create what is perhaps the administrative dilemma.
The decentralization imperative implicit in factoring problems runs into the co-ordination imperative felt keenly by the executive political and administrative elite.
Elites which wish to manage the dilemma — they cannot transcend it — must learn how to play off the various sub-organizations against one another, how to trigger particular programmes within the sub-organizations, repertoires (Allison, 1971, p. 87) and how to trigger existing routines in a new context.
They must learn how to manipulate what is not a predictable machine into something which resembles one.
Radical elite theorists agree that state activity has grown in scope and become increasingly centralized.
But they offer three conflicting accounts of how different tiers of government operate.
First, the dual polity model suggests that the US states and local governments, plus Congress, are fundamentally pluralist in their organization and operations because they only handle secondary issues of little importance for national elites (Mills, 1956, p. 244).
They provide a useful and complex institutional façade, which absorbs political energies in non-threatening ways while masking the effective centralization of power in a tightly co-ordinated executive — military machine linked to big business.
Bagehot (1967) developed a similar ‘ideological front’ account of the political significance of the monarchy and House of Lords in Victorian Britain.
In the modern period radical elite theorists have extended the argument to explain how a politically neutered Parliament, normally  controlled by a majority party leadership, functions to disguise or dress up the constitutionally uncontrolled concentration of power within the executive branch in Britain.
In the modern period even the apparatus of Cabinet government has become a masking façade for monocratic rule by the British Prime Minister (Benn, 1981).
The general form of the argument is always that ‘real’ elites find the political formulas and consecrated myths of decentralization or a fragmentation of powers a convenient cover for their monopoly control of the key decisions of state.
Second, elite theory community power studies argue by contrast that national elites do not simply float in a disconnected way above the vast mass of secondary issues which compose the domestic politics of liberal democracies.
Instead national elites need to be supported by an underpinning structure of regional and local elites, and the policy-makers at these sub-national levels also play a major role in channelling diverse influences from external business and social elites into government (Domhoff, 1967, 1976, 1978a; Hunter, 1953).
The federal, state and local levels of the state apparatus are all externally controlled by business and social elites, but of course the character of that control varies from region to region, thereby allowing very diverse elite interests to be reconciled and integrated.
In Western Europe similar lines of argument stress that sub-national governments are tied to national elites by networks of patronage, clientelism, and control over public expenditure.
‘Local notables’ control regions and municipalities, exploiting territorial interests, traditional loyalties, and incumbency to mobilize very diverse kinds of political support for national state and corporate elites.
In return, national elites channel public funding and economic development to ensure that local notables have the resources to maintain their political role effectively.
Third, more technocratic accounts do not regard federalism or decentralization in unitary states either as ideological façades or as a direct reflection of external elites' organization.
Rather federalism and local government constitute an efficient division of political labour, which permits a functional segmentation of the state.
Choosing centralization, decentralization or deconcentration of government powers is, however, never purely a matter of managerial wisdom, but also a useful political strategy for enhancing the autonomy of executive elites.
For example, tendencies for the legitimacy of public decisions to be eroded can be partly offset by ‘shifting decision-making sites towards state units that are less susceptible to a loss of popular support, such as the bureaucracy, independent agencies, planning committees and social and economic councils’(Nordlinger, 1981, p. 71).
Decentralization and deconcentration can displace responsibilities and relieve the load on executive elites.
They do not ‘solve’ intractable problems, but they make other organizations carry the can for policy failures, a factor which commonly underlies systems which accord wide discretion to local governments.
The structure of the state at any period chiefly reflects the objectives of past and current central state elites.
However, in some intra-state conflicts local elites may have the legal and administrative expertise and capacity to ignore or alter central elite policies, though for limited periods.
Law and lawmaking
For all elite theorists, explaining the operations of the legal system in liberal democracies is an important problem, since the control of legitimate coercion is such a distinctive feature of state power.
The separation of the legal system from direct political control, and its apparent operation in a dispassionate rational — legal mode also make it an aspect of the fragmentation of the state which requires the most explanation.
Some democratic elitists who impugn many other aspects of liberal representative systems nonetheless regard the legal system in terms which are indistinguishable from a pluralist view (pp. 53 — 4).
Law is a set of universal rules which applies equally to all, and represents rational — legal authority in society, as formulated by its duly chosen political elites.
Weber's account has influenced the slightly more distinctive elite theory view which sees an effective legal order as a hierarchy of norms, unified by a fundamental legal norm — the Grundnorm or source of normative authority sanctioned by a monopoly of force (Kelsen, 1945).
In any society only one  sovereign legal order is possible and justifies the recognition of a state.
The machinery of state officials is only the personification of the legal order, and the distinction between public and private law, espoused in many pluralist accounts, is largely bogus — an attempt to manipulate people into believing that ‘private’ law is apolitical or non-state.
In contrast, radical elite theorists take an uncompromisingly hostile view of law as a legitimation device, intended to foster the illusion that all are bound by the rule of law.
The pluralist view in which administrative agencies and judges play a purely mechanical role in ‘carrying out’ legislators' policies ‘are gross distortions of the process that actually takes place’(Edelman, 1964, p. 4).
Law in the liberal democratic state is a symbol, rite and myth, rather than reality.
The ‘rigour’ of the law applies only to the mass, not to the elite.
The regulation of monopolies, for example, is more honoured in the breach than the observance — as with the American antitrust laws.
‘The federal income tax law offers a rather neat illustration of the divergence between a widely publicized symbol and actual resource allocation patterns’ observes Edelman (1964, p. 28), drawing attention to the typical divergence between the ‘letter of the law’and its implementation.
The failure to enforce laws is explained not by organizational complexity but by the ability of an external business and social elite to control the means of implementation.
The administrative and judicial branches of the state are staffed by people from privileged backgrounds who identify the public interest with those of external elites.
The vast bulk of lawyers spend their lives working for business interests, and top lawyers work overwhelmingly for giant corporations who alone can afford their fees.
The whole pattern of development of legal knowledge is skewed towards protecting business interests.
Unsurprisingly, judges are not neutral in their interpretation of the public interest (Griffith, 1985, p. 235), but are biased in the performance of their roles, both by their origins and by their location in a state structured in the interests of external business elites; and where the law is implemented, in each case ‘it will be found that an organized group had an informed interest in effective administration’(Edelman, 1964, p. 41).
Lasswell (1960, p. 195) sums up this scepticism about the rule of law: ‘The number of statutes which pass the legislature, or the number of decrees which are handed down by the executive, but which change nothing in the permanent politics of society, is a rough index of the role of magic in politics’.
The more technocratic radical elite theorists see the legal system as part of the growth of elites based upon monopolies of knowledge.
Traditional legal processes do not adequately serve the needs of the extended welfare state, hence the escalating growth of administrative law, where no pretence is even made to place state agencies on an equal footing with ordinary citizens.
In most liberal democracies complex new policy arenas have been judged far too important to be left in the hands of conventional judges and lawyers.
Executive elites have tried to exempt certain policy zones from judicial oversight, or have set up specialized tribunals, committees, and boards, staffed by experts who employ inquisitorial rather than adversarial methods of establishing the truth.
In Western Europe legislators have ceded sweeping powers to make detailed regulations to central government executives, allowing them in effect to write up the law ‘as they go along’ in a discretionary way.
‘The rule of law’ appears archaic.
These transformations of legal systems do not necessarily represent an insidious increase in the growth of a hidden power elite, although radical authors expect this result.
More conservative writers see a tendency for power to diffuse out of government to interest group elites making policy in continuous negotiation with executive agencies, under the remit of wide ‘enabling’ legislation passed by the legislature and thereafter incapable of being controlled (Lowi, 1969).
This bargaining process is likely to take place in secluded agencies where the state and societal elites can work out deals, sheltered from any formalized and universally applicable legislation which might make bargains too difficult to achieve.
Only long-agreed norms between governing elites and major economic interests are easily formalized in law, because introducing law which coerces one of the interest blocs may destabilize corporatist patterns of bargaining.
State-economy policy linkages
The consequences of elite control can be read off from the record of policy formulation and implementation in liberal democracies.
For democratic elitists a dominant feature of government policy-making is the existence of numerous sources of pressure to define policy in ways which ignore the public interest.
Special interests and lobby groups characteristically deform legislative outputs and executive decisions because of the existence of strong policy networks which only established ‘insider’ groups can penetrate.
In the US system these networks appear as ‘iron triangles’, where special interests work in a unified way with Congressional committees and relevant federal agencies to skew policy towards solicitude for their concerns.
For example, in the 1950s and early 1960s a powerful Joint Committee of Congress committed millions of dollars to the development of civilian nuclear energy technologies under a single federal agency, which handed the technology over, free, to private corporations, which then built nuclear plants.
The same firms were given operating licences under very lax conditions by the same agency.
Democratic elitists remain optimistic that strong political control and improved overview capabilities within the legislature and executive can constrain such abuses of power within tolerable limits, and enforce a concern to advance the public interest on fragmented elites across different policy sectors.
But they are much more critically realistic than pluralists in their recognition that state — society (especially state — business) connections will require continuous intervention and control.
Radical elite theorists of course argue that no such control is feasible.
The history of welfare state legislation and of political interventions to manage economic development is interpreted as a fairly consistent chronicle of dominant business interests recognizing that government regulation protects their established position from new sources of competition at home or abroad, or fosters growth in demand which they could not secure by other means.
Thus the pressure to regulate consumer goods markets has chiefly come from industrial sources anxious to stabilize their market  shares (Prewitt and Stone, 1973).
Urban planning protects the value of investments in the built environment, highway building fuels demand for motor cars and gasoline, and welfare programmes curb public disorder and smooth out hiccups in demand for business' products.
Modern state growth has lengthened the interface between business and government, especially by creating an enormous ‘contract state’ where advanced technology corporations work exclusively for government on defence projects.
The ‘military — industrial complex’ was the first area of the contract state to emerge in its fully fledged form, and now exerts a paralysing grip on issues of the most fundamental concern.
The agenda for public debate about defence issues is increasingly shaped by the activities of the Pentagon's biggest arms' suppliers.
When planners in these corporations invented a new piece of military hardware, the Cruise missile, and proceeded to ‘sell’ it to their contacts in the Pentagon and in Congress, they structured the whole context of defence debates not only in the United States but across all the NATO countries in Western Europe as well(Kaldor, 1982).
Technocratic versions of radical elite theory see emergent ‘welfare — industrial, complexes as progressively developing in fields such as health care in the USA (Kleinberg, 1973), a pattern which new-right governments’‘privatization’ efforts can only strengthen for the future (Ascher, 1986).
Elite theory images of the liberal democratic state
Elite theorists are preoccupied with the state's capacity to adapt to its environment, its steering capacity, and its control of its subjects.
This shared emphasis upon the state as an organization, bureaucracy, or manager, is obvious in the near unanimity with which elite theorists describe modern states that are not liberal democracies.
Eastern bloc countries are uniformly analysed as quasi-totalitarian regimes controlled by a unified, corporate (single body) elite, which fuses political and administrative powers and monopolizes all decision-making.
Authoritarian capitalist regimes demonstrate neither the representative structures of liberal democracy nor the organizational unity of communist states: instead state elites are involved in de facto coalitions with societal elites.
However, modern elite theorists diverge considerably in their analyses of the liberal democratic state, as our distinction between democratic elitists and radical authors has constantly indicated.
We want now to introduce a different way of categorizing elite theory approaches, one which does not derive from the historical streams of thinking described so far.
Instead we want to focus on three different analytical conceptions of the state which can be discerned in elite theory accounts, and which partially cut across the divisions between classical elite theorists, the democratic elitists and radical elite theorists.
The first analytic conception understands the state as a machine controlled by an external elite (whether an elected political elite or a non-accountable business — social elite).
The second regards the state as an autonomous actor, not controlled from outside by anyone, but instead responding chiefly or solely to the preferences of the administrative and governing elites who directly staff its institutions.
The third image pictures the state in liberal democratic societies as a corporatist network, integrated with external elites into a single control system: here talk of external control versus state autonomy is irrelevant, for state and economic elites are so interpenetrated by each others' concerns that no sensible boundary line or balance of influence can be drawn.
We review each of these overall analytic approaches in turn.
The externally controlled machine model .
The best known elitist image of state — society relations sees government as a machine controlled by non-state elites.
For democratic elitists the state is directed by legitimately elected political leaders; it is a driverless car which political parties compete for the right to manage.
Radical elite theorists see the state as controlled by social elites who remain quite apart from political — electoral struggles, who operate government in a non-accountable, illegitimate and frequently exploitive manner to suit their own interests.
The radical machine model has two sub-schools, each of which nominates a different external elite as controlling government.
One approach, close to Marxist accounts, detects the dominance of big business and  owners of capital.
A more technocratic model stresses the importance of education and other features which can form the basis of ‘social closure’, as well as property, in constituting the dominant elite.
Exponents of the external control variant of elite theory thus differ considerably over who does the external controlling (see Figure 4. 1).
However, all accounts share a common conception of the state as a passive vehicle, an inert machine, a cipher which is controlled, manipulated, steered, engineered and managed from outside.
The democratic elitist machine model takes Weber's proposition that state bureaucracies can be subordinated to governing elites as an accurate description of existing liberal democracies (page, 1985).
State organizations are responsive to and controlled by legitimately elected elites.
If the state's bureaucracies are apparently colonized by external interest groups or socially privileged external elites, then it is because of the decisions (or non-decisions) of the elected governing elite.
They could alter such a state of affairs if they wished.
The structures of state organizations — the patterns of ministries, agencies, quasi-governmental agencies — display the net outcome of past elite contests.
The apparently untidy structure of the machinery of government, and its constant alteration, reflect the objectives of the political elites.
Prime ministerial manipulation of the machine in the UK (Pollitt, 1984), and the battles between presidents and Congresses over the structure of the machine in the USA, illustrate the capacity of political elites to reorganize the state (subject to internal disagreements and objectives amongst the relevant elites).
Radical elite theory's machine model presupposes that both party and state organizations are effectively controlled by socially dominant elites.
State bureaucracies are responsive to elites who do not occupy formal positions in the state apparatus.
State decisions and non-decisions are the result of the power exercised by these external elites.
The structure of state organizations — the patterns of ministerial functions, agencies, quasi-governmental agencies, and indeed the institutional separation or non-separation of executive, legislature and judiciary — proves the responsiveness of the state machinery to these external elites.
‘The most   conspicuously ‘democratic’ institutions are largely symbolic and expressive in character' (Edelman, 1964, p. 19), but the real sites of decision-making are not conspicuously democratic.
The reorganization of state administration is carried out at the behest of these elites, either directly, through unelected state officials, or indirectly, through elected politicians.
The state is a passive vehicle for transforming elite inputs into legally sanctified outputs.
The business domination variant regards the state as responsive to a cohesive property-based class of capitalists because it is literally staffed by capitalists or closely associated social groups, especially in the key (executive and judicial) decision-making sites (Domhoff, 1967, 1976, 1970, 1978b).
Business can dominate political input processes and thus control the process of agenda-setting (see pp. 152 — 8).
State officials are in the end constrained by the capitalists' control of the economy, since economic performance decides the electoral success of politicians and the revenues of state organizations.
All potential rival elites are equally dependent upon the capitalists, who are the only external elite able to exercise a general veto power over government policy, backed by decisive resources.
Business impact upon policy formation and implementation extends beyond this veto power to give it active control of all policy-making relevant to capitalist interests — as the detailed sequence and pattern of extensions to state intervention in the modern period makes clear.
The growth of the welfare state, macro-economic regulation using Keynesian policies, and the expansion of administrative law are all the products of capitalist demands for the education, socialization, and disciplining of their workforces.
The social closure variant of radical elite theory's machine model is a typical Weberian account which recognizes two universal bases for elite formation in contemporary liberal democracies: property and educational credentials (parkin, 1979).
Dominant social elites are not made up simply of capitalists, but also include managers and professionals, whose power rests upon their capacity to exclude others from their property, whether material or intellectual.
These elites are internally divided around different interpretations of liberal ideology stressing the competing claims of private  property and of merit in the allocation of social privileges.
The liberal state simply mirrors these external systems of domination.
It is not a separate corporate body distinct from the dominant social elites.
Parkin agrees with Marxists on one point, that no distinction can be drawn between state power and class power in liberal democracies.
The problem of the state could be allowed to wither away without undue loss because the interesting question for political sociology is who controls or dominates society?
(Parkin, 1979).
If we know the patterns of domination and exploitation (social closure) in liberal democratic societies, then we know the character of the state.
The state is simply the agency which buttresses and consolidates the rules and institutions of exclusion, which are not confined to class and educational credentials, but in particular societies may also include racial, religious, ethnic, and gender-based forms of exploitation.
The liberal democratic state simply mirrors the patterns of the relations between the dominant and dominated groups, and hence in different countries or time periods it may be capitalist, meritocratic, racist or sexist.
The modern growth of the state's personnel, tasks, and technologies is an outcome of the changing balance of domination in society.
Groups who organised against exploitation and tried to ‘usurp’ state power for their own ends gained increased influence in the post-war period because of fortunate economic circumstances and alliances between unskilled workers and some of the merit-based intelligentsia.
Where such alliances were especially powerful, as in Scandinavia, the growth in the state's redistributive role has been most extensive.
The autonomous model .
In this imagery the liberal democratic state is run exclusively by elected governing elites and/or the bureaucracy, but both groups are cut off from control by broader social movements, political parties, or socially privileged groups (see Figure 4.1).
The model has been developed in the late 1970s by a new wave of American elite theorists (Krasner, 1978; Skocpol, 1979; Nordlinger, 1981) influenced by both the political realism of classical elite theory and by the neo-Marxist focus upon the relative autonomy of the capitalist state (pp. 243 — 6).
Contra Marxists, exponents of the autonomous state model are particularly  keen to stress that capitalists have continually faced a governing apparatus at least partly structured against them: by feudal forces in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, by socialist labour movements in the twentieth century, and by the military requirements and foreign policy aims of governing elites at all times (Finer, 1975).
However, to say that the state is autonomous of external control does not imply that the personnel who staff key policy-making roles are guaranteed centralized, co-ordinated and hierarchical control over a ‘machine’, let alone one capable of perfect administration with zero implementation failure.
In autonomous state accounts decision-making by the governing elites does not correspond to synoptic rational policy-making; nor is policy-making easy, uncontentious or capable of being easily resolved in a conglomerate of rival organizations.
Exponents of the autonomous state model argue that other types of contemporary political theory (whether pluralist, neo-pluralist, corporatist or neo-Marxist explanations) all share the assumption that social forces of different kinds can always control the state in a liberal democracy (Mordlinger, 1981).
These other theories may differ about how to characterize the distribution of power in society, but they agree that whoever is powerful in society in any policy arena controls the state.
Such explanations of state behaviour are ‘society-centred’, seeing the state as a cipher, a machine or a mirror in our vocabulary.
By contrast a ‘state-centred’ model of liberal democracy rehabilitates classical elite theory to argue that:
The preferences of the state are at least as important as those of civil society in accounting for what the democratic state does and does not do; the democratic state is not only frequently autonomous insofar as it regularly acts upon its preferences, but also markedly autonomous in doing so even when its preferences diverge from the demands of the most powerful groups in civil society (Nordlinger, 1981, p. 1).
There are three possible forms of state autonomy:
(a)
The weakest form occurs when state officials act on their own preferences in situations where society's preferences  do not diverge from theirs.
In these circumstances it is just as reasonable to assume that political elites or administrative officials are acting autonomously as to assume that they are acting in accordance with  society's preferences.
(b)
The medium form of state autonomy occurs when state officials take effective action to alter society's preferences — to persuade a majority of social groups to want what governing elites want, before they commit policy in line with governing elite preferences.
(c)
The strongest form of state autonomy occurs when state officials act on their own preferences in contexts where governing elites' favoured options clearly diverge from society's preferences (Nordlinger, 1981, pp. 11, 9, 27 — 38).
The autonomy of governing elites is implicitly recognized in previous empirical work using society-centred approaches (including pluralist, neo-pluralist, corporatist and neo-Marxist texts), a trait which belies their formal theoretical position (Nordlinger, 1981, pp. 144 — 81).
Governing elites are under no real compulsion to submit to societal pressures in shaping state policy, for two main groups of reasons.
First, elected political leaders do not view being in government as their only goal, and they can easily compensate for losing office by finding remunerative employment elsewhere, especially in the USA, where only the corporate rich run for major offices anyway.
Other elected leaders are effectively freed from powerful electoral constraints by party lists in proportional representation systems.
In countries with plurality rule elections a majority of politicians represent ‘safe’, virtually unassailable constituencies.
Finally, the motives for deferring to public opinion pressures are at their strongest only in the run-up to an election, when most incumbent political leaderships anyway try to manipulate government budgets and taxation so that economic and social conditions are favourable for their cause.
Second, there is an immense range of strategies available to governing elites, which can be used to enhance their autonomy from societal pressures (Nordlinger, 1981, pp. 92 — 4, 111 — 12, 130 — 2).
Elected or unelected public officials can normally  maintain and strengthen their support in society, alter the attitudes of opponents, and neutralize, weaken or instill uncertainty amongst their enemies.
The inventory of propagandistic, manipulative and coercive strategies used by state officials who wish to undertake autonomous action is enormous, especially the range of ‘divide and rule’ strategies which are uniquely available to governing elites.
Consequently state power is distinct from social power in liberal democracies.
The organizational separateness and distinctiveness of the state makes it much more than a mere mirror of, or passive receptacle for, the demands of society.
The state can (and does) transform society.
State officials can decide which interested groups are consulted about policy and its implementation.
The organization and reorganization of the state must be understood to be at least as much the product of the wishes of state officials as of social pressures.
The apparently fragmented organization of the state apparatus represents not polyarchic pressures but rather the outcome of intra-state conflicts or the deliberate fragmentation and disorganisation of policy-making by state officials.
The chief difficulty with the state autonomy thesis is not the emphasis upon the sui generis basis of organizational or bureaucratic power but the lack of any clear operational distinction between what counts as ‘the state’ and what counts as ‘society’.
Nordlinger defines the state as the resource-weighted parallelogram of state officials, and society as the resource-weighted parallelogram of forces operating in society.
It is a task of unbelievable difficulty to weight these resources in such a way that testing the model might be possible.
It is an especially acute problem when we consider party elites, since they are Janus-faced.
The leaderships of political parties are both social elites and state elites.
Consequently if the state appears to be autonomous due to the action of elected elites, we cannot be certain whether political leaderships are behaving as ‘state’ elites or ‘social’elites.
In principle, exponents of the autonomous model might explain state growth in terms of budget-maximizing behaviour by bureaucrats, as do public choice theorists.
However, their preferred emphasis focuses upon state elites' attempts to  manage increasing social complexity, and the potential disintegration of society that such complexity threatens, a theme present also in neo-pluralism (pp. 300–15).
Yet the autonomous model also explains state growth, especially in military and welfare bureaucracies, as the autonomous outcome of state elites' efforts to mould and win mass loyalty and to increase their international power.
Mass loyalty is a prerequisite for state elites if they are to pursue international ambitions in an era where industrial might determines international prestige and power, and where mass disaffection directly impairs the economic and military prowess ofthe state.
If only to improve the international capacity of their state and society to engage in economic, military and diplomatic competition, state elites have institutional interests in expanded welfare services and military — industrial complexes, which in turn give an impetus to the accelerated growth of state personnel, tasks and technologies.
Liberal corporatist model .
In this image the state in liberal democracies is separated from its society by only a thin membrane of formal legality.
State and society blur into each other through the growth of liberal corporatism: ‘the osmotic process whereby the modern state and modern interest associations seek each other out’(Schmitter, 1974, p. 111).
The label ‘corporatism’ has been associated with a bewildering variety of ideologies, including modern conservatism, Catholicism and fascism (Schmitter, 1974, pp. 86 — 93).
It denotes an attempt to unify society through ‘corporations’, each of which has a monopoly on the representation of particular categories of workers, professions and business (capital).
In practical politics corporatism has been an ideology of social integration, espoused especially by non-elected political elites trying to manage increasingly complex societies without introducing liberal representative government.
By contrast the academic use of ‘liberal corporatism’ denotes a pattern of interest group representation, where a liberal democratic state does not outlaw rival interest groups but rather accords certain corporate groups a monopoly over representing given social interests, a de facto arrangement which exists side-by-side with a system of representative government.
Elite collaboration is the  rule in liberal corporatism, distinguishing it from the elite competition of democratic elitism or the single dominant elite of totalitarian regimes (see Figure 4.1).
Liberal corporatism differs sharply from pluralist analysis in several ways:
Schmitter explicitly recognizes that his definitions are Weberian ‘ideal types’, because ‘no empirically extant system of interest representation may perfectly reproduce all these dimensions’.
However, they provide a basis for research, because they are ‘not directly accessible to measurement’ but their ‘postulated components can be easily assessed if not immediately quantified’.
In liberal corporatism the institutional distinctiveness of the state becomes obscured.
In the society-centred interpretation of the concept the state is captured, divided and diluted by the major functional elites in society — business, labour and agriculture.
Each of these blocs is organized into single peak associations, which are directly represented in the decision-making sites of the state, in the governments and executive sub-committees of countries like Sweden, Norway, Denmark, Finland and Austria.
In this situation, sometimes called corporate pluralism, the state again resembles a machine which implements the bargains struck by the peak associations negotiating inside state forums and delivering their members' compliance with eventual decisions.
In areas of policy where liberal corporatism prevails political leaders and party organizations are either excluded defacto from policy-making or compelled by their dependence upon the external elites to surrender some of their public powers to steer the state.
‘Votes count but resources decide’, as Rokkan (1966, p. 105) neatly summed it up.
Elected governments and administrative elites are passive functionaries who simply facilitate the bargains struck by the functional elites.
Legislative and judicial elites are almost completely frozen out of corporatist policy arenas.
Cabinet sub-committees, bureaucratic sub-committees, commissions, boards and quangos provide the channels for processing corporatist interest intermediation.
Only the corporatist policy zones are co-ordinated in this system.
Corporatist policy-making is neither rational, comprehensive and imperative, as in the democratic elitist machine model, nor purely incremental, as in the pluralist model.
It is characterized by bargaining over indicative or strategic plans which depend for their success upon voluntary co-operation between elites who are capable of withdrawing from any bargains struck (Shonfield, 1965; Crouch, 1982).
The incomes, employment and even capital investment policies of the public and private sectors can be co-ordinated through a mixture of sticks and carrots with which each party is able to bargain.
Corporatism is thus a non-zero-sum game from which all the parties can benefit if they refrain from unenlightened egoistic behaviour.
A central problem remains the small role assigned to administrators in liberal corporatists' accounts (Nordlinger, 1981, pp. 171 — 2; Diamant 1981, p. 120).
The process by which a decision is made almost invariably affects the outcome.
State officials have the greatest agenda-setting capacity in corporatist policy-making, since they decide who is to participate in consultations, and invariably they chair the relevant committees.
Hence their policy influence seems bound to be considerable.
Administrative elites in the Scandinavian  countries are disproportionately represented on all the commissions, boards and committees engaged in corporatist policy-making.
If the policy-making area is technical and complex, public officials have a decided advantage, even though the state may not have a total monopoly of technically relevant knowledge in policy areas where it is pursuing corporatist arrangements.
Finally, if the relevant interests in the corporatist process are conflicting and balanced, then the opportunities for state elites to act autonomously are immensely enhanced.
The state-centred version of liberal corporatism argues that state officials recognize, license and grant representational monopolies to national functional elites (Beer, 1965; Schmitter, 1974).
Strong state elites may pursue corporatist modes of policy-making because they recognize that their capacity to steer the modern expanded state is enhanced if they can incorporate the expertise and legitimacy available from major functional blocs.
Organizational and ideological affinities may also lead state elites to incorporate and protect certain interests.
Finally, functional elites may be offered incorporation within the policy process in order to compel them to sacrifice their organizational muscle, and to undertake the state's dirty work by disciplining dissidents within their organizations.
All these strategems may make corporatist arrangements a façade which cloaks the successful pursuit of their own interests by state elites in key policy arenas.
In corporatist accounts the question of which elites are penetrating which can remain empirically contingent and a critical area for research.
A corporatist model is neither confirmed nor falsified by evidence of the autonomy of state officials, but such accounts must be able to evaluate precisely the role of elected governing elites, and the importance of their struggle for office.
Electoral competition partly cuts across the struggles of functional elites, and, as we noted above, party leaders elected to government are Janus-faced: both statal and societal elites.
Liberal corporatist accounts explain the growth of the state in liberal democracies by reference to the historical and culturally distinctive features of certain Western European countries which resulted in conditions conductive to  corporatism.
Feudal organizations provided historical precedents for and in some cases even the institutional forms for modern corporatism (Maier, 1981; Kocka, 1981).
Nineteenth-century political thought in Europe was not entirely liberal, individualist, competitive and mechanistic in its dispositions.
Conservatives, Catholics, socialists and anarchists in their different ways favoured collective, harmonious, co-operative and organic conceptions of the state and society.
However, liberal corporatism is no mere cultural or historical artefact; these arrangements for concerting social interests are a symbol of modernity, not of antiquity.
Liberal (or societal) corporatism is the concomitant of the post-liberal, advanced capitalist, organized, democratic, welfare state (Schmitter, 1974) and the outcome of two intersecting processes.
First, the very successes of pluralist interest representation and party government triggered the growth of an organized welfare state.
The incentives for different social groups to create larger and more inclusive functional organizations at a national level strengthened the move towards post-liberal, non-individualist modes of representation.
Second, the development of advanced capitalism produced both a large oligopolistic business sector and a large oligopolistic labour union movement.
These interacting democratic and economic pressures created an environment in which both state and social elites found that the successful pursuit of their objectives, and the management of their respective organizations, were entwined.
International economic competition, industrial concentration, working class power in union and social democratic movements, state revenues, state capacities for internal and external management, and electoral outcomes have all become interdependent variables, thereby reducing the ability of any single organizational elite to exercise power in a predictable fashion.
Political and economic elites have shared interests in managing their complex environments, which facilitates co-operative elite bargaining.
4.5 Crises
Crises in liberal democracy can emanate from three sources  according to elite theorists: over-polarized elite competition, elite immobility, or insufficient elite autonomy.
Unconstrained elite competition
Elite theory argues that the stability of liberal democracy requires a durable consensus to exist amongst salient elites to respect the rules of representative government — especially those which regulate the transition from one political leadership to another.
Unconstrained elite dissensus threatens political stability under certain specific conditions.
It can occur because one of the major political parties is dedicated to transforming society very rapidly, in a fashion which threatens the existing internal social order and external international relations.
The presence of such an electorally viable ‘anti-system’ or ‘architectonic’party (Robertson, 1976), led by an elite which intends to use its electoral victory to force through revolutionary changes against opposition, is always likely to generate unconstitutional counter-revolutionary behaviour amongst incumbent elites the more probable such a period of transition seems to become.
Hence strong electoral performances by a Marxist or fascist party committed to social transformation may well precipitate a terminal crisis for liberal democratic regimes, even if these parties fall short of achieving an absolute majority of votes or parliamentary representation.
A system of ‘adversarial politics’ in which party elites compete ‘irresponsibly’, either for electoral victory or for societal domination, may also result in a condition of permanent, though endurable, crisis, with damaging consequences for social welfare.
If party elites have an incentive to offer ‘irresponsible’ programmes, bidding up expectations amongst their party activists, then ‘policy cycles’will ensue, characterized by rapid and regular policy discontinuities, with long-term diminishing effectiveness.
In two-party systems with plurality voting rules which protect established parties from new entrants, and where the major parties are so internally democratic that party elites must satisfy the ‘extreme’ preferences of their activists, party manifestos can easily become ‘over-polarized’compared with most voters' views (Finer, 1980).
Rather than being celebrated as proof of the  competitive merits of democratic elitism, such an outcome may create convulsions or reduce national economic performance.
This theme has also been stressed by corporatist theorists, who believe that unless party and functional elites collaborate in corporatist accommodations, then the comparative economic performance of the society will be damaged.
Elite immobility
Since Pareto, elite theorists have believed that the degree of social mobility in liberal democracy is a good surrogate index of political stability.
The less upward social mobility is possible, the more visible class boundaries become, and the harder it is for energetic, ambitious and talented people from non-elite backgrounds to move into positions of power and prestige through their own efforts.
Hence elite sclerosis increases the likelihood that those excluded from power will invest in a collective effort to promote a new counter-elite which attempts to precipitate a wholesale regime change.
By contrast, if energetic, ambitious and talented people from non-elite backgrounds can move through their own efforts into leadership positions in the key economic, political and administrative organizations, then they have little incentive to try to organize a collective effort with other non-elite groups to develop themselves as a counter-elite.
In addition, there is ample evidence that widespread perception of the possibility of upward social mobility increases the legitimacy of liberal democratic systems (parkin, 1971).
Even if upward social mobility amongst non-political elites is possible, the absence of any alternation of political parties in power may also breed anti-system frustration amongst the leadership groups of minorities that are permanently excluded from access to governmental power.
For example, territorially based regional parties may adopt secessionist strategies or ‘micro-nationalism’, whilst parties organizing ethnic groups or social classes excluded from representation in government may adopt ‘ghetto politics’ and refuse to participate in the political system.
They will act as inflexible ‘tribunes’ for the social groups they represent, rather than as ‘parties of government’willing to enter mutually beneficial accommodations with  other groups.
The absence of alternation also has consequences for the governing elite.
Where one particular elite (or elite coalition) has a stranglehold on political power, it is common to find increased governmental inertia, conservative leadership, networks of nepotism and patronage, and generally rising levels of corruption, as some observers suggested was true ofthe French Fifth Republic between 1958 and 1981, and may still be true of contemporary Italy.
After a long period of such government, an accumulation of demands for reform may build up, creating the possibility of a crisis based on unrealizable expectations.
Insufficient elitism
Normative advocates of elite control believe that too much political participation indicates political instability and potential crisis (Dye and Ziegler, 1978).
When the masses enter politics, they are unskilled in accommodation and compromise, so periods of unusually high popular mobilization into democratic politics may endanger elite agreements on the rules of the game.
Populist movements demand the dictatorship of the majority, or the plurality, or the chosen ones, threatening as a logical terminus the establishment of a one-party state.
The leaders of populist movements may be much more dependent upon receiving continuous high levels of electoral and political support, and hence unable to prevent mass demands turning the normal process of elite competition temporarily into a monistic system of domination.
Thus the claim is that social movements like McCarthyism in the USA during the 1950s, or the National Front in France during the 1980s, are more associated with violence and intolerance than more routine democratic politics.
But available evidence suggests that high citizen participation is not strongly associated with political violence in contemporary democracies (Powell, 1982), although executive instability (turnover of political leaders) is.
Elite theorists agree with pluralists that political systems characterized by deep cultural cleavages, which reinforce rather than cut across one another, are more prone to regime instability (see pp. 59 — 63).
Lijphart's (1968b) typology of democratic systems classified liberal democratic systems along  two dimensions — the extent of their social heterogeneity, ranging at one end of the continuum from homogeneous to fragmented at the other; and the extent to which elite behaviour is collaborative or competitive.
These dimensions generate the typology shown in Table 4.1.
Type 1 here represents a democratic system in which party competition is minimal, and grand coalition government is the norm.
Switzerland is probably the sole candidate for inclusion.
Type 2 is the form of consociational democracy discussed above (pp. 62 — 3).
Type 3 shows that elite competition can be stable, with democratic arrangements building up support for the political system in a ‘centripetal’ fashion, so long as the political culture of the country is relatively homogeneous.
Type 4 represents the flying apart of the liberal democratic systems, which Lijphart expects to occur when elites compete in a fragmented culture, creating ‘centrifugal’ tendencies, in which the state disintegrates.
The contemporary Lebanon is a paradigm case of a crisis generated by a breakdown of a consociational system into a centrifugal system — in this case precipitated by the deliberate destabilization of the government by foreign powers (Israel and Syria) and external social movements (the Palestine Liberation Organization).
Elite theorists argue more generally than pluralists that where elites cannot act with a considerable degree of autonomy in deeply divided societies, centrifugal tendencies are much more likely than centripetal ones (Nordlinger, 1972).
Elite autonomy means simply that circumstances exist in which the  political elites representing a given social group can bargain on behalf of‘their’ communities without fearing that compromises will lead to their removal and the substitution of a new elite for the social group.
This possibility can only occur if the masses are generally speaking apolitical and acquiescent, or ready to defer to authority; or if patron — client relations can be pyramided up to the national level so as to bind mass support very firmly and unconditionally to national elites; or if mass parties with extensive organizational capabilities can be created and continuously sustained by major political leaderships.
In their absence, Nordlinger implies that conflict regulation will not occur and Lijphart's centrifugal democracy will degenerate into civil war.
Northern Ireland seems a relevant example (despite the complicating international dimensions of its permanent civil violence) ofthe importance of insufficient elite autonomy (O'Leary, 1987).
Only if elites are autonomous and have the motivations to regulate conflict can consociationalism emerge as a crisis-solving solution.
Otherwise, the crisis is terminal.
CONCLUSION
The most distinctive features of elite theory display the virtues of the classical elite theorists — especially their realism, their scepticism about the effectiveness of both liberal democratic arrangements and any alternative form of state, their focus upon the technical character of state organization and policy-making, and their undisguised pessimism about the future prospects of democracy.
These features make elite theory central in arguments about the liberal democratic state.
Marxism
The interpretation of Marxism is the subject of fierce dispute amongst theoreticians and dozens of political parties and sects, all of whom justify their interpretations by apposite selections from the writings of Marx and Engels.
The enormous diversity, of self-proclaimed ‘Marxist’ views is only rivalled by the positions inaccurately labelled as such by critics.
Analysing the Marxist theory of the state is complicated by Marxism's continuing role as the most radical and threatening critique of capitalism and liberal democracy, and as the official ideology of governments nominally engaged in revolutionary struggle against ‘bourgeois’ regimes.
5.1 Origins and development
To understand the genesis of the Marxist theory of the state, we first briefly survey the ‘classical’ Marxist system of ideas; then we discuss Marx and Engels' varying characterizations of nineteenth-century European states.
Finally, we sketch the evolution of Marxism after Marx.
Classical Marxism
The core Marxist system of ideas draws principally on three  early nineteenth-century influences: British economics, German philosophy, and French revolutionary experience.
Between 1840 and 1880 Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels criticized and restructured the ideas they gleaned from all three sources, and combined them into a potent synthesis which they acclaimed as the first ‘scientific socialism,.
From the British ‘classical’ economists , Adam Smith, David Ricardo, Adam Ferguson and James Mill, Marx accepted the idea that the ‘laws of motion’of capitalism can only be grasped via simplified economic models, and that different groups in production have opposing interests (Meek, 1973).
But he disagreed that economic ‘laws’ are ‘natural’or inevitable, insisting that current economic ‘realities’(such as poverty wages) are specific to capitalism.
From Ricardo, Marx took the idea that the value at which products exchange in a market is proportional to the labour time required to produce them.
He transformed this ‘labour theory of value’ by insisting that workers are paid only the exchange value of their labour power, enough to barely provide for (‘reproduce’) themselves and their families.
But since owners of capital control the production process, workers are not paid for the full labour time expended at work.
Once they have earned the exchange value of their labour power (L) in a given day, workers' additional efforts are expropriated by capital owners as ‘surplus value’(S).
The ratio S/L measures the rate of exploitation, and, whatever their personal ethics, all capital owners are forced by market competition to maximize the rate at which surplus value is expropriated from their workers.
Marx also took from the classical economists the idea that rates of profit are bound to fall in the long term.
Ricardo argued that population growth would bring lower grade agricultural land into production, thereby pushing up average food prices and diverting increasing social resources into landlords' rents.
But Marx argued that falling rates of profit are an ironic consequence of investment in capital goods, which in the labour theory of value are seen as the products of past labour power, a stock of ‘dead labour’.
Surplus value or profits can only be expropriated from living labour.
With increased capital investment in production the ratio of surplus  value (s) to labour costs (1) and fixed capital (c) must decline, unless capital owners can increase the rate at which they exploit their workers.
Marx believed that by the mid-nineteenth century workers in England could not easily be exploited any more than they were already: for example, the working day could not be any further extended.
So with a constant rate of exploitation (s/l), increased investment (c) inevitably meant that the rate of profit (s/l + c) must fall.
Modern Marxists are divided about whether to retain the labour theory of value or not.
Even for Marxists committed to maintaining this theory, Marx's derivation of the falling rate of profit remains controversial (see p. 259).
German philosophy in the first half of the nineteenth century was dominated by the influence of George Friedrich Hegel, especially his concept of ‘the dialectic’— a special kind of logic which he believed applies to the development of thought, human institutions, and social history.
The key pattern in the dialectic is one of ‘the negation of the negation’, an off putting label for a sequence such as the following.
Early in a baby's development she perceives her body and the external world as an undifferentiated unity; the baby cannot distinguish herself as subject from external (objective) reality.
In a second phase the baby's unified perceptions are shattered and she begins to understand herself as a subject disturbingly distant from the external world.
In the third and highest phase of development the child understands the way in which she differs from and is interdependent with the outside world, and once again feels ‘at home’ in the world.
These three phases of undifferentiated unity, then separation, and culmination in a more complex differentiated unity are often described as ‘thesis’, ‘antithesis’ and ‘synthesis’.
Hegel detected this dialectical progression in the progress of human consciousness and intellectual — emotional growth.
He even extended the pattern to apply to the deity.
As God progressively overcomes the evil in the world, so he grows into a perfect, complex being, an unfolding of God's real essence charted in successive transformations of human cultures.
Hegel also saw the state as the sphere of reason, a complex differentiated unity which can dialectically overcome contradictions and conflicts in society.
Modern constitutional  European national governments expressed the maturing of humanity from the stages of felt reason and subjective consciousness, and were a proof of God's journey towards self-perfection.
The state bureaucracies created by eighteenth-century absolutism signified the arrival of a universal class pursuing a universal interest.
Marx and Engels rejected Hegel's picture of contemporary European monarchies as the logical end-point of historical development, constructed around a universal interest.
But they completely accepted that human history is purposeful or ‘teleological’(Lowith, 1949), moving dialectically but ineluctably towards an end-point where social conflicts are completely eradicated by the arrival in power of a universal class.
Marx reconstructed Hegel's schema in a secularized, materialistic form.
The goal of history is not the realization of God or the pursuit of reason, but the full development of a supra-individual ‘humanity’(Elster, 1985, p. 1 16).
The primary engine of historical change is the transformation of the economic sphere, which progressively establishes and extends humanity's conquest of nature and moves towards the elimination of material scarcities.
Economic change in turn restructures the rest of society, in a dialectical development of social systems from the primitive communism of tribal societies, through a number of forms of class-divided society, to the final goal of advanced communism — a complex, differentiated unity devoid of class conflicts or resource deprivations.
Marx and Engels distinguished four class-divided economic systems or modes of production before socialism.
The first stage after tribal society is the ‘Asiatic’ mode of production, where a central state bureaucracy attached to a monarchy or priesthood organizes villages' economic activity and expropriates the farming surplus.
In the next ‘slave’ mode of production a class of masters wholly and literally owns the people who produce the bulk of the economic surplus.
Slave systems were typically displaced by the ‘feudal’ mode of production, where a class of partially free serfs are coerced and exploited by a dominant aristocracy of landlords, backed by a small central state.
Capitalism is the penultimate social system, where private ownership of the means of production  and the full use of money exchange allows owners of capital to exploit the mass of nominally ‘free’ people who must sell their labour to survive.
Marx and Engels transformed Hegel's dialectic into the doctrine of historical materialism, according to which human societies move violently through successive transformations to higher levels of production and technology because of irreconcilable social conflicts which mature ‘in the womb of the old society’.
The central conflict is always between the push for the productive forces (a society's technology) to develop further while the property relations enforced by the existing dominant class in their own interests obstruct this progress.
Each class-divided society has one principal exploiter class and one principal class of the exploited.
In earlier social systems this relationship was obvious, but it is less visible under capitalism, where workers are not tied to any particular capital owner but must be employed by someone, a dependency which forces workers to accept wages which expropriate surplus value from them.
In all class-divided societies the relations of exploitation create class struggles which reveal the contradiction between the forces of production and property relations.
When these conflicts reach a crisis point, existing dominant groups always fight to maintain the anachronistic form of social organization.
So the transformation to a new order can only be achieved by shattering their stranglehold on social power, and the rise of a new dominant class which will introduce new property relations allowing productive forces to develop.
The motor of history is always revolutionary change and class struggle.
French revolutionary experience cast a long shadow over the early and middle nineteenth century, in the aftermath of the 1789 — 93 overthrow of the ancien régime , and the successive coups and counter-coups of 1830, 1848 — 51 and 1870 — 1.
Marx and Engels drew on the accounts of the French revolution by liberal historians, especially Guizot.
He analysed the great 1789 uprising as a conflict between the four ‘estates’ of the ancien regime .
Commercial and merchant interests withdrew support because their economic activity was stifled by the monarchy's taxes and tariffs, while the mass of working people rebelled to resist levies on their labour imposed by the  aristocracy and the church.
For Marx and Engels the French Revolution marked the violent transition from feudalism to capitalism, which had occurred over a century earlier in England during the civil war.
The French peasantry's revolutionary energies were soon dissipated and channelled into supporting Napoleon Bonaparte's military regime after the abolition of the aristocracy and land reforms turned them into small property-owners.
But for Marx and Engels the ever-growing army of industrial workers, devoid of property, crammed in great numbers into factory towns, and working in wretched poverty were an altogether new revolutionary class, a ‘proletariat’ with absolutely no stake in maintaining the existing society.
Other European socialist thinkers made the same judgement, but some argued for diverse proletarian strategies, including reliance on trade union action and the strike weapon, or the creation of working-class communes outside capitalist relations, where a new civilization could be constructed piecemeal.
Anarchists urged acts of terror to destabilize the established social order, and together with some socialists rejected further industrialization and all forms of property.
By contrast Marx and Engels saw the proletariat's mission as breaking down the restrictions of capitalism which held back the full development of technology; and they rejected as utopian any form of transition to socialism which was not brought about by a genuine (and almost certainly violent) social revolution.
They hailed the Paris Commune of 1870–1 as the first authentic workers' revolution and a prototype of the ‘dictatorship of the proletariat’, the transitional form of strong workers' state which would have to exist between the shattering of capitalist control and the eventual abolition of all class divisions under advanced communism.
Armed with their dialectical theory of history and economic analysis of the ineluctable crisis of capitalism, Marx and Engels' account of revolution guaranteed eventual victory to the industrial working class.
Marx and Engels on the state
Marx and Engels wrote little resembling modern political  science, although Marx penned prolific journalistic accounts of contemporary politics.
Only Engels' 1884 book The Origins of the Family, Private Property and the State , based partly on Marx's notes, can count as a reasonably complete theoretical account of the state.
Nonetheless, three views consistent with historical materialism can be found in diverse works by Marx and Engels.
An instrumental model is the best known and most ‘orthodox’ Marxist interpretation (Gold et al .,
1975).
In The Communist Manifesto Marx and Engels characterized ‘the executive of the modern state’ as ‘but a committee for managing the common affairs of the whole bourgeoisie’(Marx, 1977, p. 223).
Elsewhere they describe the state simply as ‘a body of armed men’ imposing the will of a dominant class on the rest of society by force, as when a proto-class of exploiters first imposes government by a coup on others.
Two implications arise for modern state forms.
First, owners of capital, the ‘bourgeoisie’, have interests ranged against other social classes, especially the proletariat, but also dying classes such as the ‘feudal’ aristocracy.
Consequently capital owners or allied groups directly tied to them should control the state in industrial society and run it in their own interests.
Second, the bourgeoisie faces a prisoner's dilemma situation if all capital owners pursue their own individual interests at the expense of their collective interests as a class.
For example, capitalists in competition with each other could over-exploit their workforces, ruining workers' productivity, and by immiserizing them render them incapable of absorbing factory outputs.
Here some state intervention (for example, to limit the working day across all firms) may enhance labour productivity and boost workers' demand for factory products.
Hence the state can act in the long-run interests of capital against the current wishes of short-sighted capitalists.
But otherwise the state has no autonomy to define the direction of public policy, beyond that accruing to the ‘executive committee’ of any organization.
However, the instrumental model was adapted somewhat to take account of the survival of monarchical and aristocratic rule across most of Western Europe after the 1848 revolutions.
Even in the most advanced economy, Britain, the late nineteenth-century bourgeoisie played relatively little direct role in controlling government compared with the landed aristocracy.
Marx argued that capital owners left the nobility in control of government in order to force the proletariat to battle on two fronts, against capital directly in every factory and against an apparently separate state in the political sphere.
Such a strategy of maintaining a ‘feudal’ façade to government in no way qualified the role of the state as an instrument of capital.
A significantly different arbiter model of the state was sketched in Marx's account of the 1848 revolution in France and the advent of a second Napoleonic regime,The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte .
Here he envisaged that the state apparatus could operate much more autonomously from direct control by capitalists, where the class struggle is equally balanced, creating a temporary history-making role for political leaders and state bureaucracies.
‘Exceptional periods…occur in which the warring classes balance each other so nearly that the state power, as ostensible mediator, momentarily acquires a certain degree of independence of both’(Engels, 1978, p. 208).
In the modern period such stalemates could occur in the struggles of the bourgeoisie to break the grip of the feudal aristocracy under an ancien régime , or in the struggles of the proletariat in an industrial society to destroy capitalist control.
Marx and Engels expected the arbiter state to be an untypical regime under capitalism, quickly superseded as the onward rush of history produced decisive shifts of power towards the proletariat.
Even in these exceptional periods the state's autonomy from capital on economic issues was very limited by its dependence on capital accumulation to create tax revenues.
A functional approach to the state emerged in Marx's Capital , Volume 3, and Engels' account of the state as a means of co-ordinating the social organization of a complex division of labour.
In historical materialism the state apparatus and its laws and other interventions form part of the ‘superstructure’, changes in which are determined by the development of the economic ‘base’.
Government and legal — administrative institutions are moulded in forms which optimally sustain  capital accumulation, whether or not the state is directly controlled by capitalists and irrespective of the precise balance of class forces.
For example, the reshaping of absolute monarchies into liberal constitutional regimes across much of Europe in Marx and Engels' lifetimes reflected the imperatives of industrialization, since constitutionalism (temporarily) fostered stable capital accumulation, increased the rate of technical change, and helped to create a trained and compliant workforce.
Some state functions can be seen as ‘the performance of common activities arising from the nature of all communities’(Marx, 1967, p. 384), such as enhancing the effectiveness of a mode of production not yet in terminal crisis.
But under capitalism (or any other class-divided society), other state functions are class-biased, serving capital owners' interests and enhancing their ability to extract surplus value from workers.
Whichever category of function is involved, the direct transmission of capitalists' preferences to state officials is unimportant.
State policy is instead set by the impersonal logic which drives government in a capitalist society to develop the economic base and coercively maintain social stability.
Marxism after Marx
After participating in the abortive 1848 uprisings in Germany Marx lived his life in exile in England.
During his lifetime Marxism scarcely penetrated socialism in France, the main revolutionary nation of the period, and it was only with the growth of a strong Social Democratic Party (SPD) in Germany after 1870 that Marx and Engels' ideas began to be a major influence on European socialism.
In Germany a large working class had to fight simultaneously to achieve or maintain trade union and economic rights, as well as to secure full citizenship and political rights.
Marxism had less influence in countries such as Britain, where socialism remained solely union-focused.
In non-industrialized countries (such as Spain and Russia) its faith in an industrial working class competed on uneven terms with anarchist movements dedicated to destabilizing the old order by insurrection and  establishing self-governing, single-class farming communities.
Yet Marx and Engels' determination to formulate general theories eventually made Marxism one of the most successful transnational ideologies.
Both men helped found the First International Working Men's Association, and both contributed to its collapse after twelve years by their attacks on all other forms of socialist thought and their feud with the anarchists over maintaining full-scale industrialization.
A Second International was founded only in 1889, six years after Marx's death.
It was dominated from the start by Marxism, proclaiming the industrial proletariat as saviours of the human race.
But the Second International did debate two questions which Marx and Engels left unresolved.
Could a non-violent transition to socialism take place via socialist victories in liberal democratic elections, and perhaps participation in government coalitions with ‘bourgeois’ parties?
And where would the trigger for worldwide revolution come from — advanced economies or those still in the process of industrialization?
As late as 1891 Engels' major work on the state still described universal suffrage as merely ‘the gauge of the maturity of the working class.
It cannot and will never be anything more in the present day state’(quoted in Przeworski, 1985, p. 10).
But in his very last years Engels changed his mind.
The German SPD (guided by Engels' acknowledged theoretical heir Karl Kautsky) judged that although the liberal democratic state is a capitalist state, yet ‘bourgeois’ freedoms and institutions could still help a party mobilizing the new proletarian majority to oust capitalists from control of government via the ballot box.
This potential pathway could not guarantee a peaceful transition to socialism, but a militant working class advancing on both the political and industrial fronts simultaneously might avert the need for an insurrectionary capture of the state.
This ‘revisionist’ view was bitterly attacked by Vladimir Ilych Lenin, leader of the Bolshevik faction of the Russian Social Democrats, and prominent on the Second International's revolutionary wing.
Lenin characterized the liberal democratic state as the best possible shell for capitalism, where state officials are tied by ‘a thousand  threads’ to the capitalist class (Lenin, 1977, p. 108).
Parliaments are talking shops, while real power rests with the bureaucracy, police and military, controlled by and serving capitalist interests.
Bureaucracy is a form of social organization which can only serve bourgeois domination.
Democratic rights (such as press freedom or voting rights) merely foster social control over the hearts and minds of workers by virtue of capitalists' property resources.
Whatever the institutional form of the state machine, whether the limited democracy of Germany under the Kaiser or the autocracy of Czarist Russia, the proletariat's first task was to smash the state apparatus in a revolutionary push for power.
Turning to the controversy over where a world revolution could begin, Marx and Engels's stress on the determination of political events by economic change and the historic role of the proletariat both strongly suggested that a socialist revolution would occur first in one of the most industrialized economies (such as England, France or Germany) where the organized working class was largest.
The Second International also insisted that the first socialist revolution in a major country would quickly find imitators elsewhere.
Much of the International's efforts were directed at reinforcing the resolution of European socialists not to go to war with each other.
In countries such as Russia, where rapid industrialization had scarcely dented the economic preponderance of agriculture, turn-of-the-century Marxists debated how to adapt ‘scientific socialism’ to deal with the vast mass of peasants and the persistence of absolutist and quasi-feudal rule.
Some Social Democrats analysed Russia as partly an Asiatic mode of production, a position denounced by Lenin, who insisted on the fully capitalist character of the Russian economy and hence its ripeness for socialist agitation.
He stressed that a tightly organized vanguard party could tip the industrial proletariat into action against Czarism without first building up a mass membership or electoral strength like the German SDP.
The vast mass of peasantry could be neutralized by promising land reforms.
Leon Trotsky argued in the run-up to the short-lived 1905 uprising that Russia could telescope together two revolutionary stages — first, the  ‘bourgeois’ political revolution to topple the feudal apparatus of Czarism and establish a liberal constitutional regime; and, second, the working-class social revolution to decisively overthrow capitalism.
His insistence that there would be no lengthy liberal democratic interregnum, but instead a fusing of the two revolutions, was belatedly accepted by Lenin only after the February 1917 revolution.
The Second International split on nationalistic lines in August 1914, with each socialist party backing its own government in the First World War.
Only a few leaders like Lenin denounced the entire conflict as an imperialist war, useful only in hastening the terminal crisis of capitalism.
When the militarily defeated Czarist regime collapsed early in 1917, Lenin returned from exile to push for an immediate socialist revolution against the weak parliamentary regime which succeeded it.
He led his small Bolshevik party in a St Petersburg putsch in October 1917 which triggered a four-year civil war.
In the course of this conflict the Bolshevik regime progressively eliminated freedom of the press, then ‘bourgeois’ political parties and later all other socialist parties.
State power was centralized in the hands of the Communist Party Central Committee, a powerful secret police was established, and the local workers' councils or soviets (which were the initial focus of the Bolshevik push for power) were reduced to mere rubber stamps.
With a Bolshevik victory in the civil war and Lenin's death, the last vestiges of collective party leadership were swept away by the growth of Joseph Stalin's absolute monocratic dictatorship.
Purges of Stalin's leadership rivals were followed by an immense extension of bureaucratic control of the economy and a ruthless party programme of forced industrialization and collectivization of Soviet agriculture, carried out with enormous loss of life from the late 1920s onwards.
The origins of Stalinism were partly prefigured in Lenin's 1917 book,State and Revolution , which insisted that on taking power a socialist party could simply smash the existing state apparatus.
The complex bureaucracy of capitalism could be replaced with a simple-to-operate ‘workers’ administration' run by elected soviets, and with ordinary workers rotating into any remaining functionary positions.
No point could be  served by preserving ‘bourgeois’ freedoms or accountability mechanisms, nor was there any need for socialists to work out in detail how their post-revolutionary state could be run.
In practice none of these propositions was ever applied.
They served simply as an ideological cloak behind which a vast party and police bureaucracy and an immensely authoritarian state machine were created.
Internationally the Bolshevik revolution and the development of the Soviet system split Marxism into two distinct movements, subsequently reunited only briefly by transient ‘popular fronts’.
Those socialist parties which rejected insurrectionary tactics were appalled by the growth of the Russian dictatorship.
Retaining control of the Second International, they re-emphasized Kautsky's hope for a peaceful transition to socialism, or swung away completely from reliance on Marx and Engels' writings into very cautious forms of social democracy.
Russian communism established an immense ideological dominance over revolutionary Marxists, especially as other European revolutions in 1918 — 19 were crushed.
Moscow organized a Communist International (Comintern) loyal to Lenin's version of Marxism, within which Lenin's reworking of Marxism and Stalin's rise to power sterilized any realistic discussion in any way critical of Soviet practice.
The Bolsheviks' contempt for liberal democracy, and their advocacy of a dictatorship of the proletariat going far beyond Marx's limited notion (Medvedev, 1981), froze official Marxism into an insurrectionary stance.
Leninism's cult of a quasi-military party also placed a premium on discipline and extended Moscow's control over national parties into a rigid straitjacket on doctrine right through into the 1950s.
Although Stalin died in 1953 and Soviet communism changed gradually from a totalitarian regime into a more conventional authoritarian state run by a collective leadership, the de-Stalinization of Western communism proceeded very slowly.
Some Western Marxists left the Communist fold over the suppression of the Hungarian uprising in 1956 and the 1968 invasion of Czechoslovakia, swelling the Trotskyist splinter groups who defended an alternative interpretation of revolutionary Marxism through the Stalinist period.
This  limited reaction against Stalinism and the perversion of Marxist theory to justify Soviet policy-making was strengthened by the growth of more militant European forms of socialism in the mid-1960s.
New movements of student protest, militant trade unionism, and urban struggles drew their inspiration from a distinctively intellectual Western Marxism contained in the writings of Gramsci, the Frankfurt School and Sartre.
These developments in turn contributed to the rebirth of various critical and intellectually sophisticated neo-Marxisms in the 1960s and 1970s.
Even communist party intellectuals tried to adapt the core writings of Marx and Engels to analyse liberal democratic politics in apparently stable advanced industrial societies.
The nightmare which haunts Western Marxists is the dread that Marxism is simply a religion of the oppressed, capable only of destroying the worthwhile freedoms of ‘bourgeois’ democracy without creating a more liberated or egalitarian society (Gouldner, 1980).
In different ways this fear informs all neo-Marxist thought, with which we are chiefly concerned in the remainder of this chapter.
5.2 Methods and values
Lukács (1967, p. 1), a Hungarian Marxist who was forced to recant his political beliefs under the pressure of Stalinism, once argued that orthodox Marxism was defined exclusively by its method .
The trouble with Lukács' dictum is that there is no consensus as to what exactly is Marxist method.
We shall not resolve this disagreement, but three distinctive methodological approaches and the values widespread amongst Marxists will be analysed in turn.
There are considerable differences over the interpretation of the three methodological practices, but in their general form they are common currency amongst Marxists.
They are, first, an ontological distinction between appearance and reality; second, structuralism; and third, the critique of competing theories.
Finally, we shall briefly discuss the emancipatory values espoused by Marxists.
However, it should be borne in mind that for most Marxists an interpretation of historical  (or dialectical) materialism, which we have briefly discussed above, provides some degree of overarching methodological coherence to Marxism.
The appearance-reality distinction
From his early study of German philosophy Marx inherited the idealist notion that the real world cannot be directly grasped via sense data or empirical observation.
Marx nonetheless believed that an external reality did exist, and that human consciousness could understand it.
But doing so required a process of theoretical labour in which the analyst abstracts from a mass of empirical observations in order to detect the underlying order beneath the appearance of bewildering variety, and works out the fundamental causal processes in operation.
For example, Marx's economic theory insists that behind the surface phenomenon of wildly fluctuating market prices for goods and services there lies an underlying and controlling structure of values, which are determined not by the supply and demand forces which obsess ‘bourgeois’ economists, but by the laws of the labour theory of value.
Similarly behind the ebb and flow of wars, regime changes and sporadic technological advances, Marx and Engels emphasized the ever-present working out of the dialectic in history, following the predetermined sequence of modes of production.
Again in Capital Marx set out to demonstrate that the workings of an entire economic system could be logically derived from and explained by a few materialist premises and the theory of class struggle.
Structuralism
This attachment to a strong appearance — reality distinction is most often expressed in modern times as ‘structuralism,.
Structuralism is a difficult concept, which is nowadays widely used and abused.
At its simplest it is a search for systemic laws or patterns at work in phenomena — such as a language, a culture, or a society.
Structuralists try to understand change and development as the product of ‘systems of transformations’ operating along predetermined lines, and  themselves changing along lines predictable from a knowledge of the initial configuration of the system (Piaget, 1971).
In this basic sense both historical materialism and Marxist political economy are undeniably structuralist.
However, a more severely structuralist idea in social science is that explanations of social phenomena should be made without reference to the intentions of individuals.
Controversy arises over whether Marxism is structuralist in this reduced sense.
The French philosopher Althusser (1969, 1970) notoriously asserted that Marx removed agents and intentional explanations from historical materialism.
In his account Marxism is an ‘anti-humanism’, concerned exclusively with how different ‘deep’ structures (economic, political, ideological and scientific) determine all surface features of social life.
Structuralist ‘method’ identifies the structures, and unravels their laws of transformation by detecting the ‘contradictions’inherent in each structure.
No explanation which rests upon the contingent behaviour or strategic intentions of particular individuals in particular places at given points in time can be counted as ‘scientific’ in Althusser's schema.
‘Individuals’ should always be seen not as rounded historical figures but merely as bearers of roles (trager ), supporting the unfolding of structural laws without reshaping those laws.
In support of this fiercely disputed position Althusser went through Marx's output designating certain ‘texts’ as scientific theoretical works and others as pre-scientific in character.
Other Marxists have contended that Althusser's rendering of Marx compels him to deny the evidence of Marx's texts in which intentionalist as well as structuralist arguments are present (Elster, 1985).
Marx's famous dictum in the opening page of The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte is not structuralist in Althusser's sense: ‘Men make their own history, but they do not make it just as they please’(Marx, 1977, p. 300).
Contemporary Marxist structuralists arguably confuse voluntarism (the notion that individuals have unconstrained choices) with methodological individualism (the notion that social phenomena should be explained through the intended and unintended consequences  of human actors making choices within constrained feasible sets of options).
Critique and theoretical work
The sub-title of Marx's works often included the word ‘critique’, reflecting his constant debate with other theorists — both ‘bourgeois’ economists, historians and philosophers, and fellow socialists.
Marx and Engels repeatedly emphasized that by ‘dialectically’ confronting what was contradictory in the main intellectual currents of their day, and by forcibly demonstrating the class biases which produced intellectual contradictions, their own distinctive theories could be developed and enhanced.
The whole thrust of their emphasis upon dialectic (overcoming contradictions) supported this vital role for critique.
One of the most characteristic feature of modern Marxists has been their refusal to engage in any serious debate with ‘bourgeois’ critics or rival theories.
Marx and Engels' thought progressively acquired the character of Holy Writ from which quotations were exhaustively ransacked to legitimate all subsequent applications of ‘Marxist’ ideas.
Questions about adapting Marxism to cope with changed economic and political conditions were still openly debated in the Second International.
But after 1917 Lenin's resistance to all forms of ‘revisionism’ and the ideological closure enforced in the Communist International institutionalized a petrified Marxism, asserting the accuracy of every syllable which Marx or Engels ever wrote.
Responsibility for interpreting Marxist thought was also removed from intellectuals and centralized in the leadership of each national communist party, or even in the Comintern offices themselves.
One intellectual reason why Western Marxist writers accepted ‘party discipline’ and a rigid orthodoxy on their work was the conviction that the Bolshevik revolution (and the spread of Marxist regimes to Eastern Europe, China, and Cuba) had ‘validated’the ‘scientific’character of Marx and Engels' work — credit which Communist thinkers also extended to Lenin's reworking and extension of classical 
Marxism.
The test of sound theoretical work lay not in ‘bourgeois’ criteria such as consistency or falsifiability, but in the accuracy of theory as a guide for political practice.
The development of the Soviet system and the Comintern parties from the 1920s through to the 1950s made ‘self-indulgent individualism’(i.e. attempts by Marxist writers to think for themselves) a dangerous deviation.
Cut off from links with the political practice of the masses, which only the communist party could provide, their writings would inevitably serve only to confuse and mislead the popular struggle, and to give aid and comfort to counter-revolutionary forces.
Not until de-Stalinization was well under way within the Soviet Union did substantial groups of neo-Marxist thinkers emerge and begin to try to adapt Marxist thought to cope with phenomena such as the postponement of revolution in the West, the revitalization of capitalism after the Second World War, and the political stability of liberal democratic regimes.
The revitalization of critique was central in the re-emergence of significant variety in Marxist thought.
In philosophy, history and political science, dialogues with liberal thinkers rapidly assumed central significance in elaborating an updated Marxist analysis of liberal democracy.
The best neo-Marxism has obviously benefited from its serious, though critical, encounter with the best modern social science (Roemer, 1986).
Marxism and values
Whether Marxists have moral values or ethics remains very controversial (Lukes, 1985).
Marxists after all believe that morality, in the sense of rules governing personal interactions, is the product of scarcity, a constraint which will not be necessary under communism; and the Marxist theory of ideology devalues ethics, and suggests that ethical arguments are rationalizations of class interests.
Historical materialists assert that the beliefs people hold are explained (more than vice-versa) by the mode of production in which they live and by their class location.
Ideology, the ideas which rationalize a person's class interests, obfuscates scientific analysis.
This  is not to say that knowing an individual's class location is sufficient to be able to predict her beliefs.
Marx and Engels argued that the ruling class, for example, is obliged to control the dissemination of information and education to prevent the exploited class from thinking dangerous thoughts.
The exploited classes do not spontaneously generate ideologies which lead them to accept their lot.
Rather Marx and Engels argued that the ruling class conditions the thought of the exploited class, a notion elaborated by the Italian Communist Antonio Gramsci in his concept of hegemony (Femia, 1981).
A ruling class enjoys hegemony if it is capable of exercising moral and political leadership, thereby achieving the consent of the masses.
Marx and Engels were convinced that the capitalist mode of production, even without ruling class policy, systematically engenders false perceptions amongst the individuals within specific class locations.
Engels asserted that members of social classes may be falsely conscious and fail to recognize their objective interests because of the way the economic system works.
False consciousness also prevents capitalists from realizing how they could be freer individuals under advanced communism.
These suggestions are problematic since not all analysts accept that structures ‘exercise’ power; power is a predicate of agents not structures.
And it is unclear how certain individuals, namely Marxists, transcend false consciousness.
Given these ideas about ideology, Marxists argue that morality can be reduced to the conscious articulation of class interests, the unconscious acceptance of hegemonic power, or the consequence of structurally generated false consciousness.
For Marx, utilitarianism was a perfect example of a morality which glossed the interests of English capitalists.
What about Marxists' own morality, or ethical values?
They depend on a curious ethical absolutism, in which the guaranteed end of history serves, rather unclearly, as an ethical guide to the practice of the present.
The Marxist ethical imperative seems to be that whatever advances the cause of the proletariat or the advent of communism is ‘ideologically correct’.
As articulated forcefully by Trotsky in Their Morality and Ours , this imperative seems to permit the liquidation of counter-revolutionary social classes, of one  generation for another, and a whole range of outrageous Machiavellian manoeuvres, provided the ends of the proletariat or communism are advanced.
Who decides whether or not certain strategies or tactics will advance these goals is the major practical question for Marxists.
Trotsky spoke for most of them in deprecating the ‘priestly-Kantian, vegetarian-Quaker prattle about the sanctity of human life’, and polemically defended a morality in which the end justified the means.
He made it plain that it was the collective wisdom of the party, as the embodiment of the revolutionary consciousness of the class, which provided the best guide to appropriate practice.
Thus the practical stress of Marxist movements and parties has been on individuals sublimating their own ethical beliefs and judgements to a collective, party-defined line.
To achieve the revolution and communism, which is immanent in current advanced technology, the Marxist must address strategic questions, and their tactical details such as party organization, alliances, the use of force, and so on.
But there is no ethical prohibition of any strategy or tactics, save presumably estimates of the likelihood of failure.
This stance fits very oddly indeed with the deeply buried core values of Marx's thought, especially with the concepts of human nature which he drew from early nineteenth-century German philosophy.
German romantic philosophers before Hegel were infatuated by ‘expressivism’, the belief that it is possible to create a world in which human spiritual capacities can be fully expressed (Taylor, 1975).
Marx believed that in the highest stage of communism human beings would be able to realize — or actualize — their expressive essence, their ‘species being’(Geras, 1983).
Marx's philosophical anthropology or theory of human nature was inherited from German romanticism, but what distinguished Marx was his belief that the development of capitalism was an essential precondition of human flourishing under communism.
Marx condemned capitalism because it frustrated human potential and self-actualization, but believed it was a necessary stage in human dialectical development.
Unlike Hegel, Marx believed that under advanced communism everybody would be capable of being multi-faceted, thoroughly rounded  individuals, realizing their essence through creative labour.
Marxists wish to realize a society free of human alienation.
In the higher stages of communism each individual, freed from the compulsory roles of class-divided societies, will be capable of realizing his or her (presumably natural) potential.
It is these themes upon which humanistic Marxists have placed enhanced emphasis since de-Stalinization (Sartre, 1956; Elster, 1985).
Stripped of its abuse as a doctrine of governing parties, Marxism's core value seems reasonably plain, if contestable, and exceptionally vague about the core human essence.
The core Marxist value is freedom — freedom from exploitation, freedom from the coercion of others, and freedom to realize oneself in creative labour.
Ironically Marxists should be the most extreme individualists.
In advanced communism there will be no constraints, no morality required to constrain human freedom, because absolute abundance will make such restraints redundant.
When such a society is possible, there will be no need for the state, nor indeed for democracy.
Under capitalist liberal democracies such freedom is unrealizable, and justifies a total rejection of the mores of existing society.
5.3 Input politics
For some Marxists the terminology of ‘input’ politics is misleading and contentious: designating electoral competition, the interest groups, the media or political parties as ‘inputs’which shape state policy is ideological.
Especially in functionalist versions of Marxism, these phenomena are as much state ‘outputs’ as they are ‘inputs’; they are mechanisms of social control.
For other Marxists ‘input’ politics are meaningless because they are monopolized by the capitalists, whose interests are the only ones to which state officials pay attention.
But for comparability with the other approaches, we retain the idea of a realm of political activity capable of determining state policy.
Marxism has been frequently derided for its explanations of political behaviour in Western democracies.
Marxists face  at least two major problems.
First, they assign ‘primary’ importance to class struggle in understanding politics as well as economics and culture.
Yet the major lines of conflict and political mobilization evident in liberal democracies often do not appear class-based.
Accounting for the limited importance of class poses a critical test for Marxism's credibility.
Second, Marx's account of capitalism as a crisis-ridden system contrasts sharply with the evidence of considerable political stability in many (if not all) Western polyarchies.
Explaining how social and political cohesion is maintained despite capitalist crises is also critical for contemporary Marxists.
The class basis of political mobilization
The Communist Manifesto suggested that class struggle between bourgeoisie and proletariat would form the organizing principle of liberal constitutional states.
The argument was plausible when the franchise was based on property but it is not obvious today.
Few areas of modern political conflict are conducted in an explicit vocabulary of class, even in a society like Italy, where Communists comprise the second largest political party.
The fabric of political debate and mobilization is both narrower and wider.
Many conflicts can indeed be plausibly interpreted as dimensions of a fundamental class struggle: disputes over wages, housing, unemployment, and social security, are closely connected with people's class.
However, other key conflicts (religious, ethnic, gender, territorial, defence and foreign affairs controversies) and economic conflicts between people in the same class, do not fit into standard Marxist categories.
Conflicts which do not appear directly related to class divisions are no minor anomalies.
Socialist and communist parties have constantly been fragmented, defeated, and in some cases absorbed by the strength of social forces mobilized on non-class based ideas: such as nationalism, imperialism, religion, racism, fascism and sexism.
Neo-Marxists have tried to explain how and why such phenomena can nonetheless be understood through class analysis.
But their first difficulty is to define class.
Marx's propagandistic writings were distinctly unhelpful, for he  proclaimed that class divisions under -capitalism would become starker over time — although some of his unpublished writings (in the Grundrisse and Capital Volume 3) did recognize the possibility of new intermediary classes expanding.
However, in Capital Volume 1 Marx argued that the growth of monopoly capital would erode the petty bourgeoisie (shopkeepers and small farmers).
The immiserization of subordinate classes in successive economic crises would reduce the differences of interest amongst workers, creating a unified proletariat as the ‘immense majority’ ofthe population.
But once the rural population became fully integrated into industrial work, capitalist societies have shown a markedly different development.
Instead of being eroded, classes intermediate between capital and the manual working class have consistently expanded in size: wage-earners who supervise or control other people's labour, people in non-manual jobs, and state employees.
Apart from farmers, even the old petty bourgeoisie have grown or remained stable as a proportion of the labour force.
So great has been the divergence from Marx and Engels' expectations that orthodox Marxist approaches to defining the proletariat confront acute difficulties.
Wright (1978) demonstrated that if we interpret the working class to mean manual workers who lack property in the means of production and are exploited (have surplus value extracted from them), then only a fifth of the contemporary USA population fits the definition!
Modern Marxists respond to these problems in five ways.
First, the criteria used to define the working class are loosened, and serious attempts are made to analyse categories intermediate between the bourgeoisie and the working class.
Different authors use various schemes, but the key innovations of Wright (1978) and Carchedi (1976) drop direct reference to the working class as exploited.
Instead, all wage earners who carry out other people's instructions, without supervising other wage earners or organizing work, count as proletarians.
This definition includes routine non-manual workers such as clerks and typists as working class, and extends to many state employees.
Other non-manual groupings are classified by the extent to which they carry out functions of the ‘collective capitalist’: controlling other people's labour, co-ordinating and managing production.
Groups with few functions of this kind (such as technicians, scientists, teachers or many professionals) are distinguished as potential allies of the working class in promoting socialism.
Some Marxists identify these groups as a ‘new working class’, exploited not by hand, but by brain.
The ‘proletarianization’ of such groups has been stimulated by their rapid post-war growth, and because they are directly employed by large corporations or the state.
They have also demonstrated increased industrial militancy and greater political radicalism than other non-manual groups.
Their failure to attain status comparable to that of older market-sector professions corrodes ‘middle class, conservatism.
By contrast, managers, bureaucrats and controllers are identified along with the ‘old’ petit bourgeoisie as probable allies of the corporate bourgeoisie in contemporary struggles.
A working class composed of 60–70 per cent of the potential labour force confronts the 5 per cent of capitalists who own significant amounts of the means of production, but the picture is complicated by the two different intermediate categories, each accounting for 10–15 per cent of the population.
This revisionist picture captures a broader range of political cleavages within the scope of ‘class struggle’ than orthodox Marxism.
The cost is basing class theory on domination, like elite theorists, rather than upon Marxist theories of exploitation (Wright, 1986).
A second Marxist accommodation of the complexity of liberal democratic input politics is the theory of a two-tier struggle .
It is less of a break with tradition.
It claims that class struggle has two distinct phases.
The longest-lasting is the struggle for the working class to constitute itself as a class, to overcome its internal fragmentation.
Only when this phase has been completed, and perhaps only for a relatively brief period at the height of a crisis, can a second phase of overt conflict between proletarians and capitalists become manifest (Przeworski, 1977).
Liberal democracies always manifest signs of the first phase, as proletarian organizations try to overcome racial or ethnic divisions, to persuade a large majority of workers to push for radical change, and to counter the strong efforts made by capitalists and the state to  maintain or accentuate existing divisions within their ranks.
The problem with this approach is that everything in the current political scene can be redescribed as the first phase of class struggle.
No criteria could refute the use of the description.
Nor is it even very suggestive; it provides no clues as to why this first phase of class struggle is so much more advanced in Italy (where the Communist PCI regularly obtains almost a third of the popular vote) compared with the United States (where a socialist party hardly exists).
The third Marxist strategy, the development of a systematic account of within-class conflicts , is more revisionist.
Poulantzas (1973, 1975) asserts that all social classes can be internally sub-divided in three ways.
Fractions are the deepest internal division of a class, where incompatible material interests show up in separate political organization.
For example, small and large capital interests constitute separate political fractions (parties) in France, Italy and much of Scandinavia.
Strata are weaker but important lines of division, based on more temporary conflicts of economic interests which do not produce separate political organization.
For example, in Britain, West Germany and Australia differences of interest between skilled and unskilled manual workers exist, but are not sufficiently deep to prevent their labour movements and social democratic parties from maintaining a working unity.
Lastly, there are a number of isolated sub-categories of social classes with distinct corporate interests which can be critical in particular circumstances.
For example, the army and the state bureaucracy at times can behave as independent units in ‘exceptional states’, such as fascist or military regimes.
The terminology of fractions and strata has proved popular amongst Marxists because it provides a framework with which divisions within the working class and capitalists can be analysed.
In explaining why large manufacturing corporations have different interests from small firms, or from finance capital, or why some manual workers vote communist or socialist while others do not, the approach is an improvement on earlier Marxist work.
Cynics point out that Poulantzas' approach simply permits a Marxist to conduct ‘pluralist’ analysis in Marxist language.
Whereas  pluralists equate ‘interests’ with ‘groups’, poulantzas is equating class ‘fractions’, ‘strata’or ‘sub-categories’with ‘interests’and active groups.
The fourth Marxist approach to diversity in liberal democratic politics is even more revisionist.
Focus is placed upon cross-class lines of social division .
Fractions and strata are divisions specific to one social class: a difference of interests between manufacturing and finance capital may fragment the bourgeoisie, but have no implications for the internal segmentation of other classes.
By contrast theorists of cross-class divisions, such as Habermas (1976) and O'Connor (1973), contend that there are some key differences of interest which apply to several or all classes.
The division between small capitalist firms and corporations is the most frequently cited cross-class division.
Workforces in small firms are generally non-unionized, lower paid and more vulnerable to unemployment, whilst workers in large corporations are highly unionized, better paid and less routinely vulnerable to job losses.
So the labour force is fragmented on the same lines as capital.
Other cross-class interests important in Britain and Western Europe include public/private employment interests, and cleavages between those involved in collective and individualized forms of consumption (Dunleavy, 1980a).
Cross-class interests form the potential basis of cleavages which cut across the exploiter — exploited dichotomy of classical Marxism.
The fifth and most revisionist Marxist strategy is the least popular.
It abandons the attempt to detect a class struggle between exploiters and exploited within advanced capitalism.
Instead the locus of class struggle is displaced from the national level to the world level (Wallerstein, 1981).
The propertyless proletariat, exploited and progressively immiserized in line with Marx's expectations, are in the less developed countries.
The proletariat are Frantz Fanon's (1962)Wretched of the Earth , inhabiting the shanty towns, sweatshop factories, agribusinesses and impoverished villages of the Third World.
Manual workers in Western democracies are thoroughly co-opted into the exploitative international trade relations by which multi-national corporations and Western states maintain the dependent position of less  developed countries on which the prosperity of advanced capitalism is based.
Within the USA or Western European nations there is no ‘proletariat’, only a set of intermediate categories complicit in maintaining the dominance of multi-national capital.
The internal politics of liberal democracies are not explicable in Marxist categories, but reflect only the partial fragmentation of interests between capitalists and their associated functionaries.
These five different strategies for analysing liberal democratic policies are not all mutually inconsistent.
Redefining class is compatible with any of the next three strategies.
Most Marxists have treated these options (the two-stage class struggle, within-class divisions and cross-class divisions) as mutually exclusive.
One can imagine combining two of these views, but in practice they have remained separate.
But the theory of global class struggle is basically incompatible with the other approaches because it deprecates the significance of the political conflicts within liberal democracies.
Quiescence and unrest in advanced capitalism
For Marxists the basic motor of unrest in all capitalist societies is proletarians' direct experience of exploitation and alienation in production.
Unemployment, lay-offs, dismissals, worsened working conditions and wage rates lagging behind inflation regularly sustain labour dissatisfaction.
They impel people to join trade unions and radical parties, to take strike action and stage protests in which awareness of their collective interests, and of their opposition to the interests of capitalists and controllers of labour, can be dramatically strengthened (Hyman 1971).
The existence of a well organized labour movement and a socialist or communist party alerts new generations of workers to their distinct interests, and provides them with a political language.
In advanced capitalism neo-Marxists argue that the factors responsible for recruiting people into organized expressions of discontent broaden.
Conflicts over collective consumption facilities and services provided or directly funded by the state have become more explicit and important (Castells, 1979).
However, Marxists distinguish two kinds of dissenting  consciousness which can be fostered amongst workers by personal experience and by collective organization.
The first is, at best, a ‘trade union consciousness’ or a ‘subordinate value system’, in which people placed at the bottom of the social system recognize they are exploited but seek only to improve their position within it.
Capitalism may be perceived as unfair, and needing reform, but it is also perceived as incapable of fundamental transformation.
Workers may strike for better pay and conditions, but draw back from trying to gain direct control over the means of production or the content of work.
This consciousness leads only to social democratic forms of political organization, and accepts that political change has to be achieved through the mechanisms of representative politics.
The second, fully-fledged ‘class consciousness’ or ‘radical value system’, locates the cause of social ills in the dominance of capitalism and prefigures a new post-revolutionary society where working class interests will be universalized.
Since Lenin, Marxists have accepted that this consciousness only arises if it is ‘injected’ into workers' movements by an outside agency, a revolutionary party or intelligentsia.
But the situation of working people in political systems where unionization is underdeveloped and is not coupled with even a social democratic form of political mobilization is anomalous for most Marxists.
In the USA the absence of a strong socialist movement can to some degree be explained by (a) the ‘newness’ and apparent ‘classlessness’of their social structures, especially the absence of an aristocracy;(b) extensive social mobility;(c) the multiplicity of ethnic cleavages; and (d) the fact that universal suffrage arrived before large-scale industrialization, which meant that the working -class did not have to struggle for the franchise.
Although US unions have been associated with support for the Democratic Party, the politicians and policies they have backed have by no means been the most socialist of those on offer.
Why is there no socialism in the United States ? remains as pertinent a question for Marxists as when Werner Sombart, then a Marxist, first asked it in 1904.
Marxists try to answer another question: how have the dominant classes or fractions in capitalist societies managed  to enforce sufficient control to restrict class consciousness to ‘safe’ levels?
Through the state is one answer, as we shall see in the next section.
However, there are also a number of powerful non-state influences which maintain quiescence and acceptance of capitalist dominance.
First, some neo-Marxists emphasize that working-class political mobilization confronts special difficulties.
Offe and Wiesenthal (1980) take further Olson's analysis of the logic of collective action (discussed on pp. 159–63).
They argue that workers are individuals with irreducibly distinct interests, based on their age, sex, skills, and ethnicity.
Many of these differentiating characteristics are closely linked to personality and cannot be homogenized out of existence, although their significance as factors fragmenting proletarian unity can vary widely.
By contrast, capital consists of units of money and is thus a malleable entity, easily restructured into larger aggregations.
Capital has more fundamental and generalizable criteria of common interests — for example, the ‘bottom line’ criterion of profitability.
Overcoming labour's disadvantages requires an organization which can effectively sustain a ‘dialogue’ between the grassroots members of the movement and its leadership.
Such a pattern is hard to devise and sustain, and operates under considerable disadvantages in an environment where both capitalist organizations (firms, trade associations and right-wing parties) and the state are run hierarchically.
Hierarchical organizations are more unified, have more room for manoeuvre, and respond more quickly and flexibly to environmental changes, creating constant pressure upon proletarian movements to imitate their modes of organization.
But hierarchy erodes the important ‘collective identity’ of the working class on which all possibility of effective collective action depends.
Second, capitalists and their class allies — the petit bourgeoisie and controllers of labour — are much better organized than proletarian movements.
Capitalists command disproportionate influence over state agencies and funding for public campaigns.
In addition, they control resources which can be withdrawn or redeployed at their discretion, and are of vital importance for workers' livelihood and the revenue base of state expenditure.
Workers spend almost all  their income directly on consumption, so that their main weapons — withdrawing their labour or creating social disruption — immediately imply adverse consequences for their living standards and families (Crouch, 1984a).
Workers are more limited to particular geographical locations, and workers' organizations can be completely destroyed or set back for years by unsuccessful struggles such as long running strikes or (still more) a general strike.
By contrast, capitalists are able to withdraw resources more incrementally, with restricted implications for their own immediate welfare, and they can usually redeploy means of production in other localities, regions or countries if faced with large-scale disruption.
Third, Marxists emphasize the production of a ‘dominant ideology’: a set of ideas about political and social questions which privileges capitalist interests and insulates the status quo from criticism by making existing social arrangements appear ‘natural’ or inevitable.
Direct capitalist control or influence over the communication of ideas (mass media, publishing, universities), and capitalist influence over the state, both structure ‘debates’ in liberal democracies.
The available ways of understanding are systematically skewed towards representing the social system and its conflicts in ways which do not threaten the hegemony of capital.
The misrepresentation and downplaying of class-based conflicts are pervasive.
For example, the dominant ideology of representative government presents politics as relations between equal, atomized ‘citizens’ and fragmented state agencies, and asserts the ability of an electoral majority to reshape all social arrangements.
The development of dominant ideologies in advanced capitalism is also shaped by the composition of the ruling class, or the kind of ‘power bloc’ assembled by a dominant class fraction.
The relations between capitalists and previous dominant classes, such as the aristocracy, and traditional institutions, such as the monarchy (where it exists), the armed forces and the established religion, influence the textures of the dominant ideology.
North America differs from Western Europe because the construction of a dominant ideology was capitalist from its inception: no pre-existing feudal aristocracy had to be  displaced.
Gramsci argued that a proletarian movement which successfully challenges the domination of capital must not concentrate attention solely on economic or political organization.
On the contrary it must be organized as a ‘counter-hegemonic project’: as an alternative society, countering and replacing bourgeois ideas and practices in all aspects of life.
Intellectuals play a correspondingly enlarged role in Gramsci's Marxism, which perhaps accounts for its popularity amongst academic Marxists.
The battle for ideas has to be won if workers are to analyse their exploitation correctly, and to be equipped to envisage a different future.
The fourth Marxist strategy for explaining workers' quiescence under advanced capitalism is much more materialistic, and in keeping with the central thrust of classical Marxism.
As we have seen, Western Marxists generally explain proletarian apathy or quiescence as an ideological phenomenon.
By contrast, some Marxists are more inclined to emphasize capitalism's economic success in generating proletarian support.
Some stress that capitalism benefits a key group of workers — as in the theory associated with Lenin of a labour ‘aristocracy’ whose loyalty is bought by special privileges, or in O'Connor's (1973) account of the interests of workers in the monopoly capital sector.
Others emphasize capitalism's success in raising the majority of workers' living standards, as the most famous early Marxist revisionist, Eduard Bernstein (1961), contended.
Still others believe that capitalism has satisfied the material interests of all workers in advanced capitalism, as Herbert Marcuse (1969) and Andre Gorz (1985) tend to suggest.
There is also an increasing awareness amongst neo-Marxists that the failure of state socialist regimes' consumer markets and productivity rates to compare favourably with Western capitalism gives workers in capitalist society little reason to believe that socialism will improve their material prosperity.
Taking electoral democracy seriously
These strategies for grappling with the explanation of most liberal democracies' stability do little to reduce the problems that Marxist theorists confront in coming to terms with an  enduring political alternative to state socialism, and one which most Western Marxists seem to find preferable to the Stalinist forms of state socialism.
‘The entire Marxist tradition has had enormous difficulty…with the paradoxical phenomenon of bourgeois democracy — a regime in which the exploiting minority rules by means of a system of legally free popular elections’(Therborn, 1978, p. 248).
Revolutionary Marxists can write off liberal democracy as a capitalist tool, or bourgeois ‘con trick’, but then liberal democracy is indistinguishable from any other form of capitalist state — such as a military or fascist regime.
Alternatively they can argue with Lenin that liberal democracy is the best possible shell for capitalism.
But this argument is weakened when democratic arrangements break down and are not replaced by socialism, as has frequently occurred in industrializing countries.
At best Marxists can argue that liberal democracy is the optimal shell for capitalism if the working class is unorganized for expropriatory struggle.
However, even this position admits that liberal democracy is, in principle, and to some extent in practice, open to conquest by the expressed interests of the working class.
No liberal democratic election has unambiguously produced majority popular support for the transformation of a capitalist society into a socialist mode of production.
But equally Salvador Allende's 1970 presidential electoral victory in Chile and the electoral successes of the Nicaraguan socialists confirm that not all electoral outcomes are necessarily pro-capitalist.
Of course Marxists can point to Allende's subsequent overthrow by the Chilean military to help demonstrate that peaceful socialist transformation will not be permitted.
But the fact that dominant classes can throw off liberal democracy when they do not wish to abide by the rules does not prove that those rules are themselves capitalist instruments.
In principle the question of whether a liberal democratic state can be used constitutionally to transform capitalism into socialism remains empirically open (depending upon the definition of socialism adopted), with some Marxists arguing the impossibility of such a solution (Przeworski, 1985), and others that it is both feasible and welcome (Esping-Anderson, 1985).
But if Marxists believe that liberal  democratic input politics can open state organizations to accommodating class struggle, then their arguments threaten to blur into those of pluralists or democratic elite theorists.
Only a few Marxists raise fundamental doubt about Therborn's assumption above that in liberal democracy the exploiting minority rules through elections.
However, Przeworski (1980 and 1985) explores two possible consequences of liberal democracy for the proletariat.
First, workers as the majority group in the electorate might rationally choose to maintain capitalism, not because they are duped by the dominant ideology but because their individual interests are better met under redistributive capitalism than through a painful transition to socialism, which could only conceivably deliver net benefits in the very long run.
The transition to socialism entails such potential costs as falling investment, rising unemployment, civil war, the threat of successful counter-revolution, and the danger of Stalinism.
There are additional potential post-transition costs such as the possibility that socialism might be more inefficient than capitalism.
The working class in effect delegates investment decisions to capitalists because they are better allocators of investment funds, especially in resisting the temptation to consume too much out of the current social product.
Workers rationally support capitalism as long as they believe it best advances their material interests, and they are always likely to do so, given the costs of the transition to socialism.
Revolutions are only contemplated by cadres with intense preferences: most workers in liberal democracies will not vote for a revolution.
Second, capitalism may be sustained by popular voting chiefly because workers themselves have not constituted and could not constitute an electoral majority (przeworski, 1985).
Even if workers could solve their collective action problems and unite behind a socialist party, their electoral muscle would be insufficient.
Liberal democracy benefits capitalism not because capitalists control workers' minds but because the industrial proletariat have rarely been a majority and are a now shrinking minority in advanced capitalist societies.
Socialist parties face a dilemma.
They can dilute their class appeal and become simply another party of government, the  course generally adopted by social democratic parties.
This kind of deradicalization usually ends up by disorganizing the working class, since pursuing broad coalitions tends to break up proletarian solidarity and fragment socialism into workers' particular interests under redistributive capitalism.
Alternatively, socialist parties can maintain their ideology intact, keeping the class ready for a revolutionary opportunity but see their support possibly dwindle to restrictive ‘ghetto’ status.
5.4 State organization
Relatively detailed Marxist accounts of state institutions operate have emerged only in the post-war period, and are associated chiefly with the growth of Western neo-Marxisms — new forms of expressing Marx and Engels' ideas, distinguished chiefly by their willingness to engage ‘bourgeois’ social science directly in debate.
While orthodox Marxist — Leninism of the Comintern period offered no serious accounts of liberal democratic practices and institutions, neo-Marxists have tried to come to terms with phenomena which classical Marxists did not anticipate, especially the advent of some form of mixed economy and the growth of an extended welfare state in every advanced capitalist society.
Previous Marxist descriptions of the democratic state as a nakedly repressive apparatus attuned only to the behests of capitalists sat unsatisfactorily with the apparent emergence of government planning and ‘caring capitalism’, at least in the period from the early 1950s to the late 1970s.
The emergence of new-right governments in the 1980s has called in question the previous welfare consensus, and apparently signalled a drive towards the ‘recommodification’ of areas of social life previously handled by public policy decision.
But no attempt to dismantle radically the fabric of state regulation or public service provision has yet been pushed through in any liberal democracy, so that the public policy configuration now remains quite distinct from that prevailing before 1945.
If the problems requiring analysis are thus quite novel, the Marxist toolkit available for constructing a response has  remained heavily influenced by the three approaches to the state articulated in Marx and Engels' own work, namely, the instrumental, arbiter and functionalist models (see pp. 208–11).
We cover neo-Marxists modern instrumentalist, arbiter and functionalist models in turn, summarizing the differences from Marx and Engels' classical accounts, and describing how each approach analyses the workings of state institutions and policy-making.
We conclude our accounts of each approach by looking at some of its distinctive variants to demonstrate the range of options in the neo-Marxist literature.
Modern instrumentalist models
We noted above that Marx and Engels most commonly relied on an instrumentalist account of the liberal state as a machine directly controlled from outside by capitalists and hence bound to act in furthering their interests.
They' refined their account to acknowledge the possibility of indirect control of the state by capitalists, taking account of the persistence of aristocratic and monarchical governments in late nineteenth-century Europe.
Modern instrumentalism has adapted this strategy to explain how it is that the election of social democratic parties into government, or the advent of other coalitions orientated in part to working-class voters (such as Franklin Roosevelt's ‘new deal’ administration in the USA), have not qualified the fundamentally capitalist character of the liberal democratic state.
Modern instrumentalists elaborate Kautskly's proposition that the capitalist class rules but does not itself govern, contenting itself with ruling successive governments, a claim which is commonly elaborated through a point-by-point critique of pluralism.
We have already noted the key instrumentalist arguments about capitalist domination of input politics above (pp. 229–33).
The next stage of the modern instrumentalist argument has close affinities with elite theory, arguing that capitalists, state bureaucrats and political leaders are unified into a single cohesive group by their common social origin, similar lifestyles and values, and by the existence of numerous networks and forums where co-ordinated strategies for public  policy are hammered out.
While direct participation in government by personnel from big business has characteristically declined in modern liberal democracies (except in the USA), the state apparatus remains staffed overwhelmingly by strata of society who can be relied on to adopt pro-capitalist stances on economic and industrial issues — for example, members of professions, lawyers, accountants and farmers.
Where leftist governments do gain power, international financial markets and the loss of business confidence automatically create unfavourable climates for radical social reforms, normally shaping the ‘economic facts of life’ to constrain any fundamental alteration of capitalism long before the ultimate weapons available to domestic business (such as investment strikes) have to be brought into play.
The consequences of capitalist domination can be traced in the consistent orientation of much state intervention to supporting domestic capital against foreign competition, underpinning advanced technology, and imposing restrictive state controls on industrial relations.
Most mixed economy interventions involve the state in subsidizing or taking over the organization of necessary economic activities unprofitable for capital; and most welfare policies can be understood as attempts to socialize labour costs falling on businesses, which become financed out of general taxation instead of showing up directly in employers' wage bills and production costs.
The absolutely preponderant orientation of the state in capitalist society is towards ‘the containment of pressure’ from below (Miliband, 1982, pp. 54 — 93).
Instrumentalists have never paid great attention to the detailed institutional organization of the liberal democratic state.
Most instrumentalists agree with Marx that parliamentary processes are meaningless charades, significant only as a means of maintaining the key ideological illusion that there is effective popular control of state policy-making.
Legislatures are ineffectual, and real power is concentrated in the executive branch of government.
For example, in the web of agencies which surround the US presidency and make key foreign and defence policy decisions, Domhoff (1970, 1978b) claims to detect clear evidence of capitalist control  over both popular and elite opinion-making agencies, which set the agenda for policy-making.
The American executive branch of the state is overwhelmingly staffed by the upper class; Congress serves at most as a place in which dissident members of the upper class can air grievances.
Debate and apparent pluralism in the institutions of representative government mask internal and technical disagreements amongst the ruling class about how to manage the discontent of subordinate classes.
Instrumentalists regard administrative elites as simply functionaries who make policy according to the rational interests of the capitalist class.
Bureaucracies exist primarily to respond to the problems and contradictions of a capitalist economy: there is no necessary reason for their existence independent of their class-biased role.
This simple view also extends to the legal system.
Instrumentalists agree with radical elite theorists that the class origins of the judiciary are reflected in the use of judicial discretion in a consistently biased fashion against labour unions and radical social movements.
Judges consistently use the law of contract against trade unions (labour monopolists) as opposed to capitalist monopolists.
In instrumentalist writings the state is seen in the last resort as a unified organization.
Federal decentralization of domestic policy responsibilities to regional governments, local government organizations and/or the separation of powers are alike dismissed as window dressing.
Any apparent fragmentation is a ruling class stratagem designed to divide exploited classes which develop revolutionary or reformist consciousness.
Should apparent fragmentation get out of hand, control over policy will be overtly centralized, or a new but equally fraudulent decentralization of state organizations will be devised.
Reorganizations which alter the legal powers and managerial patterns of local governments are interpreted as the implementation of the national capitalists' will.
Local or regional governments originally served as the executive committees for managing the common affairs of the local or regional bourgeoisie.
In the modern period capital is instead organized at a national or transnational scale so that the previous (capitalist) rationale for sub-national government has withered away, except for a few spatially constrained  sectors of capital, such as development interests or companies engaged in extracting mineral resources.
Current local state functions are a microcosm of the repressive and class-biased strategies which apply at central state level (Cockburn, 1977).
If this situation threatens to change, as when radical left parties gain control of local authorities, then sub-national government is simply by-passed, or its powers are drastically reduced.
Conflicts between central and local governments are the only serious ones which can arise within the liberal democratic state, and are invariably resolved in favour of the centre, where the executive committee of the national bourgeoisie is located.
In the absence of such conflicts the local or regional state acts as the instrument of local or regional capitalists, except when their interests are too parochial.
So far we have been concerned with the dominant academic version of Marxist instrumentalism.
However, it is worth noting two significant variants of this account, both of them closely associated with communist party intellectuals of various shades: state monopoly capitalist theory, and the various movements and arguments described as Eurocommunist.
The theory of state monopoly capitalism (often known as Stamocap for short) is used by the ruling communist parties of the Soviet bloc and orthodox Western communist parties loyal to Moscow in order to analyse the state in contemporary liberal democracies (Jessop, 1982, p. 32; Hardach and Karras, 1978).
It asserts that the development of any advanced capitalist economy leads to a fusion of monopoly corporations and the state into a single instrument of economic exploitation and political domination.
Whereas the nineteenth-century state concerned itself with the common affairs of all capital owners, the growth of giant industrial corporations and of large financial combines has now led to the almost complete exclusion of other capitalist fractions from influence over the state.
Evidence for the theory is found in the direct and overlapping networks which tie the personnel who command the heights of the state to the personnel who command the heights of monopoly capital.
Fusion between government and business institutions was enforced by the political and  economic crisis of the 1930s which compelled state officials and monopoly capitalists to pursue joint regulation of the capitalist economy in an attempt to manage its contradictions.
This fusion is cemented by the dominant role of monopoly capital in financing and influencing non-communist political parties and the mass media.
The growth of transnational companies has been swiftly followed by the mushrooming of economic and political apparatuses above the level of the nation state — such as the European Economic Community — developments which mark a further stage in the development of monopoly capital and international imperialism.
Despite its apparently tough-minded formulation, state monopoly capital theory is essentially a reformist rather than a revolutionary creed, reflecting the Soviet Union's switch towards a policy of ‘peaceful co-existence’ and competition with capitalism in the 1950s.
Since then Stamocap theorists have asserted that the communist parties of Western Europe, at the head of popular anti-monopoly alliances, are capable of leading a peaceful, parliamentary movement to socialism in liberal democratic countries.
So far in the post-war period this belief has borne no resemblance to reality.
Communists have participated on a very small scale in the governments of Sweden and France, but apart from Italy are nowhere the dominant party of the proletariat, let alone the leaders of a cross-class anti-monopoly alliance.
In more subtle versions of the Stamocap thesis some writers contend that the development of state monopoly capitalism is related to Marx's predictions about the development of capitalism (Fine and Harris, 1979).
The centralization and concentration of capital produces pressures on the state to intervene on behalf of the monopolies because the state has to regulate the contradictions of monopoly capitalism: it must smooth out the business cycle.
The state, for Fine and Harris, is more autonomous than in Soviet orthodoxy, although they remain instrumentalists.
Other Marxists reject Stamocap theory on several grounds.
The state has always played a critical role in fostering the development of a capitalist economy (Baran and Sweezy, 1966).
State monopoly capitalism is only one period in the development of capitalism and is not relevant to all advanced  capitalist societies (Poulantzas, 1975).
Marxists should not have to assume that the connections between the state and monopoly capital are so crude and direct; there may be impersonal causation behind state officials' support for capitalist production (Offe and Ronge, 1975).
Nor is the political cohesion amongst monopoly capitalists by any means self-evident: for example, capitalists are often divided into separate industrial/manufacturing fractions and financial/ stock exchange fractions.
Eurocommunism is the generic name given to the political strategies and beliefs of those Western European communist parties which have broken from alliance with the Soviet Union and repudiated the Leninist model of socialism both as it has turned out in practice and as envisaged in ideal terms (Boggs and Plotke, 1980; Carillo, 1977; Claudin, 1979).
Most Eurocoinmunists are also instrumentalists, and their arguments go back to those of ‘the renegade Kautsky’(as Lenin called him).
On the one hand, Kautsky argued that the state was an instrument of the ruling class, and that it ‘will not cease to be a capitalist institution until the proletariat has become the ruling class’(Kautsky, 1971, p. 110).
On the other hand, he considered that through parliamentary victories the working class was capable of conquering the rest of the state.
This analysis was reiterated in a very similar form in the 1970s by Berlinguer and Carillo, then the leaders of the Italian and Spanish Communist parties, and in a form which closely resembles the views of contemporary left-wing social democrats (Hodgson, 1977).
The Italian Communist Party (PCI) was the first major Communist party to adopt a Eurocommunist position in its ‘historic compromise strategy’ of 1972.
The PCI repudiated its previous adherence to Lenin's insurrectionary road to socialism, declared its permanent attachment to multi-party politics and complete acceptance of liberal constitutional rules, and renounced its hitherto unswerving support for Soviet foreign policy.
The contemporary PCI contends that a peaceful transition to socialism can take place in Italy without damaging the fabric of liberal democracy.
Indeed it may even be achievable through alliances with the Christian Democrats around a programme of democratic reforms (Hobsbawm, 1977).
Despite  some internal controversies, reformist Eurocommunism has been as instrumentalist as the revolutionary Leninism which it rejects.
The state is still seen as an instrument which can and must be captured by the working class.
Eurocommunism's distinctiveness lies in its determination to avoid a Soviet-style one party state.
The arbiter model
Marx and Engels' arbiter model of the state suggested that if class forces in society were for a time evenly balanced, then the state bureaucracy and a strong political — military leader could intervene to impose stabilizing policies which were not controllable by capital, although they would be bound to maintain capitalist predominance in economic life.
The modern arbiter model suggests that this distinct policy stance by state agencies and political leaders could be a much more common and long-lasting phenomenon than Marx or Engels ever acknowledged.
Poulantzas (1978) suggests that the state in liberal democracies acts as a condensation of class struggle, mirroring in a distorted and class-biased way the balance of class forces in the broader society.
Elections, strikes, riots, pressure group lobbying, and decisions by law courts continuously serve to adjust state policies to keep them in touch with movements and realignments of multiple class fractions and strata.
Within modern capitalist societies the monopoly corporations constitute the dominant class fraction.
If their influence over public policy is to be maintained, it is essential that the state ensures a broad degree of support for state policy from other fractions of capital, from intermediate class categories (such as the petit bourgeoisie and non-manual groups), and from significant sections of the working class.
Flexible and adaptive public policy configurations co-opt popular struggles and disorganize working class militancy.
Maintaining this configuration requires that the state apparatus should operate with a considerable degree of autonomy from the dominant class fraction, and that the leaders who assemble and co-ordinate the ruling ‘power bloc’ should appear on the political stage as independent actors.
But this autonomy for stage agencies is relative , since in the  last instance the requirements of capitalism as an economic system will always prevail over any contradictory state policies, even supposing that these should reach the point of being explicitly formulated.
Nonetheless, because the relatively autonomous state in advanced capitalism acts in a way which gauges and responds to the balance of class forces, there is the possibility of a partial socialization of capitalism as an economic system — i.e. the introduction of elements of a socialist mode of production, an argument which purely repressive or instrumental models of the state emphatically deny.
The arbiter model has been developed to analyse major institutional changes in post-war liberal democracies by Poulantzas' concept of authoritarian statism .
This model particularly set out to explain the consolidation of the Gaullist regime in France after the Fifth French Republic was established with a strong president in 1958, a change which inaugurated an unbroken dominance of French national politics by right-wing parties for over two decades.
Poulantzas identified the rise of authoritarian statism as the principal trend in contemporary liberal democratic politics, and defined it as ‘intensified state control over every sphere of socio-economic life combined with a radical decline of the institutions of political democracy, and with draconian and multiform curtailment of so-called ‘formal’ liberties' (Poulantzas, 1978, pp. 203 — 4).
Five features are important.
First, the decline of parliaments and the strengthening of executive power corresponds to the decline of liberal bourgeois politics and presages the possible demise of liberal democracy altogether.
Second, the whole separation of powers doctrine — which prescribes no institutional connections between the executive, the legislature and the judiciary — has begun to dissolve, and liberal democratic states systematically violate their own laws.
Third, political parties have declined as serious inputs into policy-making, either because a single party grouping has emerged as dominant over all alternatives (as in Japan or Gaullist France), or because where two party groupings alternate in power, executive authority is always monopolized by a centrist bloc which spans both possible parties of government (as in Britain or West Germany).
Fourth, the  ‘legitimating process is shifting towards plebiscitary and purely manipulatory circuits (the media) dominated by the administration and the executive’(Poulantzas, 1978, p. 229).
The fifth feature is the development of so-called ‘parallel networks’, which cross-cut the formal or official organization of the state, and cause a concentration of powers to accumulate at the very top of the executive.
Political leaders and presidents increasingly seem to run government in a directly personalized, discretionary way.
At the same time quasi-governmental agencies have multiplied beyond the reach of any effective control by representative politics.
Authoritarian statism carries the ‘seeds or certain scattered elements of fascism’ and Poulantzas asserts in conclusion that ‘All contemporary power is functional to authoritarian statism’(1978, p. 239).
The arbiter approach dismisses instrumentalist arguments that the state apparatus operates to support capitalism because the social backgrounds, values and networks of contacts for senior bureaucrats and political leaders tie them into a directly pro-business orientation.
In Poulantzas' view the co-ordination of the capitalist state is achieved by the political executive and higher administrative civil service, irrespective of the type of personnel who staff these posts.
The institutional separation of the state from the capitalist class is not simply a charade.
The constitutional and organizational arrangements filter the interests of state personnel towards the long-run interests of the capitalists.
The mechanisms of legal and political accountability were initially developed to serve the interests of particular capitalists in removing the corrupt exploitation of state offices.
In the modern period the institutional separation preserves harmony amongst different types of capital and makes the state appear open to the interests of all citizens, including the working class.
The state must appear class-neutral, the better to preserve the long-run interests of the capitalist class.
Civil servants in an advanced industrial state are meritocratically selected (Therborn, 1978) even though their tasks are to plan in the long-run interests of capitalism.
State officials are dependent upon capitalist economic development  and growth if they are going to be able to pursue their interests and sustain themselves in office, so they are constrained to act in the interests of capital, although not necessarily in its optimal interests (Offe, 1984).
Planning cannot be socially rational, as it would be under socialism, where planning for need would replace production for profit.
But planning can be made rational for a particular class or for the ‘power bloc’ created to sustain monopoly capital's predominance.
A range of policy technologies, including Keynesian demand management, incomes policies, regional policies, indicative planning, and welfare management can be used by state officials.
These interventions will be implemented despite short-term business protests if state managers deem them class-rational.
In the long run administrators try to make capitalism a positive-sum game from which all classes can gain.
Such strategies prevent the breakdown of capitalism into class conflicts.
They can only succeed by imposing long-run discipline upon capitalists.
Conspiracies or strong personal relations between business and state elites, such as corruption, nepotism or clientelism, are syndromes of underdevelopment for arbiter theorists.
Such lapses from liberal democratic ethos are the legacy of feudalism, not intrinsic features of bourgeois democracy.
Arbiter theorists have a comparatively complex outlook on law, which is regarded as a partly autonomous sphere of social action, not controllable by capitalists.
Legal procedures bind judges against straightforward manipulation, and subordinate classes can take advantage of these legal procedures despite the obstacles placed in their way.
Jury systems, and the segmentation of the legal system into spheres which are in no obvious sense class-based, are given due significance in this view (Thompson, 1975).
The successful struggle of labour movements in various liberal democracies to transform the practice or contract and labour law is not ignored, as in instrumentalist models.
However, arbiter theorists have no faith in the long-run neutrality of the courts.
Concessions which judges make to workers at one moment in the class struggle may be removed at another.
The relative autonomy of law has to be constantly maintained  by successful working-class mobilization into politics and the labour movement.
Arbiter theorists also recognize that liberal democratic states vary greatly in their internal organization between federal and unitary forms.
Local governments also possess very different degrees of policy-making and financial autonomy; and a historically given separation of powers may still significantly affect the cohesion of the state.
Since the state as a whole is relatively autonomous from the short-run interests of capitalists, each state sub-organization is also relatively autonomous from the relevant short-run interests of the capitalists, and other class interests must be accommodated in some degree.
The changing institutional structure of the state is a historical artefact of class struggle which follows a simple pattern.
The successes of subordinate classes in capturing state organizations are met by reorganizations which benefit the long-run interests of capital, as in Britain, where local government units have been completely modernized and increased in size to make them less vulnerable to electoral capture by the labour movement (Dearlove, 1979).
American federalism was also explained by Charles Beard (1935) as a device which promoted national integration in the long-run interests of the merchant class.
The fragmentation of the state apparatus also conveniently diverts the class struggle to multiple fronts.
A thoroughly centralized state is avoided by an intelligent bourgeoisie because it is not in their long-run interest to build a state machine which could quickly be converted to serve socialist purposes.
Decentralization fragments the scope of radical change and raises the thresholds required for it to be achieved, a maxim which constitutional and administrative designers take seriously in many liberal democracies.
That decentralized state structures serve to reduce the scope of welfare state expansion and socialist incumbency is one of the few findings in the comparative public policy literature on which there is near unanimity (Castles, 1985, p. 120).
Constitutions embodying decentralization bind the bourgeoisie against the short-run pursuit of their material interests, reflecting an abstentionist strategic rationality.
There are no developed variants of the arbiter model.
Indeed, as we shall see below, many of its key protagonists (such as Poulantzas and Therborn) also switch back and forth between the arbiter model and functionalist arguments.
However, there is an interesting and well developed literature which is worth considering in its own right, namely the application of the arbiter model to explain the existence of authoritarian regimes under capitalism .
Marxists have traditionally agreed that liberal democracy is the ‘normal’ form of political system for an advanced industrial state.
Marx explained the regime of Napoleon III as an arbiter state temporarily gaining autonomy from the balance of class forces, a situation which he insisted could occur only when the transition from capitalism to socialism was already in train.
Orthodox Marxists in the inter-war period accordingly hailed the widespread growth of fascist exceptional regimes as a sign that the death agonies of European capitalism were imminent.
But the strength and resilience of those fascist societies, none of which fell because of internal collapse, and their replacement after 1945 by liberal democratic capitalism seemed to refute such interpretations.
Equally the long-lived persistence of authoritarian regimes in post-war capitalist societies (as in Spain, Portugal, Greece, Brazil and Argentina) reawakened Marxist writers' interest in explaining ‘exceptional’ regimes.
Trotsky (1971) suggested that fascist governments emerge not where class forces are ‘balanced’, but rather when the bourgeoisie has already lost its battle with the working class; only in these circumstances will capitalists concede a very high level of autonomy to a fascist political party or social movement which they cannot control.
In trying to explain post-war authoritarian regimes Poulantzas radically extended the arbiter model to suggest that an autonomous state is the generalized form of political system for advanced capitalism, and that ‘exceptional’ and liberal democratic governments are both equally possible and common alternatives by which a necessary degree and appropriate form of state autonomy can be achieved.
Modern functionalist approaches
The functionalist model in Marx and Engels' work stressed the shaping of state organization and policy-making by the fundamental imperatives of maintaining capitalist development.
Changes in the economic base of society determine shifts in the political and legal superstructure.
Modern functionalist approaches continue to emphasize that state intervention is best explained by an impersonal logic of the development of advanced capitalism.
Like the views of their predecessors in classical Marxist thought, modern functionalist views do not regard it as useful or necessary to demonstrate the precise mechanisms by which state policy responds to structural imperatives; instead they focus on macro-social issues and trends.
Some important Marxist functional approaches have been defined as attempts to respond to grand sociological theories formulated in the USA and Western Europe.
Conservative writers have developed complex theoretical systems to explain the maintenance of social stability and legitimacy (see pp. 20 — 21 on Talcott Parsons) or how industrial society is evolving towards more complex and sophisticated forms (see pp. 278 — 80 on Niklas Luhmann).
Neo-Marxist functionalist schemas try to match their conceptual sophistication, and to adapt the concepts of system theory to demonstrate the necessary class biases and contradictions of state interventions.
Although economic imperatives remain dominant in these schemas, all modern functionalist accounts acknowledge the existence of separate political — ideological structures or cultural processes with their own distinctive logic of development.
For example, Althusser argues that revolutionary situations can only occur when the economic system is in crisis at the same time as the political and ideological structures are in crisis.
Habermas argues that crises have been displaced from the economic realm into the state apparatus itself or into the cultural system (see pp. 264–69).
There are few if any developed functionalist accounts of state institutions, although Therborn's (1978) analysis of the decline of parliaments is a mixture of functional and arbiter model arguments.
He argues that the traditional forms of  representative government, which effectively excluded the popular masses or isolated and controlled them through local notables, is ‘no longer an adequate instrument’.
In most liberal democracies it has gradually been supplemented by a new plebiscitary politics, based on the cult of charismatic leaders built up through the mass media.
Plebiscitary politics enhances, indeed exalts, executive preponderance in policy-making and implementation, at the expense of legislatures.
This change is functional for the stability of monopoly capitalism because the pseudo-democracy of direct voting by a mass electorate for leaders or policies increases the legitimacy of the political system, allows the mass of citizens to be co-opted into compliance, and poses no real risk of losing control over key state decisions to the masses.
Similarly O'Connor (1973, p. 78) argues that the American executive branch remains independent of particular class interests, and serve the interests of monopoly capital as a whole.
These interests are sifted, ranked and transmitted by the state administration to the president and his key aides, who initiate appropriate political action on them.
The characteristics of politicians or civil servants on which instrumentalist accounts focus barely matter in a functionalist analysis.
State personnel simply fill given roles; their behaviour is largely predetermined by structural forces in line with the functional imperatives of the capitalist mode of production.
Their policy-making styles vary according to what is optimal for the function concerned.
Similarly the state's organization at any time is assumed to be optimally organized for the needs of capital at that time.
Specify capitalism's needs at any time and the structure of state organization is explained — except of course in periods of acute crisis.
A strictly functionalist Marxist must accordingly believe that problems of state co-ordination cannot exist, except in a revolutionary crisis.
In normal circumstances the capitalist state can successfully conceal its class character.
The state's function is to co-ordinate and manage the economic crises generated by the mode of production through political and ideological interventions.
Threatening co-ordination difficulties can arise if and only if the system's managers cannot resolve the displacement of crises  because of serious dysfunctions in the economy or some sort of collapse in the cultural — ideological system.
But since Marxists believe that capitalism as a social system is doomed, it follows that capitalism cannot he rationally planned for ever.
Ruling class strategies and responses to functional imperatives from an internally contradictory mode of production are permanently unstable.
Even in the functionalist version of Marxism the state's performance is contingent on class struggle (although the two explanatory mechanisms, classes in struggle and functional imperatives, are never combined convincingly).
Functionalist Marxists continue to insist that rational comprehensive planning is only possible under socialism, despite a complete lack of evidence for this judgement in the operation of planning in the Soviet Union or its allied states (Nove, 1983).
Many Western Marxists still deny that the experience of Eastern bloc countries has any direct relevance for the future planned performance of Western economies following their transformation into socialism.
However, there is some evidence of a recent reappraisal of this entrenched attitude.
Yet there have been some areas where functionalist accounts have been elaborated to try to explain the persistence of both stability and of internal tensions within the state apparatus.
A quite developed model of the reasons for fragmentation of government into different tiers and sectors is provided by the dual state thesis , which presents a Marxist alternative to liberal corporatist theory (see pp. 193 — 7).
The thesis has three main stages (O'Connor, 1973; Wolfe, 1977; Cawson and Saunders, 1983).
First, three functions of the state in the capitalist mode of production are deduced from the functional requirements of the mode of production.
They are the preservation of order, the promotion of capital accumulation and the manufacture of legitimation.
Second, forms of state expenditure corresponding to each of these functions are identified.
Order is maintained through ‘social expenses’ policy; accumulation is fostered directly by ‘social investment’expenditures to reduce production costs; and social cohesion is boosted by ‘social consumption’spending, which boosts workers' living standards (and hence only  indirectly contributes to increased profitability).
State organizations can be classified according to which function is furthered by their budgets.
Thus police organizations which preserve order fall in the social expenses category, nuclear power plants supposedly providing cheap electricity constitute social investment, and welfare agencies which promote legitimation fall in the social consumption category.
Third, the direction of state organizations is structured so that accumulation functions are ranked higher than legitimation functions.
An appropriate ranking is achieved by creating two sets of institutions.
The central government or politically uncontrolled quasi-governmental agencies monopolize social investment functions of critical significance for capital.
Here decision-making is characteristically corporatist, future-orientated, and concerned to integrate external interests in achieving state policy goals.
The central government also monopolizes social expenses functions of key significance for social stability, but these are administered in a rigidly bureaucratic way, without any attempt to co-opt external interests.
At the same time local government structures, and perhaps some politically visible sections of the national state apparatus, are entrusted with responsibility for social consumption spending.
Policy-making in this area is deliberately pluralist, mopping up political energies, providing a reassuring appearance of controversy and popular influence, and sustaining a needs-orientated ideology which seems to indicate the social neutrality of state policy.
In practice local governments or elected regional governments are rigidly controlled by the centre to prevent them adopting policies hostile to capital interests, and their decisions are extensively determined by prior central state commitments of resources.
Nonetheless, conflicts in central — local relations reveal the structural tensions between the accumulation and legitimation imperatives acting upon the capitalist state.
Critics of the dual state thesis argue that in practice public expenditures can be classified according to their function only through a post hoc evaluation of their consequences or by knowing which organizations implemented the programmes (which would make the whole schema tautologous).
Thus only after the event can one evaluate whether expenditure on  public health services contributed to capital accumulation, legitimation, and/or social order (Dunleavy, 1984).
Nor is the comparative evidence of the allocation of functions between state organizations in liberal democracies very favourable for the theory (Sharpe, 1984).
In some countries major social consumption functions are controlled by the central government and social investment functions by local governments.
A second major area of functionalist thinking is in accounts of the legal system which are based on Marx's base — superstructure metaphor (Cohen, 1978).
The legal system existing at any time is explained as functional for the development of the productive forces at that time, or (in another version) for the relations of production at that time.
As Cohen presents the functionalist model, law changes in accordance with changes in the power relations between classes, a feature particularly true of the law of the labour contract.
There may be time lags and a degree of sub-optimality in the correspondence between relations of production and legal relations, but otherwise law is functional for the economic base.
Critics of the functionalist base-superstructure distinction argue that law is in fact part of the property relations governing production, so it is not possible to separate the two (Lukes, 1983).
Nonetheless, the base — superstructure model is the dominant Marxist approach to law.
Renner (1949) argued with some plausible empirical evidence that legal norms which appear to persist for lengthy historical periods, spanning different modes of production, in fact change their substantive functions in response to developments in economic structures.
However, Renner's arguments did not imply that law is a passive reflection of its class-divided environment.
Judges and the legal system play an active role in the maintenance and alteration of social relations.
Pashukanis (1979) stressed the formal resemblance between law and capitalist rationality.
Law mirrors the abstract individuality and formal equality of contracting parties in the capitalist market.
Law will consequently disappear under socialism, where substantive collective goals (embodied in the plan) will replace formal legal equality, which would be dysfunctional to socialism.
However, in some  functionalist versions of Marxism, the legal system does have the capacity to be class-neutral, because it does not recognize classes, only abstract individuals (Poulantzas, 1973).
Nonetheless, this judicial fiction functions in a class-biased way, maintaining the capitalist mode of production through the ‘juridical illusion’ that social conflicts can be settled or refereed outside the class struggle.
There has been a considerable fashion for functionalist accounts among Western Marxists, since an apparently more elegant intellectual apparatus than those of orthodox instrumentalists can be constructed.
Three distinctive variants of the functionalist approach have been noteworthy: structuralist Marxism, the capital logic school, and German neo-Marxism.
Structuralist Marxism originated in France in the 1960s, especially in the work of the communist philosopher Louis Althusser, although other key writers have included Poulantzas (who sometimes uses the arbiter model and sometimes a functional approach).
In structuralist accounts the state is seen as essentially a factor of cohesion in society, which functions to organize the dominant class and to disorganize the subordinate classes through the use of either repressive or ideological apparatuses (Althusser, 1969).
Repressive state apparatuses (RSAs) are new labels for armies and police forces.
Ideological state apparatuses (ISAs) include a very wide range of institutions which are said to perform the ‘state’ function of ensuring social stability.
Althusser's list includes religious, educational, trade union and mass media organizations, and the family.
But remarkably no mention is made of welfare agencies, public enterprises or planning bodies, all of which are major additions in the extended welfare state.
RSAs and ISAs continually create the ‘conditions of existence’ of the capitalist mode of production, producing docile, disciplined and fragmented ‘individuals’whose viewpoints and behaviour are suitable for capitalist life.
It is to capture this function that Althusser defined the state to include almost all non-economic organizations, except the revolutionary party of the working class, in the process definitionally obliterating the difference between input politics  and state organization, or between the state and society (Polan, 1984, pp. 34 — 5).
Althusser denies that there is anything specific to explain about liberal democracy except its illusory existence.
His ISA concept implies that the populations of the capitalist state are living under a dictatorship, a bourgeois dictatorship.
What they think is private is in fact public.
Liberal democracy, private life, civil rights and interest groups are all simply ideological constructs designed to pacify and mislead.
One purpose underlying Althusser's work was to rationalize the French Communist Party's continued adherence to a pro-Moscow line and admiration for the Eastern-bloc system.
Althusser's analysis implies that the Soviet Union and capitalist societies do not differ in degrees of democracy or political freedom.
The only essential dissimilarity is that in the Eastern bloc the economy is socialized and directed towards the common welfare.
Hence the Soviet Union is superior to capitalist societies if judged by Marxism's standard evaluative yardsticks.
However, Althusser's approach does go beyond orthodox Stamocap models by promising to provide a theory of the functional autonomy of the state from responding directly to the economic imperatives of capitalism.
Althusser insists that political and ideological structures exist with their own rhythm and laws of development quite distinct from those in the economic sphere.
One might have expected an examination of the non-economic bases of liberal democracy or of bureaucracy in understanding the distinction between ‘class power’ and ‘state power’, or ‘the specificity of the political’(Laclau, 1977).
However, structuralist Marxists fail to carry through their qualification of economic determinism.
Social classes, political parties, ideologies and state organizations still seem to be ‘explained’ by the logic of the mode of production.
Some critics also argue that any qualification of economic determinism threatens the distinctiveness of Marxism.
For example, neo-Marxist analyses of bureaucracy and the division of labour have converged on the accounts given by elite theorists (Parkin, 1979); and post-Althusserian and post-Gramscian Marxism is indistinguishable from  pluralism except in its vocabulary (Laclau and Mouffe, 1985).
A further problem for structuralist Marxists is the relation between class struggle and functionalist state theory.
They later came to argue that class struggle goes on in state institutions (Althusser, 1976; Poulantzas, 1978).
But such class struggle cannot originate in the political and ideological levels of the mode of production, because in their scheme the functions of these levels are to stabilize the mode of production.
On the other hand, if the class struggle going on inside the state originates at the economic sphere, then surely there is no separation of the economic and the political — ideological levels at all?
The capital logic school of neo-Marxist theories (sometimes also called the ‘state derivation’ approach) set out to deduce the functional necessity of the state from analysis of the capitalist mode of production (Altvater, 1973; Holloway and Picciotto, 1978).
For example, legal and monetary systems necessary for the production and exchange of commodities and the circulation of capital are ‘deduced’ from the functional needs of capitalism.
The state as a whole functions as ‘an ideal collective capitalist’(Altvater, 1973), a political institution which corresponds to the common needs of capital.
Whereas public choice theorists explain state activities, such as the production of public goods, as a result of intentional rationality (see pp. 125 — 7), the capital logic school deduces the functional necessity of the state from analysis of the imputed needs of capital.
They similarly deduce the need for the contemporary state to intervene extensively to regulate the crisis-prone capitalist economy in four ways — providing the general, material conditions of production; establishing general, legal relations; regulating and suppressing conflicts between capital and wage-labour; and protecting national capital in the world market (Altvater, 1978, p. 42).
However, there are limits to the functional capacities of the state — it cannot transcend the contradictions of capitalism.
German neo-Marxism is influenced by the Frankfurt School of critical theory and by systems thinking (Jay, 1973).
A leading author in the genre, Claus Offe, defines the capitalist state as an institutionalized form of political power which  ‘seeks to implement and guarantee the collective interests of all members of a class society dominated by capital’(Offe, 1984, p. 120).
This conception mixes an organizational and functional definition of the state.
It presupposes that the functionally optimal capitalist state is in some senses class-neutral.
Offe believes that the institutional operations of the state are guided by three conditions.
First, the state is excluded from organizing production according to its own ‘political’ criteria.
This ‘exclusion principle’ means that investment decisions in any liberal democracy lie with capitalists, outside direct state control.
Second, state policy is constrained because government depends for taxation revenue upon maintaining successful capital accumulation.
State officials must be interested, for the sake of their own power, in guaranteeing and safeguarding healthy capital accumulation, an argument which anticipates the neo-pluralist position of Charles Lindblom (pp. 293 — 5).
Third, the capitalist state is built upon this combination of exclusion from direct production and dependence on capital accumulation, but an ideal form of state also requires democratic legitimation.
The state's function,par excellence , is to manage potential crises which may occur in the economy, in its own fiscal resources, or in the legitimacy of existing social arrangements.
Marxist critics argue that functionalist accounts of the state are vacuous because they consist of citing the consequences of particular actions as their causes (Elster, 1986; also note 1, p. 71).
Because a particular action achieves a given result, the action is seen as made necessary in order to achieve that result, and a loose typology of the ‘needs’ of capital is constructed to demonstrate the functionality of any particular outcome.
Thus we ‘know’ that the creation of an extended welfare state was functional for capital in the three decades after 1945 because that was what occurred.
Equally we know that cutbacks and retrenchment of welfare services have become functional for capital since the mid-1970s because that too has occurred.
In short, whatever the state does is functional for the capitalist class in the long run, so the theory is immunized against any conflicting evidence.
Instrumentalists also claim that poulantzas' conception of  the state as the factor of cohesion in the social formation is equally unhelpful.
To say that the reproduction of the capitalist mode of production requires a number of conditions to be met is not an explanation of how they are met, of what happens if they are not met, of whether they can be met in ‘functionally equivalent ways’, or of why these needs are met.
The relative autonomy of the state
All neo-Marxist word-processors have been programmed with the phrase ‘the relative autonomy of the capitalist state’, so it may be useful in rounding off this section to recap very briefly on how the three approaches actually use this concept.
In fact there are two different meanings hidden away in this phrase: the state can be relatively autonomous of the capitalist class, which is appropriate for an organizational model of the state (Figure 5.1).
Alternatively the state may be relatively autonomous of the capitalist mode of production, which is appropriate for a functionalist approach.