

Chapter 1
Only England has mornings like these.
I walked quietly past the clubhouse, towards the first tee of the Royal Bucks Golf Club, and paused.
In early May at 6 a.m. there was hardly a sound, but the sun was already up and giving the hint of a beautiful day to come.
A perfect day for golf, as the club golfer invariably terms it.
The outline of the fairway was almost pernickety in the way it was defined against the darker green of the semi-rough and the denser patches of the real rough.
The bunkers ate into the fairway at around the 240-yard mark to cool the aggressive ardour of the professional golfer who might try to cut the slight dogleg and set himself up for an easier shot into the two-tier green.
These bunkers, beautifully trimmed around the edges and beautifully raked, looked innocent and defenceless — an illusion, as I knew, brought on by the fresh and shining morning.
The sun was setting a glittering scene for the first hole, enlivening the damp leaves on the backdrop of ancient and stately trees, whose different designs gave character to each and every hole on this, one of the loveliest golf courses in southern  England.
It would not be so attractive to many of the professional golfers in the field of nearly 150 who would shortly begin to contest the World Wide Insurance Golf Championship.
The beauties of the course couldn't hide its tough and unremitting nature, which demanded accurate striking of the ball on virtually every hole.
It had been laid out some fifty years before by one of those famous Scottish golfers who had dominated golf in the first couple of decades of the century.
He had used all the natural contours of the ground, the heather which abounds in this part of England, and the hordes of mighty trees — all even mightier now — to produce a hard but enjoyable test for the club members.
There was plenty of room on the course and it was relatively easy to lengthen it enough to test the professionals.
New tees lurked in the trees on several holes, and were skilfully placed to bring into play the same hazards which threatened the club players from their tees.
There were already several cars in the VIP car park, and — prominent amongst them was a new Rolls-Royce Corniche with the number plate BS1.
This obviously belonged to Brian Summers, the chairman of World Wide Insurance.
He was a fanatical and not very competent golfer and a member of the Royal Bucks Club.
He had started sponsoring the tournament half a dozen years ago, and loved the prestige that ‘his’ tournament gave him amongst the other members.
Some of them had no doubt spent most of the preceding year trying to wangle an invitation to play in the pro-am.
Above all, Brian Summers delighted in rubbing  shoulders with some of the world's best golfers, and his big day was the pro-am, which usually takes place the day before the tournament proper.
You might think that the function of the pro-am is to enable the professional to take a good look at the course under competitive conditions.
Wrong.
For a start only about thirty or so take part, since it is organised in four-ball teams, with one professional, a celebrity who is normally from sport or show business, and two amateurs.
The main purpose of the pro-am has nothing to do with golf.
It is the day on which the sponsor entertains his major customers.
The day on which he pours as much food, drink and bonhomie into them as possible; and into the gentlemen of the Press, too.
The chairman can then, whether it is justified or not, tell his board of directors and his shareholders how successful the whole exercise has been in terms of customer relations and exposure for the company and its services.
He can then happily lay his plans for next year's shindig.
I walked down the first fairway in a relaxed and peaceful mood, despite my early departure from my bed.
I paused by the first green, where one of the greenkeepers was raking 8 deep bunker.
It was Mark Spicer, the son of the Royal Bucks secretary, and he was earning some extra money during his time off from university.
He leant on his long rake and grinned up at me.
‘Did you see some of those swings yesterday?’ he asked.
‘My God, they weren't just hitting it sideways, some of them weren't even making contact.
Why do they bother?’
Mark played off a low handicap, and he had a  point.
It seems that no businessman, even if he hasn't touched a club for years, can resist an invitation to a pro-am.
The results are often more comic than the antics of the television comedians and personalities who are out in force on these occasions.
‘And did you see the gear?’
Mark laughed and we compared notes on the most garish sights we'd seen.
The prize went to a pop singer who had attired himself in tartan trousers, a flower-patterned shirt and a sweater with zig-zag stripes.
Mark and I agreed to have a game together soon and I moved off down the course, and mused on the ways in which the pro golfers cope in their different ways with the unusual demands of the pro-am.
The superstar is doubly lucky in that a certain aloofness — a concentration on tomorrow's battle for supremacy — is expected.
Lesser players can try the same tack but run the risk of being berated by their amateur partners for being unfriendly or even unprofessional.
On one famous occasion an aspiring pro, later to play in the Ryder Cup, was so incensed by the antics of his pro-am partners that he left the course in mid-round.
He was fined and warned severely by the Professional Golfers Association, but there was many a wry and sympathetic smile about the incident amongst his fellow professionals.
Another way to cope with the day is for the pro to enter totally into the spirit of it all: like the perfect publican, he must try to be arbiter, philosopher, psychologist and friend, all rolled into one.
In addition he must be the team captain, strong and sympathetic.
He must listen attentively to the tales of  how the amateur would have broken sixty-five in a competition last Saturday if he had not had such disgusting luck on the greens.
He must give lessons on the golf swing on the way round, encourage, cajole, crack jokes, tell tall golfing tales and generally be Mr Golf Personality.
This is the best way.
His reputation as a really nice guy will be assured, amongst two club golfers at least, and he might even get into the pro-am prize money.
One of the professional golfers had cracked under the strain yesterday.
Jack Mason.
I had seen it happen at close quarters because I am his caddie.
The golf fan, if he notices the caddie at all, probably just sees him as the anonymous person who carries the superstar's bag and is, incidentally, a walking billboard for the sponsor.
Some caddies are just that, and the old tradition of the itinerant caddie who sleeps rough and dresses in cast-off clothing is still abroad.
But many caddies offer a great deal more and look upon themselves as vital components in the professional golfer's armoury.
At this early hour I was taking a final look at the layout of the course.
I already had two vital tools of the caddie's trade in my pocket: notes on the measurements and characteristics of each hole, which I had checked and rechecked on the practice days; and a chart, issued ahead of each day's play by the PGA which told me where the hole would be cut on each green.
Despite these I always took a last look at the course on the first day of the tournament.
It was a superstition of mine.
I was reminding the golfing spirits that I could not be caught napping.
These measurements were vital to Jack Mason who relied upon me to confirm where he should hit his shots and how hard.
A pro knows within a few yards how far he can hit the ball with each club — unlike the club golfer who has a wide variation from day to day, and even from hole to hole.
Later in the day I would tell Jack the exact distance that the first bunker was from the tee.
Depending on the direction and strength of the breeze, Jack would opt either to carry his drive right over the bunker to set up an easy shot into the green or, more likely, for a conservative drive down the left side of the fairway and a mid-iron to the heart of the green.
Just as important is the chart which shows the position of the hole on the green.
Some greens can be forty yards long, so the pin position can often mean a difference of two clubs.
I checked the first one on my chart — a none-too-generous position near the back and on the left.
It would be difficult to hit the ball close since a big bunker, cut into the front left edge of the green, was a threat, especially since the fairway sloped slightly towards it.
I went on my way, gazing anew at the beauties of the course.
I noticed the leather of my shoes darken as it picked up the moisture from the grass.
I was really looking forward to my breakfast.
The greenkeepers were already sweeping the dew off the greens with elongated poles — the final polish to an immaculately groomed course.
In less than two hours the first shot would be hit — and the first tales of glory or misery or ‘if only’ would be told.
Perhaps a new young star would make his insistent mark on the golfing heavens; or, more  likely, one of the top dozen or so established golfers would add to his bank balance.
As I strolled down the next fairway and skirted a mass of heather which cut into the fairway on the angle of the dogleg, I wondered how my boss, Jack Mason, would fare in the tournament.
He was approaching the awkward age in a professional golfer's career.
After a short but successful amateur career he had been a steady winner of golfing titles in Europe and Africa; had flirted with the American tour in the seventies, but without the conviction to make a real marriage of it; and had been good enough occasionally to carry the hopes of British fans into the Open Championship.
This invariably led to a first round in the high seventies followed by brilliant but despairing rounds which carried him well up into the place money.
He was another ‘if only’ character, who nevertheless had played several times in the Ryder Cup against the USA with distinction.
His game was sound in all departments and his putting was particularly good, but his temperament was erratic.
If he had a hangover from too much of the strongest real ale to be found the night before — Jack was a formidable seeker-out of head-banging beers with frightening names — or if the play was too slow, or if he disapproved of a local rule, or a local official, or a new initiative by the PGA, or…
I could go on for minutes on end.
This was one of the many reasons why he was such an immensely likeable man.
He made short shrift of fools and knaves, but was human, too, and generous with his money and his time.
Many of the younger professionals sought him out to have a  look at swings and putting strokes that were out of tune, and he rarely if ever refused them his advice.
His attitude to any form of authority was irreverent to say the least, and a story still went the rounds of how, at the age of fifteen, he won a sporting scholarship to a relatively new and very expensive boarding school.
When he arrived with his parents for the interview the headmaster took him to a field where a few golf holes were laid out, handed him a wedge and a bucket of balls, and told Jack to hit some shots at one of the greens while he organised some tea for his parents.
Jack hit a few shots and when the headmaster had disappeared around the corner he strolled down to the green and dropped three or four balls into the hole ‘just to make sure’.
But Jack always gave good value and, apart from winning the British Boys' Golf Championship, he played rugby, cricket and tennis for the school and even managed to play county tennis as well.
Like most intelligent sportsmen, his was a complicated psychology which was highly tuned to provide feasible excuses for not winning every week.
This is no criticism — virtually every sportsman has the same ability to turn a slight irritation or misfortune into a reason for defeat.
Only the really great champions refuse to be sidetracked by any of these minor problems.
This can make those rare beings quite boring — an accusation you could never level at Jack.
He was perhaps a little too intelligent for the daily grind of professional golf, without having that last cutting edge of brilliance which would have brought him an Open Championship.
The X-factor, what the film people call ‘bankability’ when talking of superstars like John Wayne or Paul Newman or Barbra Streisand, was missing.
How Jack Mason would perform on any given day was, more than with most sportsmen, in the gift of the golfing gods.
But it was one of my self-imposed duties to try to even out the peaks and troughs of his capricious temperament and make sure he produced his best golf when it mattered.
I was now approaching the eighth green, a plateau with four deep bunkers cut into the face and sides and a pronounced slope at the back if you overshot.
At 170 yards it would not do to be less than accurate.
I had caught up with the advance guard of greenkeepers, and greeted the head greenkeeper, a fit-looking, lean man with a rather scholarly stoop and a trim grey beard.
I knew Tony Milton well from my brief days on the amateur golfing circuit.
In his unobtrusive way he had shown his interest in my faltering attempts to climb the golfing ladder, and had even carried my bag in the Amateur Championship.
As befitted a man who had been an assistant professional in his youth he had great sympathy for those afflicted by golf mania.
‘Morning, Tony.
A lovely day for golf.’
‘Hello, Chris,’ he said, in his quiet and welcoming way.
‘How are the greens?’
I don't know why I asked.
No greenkeeper in the world would admit that his greens were anything but perfection, especially for an important tournament.
‘Perfect,’ he said.
‘They'll hold a properly hit shot, but they'll be quick enough to test even the  Swede, and they'll put the wind up some of ‘em.’
The Swede was Bjorn Carlssen and he was the current leader of the European Order of Merit — a brilliant player in his mid-twenties, who could hit the ball miles and putted like a dream.
As brilliant as he was on the course, so he was anonymous off it.
There was nothing in the least bit objectionable about him, but he looked as though he had a computer where his heart was, and rushed home at night to plug in to a socket and recharge the batteries.
There was no doubt that he was the first of an avalanche of Swedish players who might do to the golf circuits of the world what they were already doing to the tennis circuit.
I wondered if I should learn Swedish (impossible, I'm told) and then remembered that most of them speak reasonable English.
‘Your governor was at it again, then, yesterday,’ Tony said.
‘Up before the PGA committee, do you think?’
‘Apparently not.
Oliver warned him after his round, and offered the option of two hundred and fifty pounds into the Pro Golfers’ Benevolent Fund, or an official reprimand and a fine.
He chose the Fund — he reckons he'll get the money back one day.’
‘He'll drop himself right in it, one day.
He's got a mouth like Hell Bunker,’ Tony said.
‘But never as dry.
Well, I must get on with it.
See you later, Tony.’
Yes, Jack had certainly cracked in the pro-am, and had been given a sharp reprimand by the tournament director, Oliver Moreton, no doubt much to the latter's enjoyment.
Jack as always had an excuse.
The hackers were surpassing themselves in the inventive ways they hit the ball badly, and often, and in the wrong direction.
It was a tiresome and protracted round, and Jack had an evil hangover from too much Bonehead bitter during the previous evening.
If Jack had just returned in pristine health from a month at a health farm he might still have had trouble in coping with two of his partners.
One was a rather patrician young man from a firm of London stockbrokers who played off a single figure handicap at Sunningdale and was a special guest of the chairman of the sponsoring company.
He was dressed in traditional subfusc brown with a ragged sweater and a Viyella check shirt that his father must have handed down to him, and addressed Jack as if the status of professional golfers had not changed since the thirties.
The celebrity was a monosyllabic professional footballer who had been transferred from a Scottish club to a fashionable one in London.
He had acquired an agent of dubious reputation, a new hair style of highlighted curls, and the reputation of being a very trendy dresser.
He was a novice golfer but at least he didn't talk much, and had an innate respect for a fellow professional sportsman.
The fourth member of the four-ball was neither silent nor relaxing to be with.
He was, we gathered within seconds, the marketing director of a record company, and he knew everybody.
Last year he had played in the pro-am with the Open Champion and Terry Wogan, and they should have won it, and next week he was playing in California with  Trevino.
He was of course on first-name terms with everyone from the Prime Minister downwards whom he probably and inappropriately called ‘man’.
Before we got to the first tee I could see that Jack was already on edge — or more on edge, rather, because a hangover had already eaten into his small reserves of patience and equanimity.
Jack's tactic was to keep as far away from his team-mates as possible — not difficult, because he was hitting the ball pretty straight and the Sunningdale amateur, who was also fairly straight, didn't really want to talk to a pro golfer.
We could hear the constant drone of the record producer in the heather and the woods, and quite often when the others were chipping or putting.
By dint of a couple of birdies and a fortunate eagle on the long fourteenth hole, Jack was looking good for a share of the prize money.
The fifteenth hole is short but dangerous; its plateau green is ringed by bunkers at the front and sides and the trees press in at the back in a claustrophobic way — a nightmarish hole if you are playing badly.
‘Well done, Mason,’ said the stockbroker curtly after Jack's eagle and Jack raised his eyes to heaven but said nothing.
‘Yeah, great putt, man,’ said the record man.
Jack teed the ball up, after a short discussion with me about the merits of a six- or a seven-iron.
A high six-iron was the mutual decision, since there was just a gentle breeze to hold the ball up and give it a good chance to stop quickly.
Jack settled into his stance, and relaxed as much as possible over the ball.
He swung back and, just as his legs began  to shift his weight forward into the shot and the downswing began, the record man shouted, ‘Hey, Wally, how ya doin', man?’
He had seen a friend fifty yards away.
Inevitably Jack came over the top of the ball, hit a combination of a pull and a hook and the ball went crashing into the trees left of the green.
He dropped his club and, as the culprit began to mouth his apologies, picked up the large wooden tee-box and bellowed:
‘If you open your big mouth again I'll ram this sodding box over your head and kick you all the way back to the clubhouse.’
Unfortunately, a member of the tournament committee heard this picturesque statement of Jack's intentions — not difficult, you could probably have heard it twenty miles away at the PGA headquarters — and of course the stockbroker was a close friend of the sponsor.
The rest of the round was played in almost total silence, and Oliver Moreton duly took Jack on one side in the clubhouse and, in my view but not in Jack's, did what was necessary.
This tournament was my first outing of the year.
I usually confined my caddying career to the main British and European season, with the odd foray to the United States or Japan or exotic places like the Philippines if my current boss was lucky enough to be invited, and if I was lucky enough to be invited by my boss.
I had drifted into caddying, much to the disgust of my father who had other ideas about careers for his eldest son and heir whom he had sent to the best public school he could afford (a slightly  philistine, second-division one near Brighton) and supported through university (Sussex-by-the-Sea).
Despite playing all the usual team games at school it was the game of golf that captivated me.
The headmaster may not have been able to groom many boys for Oxbridge scholarships, but he did love his sport.
So, apart from building tennis and squash courts, he managed to fit five holes of golf into a part of the school grounds and encouraged the boys to have a go.
We did more than just have a go when a golfing blue from Cambridge, whose other forte was history, joined the staff.
He not only gave us a basic and very sound idea of the golf swing but enlisted the help of a young and enthusiastic local club professional.
With all those holidays in which to practise and play — almost from dawn to dusk at times — my handicap rattled down, and I went to university with a handicap of two.
By now, rather than dreaming of becoming Regius Professor of History, I was planning my speech to the cameras when I won my first Open Championship.
I strolled on down the edge of the ninth fairway in the gradually strengthening sun.
It was picking out the spaces through the trees and making enchanting patterns among the bronzes and browns and greens, and occasionally highlighting spiders' webs, laden with moisture.
The many grey squirrels were out and about, busy, and unaware of the interruptions to their habitat which the golf fans would bring.
An even more pleasant prospect for club golfers is the presence of the refreshment hut in a little clearing between the ninth green and the tenth tee.
On warm days a long and cooling drink, or a mug of tea, is impossible to resist.
On winter days, usually after unsuccessfully battling against the spiteful thrusts of nature, a bacon sandwich and a mug of Bovril laced with sherry is guaranteed to soothe the injured spirit.
The golfer, his strength renewed, is then eager to do battle with the remaining holes.
I checked the position of the pin, rather generously placed in the right centre of the green, and moved on towards the tenth hole.
I was passing to the side of the refreshment hut and noticed that the door was slightly ajar, which was unusual because the genial Len who ran the place did not open his hut during a tournament as all the catering was franchised out.
I walked towards the door in the hope of a cup of tea.
Len wasn't there, and the man who was would never drink a cup of tea again.
Not with the shaft of a golf club driven through his neck and pinning him to the wooden floor.
Chapter 2
The shock delayed any panic and I forced myself to walk across to the body and look at the face.
Despite the caked blood and the chalky bruised skin I recognised the victim.
I couldn't bring myself to close the staring eyes, and that's when my courage dissolved.
I knew that a dead man could not harm me, but didn't hang around to test the theory.
I raced for the door and high-kneed it through the trees.
Tony Milton and his assistant, thank goodness, were coming down the ninth fairway on an electric buggy.
‘What's up, Chris, seen a ghost?’
‘Froggy Davies is dead, in the hut,’ I gasped out, but I was so breathless, from shock rather than running, that they didn't understand me.
I repeated it, twice, before they got the message.
Tony gaped at me.
We all knew Froggy, a caddie who had worked the circuit since the late fifties and had carried for many winners, including a couple of Open Champions — American, of course— in the mid-seventies.
All his money went on beer, whisky and cigarettes, and whatever was left on the horses.
He was much respected for his knowledge  of golf courses, but was a throwback to the days when caddies wore old macs or tweed overcoats, slept rough in the summer, and in October committed a misdemeanour mild enough to ensure six months in jail to see them through the winter and send them out sobered up and refreshed for the new golf season.
Froggy was sufficiently a part of that tradition to scorn the smart and colourful clothes that the younger caddies wore as mirror images of their masters.
It was only the threat of banishment from the game that persuaded him to wear the sponsors' bibs at the tournaments.
It was never entirely clear where he bedded down at night after he lurched from the pub with various caddying cronies of a like mind.
He wasn't the prettiest sight you would see on a golf course but, since he always turned up at the practice ground the following morning more or less on time and more or less clean-shaven, it was obvious that he patronised his own circuit of cheap guesthouses.
Strong drink, and a frequent excess of it, made him unreliable at times, both in his judgements on the course and in his time-keeping.
There was one touching period in his life when he had tried to reform.
He was carrying regularly for a top-class American golfer who eventually won the Open.
This stylish player, in his forays to the British circuit, relied heavily on Froggy's local knowledge but was offended by his sinful lifestyle.
Since he was a member of some obscure American religious sect which eschewed tobacco, alcohol and premarital sex, he tried to convert his caddie.
Froggy, mainly for the sake of his generous  retainer and the equally generous bonuses which glittered on the horizon, swore off drink, tobacco and even gambling.
He lasted about ten days; through the week prior to the Open and until a couple of days before the tournament began.
On the Tuesday his American boss had a practice round in the morning, practised for a couple of hours, pronounced himself satisfied and arranged to meet Froggy at ten o'clock the next day.
One of his more persistent cronies persuaded him to have ‘just a little flutter on the four o'clock at Newbury’.
Unfortunately for Froggy the outsider romped in, the unexpected bonus of nearly £100 led to ‘just one drink’ to celebrate, and by throwing out time that night all the money had gone and Froggy was legless.
He didn't make it to the course on the next day, was sacked, and always maintained that if he hadn't given up the drink for those ten days or so and ‘dried out’ he would not have got so drunk, would have been on the course at the appointed time, would not have lost his job, and would have have carried for yet another Open Champion.
So it was all the straitlaced American's fault.
He never reached such eminence again and had caddied, less reliably and more cantankerously, for a succession of middling golfers.
We had reached the hut and I didn't know what to do.
I hoped Tony would know.
He did and took the initiative in his firm but unassuming way.
‘You stay outside, Jack,’ he told his assistant, and he warily put his head round the door and then went in.
I followed, even more warily, and my eyes confirmed what I did not want to believe.
‘Right, let's get back to the clubhouse and ring the police.
Hop on the back of the buggy, Chris.’
We took the shortest route back to the clubhouse.
Tony went as fast as he could, and I was concentrating on staying on board as we rattled over the bumpy paths.
We were all too shocked to say anything more than ‘Poor old Froggy’ and ‘Who on earth could have done it?’
Violent death, thank God, is a stranger to most people, and all three of us were knocked sideways.
It was only just after seven o'clock and the course was coming to life.
The early starters were already on the practice ground and the putting green.
We drew up by the main entrance and Tony and I went through the swing doors at speed and headed for the secretary's office.
It was already chaotically busy with officials and administrators knitting together the many responsibilities which would eventually make a successful tournament.
Without ceremony, we headed past all these busy people and knocked on the half-open door of the secretary's office.
James Spicer had been a major in an infantry regiment and looked the part in a well-cut tweed suit, burnished brown brogues and his regimental tie.
But his years in charge of a thriving and successful golf club had softened his hard-edged military manner, and he had trained himself to adopt an informal, ‘civilian’ manner.
‘Morning, Chris.
Hi, Tony.
What's the problem?’
Yes, he could see that there was a problem.
Tony took the lead, and with a succinctness that would certainly have satisfied any military man, said:
‘We must call the police.
Froggy Davies has been killed.
He's in the hut by the ninth.’
Spicer got to his feet and stared at us.
His mind had no doubt been on a myriad of problems, from the amount of lavatory paper required in the clubhouse to the quality of the claret in the sponsor's dining room.
He started to speak, but was interrupted by the slightly flat tones of the London suburbs:
‘And what the hell will this do to my tournament?’
The speaker rose from his chair at the side of the room.
He was smallish and dressed in a dark, lightweight suit with a rather violent striped shirt and the Royal Bucks Golf Club tie.
He was tanned, fit-looking and fortyish, and had dark frizzy hair which might have been permed.
This was obviously the sponsor, the chairman of World Wide Insurance, Brian Summers.
I had occasionally seen his photograph as I skimmed the financial sections of the newspapers.
James Spicer, his military persona now well to the fore, ignored the question and picked up the phone.
‘Put me through to the police office, please,’ he said to someone in the outer office.
While he waited he asked us a few basic and searching questions about our discovery.
He then summed up the situation in brusque style for the policeman at the other end.
At every major tournament there is a police presence, partly to control the crowds, partly for security reasons since a lot of money is collected at the gate; and occasionally to deal with spectators  who have lingered too long in the beer tents.
James Spicer put down the phone and turned to Brian Summers.
‘First, Brian, there is no reason why this should affect the playing of the tournament.
We shall carry on as if it has not happened.
The major problem will be the Press, who will be here in their droves, and television who are already here.’
‘Chris, what have you got to do with all this?’
Under pressure the secretary became more and more military, and his question sounded almost like an accusation.
‘I found him, when I was walking the course,’ I said apprehensively.
‘Well, you must be prepared to make a statement to the police.
And you too, Tony.’
He turned back to me.
‘Let's see, what time is your man off the first tee?’
He consulted a piece of paper.
‘Eleven o'clock, so you should be OK.
Your partners are Jose Miguel and Brian Harley.’
The first was a steady performer who was invariably among the top twenty money-winners at the end of each season.
‘Steady’ summed him up: he was adroit and unspectacular in all departments of the game.
It was only when you looked at his score at the end of a round that you realised that somehow he was three under par.
Brian Harley was the reverse.
When he had come on the scene about fifteen years earlier he had been a spectacular hitter of a golf ball and a brilliant putter: a fearsome blend of talents in a golfer — if they combine regularly.
They did for a couple of years, and he won several tournaments and appeared in the Ryder Cup at the age of  twenty-two.
His game then deteriorated and he was rarely in the top fifty in a tournament, let alone the top ten.
Later there came a reprimand for a breach of rules and, not long after, a six month suspension for a further misdemeanour.
He drank too much and was usually overweight but, to his credit, had dragged himself back into the top thirty on the circuit in the last couple of years.
This year he had begun brilliantly on the Safari circuit in Africa, had won two tournaments and headed their Order of Merit.
His form had continued with a win by several strokes in the Madrid Open and a high finish in the Italian Championship.
James Spicer interrupted my thoughts.
‘Good God, Froggy carries for Harley.
Where is he staying?’
He picked up his phone again.
‘Anne, bring us all some coffee please, and ring Brian Harley wherever he's billetted.’
Five minutes later the coffee arrived and so did a call from Brian Harley.
Spicer told him the news and asked him if he would like a local caddie to be booked.
Apparently not, Harley would make his own arrangements.
At this stage two men, unknown to any of us, were introduced by the industrious Anne, whose excited curiosity was increasing by the second.
‘Inspector Drew and Sergeant Aitken,’ she announced, and hovered by the door.
‘That's all, thank you, Anne,’ said the secretary, ‘except for two more coffees.’
Disappointed, she withdrew.
Inspector Drew was not a man who would stand out in a crowd.
All detectives wear raincoats and his, a dark one, covered a charcoal-grey suit, a  white shirt and an unidentifiable club tie of the striped variety.
He could have been a computer salesman.
His face was ordinary, slightly florid, but enlivened by bright and very blue eyes.
His assistant, who was about my age, affected a more stylish dress, with an off-white raincoat which looked like a Hong Kong copy of a Burberry and a mid-blue suit with lapels which were fashionably narrow.
The Inspector took charge.
‘I shall need statements from both of you,’ he said, turning to Tony and me.
James Spicer explained that we both had pressing jobs to do and the Inspector agreed to take my statement immediately and that Tony could go off and make his final checks of the golf course and make his statement later.
‘Right, let's get this done before the Press get wind of what's happened,’ said Inspector Drew.
‘Please may we borrow your office for a few minutes, Major Spicer?’
For the first time I had to tell my story logically, and the effort which this entailed, under the critical questioning of the Inspector, dispelled some of the depression which I felt.
Less than one hour had passed since I had found Froggy's body, but it felt a lot longer.
‘How well did you know Froggy Davies?’ the Inspector asked.
‘Mainly by repute.
He was one of the old school, not exactly sleeping under hedges, but an itinerant caddie.
You never quite know what they do or where they go in winter, though I'm told Froggy had a sister in the Birmingham area.’
Would a caddie like Davies make a lot of money?’
‘In general, no, Inspector.
He wasn't out on the Safari circuit with Brian Harley so wouldn't have picked up his bonuses.’
I explained that a caddie is normally paid a retainer by the professional, plus a bonus of five per cent of winnings, sometimes a little more.
Not many caddies can make a decent living this way.
It's fine if all year round you carry the bag of a genuine superstar, who might win £500,000; but a caddie who works for a golfer who is outside the top twenty in the Order of Merit will not exactly be reaching for the champagne every night.
‘So how much would Froggy reckon to make in a season?’ asked Inspector Drew.
‘Difficult to say,’ I replied.
‘Last year he mostly caddied for Lars Persson, who finished around twenty-fifth in the Order of Merit and so he probably made less than five thousand pounds.
And that would mostly have gone on booze and horses.
But the way Brian Harley is playing at the moment he must have been hoping to double that at least.’
‘Do you think another caddie could have killed Froggy in order to get the job with Harley?’
I didn't like the way the questions were going, and in particular the concentration that was now all too apparent in Inspector Drew's eyes.
Talk about the Ancient Mariner.
‘Possible, but unlikely,’ I said lamely.
‘How much did you earn from caddying last season, sir?’
I didn't like the way he slipped in the ‘sir’ either.
Jack had had a good to middling season and with  pro-ams and the occasional exhibition match I had earned nearly £8000.
At this point Sergeant Aitken came in and muttered something in the Inspector's ear.
‘You'd better get back to your tournament, Mr Ludlow,’ he said.
‘But I would like to see you again this evening to take a fuller statement.’
Off I went to resume normal existence and my first priority, since it was now nearly nine o'clock and I was due to meet Jack Mason at a quarter to ten, was breakfast.
I felt slightly ashamed that my priority was breakfast, but excused it on the grounds that shock probably induced hunger.
I was on my way towards the main door of the clubhouse when I saw a cluster of men who could only be journalists.
They surged forward but were held back by two very large and determined security men.
I knew the clubhouse well from my amateur days and I quickly turned left, went through the main lounge (to the horror of one member who recognised me not as a former amateur golfer but as a caddie, God dammit), through the back of the already busy bar and through the goods entrance, or exit in this case.
I breathed again, and decided to walk a few hundred yards down the road to a Happy Diner for a rapid sandwich and a cup of tea.
I had some fruit in my car and this would sustain me during the round.
‘Can I buy you breakfast?’ asked a voice behind me.
I turned and the expletives died on my lips.
It was a journalist, but Toby Greenslade was one of the rare ones who could write entertainingly about golf, and was a companionable and amusing fellow as well.
‘I heard about Froggy,’ he said, ‘and that you found him with the shaft of a golf club stuck through his gullet,’he finished brightly.
‘Will you give me an exclusive interview?’
‘Sod off, Toby,’ I said in friendly fashion.
‘I want my breakfast and then to get on with my job.’
‘I'm told that he may still have been alive when the murderer, or murderers, hammered the shaft through his neck and into the floor of the hut.
Nasty, eh?’
We were by now seated in the Happy Diner, and I was still rather amazed that I could face a bacon sandwich.
But down it went and it stayed down.
I tried to change the subject.
‘Who's going to caddie for Harley, by the way?’
‘Derek Jefferson, apparently,’ replied Toby.
He was the managing director of Supersight Golf, and had been selling golf clubs for as long as most people could remember.
He had been sales director for the major British manufacturer and had left two or three years ago when they were absorbed into a large industrial conglomerate.
It was said that he was not enamoured of the tight business disciplines which they attempted to impose.
He had started Supersight and had made quite an impact on an already highly competitive market with some clubs and putters which were a shade too gimmicky for me, but were tailor-made for the average club golfer, who will buy anything if it is ‘guaranteed to add fifteen yards to your drive’.
However, Jefferson had done well, in no small way due to his own considerable abilities as a salesman.
He was a large and outwardly jovial  man in his early fifties, with a gift for generating publicity for himself and his products.
At tournaments and trade shows he always offered ‘open house’ and you could eat and drink all day at his expense if you wished, and many did.
‘Have you seen the new Supersight putter?’ asked Toby.
I hadn't.
‘Apparently you can't miss, but only Brian Harley has got one so far, and this is mainly why he cleaned up on the Safari circuit.
All the other pros are going mad to get hold of them, but Jefferson says this is the only one — a prototype in the real sense — and it won't be in production for several months.’
‘What's the secret?’
I asked.
‘Well, if there is a secret, only Harley knows it.
It looks fairly ordinary, although it's one of the ‘big head’ designs and it seems to be made of some sort of high-tech composite of plastic and metal.
But Harley never lets it out of his sight.
He sleeps with it, I'm told.
That must give some of the girls a shock — a pleasant one, perhaps.’
I grinned at Toby.
Brian Harley, with a failed marriage behind him, was one of several golfers on the tour who were renowned for their ability to pull the women.
Interest in golf has grown so rapidly in the last ten years that it has reached out beyond its traditional confines and become glamorous.
And the appeal of the professional golfers has grown with the sport, so that they are much sought after, not only in boardrooms but in bedrooms, too.
‘Do you fancy Harley's chances?’
I asked Toby.
‘The way he's putting he could win anything, even though the rest of his game is no better than  average.
But he's so confident on the greens that the rest of his game doesn't seem to matter and, of course, as Willie Park said, ‘the man who can putt…’‘
‘'…is a match for anyone.’'
I completed one of the great truths of golf.
Every professional knows that if he holes a few of those vital putts of eight feet or more, it can transform his whole round and maybe make him into a winner.
Not only is his score likely to be several shots better, but a little success on the greens can infect a golfer's whole game.
Suddenly he is more relaxed and confident and those horrible little worms of self-doubt which are perpetually burrowing away in a golfer's head are banished for a few holes, anyway.
This is why professional golfers spend hour after hour on the practice greens in an effort to find that Holy Grail of golf — a consistent and ever-repeating putting stroke.
Like the Holy Grail, it is a dream, a tantalising illusion.
Now you have it and now you don't.
Putting is one of the enigmas of an extraordinarily difficult game.
You have all heard the club golfer who says of his opponent, after losing a match, ‘he putted like God.’
What he really means is that he putted like the devil and it was grossly unfair — there is even a feeling that it is ‘not quite golf’ to win by superior skill on the greens.
The careers of many great champions have been blighted and eventually ruined by their putting.
Look at Ben Hogan, a legend and a perfectionist who gave up the game when he was struck down by the dreaded ‘yips’.
Another past champion graphically  described this as the moment when the golfer blacks out and hasn't the remotest idea that he is holding a putter at all.
Every golfer in the world experiences that awful feeling of helplessness when he stands over a putt and knows that he has not the slightest chance of getting the ball near the hole, let alone into it.
Conversely, a golfer occasionally has a phase when the hole really seems larger and it seems possible to hole almost every putt.
Obviously Brian Harley was going through one of those phases, and felt that he could one-putt every green.
Lucky fellow.
Before much longer fellow professionals would be wanting to touch his clothing just in case some ‘fluence’ would rub off on them.
‘You know, by the way, that Brian's got a new agent, do you?
Oh yes, he ditched Graham who's looked after him for over ten years through thick and thin, and mainly thin, in favour of Mike Martinez.’
This was news to me, although I knew Graham Fearnley, who was Jack Mason's agent and looked after quite a big stable of European golfers.
He was really the only opposition to the powerful American golf managers, of whom Mike Martinez was the most successful, with clients in tennis, baseball, motor racing and with worldwide television interests as well.
Many people thought he was too powerful, especially when he was able to set up his own sponsored tournaments, sometimes in opposition to official ones, into which he put his own clients and then sold the television rights around the world.
He was powerful all right.
‘Toby, I don't understand why Martinez would want to sign up Brian Harley.’
‘Neither does anyone else, but of course Graham's furious now that he's started winning, because for the first time for years he could have set up some good contracts — and not least collected some commission on the bonuses paid by Hi-Flight.’
Toby was referring to the clause which was usually written into contracts between golfers and the manufacturer who supplies their equipment.
Hi-Flight, as well as paying Harley an annual retainer to play with and publicise their equipment, would pay bonuses for wins in official tournaments.
Toby continued.
‘Martinez pulled him out of the Hi-Flight contract and signed him up with Supersight.’
It sounded as if Martinez legendary foresight had paid off yet again.
He was famous for picking sportsmen young and preparing them for success; but in this case he had picked an apparent no-hoper like Harley, who immediately confirmed his judgement by notching up three tournament victories.
I was going to be late for Jack Mason and made for the door.
I asked Toby to do me a favour and tell the Fleet Street ‘dirty mac brigade’, who covered crime and other seedy activities, that I had given him an exclusive.
Chapter 3
I made it to the front of the clubhouse just in time to seize Jack's bag and head for the practice ground.
Toby hadn't had time to try the ‘exclusive’ story on the dirty mac brigade and they clustered about me and shouted the usual obvious questions.
I kept my head down and the heavy bag well to the fore as a protective shield.
You may not realise, as you watch the humble caddie walk the fairways, how heavy that bag is.
On its own it's weighty enough; but then you must add fourteen golf clubs, a dozen or so balls, an umbrella, a set of waterproofs, spare sweaters, caps and visors, half a dozen golf gloves, a book of rules, tins of sweets, bars of chocolates, apples, bananas and other fruit and, in Jack Mason's case, sometimes a couple of bottles of strong beer.
It all weighs about forty pounds, and I carefully bumped, to good effect, into several of the more persistent reporters.
Jack was a good ally and more or less scared them off.
When told to sod off by a man well over six feet tall, about fourteen stones in weight, with a four-iron in his hand, and known to be of uncertain  temperament, even the most hardened reporter will do just that.
We reached the haven of the practice ground and went past the barrier.
The tournament was, as far as we were concerned, about to begin.
Jack began his practice in his usual fashion by hitting a few half shots with the short irons.
The objective was to try to reproduce a smooth and consistent swing; to trigger the muscle memory to produce such a swing automatically.
A professional golfer tries to pull off a confidence trick against his own body.
During the approaching round the time would come, inevitably, when he would have to play a shot under immense pressure.
It might be a recovery shot from deep rough with a minute margin for error; or a pitch shot from a bare lie over a bunker to a flag in a very tight position; or simply a six-foot putt to save par.
These are the examinations that a golfer's hours of practice are designed to pass.
The mind must try to lull the body into the automatic response that has been instilled during practice.
At his best, the golfer gets ‘outside himself’; he is a detached observer of his own actions and the shot is hit automatically.
A conditioned reflex.
This was what Jack, and most of the other pros on the practice ground, was trying to achieve.
He was now on to the mid-irons and these were flying high and true.
He hit a few three-irons and three-woods and that was it.
We walked over to the practice putting green and set about his putting.
His stroke looked pretty smooth to me and he was obviously confident.
There was a better than average crowd watching  us and a fair number were Press photographers who were intent on getting pictures of the unwitting discoverer of Froggy's body.
But at least they were kept under control by several large gentlemen from the security company.
There was also a surprisingly large contingent watching another golfer at his putting practice.
I was about to ask Jack who it was, when the penny dropped.
It was Brian Harley, but a new and obviously improved Brian Harley.
For a start, he was considerably slimmer — around two stones had disappeared, I guessed — and was dressed in very jazzy style with the Supersight logo very much to the fore.
Which was just as well because Derek Jefferson, the managing director of the firm, was there as the stand-in caddie, and was similarly dressed in Supersight clothing.
Many eyes were on his putter, which looked very Star Wars, with its large, rather bulbous head in some sort of black metal and plastic and a black shaft which looked slightly thicker than normal.
Like Jack, he was trying to concentrate on smoothing out his stroke, but several reporters were waiting to ask questions about his dead caddie and Harley knew it.
A few minutes before we were all due on the first tee a tall and sturdy figure, crowned with a near-bald, sun-tanned head, appeared through the crowd.
He was Oliver Moreton, the PGA tournament director, and he motioned Jack, Brian Harley and Jose Miguel and their caddies to the centre of the practice green and out of hearing of the cluster of Press men.
‘You all know about Froggy,’ he began briskly.
‘I  am glad to see, Brian, that you have such an excellent replacement,’ he continued, a little ironically, with a glance at Derek Jefferson.
‘You will all have to put up with a certain amount of unwelcome attention from the Press, but I have warned them that we will not tolerate any interference with your golf.
So, carry on as usual, and good luck.’
He strode off in his usual busy fashion and left us to ‘carry on as usual’.
I wondered how Harley would cope.
The tournament did, after all, offer a lot of prize money with £60,000 to the winner, and was therefore very important in the battle for inclusion in the Ryder Cup team.
Harley was coming into it as an early-season form horse and was therefore in the news, and now his caddie had been murdered so he was very much in the news.
Quite difficult to ‘carry on as usual’, I thought.
The first tee was packed and the cameras were clicking like typewriters.
After the announcer had introduced the players and called for quiet, Jack Mason did an unusual thing.
He walked over to Brian Harley, who was first to drive, and shook his hand.
‘Good luck, Brian, and now let battle commence,’ he said.
It was a generous gesture to try to ease the tension and relax a fellow professional.
Nevertheless Brian Harley hit a sketchy drive down the right-hand side of the fairway and his shot to the green was partly masked by encroaching trees on the right.
But he got the ball near the left edge of the green, flicked it confidently over the bunker to about four feet and holed out with ease.
Jack had a conventional par four — a good drive, a smooth  four-iron to the middle of the green and two putts.
It's an easy game, really.
On the walk to the next tee, I nodded to Derek Jefferson and asked: ‘When is this famous putter going into production?’
‘Later in the year, we hope.
Brian's got the prototype but it needs a lot of testing still.’
‘The way Brian's putting with it you seem to have something good, don't you?’
‘Maybe,’ he said guardedly, put Harley's bag down, and got out his driver.
Again, Brian Harley hit a less-than-perfect drive, but his two-iron across the angle of the dogleg put him on the front edge of the green.
His two opponents were safely on in two.
Derek Jefferson held the pin for Harley's approach putt of about fifty feet.
It was downhill, and with a left-to-right break of several feet.
Nasty.
It didn't bother Brian Harley because he holed a very unlikely putt and went one under par after two holes.
By the turn, this had become the pattern of the round.
Jack was very much in the groove, rarely deviating from the fairways and the centre of the green, but was a mere one shot under par, while Miguel was one shot better.
Harley, however, was all over the course, but his short game and especially his putting was brilliant.
He was four under par, and never looked like missing a putt.
Fortunately for the players, only accredited golfing journalists were allowed to encroach on the fairways and everyone else was kept firmly behind the ropes and barriers which ran along the perimeter of each hole.
The golf journalists knew  enough not to ask any leading questions in the middle of a round, and they were sufficiently wary of Jack's temperament and his considerable command of the pointed rebuke.
There was, nevertheless, an unusually large crowd, including one or two golf journalists who rarely saw a golf course.
They usually watched the action on the television in the Press tent or, even better, in the champagne tent.
They had obviously received strict orders from their editors not to miss a story.
We skirted the now-notorious refreshment hut, which was marked off with those fluorescent orange ribbons that usually signal a particularly nasty accident, and which was now guarded by two policemen.
‘Was that where…?’ began Brian Harley.
‘Yes, it was,’ I said quickly, ‘and it was not a pretty sight.’
I hoped nobody would pursue the matter, and the golfers had other things on their minds anyway.
But Derek Jefferson wanted to know more and asked how Froggy was killed.
‘He was stabbed through the neck with the shaft of a golf club,’ I said, with no attempt at, or wish for, subtlety.
I watched his face as he blinked rapidly and he looked at me in disgust, or was it disbelief?
He muttered something, turned his back on me, and strode on to the tenth tee.
There were no more questions on that subject during the rest of the round.
The second half of the course is a more difficult proposition, with five very difficult par fours to test the golfer's nerves and his abilities.
Any  thought in his mind of trying to protect a good score will rarely be successful; he must meet the challenge squarely or drop shots.
Jack dropped a couple of shots with poor putts but got them both back with a superb eagle at the sixteenth — an uphill par five with a difficult green, long and narrow and well protected with bunkers.
Jose Miguel had been his usual model of self-effacing but steely efficiency and he seemed to have conjured another two birdies from the course without anyone noticing, although he too had dropped one shot.
Brian Harley had made his one mistake at the sixteenth by finding both a fairway bunker and one by the green and was still standing at four under.
The two finishing holes are designed to test the last reserves of the golfer's confidence.
They are both over 450 yards and their design, as they curve through the protection of the heavy trees with a scattering of bunkers on the angles of the fairways, induces tremors in even the most hardened competitors.
Harley was in trouble off the seventeenth tee.
His swing was taut and abbreviated as, despite what his golfing mind was telling him (swing slow, swing smoothly through the ball), the darker side of his mind made him try to steer the ball.
The ghost had definitely got into the machine.
His drive went low up the right side of the fairway and faded impotently into the heather.
He managed to hack it forward just to the angle of the fairway, and had still not reached his opponents' drives which were about thirty yards ahead.
He was now faced with a shot of about 230 yards, with the prospect of dropping one shot at best, but possibly two.
In the  circumstances, he made a fair pass at the ball and got it into a reasonable spot about fifteen yards short of the edge of the green and about thirty yards from the hole.
This is the shot that the club golfer dreads and that the professional, with his adroitness with his chipping and pitching clubs, loves.
I was duly astonished when Harley asked for his putter and sent Derek Jefferson ahead to hold the flag.
With fifteen yards of quite lush fairway to cover before the ball even reached the putting surface, the margin for error was dangerously small.
He gave the ball a very sweet hit and off it went.
It reached the green at a good speed, took a right-to-left swing, and disappeared into the hole.
I looked at Jack Mason who just shook his head, gave one of his sourer smiles, and then also holed out for a four.
The drama was not quite over because all three players managed to hit the last green in two shots, and Harley, by dint of a nice kick forward when the ball pitched, was no more than six feet from the hole.
Jack and Miguel got their pars and it was Harley's turn to go for a closing birdie to put him well up the leader board.
He asked his caddie to hold the pin.
This was highly unusual, since most golfers prefer their caddies to be well out of the way for such crucial short putts.
It looked positively eccentric as Jefferson stood alongside the hole.
I wondered how Harley would relish a putt back over Jefferson's footprint — a substantial one since he was a good fifteen stones in weight — if the putt hit the hole and bounced left.
My speculation was irrelevant — the putt went straight in the middle of the cup.
There were handshakes all round and the usual ‘well playeds’, and we headed for the PGA hut where the scores are checked and handed in.
It is extraordinary how often professional golfers record the wrong score or add it up incorrectly.
The PGA therefore allows them a sort of cooling-off period at the end of a round to check each other 's scores thoroughly.
The rules on incorrect scores are simple and Draconian: if you sign for a score which is lower than your actual score you are disqualified; if you sign for a higher score than your actual, the higher score stands.
We waited near the PGA hut, and I particularly wanted Jack's instructions, if any, for the rest of the day.
Sometimes he wanted to practise, and might well require an hour or so on the putting green, or sometimes he fancied a pint or two of some obscure real ale that he had heard of in the vicinity.
Not today, however.
‘That's fine, Chris,’ he said, ‘I'll see you at about one thirty tomorrow.’
He had a late starting time at three o'clock.
He turned to Brian Harley who was talking to Jefferson.
‘Well putted, Brian, you bugger.
Let's have a look at that putter of yours.
I reckon I need one of those,’ he said.
Jefferson deliberately put the leather hood on Harley's bag and zipped it up.
‘Sorry, Jack,’ he said, ‘that's the only one available and is for Brian's use only.
We might have some more prototypes in a couple of weeks and you're welcome to one of those.’
‘Suit yourself.
Are you worried I'll take away the magic, or what?’ he asked sarcastically.
But  Jefferson just nodded, not in his usual jovial manner, and walked off with Brian Harley.
I guessed it was the shock of Froggy's death, and the tension of caddying for one of his contracted professionals.
Certainly it was unusual to refuse another golfer a practice with a new putter because professionals are notorious for trying each other 's equipment, and for swapping clubs.
But I put it down to a natural wish on Jefferson's part to protect what for him was a considerable investment in a new club and, if Harley's new agent had exacted his usual pound, or stone rather, of flesh, a considerable investment in a golf pro.
As we walked off towards the car park, a woman's voice shouted my name.
‘Chris, a message for you.’
I turned towards the voice and saw a slender young woman hurrying towards me.
She was dressed in the gear which the PGA encouraged for their female employees, dark trousers with a pastel-coloured sweater.
She looked familiar, and I was soon looking into the green and expressive eyes of Sally Drayton, who had been a fellow student at Sussex University.
‘What on earth are you doing here?’
I asked.
‘I'm working for Oliver Moreton,’ Sally said.
‘And I work for Jack Mason,’ I said and introduced them.
Jack who, despite his stable and untroubled domestic life, was not averse to an occasional dalliance with a pretty girl, loomed over her in genial fashion.
‘Nice to meet you, Sally.
And a word of advice just you be careful of that old goat, Moreton.
And  Chris, I'll see you tomorrow.’
Diplomatically, he took the golf bag from me and headed for the car park.
‘How long have you been with the PGA?’
I asked.
‘Oh, about three weeks.
I'm Oliver's personal assistant.’
‘Not too personal, I hope,’ I said pointedly.
At Sussex University I had harboured hopes of getting very personal with Sally Drayton.
She was the female student of her year.
Apart from her looks, and especially those deep green eyes, she was cheerful and friendly and seemingly unaware of the effect she had on the unsophisticated young men around her.
Not for her that studied aloofness which so many attractive women mistakenly affect.
She had on several occasions fobbed off my clumsy advances with great ease and much friendliness.
So much so that even when I had abandoned hopes of luring her into my narrow and uncomfortable bed, we frequently got together for a drink or a cheap meal.
But after university, despite our protestations of eternal friendship and vows to get together, the gaps between our meetings and our phone calls had got longer and longer.
The last communication had been a letter from somewhere on the west coast of America, and my eventual reply had been returned ‘not known at this address’.
That was about five years ago.
‘Where are you living these days — in London by the sea?’
I asked her.
Her parents used to live just inland from Brighton in a converted windmill.
‘No.
My parents are still there, but I've just bought a little flat in Fulham.’
‘Well, I live in Putney, so do you fancy a drink or a meal, or something?
Preferably the something,’ I said with a hopeful smile.
‘A drink will be fine, Chris,’ she said and her friendly grin took any primness out of the remark.
I knew that it would at the very least be fun to fail again, however effortlessly, and we agreed to meet at a pub in Barnes on the following evening.
‘By the way, a message for you.
Inspector Drew wants to see you at five o'clock at Richmond Police Station.’
I had almost forgotten about him and immediately felt depressed as I trudged off to find my car.
Apart from having to go over the unpleasant details of Froggy's death yet again, I had a nasty feeling that Inspector Drew's bright and suspicious eyes masked darker ideas about my role in Froggy's murder.
At five minutes to five I parked my car alongside Richmond Police Station, and on the dot of five o'clock was shown into Inspector Drew's office.
Without any preamble, except the customary offer of a cup of tea which I declined, the Inspector began to take me in painstaking detail through my account of my discovery of Froggy's body.
After this, more questions.
‘Would it surprise you to hear that Froggy Davies was stabbed with a golf shaft that is specially made for Supersight?’ asked Inspector Drew.
‘I didn't stay around long enough to check the make, Inspector,’ I said, pointedly.
‘Of course not.
But you understand that someone went to a deal of trouble to sharpen it, well in  advance, and so must have planned the murder.
It obviously wasn't just a quarrel which got out of hand, or robbery with violence.’
Inspector Drew was looking at me very closely, and I felt rather like a naughty schoolboy under the stern gaze of the headmaster.
Uncomfortable.
He continued: ‘Someone with a very sadistic outlook committed that murder; someone who obviously doesn't like Supersight and its owner, or who possibly doesn't like Brian Harley.’
He paused again and gazed over my shoulder and I wondered what was coming next.
‘Would you also be surprised to hear that Froggy Davies had given his sister nearly two thousand pounds in cash?’
It was certainly a day for surprises, because Froggy had probably never seen so much cash in one lump, let alone earned it.
‘Well, he has been caddying for Harley in Europe, and he did win one tournament and finished equal second in the other.
So, his bonuses would have brought him over two thousand pounds.’
I was thinking to myself that he would have blown most of it on horses and strong drink.
His mind would gleefully have converted the money into his own units of currency — large whiskies and five-pound yankees.
Inspector Drew was obviously a mind-reader, too.
He said: ‘You are thinking what I'm thinking, aren't you, that Froggy would normally have squandered the lot?’
‘Well, maybe he'd seen the error of his ways,’ I said lamely.
‘Maybe not,’ said Inspector Drew, grimly.
The Inspector left it at that and as I was waiting expectantly for the interview to end, he said: ‘Why does an educated man like you spend his time caddying?
You went to a good school and then to a reasonably good university, didn't you?’
Shades of my father, I thought, but replied amicably: ‘Because I enjoy it, and remember that I don't work at it the whole year, so I don't get bored.’
‘Not even with the company of people like Froggy Davies?’
‘I don't spend much of my time with the other caddies, Inspector.
I have the occasional drink with my current boss, Jack Mason, but otherwise have my own friends.’
‘So would the other caddies regard you as stand-offish, a bit of a snob perhaps?’ he asked.
‘Some of them.’
‘Especially when they see you getting into your Porsche, and driving off to the flat you own in Putney?’
There was a harshness to Inspector Drew's questions, despite their quiet, almost conversational delivery, and I tried hard not to become uncomfortable under his eye.
‘Look, Inspector, Dave Wheatley caddies for Bjorn Carlssen, who guarantees him twenty thousand a year, and he earns at least double that.
He's also got a Porsche, and a more expensive one than mine, and he's even sponsored by Carlssen's clothing company.’
‘Yes, but he's a very successful caddie with one of the highest earners in the game outside the  States,’ said Drew.
‘You are not.
You carry for Jack Mason who won just over a hundred thousand last year in tournaments.
So, do I assume that you have a private income?’
I explained that I worked during the winter for a golf-mad stockbroker called Andrew Buccleuth whom I had met during my year on the amateur circuit.
I also kept my contacts and my work going during the golf season, even if I did it mostly by telephone.
The telephone answering machine, and my clients' willingness to talk to me at unusual hours of the day and night, kept me firmly in touch.
My father had initially encouraged my interest in the stock market and I had jumped at the chance of a part-time job in the City.
I had become something of an expert in the leisure market, and to many of the institutional buyers had some spurious extra authority simply because I could hit a golf ball further and straighter than they could.
As the share markets of the eighties rocketed upwards so did my commission and much of it was reinvested.
I was happy with the arrangement because I did not want to be tied to a nine-to-five existence, and my employer remained happy, especially when I made regular appearances as his partner at various golf days — all good for business, of course.
We both suspected that it could not last, but it even survived the Big Bang when the leisurely practices of the City — short days, long lunches, and three-day weekends — supposedly ended.
Everyone was believed to be glued to their computer screens from seven in the morning until nine at night.
Andrew Buccleuth certainly had his fair share of brokers and analysts doing exactly that, but he had a more relaxed view of the duties of a salesman — and especially of one who enabled him to win substantial bets on the golf courses of southern England.
Inspector Drew listened, and nodded.
Not approvingly, because that world of brokers and bankers and speculators, piling their insubstantial castles of paper money ever higher, was foreign to him — and judging by the look on his face, anathema.
‘Mr Ludlow, let me test a theory on you.
You are a young man who is a part-time caddie and a part-time stockbroker, and you don't seem to be particularly successful at either job.
You have heavy commitments, a flat on which you probably spent over a hundred and fifty thousand pounds, a Porsche to run, and a suitably lavish way of life, no doubt.
‘You earned, by your own admission, less than ten thousand from caddying last year and, late in the year, there was quite a drop in the stock market.
It caused a lot of financial pain to a lot of people, and especially to the fast operators in the City who were over-extended with investments in secondary stocks and flashy shell companies.
And I can't say I have the slightest sympathy for them, and I would also guess that you were one of those caught with their financial trousers down.’
Well, Inspector Drew had certainly hoisted his colours to the mast.
I began to speak, but was silenced by a stern look from the Inspector and a raising of his hand.
‘So, perhaps a really cynical person would conjecture that you need the money that caddying for a golfer like Harley, who is obviously back in form  and on the verge of some big wins and big money, would bring.
And that being an intelligent man you planned the murder to divert any suspicion from yourself to someone who had some sort of grudge against Brian Harley or Derek Jefferson.’
I looked at Inspector Drew for several seconds while I tried to marshal my tumbling thoughts.
‘A couple of points, Inspector.
I have no wish to caddie for Brian Harley; I am happy working for Jack.
Second, the motive — money — doesn't apply.
‘You are quite right that the decline in the market caught a lot of people short.
But I was lucky.
About two months before, I sold almost all my shares in order to buy the flat.
I wanted a manageable mortgage.
So I put down a hundred thousand in cash and took out an eighty-thousand mortgage.’
I can't say that my revelations were having any effect on the Inspector.
He sat unmoved.
‘If you want proof, you can see my bank account and all my share-dealing records.’
‘Yes, I will probably want to,’ he said ominously.
‘Well, that's all.
For the time being.’
If the Inspector had planned to unsettle me for some reason, he had succeeded.
As I walked across the car park I looked back at the police station and almost expected to see the figure of Inspector Drew looming at one of the windows as in an early Orson Welles film.
I actually felt guilty as I climbed into my Porsche, and then kicked myself hard, metaphorically, and told myself not to let a nasty-minded Police Inspector upset me.
The car was, after all, three years old and had over 50,000 miles on the clock.
Chapter 4
When I reached my flat on the ground floor of a huge house in a quiet road off Putney Hill, I reflected that it had been, to put it very mildly, a somewhat taxing day.
I was thinking about the relative merits of a bottle or two of Ruddles from the fridge or a glass or two of Sancerre or even, in the circumstances, something stronger, when there was a knock on my door.
There was a peremptory sharpness to the knock which announced the presence of Mrs Bradshaw, a lady in her early sixties who lived in the next-door flat.
When I moved in to my flat she had to a certain extent taken me over, and treated me like an erring and somewhat unintelligent son who obviously needed the care and attention of a responsible adult.
She insisted on cleaning my flat very thoroughly every Tuesday and Thursday, and often left me a casserole in the oven.
I had never been able to persuade her to accept any money for her kindness and tried to reciprocate by doing any small repairs she needed to her flat, and by supplying occasional tickets for the theatre, for the  tennis at Wimbledon, and for the races at Epsom.
I also guided her occasionally in the stock market: she shared these tips and the jaunts with her friend from around the corner, Mrs Warburton, who was also widowed.
I opened the door and there was the commanding figure of Mrs Bradshaw.
She was dressed in a sensible tweed skirt and a rather elegant cashmere sweater.
Her widowhood had thankfully not reduced her circumstances too drastically and had certainly not altered her sense of style.
Her hair, as always, was immaculately arranged.
‘Chris, are you all right?
I read about you in the evening paper.
What a dreadful business.
Is there anything I can do?
Have you phoned your mother?’
Mrs Bradshaw had met my mother a couple of times and they plainly approved of each other.
Indeed they had spent most of their time reassuring each other that, despite all my obvious failings, I was almost capable of looking after myself — under their joint and several supervision.
Right on cue, the telephone rang and I waved Mrs Bradshaw into my lounge.
It was of course my mother, and she asked me the same questions as my neighbour.
I assured her that all was as it seemed, and that I was not under suspicion of murder, and that I was indeed doing all I could to help the police.
‘How has Dad taken the news?’
I asked.
I was anticipating severe disapproval from that quarter, because my father was bemused, to say the least, by my refusal to settle down into a job with a future, as he put it.
He had been very proud of my golfing prowess  when it won me a place in the university golf team, and had even been heard to express his satisfaction when my handicap went down to scratch.
Even so, I had been surprised when he agreed to back me on the amateur circuit for one year after I left the university.
He could afford it — he was the owner of a successful computer software company.
He put up some token resistance: he'd never had my advantages, it was time I got down to some hard work, and so on.
But secretly he loved the idea, and it gave him a great kick to tell his friends and business acquaintances that he was supporting his son on the amateur golf circuit.
It was just as well that he didn't know my long-term aim was to be a pro golfer.
My grand plan was simple enough, and was one of the traditional ways into the professional game.
I would play the amateur circuit to get some hard competitive experience, enter the qualifying school in Portugal at the end of the year, and be a fully fledged tournament pro in the following season.
Simple.
This is the stuff our dreams are made of, but it didn't quite work out that way.
My best finish was in my first major tournament, the Southern Amateur in the cold and rain of Royal Cinque Ports in March.
I finished equal fifth and, although I got as far as the final qualifying round for the Open and won through two rounds of the Amateur Championship, that was to be my best result for the year.
When I saw the potential ability of so many of my opponents and how young so many of them were, I realised that I would have to devote more time to practice than there was in a day just to become a moderate professional.
My comparative lack of basic talent came home to me on the practice ground before the first round of the Amateur.
Alongside me was Sam Ratcliffe who, at the tender age of sixteen, had already had quite a bit of publicity.
He was the son of a club professional in the Midlands, and had apparently first swung a golf club when he was about three.
He was obviously destined for the professional ranks and as I watched him I could see why.
His swing was slow and very compact, and at impact he was beautifully in control of the club.
The power he generated with his simple swing was devastating.
What really gave it away was the totally different sound his ball made when his club connected.
Despite our difference in years, I felt like a boy alongside a man.
It was then that I resolved to enjoy the rest of the year, accept that I simply did not have the talent to make the professional grade, and find a job.
My mother told me that Dad was on one of his frequent business trips to America and would be home in a couple of days.
I promised to ring him, if he didn't ring me first, reassured her again that everything was fine and that she didn't need to drive over to look after me.
Mrs Bradshaw didn't want a drink because she was going over to Mrs Warburton's flat to play bridge.
‘I noticed a man wandering around the garden a couple of hours ago and asked him what he wanted.
He asked if this was your flat.
Well, I didn't say it was, because you can't be too careful these days with all these burglaries.
But I said I knew you and did he want to leave a message.
He  didn't, and said he'd call you and wouldn't leave a name.
Very odd.’
‘What did he look like?’
I asked.
‘Oh, about forty.
Blue cord trousers from M&S, I would say, and a maroon sweater.
Old training shoes.
He was unshaven and looked a bit rough.
I didn't take to him.
He certainly didn't look like the sort of friend you would have, Chris.’
Mrs Bradshaw was certainly in the Inspector Drew class for observation.
‘Well, he doesn't sound like anyone I know,’ I said, ‘unless he's a caddie who happened to be passing nearby and wanted to quiz me about any work available.’
‘Perhaps so,’ said Mrs Bradshaw.
‘Give my regards to Mr Mason tomorrow, won't you.
I shall be watching him on the television.’
She had become a golf fan when she had learned of my job and took a highly personal interest in Jack's performances.
He, too, had become part of her vicarious family, and she sent him regular messages of encouragement.
‘Now then, Chris, you take it easy and have an early night.
You look very tired and I'm not surprised,’ she said.
A few reassurances later and she was on her way to do battle at the bridge table.
I glanced at the answering machine in the corner and saw that the red light was glowing.
I rewound the tape and prepared to note down any urgent messages.
A couple of clients had called me, and I would have time to talk to them in the morning; and I had an invitation to a golf society day in a couple of weeks' time.
The final message was from Andrew Buccleuth, who told me that the shares in one of the leisure companies which I followed closely had dropped a further 20p during the day.
I switched on my computer, which gave me access to the prices of all the stocks listed, to price movements of the market as a whole and of individual sectors — a splendid toy, and an essential one.
Andrew was right — another fall of 20p.
This particular company, with the unusual name of Garth Enterprises, had been quite a glamour stock over the past eighteen months or so, and had a mixture of interests in restaurants, pubs, snooker halls, and property.
It was run by a couple of brothers who had started with one large pub in North London and had built the company, by dint of aggressive take-over tactics and shrewd property dealing, to a sizeable enterprise with a turnover of nearly forty million pounds.
Such was the heady nature of the stock market at this time, when share prices in obscure shell companies could shoot upwards on vague promises of exciting future developments, that Garth Enterprises had advanced from being a penny share to the dizzy heights of nearly £4 a share.
One of Andrew Buccleuth's analysts had looked carefully at the company since one of my big customers, a pension fund with vast resources to spend, had bought heavily into the company and so had several of my private clients.
We had indeed given several recommendations over the past few months to buy the shares.
About five weeks ago, I had been invited to a presentation by Garth Enterprises, who were unveiling their plans for a golf course and leisure  complex which would also include a hotel and the provision of some expensive houses alongside each fairway.
God knows how they had conjured up the planning permission for such a venture, situated as it was on the borders of Essex in a green-belt area.
The presentation was smoothly and effectively done by the experienced PR company which Garth Enterprises employed.
The inevitable lunch followed, since this is the opportunity for the PR executives heavily to plug the project to the assembled journalists; and to the City boys such as myself and the various stockbrokers' analysts so that we will continue to rate the company as a ‘buy’.
It is permissible for journalists to get drunk at these affairs — and indeed encouraged — but not recommended that the executives of the company doing the presentation do so, and especially not the joint managing directors.
The Stevens brothers, who had built up Garth Enterprises, got very drunk and very noisy.
That's when I began to have doubts about the company.
In particular I wondered whether the two brothers would have the capacity and the style to take their company into the upper echelons of the business world.
Stockbrokers issue circulars to all their major clients on a regular basis.
They assess specific companies and make recommendations to buy, sell or hold the shares.
We were about to issue one, with a buy recommendation, on Garth Enterprises.
I got back to the office and explained my doubts to the analyst.
Even if there was a certain amount of personal intuition involved, these questions  were real enough, especially with regard to the management skills of the company.
Its long-term liquidity was also suspect.
We agreed that these doubts were sufficient to justify a recommendation to sell.
Over the next twenty-four hours a flurry of selling, mainly triggered by our circular, sent the shares of Garth Enterprises down by 40p, and by another 50p on the following day.
It was then revealed that the two brothers had been on the brink of a merger with a hotel group, a highly respectable one with over fifty good solid hotels in the provinces.
The depression in their share price had aborted the deal, and the net result was another 50p off Garth Enterprises shares.
My clients were relieved, but the brothers, George and Mike Stevens, were not, and had made their feelings plain to Andrew Buccleuth in language that he did not normally hear outside the fringe theatre, of which he was a generous patron.
My mind was rattling away hard enough without the latest news on Garth Enterprises.
I was trying hard to absorb the bizarre happenings of the day.
So I manfully postponed the drink I fancied and put on a tracksuit.
The drink, whatever it might be, would be all the sweeter after a run, and maybe the relative peace of Wimbledon Common on a mild and gentle spring evening would bring a measure of tranquillity to my mind.
It did, especially after lolling in the bath with the first of several Ruddles.
A meal of fresh pasta and a glass of Sancerre ensured that I was sound asleep in front of the television's latest moronic soap opera by ten o'clock.
I went to bed, slept like an oak, and woke at around eight o'clock.
I could faintly hear the distant rumble of commuter traffic from my bedroom — a reminder of what I had temporarily escaped.
The three newspapers I took were sticking through my front door, which was at the side of the house.
It's a bonus to have your papers delivered, but my newspaper boy, like all others, had perfected the art of cramming them in the letter box so that they were shredded as you pulled them inside.
I buy one of the newspapers for its financial pages, another for its news coverage, especially its sport, and the third out of loyalty to my favourite golf correspondent, Toby Greenslade.
His talents were wasted on the tabloid for which he worked.
It had once been a middle-of-the-road paper with a big circulation and had traditionally reflected the views, or prejudices, of its middle-of-the-road readers.
The advent of racier papers with topless models featured on the inside pages and a grim concentration on the latest doings of talentless television stars, equally talentless soccer stars and the Royal Family had taken away its market.
As a result the Daily News decided to compete, and sentences of no more than five words and paragraphs of no more than ten did not really suit Toby's style.
A glance at the ‘qualities’ revealed that Froggy's death had certainly not made either the front or the back page, but I guessed that the Daily News might have a headline somewhere.
I was unprepared for a full spread on the back page, where normally soccer was king — even in the middle of summer.
TOP CADDIE SLAIN GRIM DISCOVERY BY UPPER-CRUST CADDIE
An exclusive report by Toby Greenslade
The world of golf is in shock.
Froggy Davies, caddie to the golfing superstars, was found murdered early yesterday morning at Royal Bucks Golf Club.
He was stabbed through the neck with the sharpened shaft of a golf club.
In the early hours of Thursday morning, the murderer skewered him to the wooden floor of a refreshment hut.
Dilettante caddie Chris Ludlow, who was educated at Britain's finest public school and a top university (some poetic licence there, I thought), found the body on the morning of one of golf's biggest tournaments, the World Wide Insurance Championship.
In an exclusive interview with the Daily News , Chris explained that, while he was walking the course early that morning, he saw that the door of the hut was open.
‘I glanced inside, and saw Froggy lying there in a pool of blood.
It was ghastly, and a ghastly day for golf.
Froggy was a splendid character, and we shall all miss him.’
The chairman of World Wide Insurance, Mr Brian Summers, told me: ‘We greatly regret the death of Mr Davies, who was one of the unsung servants of golf.
But I know that he would wish the tournament to continue, and we, as sponsors of this great tournament, have a duty to the sporting public to carry on.’
Mr Davies' employer, Brian Harley, who is lying second in the tournament after the first round, was unavailable for comment.
The police are pursuing their inquiries.
Unusually for the Daily News there was a tailpiece to the article, set in darker type, with Toby's name attached.
The death of Froggy Davies has certainly removed a real character from the golf scene.
He was the genuine article, a caddie who followed the circuit for year after year and carried the bags of two Open Champions.
His death, in such strange circumstances, comes soon after beginning work for Brian Harley who, after so little success over the last few years, has suddenly come good.
He has won three tournaments this year; got himself a new agent, the all-powerful American golf manager, Mike Martinez; and a new, and I'm told very lucrative, golf club contract.
He also got himself a new caddie, Froggy Davies.
To many of us inside the game of golf, Froggy seemed to stick out like a sore thumb in this world of smooth agents, six-figure endorsement contracts and marketing strategies.
Someone obviously decided to do something about it, and we wonder why, and who.
This was strong stuff, even if it was wrapped up as mere journalistic conjecture, and obviously Toby knew or suspected something.
I decided to  telephone him in the hope that he was still soothing his habitual hangover with buckets of orange juice, followed by gallons of coffee.
There was no reply, so I would have to contain my curiosity until I got to the golf course.
I had most of the morning to myself and made a few calls to clients, to a financial journalist whose opinion I valued and finally to Andrew Buccleuth.
He passed lightly over the Garth Enterprises business and seemed more interested in Brian Harley's putter and the chances of his getting his hands on one.
I said I would do my best for him.
I then decided to have a work-out on the weights.
In my spare bedroom, which was the size of a ballroom, I had installed a clever piece of apparatus which, despite its compact size, allowed me to exercise most of the essential muscles.
I started with five minutes of rowing and then went through the rest of the circuit, and then repeated the process.
Forty minutes was enough, but after a shower and a breakfast of fruit and cups of tea I felt very sprightly and strolled out to the row of shops nearby.
After browsing in the local bookshop and buying a few necessities for the flat, I decided to leave for the course.
I hoped to catch Toby in the Press tent — a good bet since he kept his appearances on the course itself down to the minimum, on the grounds that his editor was not interested in golf but only in scandals that might be unearthed or invented.
I had parked my car about fifty yards down the road.
There were only three spaces available on a concreted section of the front garden and I normally left these for the use of Mrs Bradshaw and  the two families who lived in the second-floor flats.
The parents invariably seemed to be laden with shopping, children, pushchairs, and all the other paraphernalia of parenthood.
As I got nearer the Porsche I saw that during the night someone had taken a sharp instrument to the bodywork.
There were deep gouges in the paintwork down both sides and across the bonnet.
It was no accident, and I knew I was looking at several hundred pounds' worth of damage.
My mind turned back to the man Mrs Bradshaw had accosted in the garden, but I knew of no one who bore me that kind of grudge or, if he did, would take it out on me in such a petty and spiteful way.
Maybe I was just another minor victim of the class war that continues unabated, especially in large cities.
I comforted myself with a few thoughts of what I would do to the culprit if I ever caught him; realised that was highly unlikely, and headed for the golf course.
I parked my car at around midday and set out towards the Press tent.
I was tempted through the doors of the trade show.
Most big tournaments have a tent in which the major manufacturers of equipment and clothing display their wares.
It is another opportunity to promote sales and to entertain customers, and bonhomie is the order of the day.
I knew many of the manufacturers from my brief career on the amateur circuit, and was always fascinated by the gimmicks that appeared without fail every year.
Revolutionary new…clubs, balls, gloves, and even tees; and all guaranteed to add twenty yards to your drive.
If they all  worked, every golfer would be driving the ball about a quarter of a mile.
But I was as susceptible as any other golfer and loved to look at new equipment.
Supersight had one of the biggest stands and it stood, emblazoned with the company logo, in the centre of the tent.
Derek Jefferson was there doing what he did best — the hard sell.
He was telling all and sundry how his new range of clubs were the best in the world and would transform anyone's game.
His new putter would take the world by storm because it was revolutionary and, as Brian Harley was already demonstrating on the pro tour, the most effective putter ever designed.
So get your orders in well in advance for when the putter goes into production in a few months' time….
His light-hearted and friendly manner enabled him to put over a very strong sales pitch without a hint of strain.
It was a well-turned performance and, if the putter was really as good as Brian Harley made it look, there was no doubt that he would sell a huge number.
I walked on, exchanged some nods and greetings with other manufacturers, looked wistfully at the array of cashmere sweaters and went to find Toby.
At the entrance to the Press tent I asked the security man if Toby was inside and he pointed him out in the middle of the usual muddle of desks and papers, with telephones ringing and cigarette smoke drifting, and expletives exploding.
No wonder the prose is not so peerless in our morning newspapers.
I waved at Toby and he walked over.
He looked quite pale and rather untidy, with his tie undone and his hair ruffled.
Very much the  Front Page look today, I thought, or was the hangover worse than usual?
‘Chris, dear boy.
I badly need a drink and I need to talk to you.’
‘Fine.
Here I am.
What's the problem?’
‘No, I want to get away from here.
Prying eyes and flapping ears.’
He gestured over his shoulder at the other members of the golfing Press.
Much to my surprise, he led me towards one of the public beer tents.
He was obviously in a worse state than I had imagined because to Toby a bar invariably meant a sponsor's tent where the booze flowed like water, and at no expense to the consumer.
Toby was a well-known golf writer, even if he wrote for a newspaper that was rarely, if ever, seen in the boardrooms of Britain.
But he was, nevertheless, a witty and civilised man and was always welcomed by the public relations people who like nothing better than to pour alcohol down the usually receptive throat of a member of the Press.
The public bar was already doing a brisk trade.
The metallic keg bitter was being poured rapidly into those disgusting plastic pint glasses; and the sandwiches, a millimetre of filling between emasculated slices of white cotton wool masquerading as bread, and all safely encased in more white plastic, were also selling rapidly.
Toby appeared at my elbow in very quick time — nobody was more expert than him at getting served quickly in a crowded bar — with an extra-large glass of Scotch and a mineral water for me, my habitual drink when I was working.
By the time  we found a space to stand in comfort most of his drink had gone with a gulp.
‘Chris, I've just had a threatening phone call,’ he said.
‘What, from your editor?’
I said facetiously.
He ignored my remark and carried on.
‘Just before you arrived a bloke came on the phone and said he had read my article this morning.
At first I thought the unlikely had happened and I had a fan out there somewhere.
But he then said that he and his friends didn't like the drift of my article at all, and for the sake of my health I would be well advised to leave the subject alone.
It was his tone that got me.
He was matter-of-fact about it, as if he were telling me what time it was.
It really frightened me, Chris.’
‘Did you recognise the voice?
Maybe it was a joke.
You know how the other journalists take the mickey occasionally,’ I suggested.
‘No, I certainly didn't recognise the voice.
It was one of those featureless, slightly off-centre voices.
You know — someone who lives in London or nearby.
The vowels are not quite right — like football commentators on television.’
He wasn't joking.
I could tell he meant it.
He was deadly serious and I knew it.
I was at a loss, because Toby was so clearly shaken.
Only one response came to mind.
Automatic.
‘Toby, would you like another?’
‘Yes, but I'll do it.
Expenses, dear boy.’
He made another foray to the bar and was back in quick time with another of the same.
‘Chris, I really didn't know who to turn to; and  that voice made me shiver.
But I knew I could trust you, and that at least you would believe me.
I haven't forgotten either how you rescued me from that drunken Scot in Champers a couple of years ago.’
Champers is one of Toby's favourite watering holes just off Ludgate Hill and within an easy stagger of his office.
It is also on my way home from my stockbroker's office in the City.
On the winter evening in question I was sharing a bottle of champagne with Toby and we were, inevitably, talking golf.
I was only half-aware of a looming presence next to me at the bar, until he joined in our conversation:
‘Are you that bloody idiot who does golf for the News ?’ was his opening salvo; and things got worse when Toby, never able to turn the verbal cheek, even to a large and extremely aggressive drunk, proceeded to tell him his opinion of Scottish golfers in general and of unwelcome Scottish drunks in particular.
As the Scot pushed his way past me I grabbed him, put an arm-lock on him and suggested that he had a drink elsewhere.
As I escorted him, none too gently, to the door, I thanked my lucky stars for the hours of self-defence training that I had undergone, at my father's insistence, from the age of twelve onwards.
‘Why did you write that tailpiece to the article, by the way?
I assumed it was just journalistic surmise but obviously, from the sound of your friend on the phone, it struck home.’
‘Quite frankly,’ said Toby, ‘a lot of it was surmise.
I was dropping a hint, trailing a cloak, in the  hope of making the article a bit more interesting.’
‘Yes, thanks for the write-up, by the way.’
‘Think nothing of it.
The only concrete information I had, and that was more sand than cement, was from Froggy Davies's sister.
I managed to track her down and eventually got her on the telephone.
By the way the sports editor really did ‘hold the back page’ for me yesterday.
I only wanted to get a few comments about Froggy.
Was he pleased with his new job with Harley?
You know, a bit of colour as sentimental as possible, with which to tickle the tear ducts of my faithful readers.
Well, Mrs Newton, as she is now, was fairly monosyllabic until I promised that the Daily News would send her a little present.
She then told me what she said she had already told the police and that there was no harm in telling me, to wit that Froggy had given her nearly two thousand quid to do up the kitchen and bathroom.’
I nodded.
‘Oh, you already knew that!
Well, why didn't you tell me?’ asked Toby.
I explained that this had come out during my long interview with Inspector Drew last night.
‘Right.
Anyway I suggested to Mrs Newton that this sort of thing didn't sound like the Froggy we all knew and loved because, with great respect, that sort of money would usually have gone only in one direction — to the publicans and bookies.
She agreed, but said that before he began work with Brian Harley — after the Safari circuit but before the European Tour began — he had gone off for several days’ training.
This sounded very odd to me, because who on earth could hope, or even  wish, to ‘train’ an experienced caddie like Froggy.
But she maintained that he went off to the Supersight factory with Brian Harley for several days.
‘When he came back he said he was going to make more money than he or she had ever dreamed of.
He gave her the money then, and said it was part of his retainer for the season.’
I interrupted Toby.
‘The police assumed that the money he gave her was his bonus for the Madrid Open and the Italian Championship.’
‘Quite.
And that's when I began to get suspicious.
For who would ever bother to give a caddie like Froggy Davies such a huge retainer up-front.
You wouldn't expect to see him again for months or weeks anyway — until he'd spent the lot.
And more to the point he didn't disappear on a massive binge, and he gave all that money to his sister.
So he must have been convinced that there really was a lot more where that came from.
It all rang very off-key and that was the basis of my tailpiece article.’
‘And now you've been warned off, which confirms your suspicions.’
‘Exactly.’
‘Have you told your editor?’
‘Not yet.
I'm trying to decide whether to be a crusading journalist or a craven hack.’
‘But you have told the police, of course.’
‘Not bloody likely.
There could be a great story in this.’
‘Yes and you might not live to tell it.
I don't know what to suggest except for God's sake be careful.
Let me think — and let's meet up later.
But I've got to meet Jack now.
I'll see you later.’
‘Good luck,’ said Toby.
I mused on Toby's story as I walked towards the clubhouse and so intent was I on my thoughts that I nearly knocked over Sally Drayton as I passed the PGA hut.
She looked as delightful as ever, trimly turned out in cream trousers and a bright red sweater and with the bumps all present and correct and in the right places.
‘Good luck today,’ she said, ‘and don't forget about tonight.’
I'd rather have the good luck tonight, I thought, as I resumed my walk to the clubhouse.
Jack Mason appeared at the players' entrance and greeted me in his usual jovial way.
‘Ah, the upper-crust caddie has appeared.
Would you care to carry my bag, sir.’
I grinned dutifully and asked him how he was.
‘Not bad.
I slept well after a few pints of Sussex Devil at the local, and woke up to find my caddie famous.’
I said nothing about Toby's revelations, and Jack had other matters on his mind.
He did his usual practice stint, during which I endured more jokes from the other caddies and from some of the players about my sudden fame.
At three o'clock the same three players — Jack, Harley, and the self-contained Spaniard, Jose Miguel — teed off.
The wind had changed slightly and had strengthened and there was a hint of rain in the air.
Rarely are two days the same in England, and this made the shot calculations on each hole quite different from the preceding day.
Derek Jefferson had abandoned his executive suit for a caddie's bib and was ready to do his stuff again.
Despite losing a ball on the second hole, Harley had a respectable opening half of two under par and his putting was as consistent and accurate as before.
He ended up with another sub-par round and the leader board showed him in a tie for second place behind Carlssen, who had played another superb round to be nine under par.
Jack had obviously had one pint too many of Sussex Devil because his swing was not quite as smooth and slow as usual.
His body was not as solid and stable as it should be and he was frequently off-line by a few degrees.
It was one of those days which all professional golfers have to endure, when their swing isn't quite right.
Most of them know enough about their swings to make minor compensations and can work the ball around the course quite adequately since they can all revert to a ‘bread and butter’ swing, usually with ‘bread and butter’results.
Even when the swing is slightly out of tune, the really good golfer has such good feel for the ball and where it ought to go that he can produce a respectable shot most of the time.
Jack was certainly aware that this was one of his off days.
Instead of the fairway he found the edge of the rough several times, and his irons were not flying straight at the flag.
The consequence was that he returned a par 72 to recede into the pack.
Miguel was his usual self and his efficiency left him in fifth place.
It was down to the practice ground in the gloom for Jack and myself but I managed to get a message to Sally to meet me an hour later than planned.
I was grateful that practice balls are now  provided for the golfers, courtesy of a sponsor, of course.
A few years back each golfer used his own collection of chipped and misshapen balls and the caddies were expected to stand at the end of the practice area and collect them.
It was a very dangerous business, if up to thirty or so golfers were letting fly.
Caddies were hit often and painfully and several took to wearing crash helmets, and one well-known caddie, who obviously had other priorities, used to wear a cricketer's box.
I was able to stand alongside Jack and offer some advice.
He had been moving his body slightly as he came into the shot, and the club head was being thrown slightly off line.
After half an hour or so he was happy that the fault had been corrected — for the time being.
I reached one of my favourite pubs in Barnes at nine o'clock.
It is one of the few pubs in London where the landlord and his staff have mastered the art of pulling a really good pint of bitter: one with a creamy head which lasts right down the glass.
I was making my first inroads into a superb specimen of the amber fluid when Sally walked in.
Dressed as she was in a simple dark green dress, set off by a bright red scarf, she caused a momentary pause in several conversations.
I grinned at her and kissed her lightly on the cheek.
‘What would you like to drink?’
I asked her.
‘Oh, half a bitter would be fine.’
‘OK.
I don't want to rush you but I've booked at the bistro down the road for nine o'clock so we ought to have this drink and go.’
‘Suits me.
I'm starving,’ she said.
A few minutes later we were seated at a corner table in the small bistro which I had known for several years.
It has the advantage of offering a small choice of three or four dishes for each course, all cooked with skill by a cheerful Frenchman in a kitchen in full view of the customers.
I am always deeply suspicious of long and complicated menus; the chances are that the busiest thing in the kitchen is a microwave oven.
The food was served up by the equally cheerful owner, a middle-aged lady who did not believe in overcharging her customers.
‘Hello, Monsieur Chris,comment ça va ?’
My usual greeting from the cook from his kitchen on one side of the small restaurant.
‘Très bien, Roger,merci, et vous ?’
I was anxious to avoid too lengthy a conversation with Roger.
Because I retained a few French words and phrases and could make myself understood in his language he had assumed a much wider knowledge than I possessed.
He usually left me floundering in his voluble Gallic wake.
So I waved and ushered Sally to our table.
Over the first course I made the usual polite inquiries about Sally's new job and asked her what she had been up to for the last half-dozen years or so.
Like me she had been disenchanted with the various jobs she had taken after university.
Perhaps student life does not prepare anyone adequately for the daily slog of an ordinary job, and after two or three attempts to settle into a career in  sales management and even in personnel, she had taken off for America.
‘Personnel.
My God, you must have been desperate,’ I said.
Sally grinned.
‘I have an old friend who works for a publisher in New York and I stayed with her for a couple of weeks while I found a job.
Eventually I joined a real estate company in New Jersey and did rather well.
I was selling houses and apartments on a commission basis, and I think that my English accent stood me in good stead.
It's surprising how the American middle class are still very pro English.
I used to wonder whether they were actually taking in the meaning of what I was saying, or just listening to the accent.
‘Anyway, after about six months I had saved several thousand dollars and decided to spend a few weeks drifting across the country to the West Coast.
‘I eventually arrived in Los Angeles and got a job with a show-business agency as a secretary.
I didn't particularly enjoy that, but the fact that I could play a reasonable game of golf led to an offer to do a sales job for a golf manufacturer just south of Los Angeles in a place called Tustin.’
I remembered that Sally had been on the brink of a place in the university ladies golf team, and I discovered that she now sported a handicap of four.
She went on.
‘The new job mainly entailed selling the company's equipment to the big stores in the Los Angeles area and to some of the bigger golf courses.
This suited me because I got plenty of invitations to play golf, and the only fly in the  ointment was the sales manager.
He was convinced that if he tried hard enough and often enough I would go to bed with him.
Well, since he did not appeal to me in the slightest, the whole business became a terrible bore.
‘He tried all the usual tricks.
Would I stay on at night to go over some sales figures?
You know the patter, I'm sure.’
‘Absolutely not.’
‘Anyway, he then insisted that I went with him to a trade show in San Francisco.
When we arrived at the hotel I found that he'd booked us both into the same double room.
I embarrassed him terribly — in my loudest voice — in front of all the people working on the reception desk, and a separate room was very quickly found for me.
But I knew my days were numbered at that firm.’
I made a mental note not to suggest a dirty weekend away somewhere — well, not yet, anyway.
‘So, I started looking around for another job and heard that Mike Martinez, the agent, was looking for someone to do some secretarial work and some negotiating, and that he preferred English girls for such work.
I discovered at the interview that he's a most amazing snob.
He asked me if I'd been to Eton, but seemed more or less satisfied when I told him I was educated at Cheltenham Ladies’ College.
So I got the job, which had the great perk of corporate membership at the Riviera course, which was just down the road from the office.’
My ears had certainly pricked up when Sally mentioned Mike Martinez.
‘How long did you stay with his agency?’
‘For about a year.
I left a couple of months ago, at the end of March.’
‘Why?’
‘Mostly because I was homesick.
And despite the wonderful climate, and being able to play Riviera whenever I wanted, I longed to see green fields and my folks and my friends, and hear the cricket scores on the radio, and escape from the constant pursuit of more money and better deals for the clients, who mostly didn't care anyway because they already had more money than they knew what to do with.’
I could partly understand Sally's comments because I heard at second hand from Jack Mason about the bickering that went on between manufacturers and the players' agents about contracts.
It was a constant battle.
On the one hand, the size of the guarantee which must be paid for a famous player's name and, on the other, how much support the player would give to the company.
Personal appearances always seemed to be a bone of contention.
Would the star turn up on time?
Would he turn up sober?
Would he turn up at all?
And so on.
‘You were presumably with Martinez’ agency when they signed up Brian Harley?’
‘Yes I was.
I couldn't understand why they bothered to take him on, because he hadn't won anything for years.
My immediate boss, Ed Grainger, hadn't even heard of Harley and he is actually the man who runs the golf division for Martinez.
‘In fact he was very put out because Martinez simply told him one day at the end of last year that  the agency had a new client but he, Martinez, was going to handle him personally and Ed Grainger didn't need to bother about him.
Ed just muttered ‘Brian who?’ and left it at that.’
I butted in: ‘But of course Martinez was right again — Harley starts to win and Martinez gets him a fat contract with Supersight.
By the way, have you any idea what that contract is worth?’
‘No, I haven't,’ said Sally, ‘and Ed was also fed up by the way the deal was done.
As the golf director he normally oversees all those negotiations although the contract is ultimately approved by Martinez.
‘In fact, Ed knows far more about endorsement details these days than Martinez, who is mainly concerned with the big-time sponsors and the top brass at the TV companies.
You know the form.
Power lunches at Ma Maison or the Connaught.
A day's golf with the president of this company or that company when the fellow who makes up the four and plays with the president of the corporation just happens to be last year's Masters Champion.
All legitimate and very effective, and Martinez is very good at it.
But Ed was very annoyed when Martinez negotiated the Supersight deal for Harley.
Not a word.
No consultation at all.’
Sally wanted to know how I became a caddie and I filled her in on my doings since we left university.
She knew a little about my brief and less than glorious foray on to the amateur circuit.
I told her that my ability as a golfer had secured me a good job at a finance company and a certain amount of time off for local competitions.
I was bored stupid by it and moved on to the marketing  department of an American conglomerate.
The experience of working for a number of American executives, who were too busy protecting their jobs and the inflated salaries that went with them to pass on any responsibilities to me, made a move imperative after about a year.
Various jobs followed in sales and marketing, with the shadow of my father always looming, together with his wish that I should work for his company.
Not a course I relished.
‘One spring day, rather like today, I was playing in a pro-am.
The Irish professional I was partnering needed a caddie for the tournament, since his usual man had not turned up.
I was between jobs, and I actually had enough to tide me over while I had a sabbatical.
At the ripe old age of twenty-six, I had half-decided to take stock of my life so far and try to decide what to do.
‘Of course, I agreed to carry his bag like a shot, and the Irish golfer gave me some very basic instruction in my duties over a couple of pints of the dark stuff from his native land.
I enjoyed the experience immensely, since it opened my eyes, a little, to the huge differences between top amateur and top professional golf.
My man, Jim Flanagan, was a middle-of-the-road, journeyman professional, but a real professional.
‘As you know, Sally, he's no great shakes as a shot-maker but a wonderful putter — he has a great feel.
And you know what Willie Park said.’
‘'The man who can putt is a match for anyone,’'she replied triumphantly.
‘Quite.
And he was good enough to win the Open,’ I said and tried not to sound peevish  because she knew the quote.
‘Anyway, Jim putted brilliantly in all four rounds, finished equal seventh, genially accepted a cheque for about six thousand pounds and then gave me his own cheque for four hundred.
Well, I didn't want to take it, because I was vaguely thinking of my amateur status.
But Jim insisted, insisted that I bought him a pint and asked me to caddie for him the following week at St Anne's.
‘So my career had begun, even if at that stage I had no intention of prolonging it.
Eventually Jim's old caddie came out of the woodwork again and I carried on for one or two other pros.
I even caddied in the Open and that was simply marvellous.
Even though my man, a very strong American, was blown away by the winds.
And I eventually ended up with Jack Mason.’
We were on to the pudding course by now and I was attacking a delicious crème brûlée with great gusto, while Sally sensibly preferred the fresh fruit salad.
‘Come and have coffee at my place,’ I suggested.
‘I don't drink it very often.
It keeps me awake.’
‘That's what I was hoping,’ I said with a deliberate leer.
‘Another time, Chris.
I have to be up very early.’
She had.
‘It's been a lovely evening.’
It had.
‘Why don't you come round to my flat next week, and I'll cook you a meal.’
‘I'd be delighted.’
Oh well, hope springs eternal, I thought as, after a brief and chaste kiss, we climbed into our  separate cars.
Like the golfer who hits his one decent shot on the eighteenth hole and cannot wait for the following weekend's game, I felt light of heart with the warm promise of another evening in the company of the delightful Sally Drayton.
Chapter 5
Saturday morning dawned late for me, and I just caught the tail end of Sport on Four .
I was glad to see that the weather was presenting its sunnier face today, although a breeze was scurrying through the tops of the trees.
But a dry day would bring bigger crowds and add to the excitement of the vital third round of the tournament.
I hoped that Jack Mason had restricted his intake of real ale last night and that he was feeling as cheerful as I was, though my happy frame of mind had a lot to do with Sally Drayton.
As I put some oranges through the juicer, her image, bright and laughing, was in my mind.
I settled down at the kitchen table with a jug of fresh orange juice, a bowl of fruit at my elbow, and the newspapers before me.
Toby first — and I turned to the back pages of the Daily News .
‘HARLEY HOT IN PURSUIT OF COOL SWEDE’ read the headline, and the first sentence ran: ‘Brian Harley, the golfer who was on the scrapheap a year ago, continued his early season bid for glory yesterday with a brave round of sixty-eight to leave him one shot behind the cold-eyed Swedish ace, Bjorn Carlssen.’
I looked down the other scores and confirmed that Jack was in about twentieth place, so he would need a very special round today to force his way back among the leaders.
I was ruminating on his chances when my phone rang in the hallway.
I thought about letting it ring, but there was a faint hope that it might be Sally.
It was the ace golf reporter, Toby Greenslade.
‘Good morning, Chris,’ he said briskly.
‘Are you all right?
No more nasty phone calls?’
‘No, thank goodness.
I trust that you have been reading my peerless prose this lovely morning.’
‘Yes, Toby.
It didn't take long and I only spotted one word with more than one syllable.’
‘Thank you, Chris.
But I didn't ring you for a critical appraisal of my work.
How do you fancy a trip to Birmingham?’
‘I don't.’
Let me tell you more, dear boy,’ said Toby in the sonorous manner he adopts when he is either about to state an immortal truth, or browbeat you, or both.
‘There is obviously more to Froggy's murder than meets the eye and, despite the bullying phone call, my editor, God bless him, wants me to do a little more digging.
The place to start is clearly with Froggy's sister.
I want to know why Froggy was so confident that his financial ship was about to dock.
Will you keep me company on Tuesday?
It'll be a nice change for you.’
It would have been easy to claim some other appointment, or a practice session with Jack, but the situation intrigued me and I was particularly happy at the thought of pulling a fast one over the  shrewd and imperturbable Inspector Drew.
‘OK Toby, you're on.
I'll see you later at the course.’
‘Thanks.
And good luck today; you'll need it if Jack is to get anywhere near Harley, let alone the Swede.’
‘Ah, yes, the cold-eyed Scandinavian ace.’
‘Don't, Chris,’ begged Toby.
‘I'll see you anon.’
He rang off and I realised that I ought to leave shortly since Jack was due to tee off at midday.
The phone rang again and this time it was my father.
‘Are you all right?
I've only just read about this old caddie you found murdered.
I got back from the States this morning.
What's going on?’
There was certainly a note of concern in my father's voice but it was overlaid with annoyance, as if I'd let him down by finding a dead body.
‘Dad, I found Froggy dead — murdered — reported it to the police, made my statement, and that's it.’
‘Well, if you mix with those types you'll become as bad as they are.’
My father, when he talked to me, always tended to ape some crusty old colonel of decidedly right-wing tendencies.
He wouldn't dream of adopting such a persona in his own business world, and I knew it.
‘Come off it, Dad, there is nothing wrong with the world of golf.
It's not full of coke sniffers like the music business; it's not full of yobs like football; and it's not full of crooks like horse racing.
No doubt there are some of each in golf, but not many.’
‘Well, as long as you're OK.
Are you sure?’ he asked placatingly.
‘I tell you what, if it's a nice day  why don't your mother and I come down to the tournament on Sunday?
Maybe Jack will win some money.’
They knew Jack Mason and liked him despite his occasional tantrums both on and off the course.
I promised to get them tickets and to let them know where and when to meet me on Sunday.
I had to make haste now or I would be late, so I threw my kit in the back of the Porsche, threaded my way through the traffic on the Kingston By-pass and then put my foot down on the M3, keeping a wary eye open for the police.
As long as I kept just over 80mph I reckoned that, even in a red Porsche, the traffic police would turn a blind eye.
Only the occasional sales rep, in his weekend mufti, went past me in his company Cavalier.
It was relatively mild and sunny when Jack teed off just after midday, in company with an Irish golfer who was a couple of places ahead of Jack in the Order of Merit.
Jack was in an attacking mood and hit an immense drive over the angle of the dogleg on the first hole.
A seven-iron and one putt later he had recorded his first birdie of the day.
It was a great way to start any round and the bright sunshine and colourfully dressed spectators lining the fairways and ringing the greens combined to give everyone a lift — Jack included.
His swing was solid and deliberate.
A mistake at the eighth, which cost him a shot, was only a momentary falter in his stately progress to a seven-under-par round at 65.
This marched him well up the field, and when the final scores came in we saw that he was in equal third place behind Brian Harley and the inevitable Bjorn Carlssen.
The BBC was covering the tournament and their man on the spot had the dubious pleasure of interviewing Jack Mason after his splendid round.
A dubious pleasure because Jack, as in most of his activities, was unpredictable.
Despite all the homilies from the PGA that professional golfers must help the sponsor in every way possible, especially by cooperating with the media and especially with television, Jack had been known to stride straight past a TV interviewer without a word.
On another famous occasion he had left the TV man floundering in his 90-second interview by answering every question with a single yes or no.
On this occasion he was in a jovial, even bantering mood, as I stood beside him facing the camera.
Caddies were told to do this so that the sponsor's name printed on our bibs could be clearly seen by millions of viewers.
This, after all, was the whole point of the exercise for the sponsor.
I put on my best alert face, in case my mother was watching, and saw that the camera was in close on Jack, so the cameraman had neatly avoided getting the sponsor's name into his shot.
Obviously a few spare fivers had not found the right pocket.
The TV interviewer, Stewart Hart, a former golfer of middling talent, spoke into his microphone: ‘Well, Jack, that was a splendid round.
You're obviously in great form.
How do you rate your chances tomorrow?’
‘I'm hardly likely to say that they're slim, am I, Stew?’ said Jack.
‘I wouldn't bother to go out there if I didn't think I could win.
What do you think of my chances, Stew?’
This caught the interviewer unawares, because  he was already rehearsing his next question in his mind.
‘Well, another round of sixty-five should do it, Jack,’ he said after a moment's hesitation, and then continued.
‘Do you think you can win tomorrow?’
‘Yes, I do,’ said Jack firmly, ‘with a little touch of luck on and around the greens.
I'll do my best and aim for a sixty-three.’
Jack grinned amiably into the camera.
‘Thank you and good luck to Jack Mason tomorrow,’ said a slightly flustered Stewart Hart.
‘And now back to Brian in the studio.’
‘Was that all right, Stewart?’ asked Jack innocently.
‘You're an awkward bastard, Jack,’ said the affronted Hart, and drove off in his buggy to do another ‘on the spot’report.
On the Sunday I met my parents and, courtesy of Jack, handed over sponsor's tickets which allowed them into any part of the course and the clubhouse and also provided tickets for lunch.
Jack's round was not as vivid as the day before.
He made the turn in one under par and was joined in a battle with the Spanish machine Jose Miguel and a few other golfers for the places from third downwards.
A stroke dropped or gained was crucial.
Apart from the differences of several thousand pounds between the final placings, Ryder Cup points were at stake.
Behind us, Carlssen and Harley were having their own private battle.
They were already joint leaders, five shots to the good on Miguel who was one ahead of Jack.
The relative positions of the players changed and changed again over the  second half and, as we waited on the eighteenth tee, Miguel had edged yet again one shot ahead of Jack.
We looked back at the tournament leaders on the seventeenth.
Carlssen was safely on the green in two shots, but Harley was in trouble again.
He played his third shot from the semi-rough to the left of the green, got it up fast over the bunkers and finished about six feet from the pin.
His opponent got his par four, and then Harley lined up his ‘arsegripper’ putt.
Derek Jefferson once again took the unusual course of holding the flag for such a short putt, but it didn't put Brian Harley off.
He holed a very difficult putt with great confidence.
The crowd cheered their British player and hurried to the next tee, which we were just leaving.
Both Jack and Miguel finished with par fours and headed for the PGA hut to check and sign their scores.
Jack was £10,000 richer or, rather, a shade over £9000 after my bonus was deducted.
I waited by the eighteenth green with thousands of spectators to see the denouement, and my money was mentally on the dashing Swede.
He obliged by hitting a vast drive about fifty yards beyond Harley's, who then got his second shot just on to the front edge of the green and about forty feet from the flag.
With a much shorter iron, Carlssen placed his ball ten feet from the cup.
Advantage Carlssen.
In dead silence Harley surveyed his putt and Jefferson took up his usual position beside the pin.
A final look, two practice swings with the putter and the ball was on its way.
Everyone, myself included, held their breath as the ball swung the last couple of feet towards the cup and  disappeared.
Shouts and cheers of ‘Great putt’ greeted yet another brilliant shot.
Harley raised his arms in relief and triumph.
The stewards called for quiet but, even to the brilliant Swede, the hole must have seemed distant and minute.
He missed easily and Brian Harley had won a spectacular victory.
I wandered off to find Jack Mason and my parents and saw Toby, who was obviously heading for the Press tent, the conference with the winner, and several post-tournament drinks.
‘The man can certainly putt,’ he said somewhat obviously.
‘Yes, but why does his caddie hold the pin even on the short putts?
And come to think of it why didn't he find himself another caddie after the first round?’
I asked Toby.
‘First of all, he kept Derek Jefferson on because he brought him luck and he likes the caddie to hold the flag because he can concentrate on his stroke better.
Well, that's what he said.’
There are many theories about putting, most of them weird and wonderful, and here was another for the collection.
No doubt when Harley's golden streak with his putter came to an end, as end it must, his theory would be consigned to the dustbin — at the same time as his current putter was hurled into a dusty corner of the attic.
I eventually found my parents in the sponsor's tent in a huddle with Jack and his delightful wife, Jenny.
My father was obviously enjoying the company of the Masons; like most people he was gratified to be seen with a well-known golfer and to be ever-so-slightly in the spotlight.
‘I was just congratulating Jack on his round,’ Dad said.
‘What a splendid effort.’
‘Well, it was a decent pay day, anyway,’ said Jack.
‘And puts you further up the Ryder Cup list,’ I pointed out.
‘If I make it,’ said Jack automatically.
I inquired after my brother, Max, who had finally agreed a few months ago to work for Dad's firm, and I established that he was in Paris for a few more days.
One of the sons had done the right thing and had taken the pressure off me for a while.
After I had arranged to meet Jack on the following Wednesday, the Masons left for home, and I had an early dinner with my parents.
Monday was usually a busy day for me, when I talked to my clients at length and often had lunch with one of my various contacts in the City.
Ritually I turned to the back pages of the Daily News to see a picture of a grinning Brian Harley holding the habitual poster-sized cheque beside the equally cheerful sponsor.
‘BRIAN BOOSTS BRITISH GOLF’ said the headline, followed by Toby's account of how the ‘foreign invader in the person of Bjorn Carlssen was repulsed by British phlegm and determination in the person of Brian Harley.’
But he finished the article on a serious note: you could tell it was serious because it was printed in heavy type.
After re-stating, in different words, his comments in Friday morning's edition, Toby ended: ‘This paper reaffirms its commitment to unearth the unsavoury truth about the death of the caddie, Froggy Davies.
We are happy to offer a  substantial reward for information which leads to the arrest of the guilty person or persons.
You can speak in total confidence to the Editor.’
A special direct line to his office was then given.
I wondered how the redoubtable Inspector Drew would react to the Daily News initiative, and hoped I would hear a verbatim account of his first interview with Toby Greenslade.
After spending all morning talking to clients on the telephone, in place of lunch I nipped up to the golf club and played a few holes with one of the assistants.
When I got back to my flat I decided to ring Toby.
No reply, but that was not unusual at three o'clock, since he was probably in a hostelry somewhere.
I tried his office at four o'clock and then his house at five, without success.
He had not been seen at all at his office.
That was not unusual on the Monday after a tournament, so I decided to drive to his house in Clapham in the hope that I might intercept him either on the way in from a long lunch or on the way out for a pre-prandial drink.
If not, a note would suffice to confirm our plans to head for Birmingham to see Froggy's sister on the following day.
Toby had been married twice and divorced twice but, without the problem of children to provide for, had escaped without too many financial penalties.
He lived in a quiet road off the south side of Clapham Common in a small Victorian semi, with tiny patches of garden at front and back.
His car was outside, so I was probably in luck, since Toby never went anywhere on foot.
A trip to his local pub, which was two roads away, was invariably undertaken by car.
I rang the bell, bashed the knocker and rattled the letter box since this was guaranteed to provoke a tirade of the ‘noisy young bastard’ variety from Toby, who was probably in an irritable state, stranded as he was between the lunchtime and the early evening session.
There was no response, which meant that he might still be sleeping off a particularly heavy lunchtime session or perhaps was in the bath and couldn't be bothered to get out.
I knew where he kept a spare back-door key and walked round the side of the house.
Whoever had been there before me didn't know about the spare key because the glass in the top half of the door was shattered and the door was open.
Burglars, I thought, and then thought again as I remembered the threatening phone call.
I suddenly felt cold and my stomach tightened up as I went through the kitchen, crunching over the bits and shards of broken glass, and towards the main part of the house.
There was nothing untoward in the lounge-cum-dining room which occupied most of the ground floor.
With every nerve on edge and my heart pumping I put my foot on the first stair.
It creaked and I stopped and then heard something: a sort of thin scratching from underneath the stairs.
Toby had a cupboard there in which he threw his golf clubs, normally with a high degree of disgust, and where he kept a dozen or so bottles of wine.
With all sorts of primeval fears about dark cupboards and traps and ghostly animals I put my hand on the handle, turned it, pulled and jumped back.
Sprawled on the floor with hands and feet tied and sticking plaster over his mouth was my  friend Toby.
At least I assumed it was Toby.
It was hard to tell because his face was masked with ribbons of caked blood, and his eyes were just slits in a puffy mess of red and black bruises.
‘Oh Christ, oh Christ,’ I mouthed in a panic and first set about getting the sticking plaster off him.
I tried to pull him bodily out of the cupboard but could hear his agonies even through the gag.
I eased the corners of the sticky tape off his cheeks, held the side of his head steady and pulled.
I had to tug hard and at last freed him.
‘Don't move me,’ Toby groaned, ‘get a knife, untie me.
Don't move me.’
I ran into the kitchen and looked about wildly for a knife.
It seemed an age before I finally saw his collection of Sabatiers on the wall by the cooker.
I ran back and turned him, ever so gently, to get at his hands.
More sticking plaster and more blood all over his hands.
I cut through it on each side and did the same to the binding on his ankles.
To further pleas from Toby not to touch him I raced upstairs, grabbed a duvet and put it round him.
The 999 call took a maddening amount of time, but finally the ambulance and the police were on their way.
I sat by Toby, and stopped myself asking the questions which were dashing through my head.
Poor Toby would tell me what he could, when he could.
I wondered what to do.
My first-aid skills were non-existent.
A cup of sweet tea?
A brandy?
At least I knew that was wrong.
I wished Mrs Bradshaw would walk in.
She would know exactly what to do.
Eventually he spoke.
Two men…this morning…big.
They didn't say a word.
Just smashed my head and my ribs.’
The ambulance only took a few minutes, but it seemed like hours.
The ambulance men took over, so calmly and reassuringly; and Toby was soon in the van and on his way to the nearest hospital.
The police were a minute or two behind but, before the inevitable string of questions began, I insisted on making and drinking a huge mug of tea.
I could hardly pour the kettle because I was shaking.
My fingers seemed to be made of cotton wool.
I also insisted that Inspector Drew be called.
I followed the police car back to base and made a short statement about finding Toby, and then drove over to the hospital.
Toby, surprisingly, had been put in his own small room and I guessed that the power of the Press was already being wielded in his favour.
I was given a brisk homily by the sister in charge about how ill Toby was, and that my allowance was no more than ten minutes.
I idly wondered why there are so many brusque Scottish women in the nursing profession.
Toby certainly looked in better shape than when I last saw him, but these things are comparative.
He still looked as if he had escaped from a major car crash.
His face was full technicolour with red and black the predominant hues, with stitches over one eye and underneath the other.
He managed a very weak and soporific smile.
‘Thank you, old boy, for rescuing me.
I thought I was a gonner,’ he said weakly and tried a smile which became a grimace.
‘Christ, I hurt everywhere.’
‘Have you any idea who did it?’
‘None at all.
I was upstairs and heard the window smash.
They caught me as I came through the lounge door.
I only got a glimpse of them.
They were big and I registered the yob uniform — jeans and bomber jackets.
The next moment I was on the floor and one was kicking me and the other was hitting me in the face.
‘The terrifying thing was that they didn't speak.
I thought they were going to kill me.
Then just before I blacked out one of them said, ‘This is your one and only warning’, or something like that.’
He looked all in and was almost asleep, so I got up and patted his shoulder very gently.
‘Toby, I'm going to keep our appointment in Birmingham tomorrow.
Take care.’
He was asleep but a voice from behind me might have curdled anybody's dreams.
It was Inspector Drew.
‘And who might you be planning to see in Birmingham, Mr Ludlow?
No, don't answer, it's Mrs Newton, isn't it?
Froggy's sister.’
I saw no point in lying to an already acerbic-looking policeman, and agreed that it was.
‘If you are having fantasies of doing a Sherlock Holmes, or perhaps ‘doing a Lord Peter Wimsey’ would be a more appropriate expression for you, forget it.
I think that we have got every scrap of relevant information out of her.
I can't stop you going to see her, but if you interfere in police business you will be in severe trouble.
‘Just remember, too, that a man has already been killed and another one half killed.
You found them both — an odd coincidence, don't you think?’
‘What are you implying, Inspector?’
‘Just warning you, Mr Ludlow, to keep your distance, because you could be next.
I'll be looking at your statement later and I'll probably want to see you in the next day or so.’
I left the hospital with Drew's warning eating away at my subconscious, but I knew that I must keep faith with Toby and talk to Froggy's sister.
As I walked to my car I wondered why the heavies had pushed Toby into the cupboard.
Was it the ultimate in malice — to make sure that Toby, when he came to, in appalling pain, would have to contend with the idea that he would eventually die alone in the darkness?
Or perhaps they were tidy by nature.
They had tidied him away into the cupboard where nobody would see him.
In any event he would have died from his injuries within hours.
If that was just a warning I didn't want to be around when they got really nasty.
Chapter 6
We had arranged to meet Mrs Newton at her home at ten o'clock and I left my flat earlier than necessary to try to miss some of the rush-hour traffic, though how you avoid a rush hour which lasts from around seven in the morning to nine o'clock at night, I do not know.
But I eventually reached the motorway and headed north.
I felt I deserved a break halfway up the M1 after negotiating the usual flurry of roadworks and contraflow systems and dodging the playful lane changes of juggernauts whose sole aim seems to be to persuade drivers of cars, and especially drivers of Porsches, that motorways are too dangerous for anything but lorries.
In the motorway restaurant I asked for tea and wholemeal toast, and saw the usual look of incomprehension on the face of the girl behind the counter.
Off she went ‘to see’ and eventually I got my two pieces of wholemeal, well more or less wholemeal, bread.
I sat down with the Financial Times and tried to count how many people were actually smoking underneath no-smoking signs.
I gave up at half a dozen, desultorily checked a few  share prices and failed to read more than two paragraphs of an article on the gilt-edged market.
Time to go.
I left the motorway system east of the centre of Birmingham and, with my map of the area open beside me, headed into the grey and depressing urban blight that lies to the south of the city or, rather, that lies all around the city.
Do people create their own environment, or will they learn to live in any conditions?
A conundrum for minds of a more philosophical cast than mine.
Thinking wrily of Inspector Drew's pointed remarks about Lord Peter Wimsey, I reckoned I'd be better off with someone like Philip Marlowe to help me.
I eventually found Mrs Newton's road, off an interminable High Street that was crammed with small shops mostly with Asian names over their facades.
As I turned into the street I felt conspicuous, to say the least, in a red Porsche and wished I was driving a ten-year-old Japanese saloon like most of those rusting away on both sides of the road.
The houses ran in long terraces, built in the late nineteenth century to house the workers and their families in this thriving industrial centre.
Some of the houses stood out by dint of their brightly painted front doors but mostly the only sign of decoration was the washing on the lines and hanging from windows.
I parked the car a few doors away from the Newton house, which looked neat enough behind a freshly painted fence, and ran the gauntlet of half a dozen youngsters who were all offering to mind my car.
I accepted the inevitable and picked the  biggest boy, a lad of about twelve who already had the looks and the embryonic physique of the typical Pathan, the North-West frontiersmen who produce fierce fighting men and, surprisingly, great squash champions — like the legendary Hashim Khan.
I gave him a pound coin and promised him another if he did his stuff and I walked over to Mrs Newton's front door.
The woman who answered my knock was dressed in what seemed to be the standard uniform of the housewife: dark trousers made of some shiny synthetic material, a plain blue sweater and a flowery pinafore.
Her hair was dyed black and didn't suit her lined face, which gave clear evidence of a hard life but was, however, enlivened by a pair of watchful blue eyes.
‘Good morning, I'm Chris Ludlow, a friend of Toby Greenslade.
He couldn't make it and asked me to come instead.’
She looked disappointed, so Toby had obviously disarmed her with his usual charm, and had probably promised some expenses, too.
‘Well, come inside and have a cup of tea,’ she said, and showed me into the front room of the house.
It was dominated by a huge television in one corner and she pointed me towards an armchair, covered in worn corduroy, which had once been dark red.
The tea came up quickly, accompanied by biscuits, and Mrs Newton perched uncertainly opposite on the edge of an armchair similar to mine.
I began.
‘I knew your brother, and I'm very sorry about his death.
Toby and I both think that he got himself involved in something that was too deep for him, and that is why he was killed.’
‘You mean that he was a crook,’ said Mrs Newton, sharply.
No, I don't think Froggy had it in him to be a crook, it wasn't in his nature.
But it's obvious that the sudden appearance of money in his pocket and his death are linked and we want to find out how.
It might tell us who killed him.’
She did not look convinced, but I soldiered on.
‘When was Froggy approached to caddie for Brian Harley?’
‘It was a couple of months ago, just before the season began over here.
Froggy was staying with me as usual, making a few bob at caddying on the nearby courses and spending it in the local pubs.
Somebody got hold of him at Edgbaston Golf Club one morning and asked him if he wanted a job this season — carrying for Brian Harley.
Well, he wasn't too keen, because he reckoned Harley was a no-hoper.
‘But a few days later he got a letter with a train ticket down south and two hundred pounds in notes as expenses.
He was to go down to the Supersight factory for some practice with Harley and was then to go with him to a couple of the Continental tournaments.’
‘A bit unusual, wasn't it, Mrs Newton, to be asked to practise with a pro before the season?’
‘Yes, and Froggy didn't like it.
But he liked the cash and decided to go along with it.
When he got back, he'd changed his tune.
He said that Harley was going to be a winner and so was he.
He was going to make a lot of money.
‘Well, I just thought he'd been at the whisky even more than usual, and ignored him.
The next  morning he plonked all this money on the table, about eighteen hundred quid, and said it was mine to re-do the kitchen and the bathroom.’
‘And he'd got it, presumably, as a down-payment from Harley?’
‘Yes.
He said that the Supersight people had put a lot of money up front, and this was his share and plenty more where that came from.’
‘This is what sounds odd to us, Mrs Newton.
That sort of money is rarely, if ever, given up front— even by a big star to a top caddie.
Brian Harley is no superstar and Froggy, although an excellent caddie, could well have disappeared with the money to his favourite distillery for a month.
So, the money must have locked Froggy in to some deal which was important to him and important to Supersight.’
Mrs Newton was looking more and more agitated, as I spoke.
At last she burst out: ‘That's not the only thing.
When I was sorting out his clothes yesterday I found this.’
She produced a building society passbook from her pocket and passed it to me.
It showed that Froggy was richer than we all imagined: to the tune of five thousand pounds.
‘Have you told the police yet about this?’
‘No, and I don't want to.
I'm Froggy's only relation, and I reckon I deserve the money after looking after him every winter for years.
Not that he was much trouble, and he always gave me what money he could.’
A few tears were rolling down her worn cheeks, partly in memory of her dead brother no doubt, and partly out of self-pity and fear of the ‘authorities’ who might take  away her unexpected and much-needed windfall.
‘Don't worry,’ I reassured her, ‘if he came by the money legally, they can't take it away from you.’
‘But what shall I do?’
‘You can't do anything yet.
Sit tight.
I won't mention its existence to anyone except Toby.’
I rose to go, reassured her yet again, and headed back to the car.
The young Pathan had guarded my car zealously and got my thanks and the second half of his reward.
The journey back to London went quickly as I mulled over the strange background to Froggy Davies' death.
Whoever heard of a manufacturer signing up a has-been like Brian Harley and then advancing his caddie, who was hardly noted for his reliability, in the region of £7000 for his services?
It didn't make any kind of sense.
I tried to put what I knew and surmised into the context of other sports.
Horse racing, for instance.
Jockeys have been known to prevent their horses from winning, and favourites are sometimes ‘got at’ to spoil their chances.
But it is impossible to force a horse to win if the talent isn't there.
So how could anyone hope to make Brian Harley into a winner?
It just wasn't possible — and yet he was winning tournaments.
I wondered whether it could be drugs — that a caddie perhaps had to be made privy to, because the golfer had to be topped up during the round.
But there was not yet a drug invented, or ever likely to be, that could cope with all the different and complex actions and judgements that make up a round of tournament golf.
The furious rush and release of a full-blooded hit with a driver to the  Buddha-like calm required to hole a four-foot downhill putt, and everything else in between, would require a whole pharmacy.
I was getting nowhere and sought relief in some music on the stereo.
I eventually got off the motorway and decided to drive straight to the hospital to see Toby, and paused only to buy him some fruit and a bottle of his favourite Bollinger.
He was still looking dozy and was obviously full of painkillers, but was at least propped up on pillows and taking notice.
‘Chris, my dear boy, how are you and how was Mrs Newton?’
His voice wasn't its usual fulsome boom, and probably only carried down half a mile of corridor.
‘Never mind me, what about you?’
‘Just three ribs broken, twenty-eight stitches in my head, and two broken bones in my right hand.
Obviously the opposition were lovers of literature, but I fooled them — I can type with either hand.’
He grinned briefly, but it was a painful effort.
I summarised what I had learned from Froggy's sister, and the many questions in my mind.
Toby said, ‘Is that Bolly cold?
I think it might aid the thought processes, old boy.
There are two glasses in the cupboard.’
I eased the cork out of the bottle very quietly, as if I was a maître d' in a very posh restaurant.
I guessed that the Scottish sister would probably register the sound of a champagne cork on her infallible antennae from several rooms away.
So far so good: and we drank to Toby's usual cry of ‘up she goes’.
‘There are two angles which you might look at, young Chris,’ he said as I refilled his glass.
‘First, is  there anything suspect about that Supersight putter?
To all intents and purposes it is legal — it may look ugly but so do most of the putters these days, and the design has obviously been passed by the Royal and Ancient Golf Club, which does exercise a very tight control over such matters.
As you know, it's pretty easy to stay within R & A guidelines as long as any kinks in the shaft are within so many inches of the putter head and so on.
So, I doubt whether the solution lies there.
‘After all, even if Jefferson has perfected some magic putter which gives Harley an illegal edge on the greens, he will never be allowed to sell it to the ordinary punter, so there's no point.
Remember all the hullabaloo over the golf ball with the transmitter inside it.
If you hit it into the trees you tuned in your receiver and walked straight to it.
A super idea for hackers like me but the R & A immediately banned it, the swines.’
Toby gestured for another glass of Bollinger and continued: ‘No, the clues may perhaps lie in that contract between Supersight and Brian Harley.
Try and tap up Mike Martinez’ people at this week's tournament.
I believe they are importing Carl Krantz at vast expense, so the clones from the Martinez agency will be swarming all over the place.’
Toby was referring to one of the great stars in the American golfing firmament whom the sponsors were said to be paying £50,000 in appearance money, much to the disgust of most of the other professionals.
Predictably they said that the money should be going into the overall prize fund; and, equally predictably, the sponsors replied that  the money was being paid for Krantz to head up a special promotion for the company, and anyway they wanted some extra glamour and colour which a top American golfer would provide.
Krantz had won three US Opens and numerous tournaments around the world.
He was tall, good-looking and fast-talking, and was said to be a first-class shit.
‘You might try to tap Andrew Storey about the contract.
He's Martinez’ right-hand man over here and, although he's usually pretty close about his clients' deals, he's sometimes conceited enough to boast about them.
You can also talk to Jack's agent.
Graham Fearnley keeps his ear to the ground and you never know — he might tell us something.’
At this point, the Scottish sister entered at speed — she had probably smelt the champagne from several wards away.
Her eyes glittered as she saw the bottle.
‘Mr Greenslade, you know that you are not allowed any alcohol,’ she began.
‘Well, sister, it'll do no harm.
It's a tonic, really.’
I didn't wait until she could turn the full force of her disapproval on me.
I waved to Toby and went for the door.
I knew he could cope.
As soon as I got home I rang Graham Fearnley and established that he would be at the Crystal International Tournament on Thursday, its opening day, and we arranged to meet after Jack Mason had played.
‘I'll see you in the champagne tent at three o'clock,’ Graham Fearnley said.
He was quite fond of that particular drink.
‘Well, as long as you're buying,’ I said defensively.
‘Sure, and you can give me a few tips on the leisure market.’
I wondered how much Graham Fearnley would be prepared to tell me, even if he knew anything about Harley's contract with Supersight.
On the one hand he was no friend of Mike Martinez, since the latter was always a great threat to Fearnley's own business, which was based firmly on representing European, and especially top British, golfers.
If a spark of success was first engendered by a British golfer and then maintained, Martinez' clones would quickly and insidiously begin the process of prising the potential star, and his potential earnings, away from Fearnley.
Although Fearnley had contracts with his players, such contracts can always be cancelled, especially if Martinez' lawyers got involved.
Or the golfer in question could claim ‘non-performance’ by Fearnley, that his efforts to secure lucrative contracts on the golfer's behalf had not been successful enough.
In the final instance the golfer could simply refuse to work with his agent, who would then be faced with the problem of whether to sue his erstwhile client — a very expensive, long-winded and unsatisfactory process.
Usually an agreement to end the business relationship was reached.
So, Fearnley was under continuous threat from the two or three agencies which operated on an international basis, and especially from the most powerful, Mike Martinez.
This made Fearnley very defensive about his own business, and usually happy to dish the dirt about his aggressive competitor.
On the following day I carried Jack Mason's bag in the pro-am.
He got round in par figures, but was obviously playing from memory.
He was even polite to all his amateur partners.
Perhaps the very nature of the course on which the Crystal International was being played had had an effect on Jack's temperament.
It was a newish course, just south of Birmingham and within twenty miles of Crystal's head office.
Despite the efforts of the designers, who had moved mountains to landscape the course, planted tens of thousands of trees and built artificial lakes and streams throughout, the course looked bland and uninteresting, essentially because it was so obviously man-made.
Give me a links course in Scotland or Lancashire, or one of the beautiful Surrey courses any day, where the natural terrain has been used to its best advantage; such courses have the great benefit of maturity.
This new course didn't seem to fit; its layout was more suited to California than Warwickshire, and this undoubtedly affected some players, like Jack, who couldn't react to its challenges in the usual way.
On the following day Jack still seemed to be sleep-walking his way around the course and I was not surprised when he visited the water a couple of times and eventually handed in a score of two over par.
Jack didn't even bother to practise but headed for his car and the drive back to his Wiltshire home.
I bought myself some fruit and wandered over to the first tee where Brian Harley was about to drive off.
He had been drawn with a young Irish player and Carl Krantz, the expensive American import.
In his mid thirties, he was certainly one of the most stylish players on the golf circuits of the world.
Naturally, he was a client of Mike Martinez.
In some ways he was a throw-back to another era when golfers swung the golf club rather than tried to hit the ball with as much power as they could command.
Krantz's swing was slow and rounded, and almost metronomic in its smoothness.
I watched him drive effortlessly down the middle.
The young Irishman was a complete contrast with a looping and swooping swing which nevertheless propelled the ball with great power.
Harley was next and I saw with interest that he had a new caddie who was unknown to me.
He was tall and skinny and obviously in his early twenties, and was most noticeable for his permed and bleached hair, an unusual stylistic departure for a caddie.
Just as the rewards for European golfers have increased dramatically over the last few years with a circuit worth nearly twenty million pounds, so have they for caddies.
This was tempting a different breed into the job — it could now be seen as a rewarding all-year-round career.
Harley's man was perhaps one of these.
It was time to find Graham Fearnley and I headed for the champagne tent.
Jack's agent was already well ensconced at a table with half a dozen people, a couple of whom I recognised as regulars on the pro-am circuit.
I went over, exchanged greetings with everyone and Graham pointed at an empty table a few yards away and said:
‘Grab that table and I'll be with you.
What do you prefer — Bolly or the Widow?’
I plumped for Veuve Clicquot and sat down.
I watched him at the bar, a short but fairly broad-shouldered figure with fairish hair.
He was dressed in sober black-and-white checked trousers, with a plain cotton golf shirt and a navy blazer, and was going through his familiar bonhomous routine with everyone within reach at the bar.
He reckoned to do most of his business in the bars and hospitality tents during the tournaments, and I wondered if he could remember the details after all the champagne.
‘Good health, Chris!’ he said, and we drank.
‘Who's Brian Harley's new caddie?’
I asked.
‘Apparently he's been imported from California by Martinez.
You'd think there weren't enough caddies to choose from over here.’
‘Yes, it seems odd, doesn't it?’
‘Why?
Did you fancy the job?’
‘No,’ I answered.
‘I'm quite happy working with Jack, as you know.’
‘I don't blame you.
That bastard Harley dumped me after I'd looked after him for nearly ten years.
I hardly made a bean from him in the last five.
I had to tag him on to group deals as a makeweight — you know, like the contract I did for twelve of my players with UK Airlines.
They didn't want him, but I persuaded them in the end.
As for equipment I could hardly get him a free set of clubs, let alone any fees.
‘And then he ditches me, gets a new contract with that shit Martinez and starts winning tournaments.
I can't believe it.’
‘Well, no one can believe it,’ I said placatingly, ‘but why do you think Martinez took him on?’
‘I've no idea.
But just remember that Martinez has his fingers in every pie in golf.
I admit that he's a brilliant businessman, but I just wish he wasn't in my business.
As soon as one of my clients looks like winning anything important, he's after him.
‘All I can say, Chris, is that he took Harley on because he knew he could get him a good contract.’
He paused and refilled our glasses, looked up and waved a greeting at a couple by the bar.
His smile switched on, lit up like a beacon, and was gone as suddenly.
‘I still don't understand why Supersight took a gamble on Harley, either.
Jefferson has been in the business a long time and is no fool, is he?’
‘No fool at all,’ said Fearnley, ‘and just about as devious as Martinez.’
He leaned closer across the table.
‘When Jefferson left Downton International a few years ago it certainly wasn't of his own free will.
Apart from the fact that there was trouble with one of the other directors — apparently Jefferson was having a high old time with his wife and, to add insult to injury, charging the hotel rooms to expenses — you may recall that Downton lost two very valuable contracts with players in tennis and golf.
‘Remember the famous love affair between Mary-Ann Curtis and Larry Marsh?’
Three years ago, nobody who read either the front, middle or back pages of a newspaper could have missed reading about the exploits of these two mega-stars.
Mary-Ann Curtis was the best tennis player in the world, with three Wimbledon titles and a Grand Slam under her belt, while Larry Marsh looked as if he would be her equivalent in  golf.
He had won a US Open and a Masters title in great style, and their affair was a natural for the pages of the world's newspapers.
Whenever their conflicting playing schedules allowed, these two attractive superstars of sport managed to meet in a blaze of publicity.
Between the tournaments and all that smiling at the cameras, one wondered how they found the time and the energy to do all those things that the popular press said they did.
Graham Fearnley continued.
‘They were, of course, both clients of Martinez, and all this free publicity was grist to his mill.
They also both had long-term contracts to play Downton equipment worldwide.
But the Kane Corporation in America badly wanted them both to endorse their products and generally to revive their image.
They offered Martinez millions to get them out of the Downton deal and into the Kane Corporation.
‘No go, however hard Martinez tried.
And his lawyers combed every syllable of the contracts.
But of course Downton is a huge company, too, and would have dragged everyone through the courts if necessary.’
Fearnley was by now talking so quietly that I had to lean close to hear him.
‘The story is that two other clients of Martinez,’ and Fearnley named two tennis players who were well-known for their skill at ladies' doubles and notorious within tennis for their lesbian activities, ‘were detailed to pursue Mary-Ann.
Well, they eventually got their chance, during a rest day at the Monte Carlo Open.
Some rest day!
They filled her full of booze and probably cocaine and eventually had their way with her.
‘Remember, at that time the general public were quite unaware of their sexual preferences.
The two of them were merely a couple of outstanding lady tennis players, one of whom had won Wimbledon.
The Downton company had just teamed them up, with Martinez’ agreement, to launch a new range of tennis clothing and equipment for the cheaper end of the market, mail order and so on.
They had already put several million pounds into a launch of the products around the world.
‘When the two star-crossed lovers next met, someone, it doesn't take much imagination to guess who, had made sure that Larry Marsh suspected something was wrong.
Mary-Ann, who was a bit of an innocent, told all.
She was more remorseful because she'd enjoyed the experience so much,’ Fearnley added, maliciously.
‘Of course Marsh went wild.
He rang the managing director of Downton and said that if the other two players didn't have their contracts cancelled immediately he and Mary-Ann would call a Press Conference, tear up their contracts with his company, and tell the world's Press why.
‘To say the least, the company were in an impossible situation.
They either had to abandon a very important marketing campaign and also write off God knows how many millions of pounds already spent on it and on guarantees to their lesbian lovelies, or let Mary-Ann Curtis and Larry Marsh go.
‘This was exactly what Martinez had planned, and the rumour was that he worked the whole scheme out with Derek Jefferson.
He suggested to the Downton MD that they keep the two girls to  their contracts, but release Curtis and Marsh.
That way there would be no trouble and Martinez, who represented all the people involved, would agree to it.
‘So, Martinez got exactly what he wanted.
He even got the guarantees that were still left on Curtis and Marsh's contracts paid up by Downton and then negotiated huge deals with the Kane Corporation for both of them.
What an operator that bloke is.’
There was a rueful admiration in Fearnley's voice.
He stopped and drew a long breath and I stared at him and said: ‘Are you serious?’
‘Well, you don't think I made it up, do you?’
I realised that the detail and the logic of the story made it impossible not to believe Fearnley.
‘Chris, that's just one of the many strokes that Martinez has pulled in his time; and he still goes laughing on his way to the bank with his twenty-five per cent commission.
Jefferson resigned from Downton International shortly afterwards, and put it about that he was fed up with working with such a large company.
Not so, the managing director knew that Jefferson was knocking off one of the other director's wives, but much worse than that there had been some really dirty work going on with Martinez.
Unfortunately he couldn't prove anything.
But it didn't take Jefferson long to find enough money to set up a factory to make golf clubs, and it doesn't take a lot of imagination to guess who provided the money.’
I asked Fearnley whether he knew any of the details of Brian Harley's contract with Supersight.
‘Strangely enough, I haven't even heard a  whisper about it,’ he said.
‘You know how word gets out in the golf business, but there's been nothing on this one.
You might try to tap Andrew Storey, but he can be very tight-lipped.
But be sure of one thing,’ he added bitterly, ‘whoever makes money out of the deal, it won't be Brian Harley.’
I thanked him and left.
I was still dazed by the extraordinary story he had told me.
In my innocence I had not imagined that such Machiavellian schemes could be devised, let alone carried out.
I had stumbled into the fringes of a world where cynical and ruthless manipulation of other people was the norm, and where even violence and perhaps murder was used to achieve one's ends.
Chapter 7
I walked out of the champagne tent in a dream or, rather, a nightmare and put two elderly customers, who were coming towards me and were obviously intent on a reviving glass or two, in peril as I blundered into them.
I apologised and strode on and decided to seek out the man who looked after Martinez' business in Europe.
I knew Andrew Storey since we had occasionally crossed swords in the Halford Hewitt Cup — an extraordinarily friendly but highly competitive event for old boys of a select group of schools.
It is held at two famous courses on the Kent coast in the early spring, when the cold is invariably at its most insidious and the winds at their fiercest.
He seemed an unlikely executive for someone as American as Martinez since he was the product of an elite public school, followed by an equally elite advertising agency.
He was not short of that peculiarly British brand of slightly disdainful, rather loud self-confidence.
I remembered then Sally Drayton's remarks about Martinez' own special strain of snobbery — the more ‘British’ the better.
Since Andrew Storey was responsible for the  expensive importation of Carl Krantz by the sponsors, there was obviously a good chance that he would be doing his public relations stuff in their tent.
As I walked towards it, I glanced at the leader board and saw that his client was doing his stuff too — he was two under after five holes.
I nodded to the security man and asked if Mr Storey was inside.
There was quite a scrum of people at the bar giving their orders for large post-prandial brandies and ports and the commissionaire waved me through.
I spotted the tall figure of Andrew Storey in the far corner of the bar.
There was an ice-bucket on the counter at his elbow with a familiar bottle of champagne therein, and he had assumed his favourite pose.
He was looking steadily into the eyes of one of the sponsor's publicity girls and exuding enormous interest in what she was saying.
He had to look into her eyes because he was so close to her that to look elsewhere would have been blatant rudeness.
Andrew was on his well-trodden path to captivating and conquering yet another willing lady.
I made my way slowly through the crowd of people, pausing now and again to chat briefly to people I knew.
‘Andrew, so sorry to interrupt you but I wanted to say hello.
When are we going to have a game again?’
‘Chris, great to see you, and let me introduce the lovely Lindy.
She's with the Crystal publicity people,’ he said unnecessarily.
‘Have a glass of fizz.
How are things?
Oh, Lindy, would you excuse us?
I'll be with you shortly.
Don't run away.’
She eased her way past Andrew Storey and into the press of sponsor's guests.
He patted her neat, round bottom automatically as she went past.
‘She'll do for tonight,’ he said.
We passed a few minutes in the exchanges that usually pass for conversation between people who know each other slightly and have no real business connection.
How's the golf?
How's old Jimmy getting on?
Are you still living in…?
I was bending my brains to think of a way of introducing Brian Harley into the conversation when the television monitor in the corner of the tent gave me the ideal opportunity.
It showed the leader board and then switched to the seventh where Krantz was preparing for a long approach putt down the kidney-shaped green.
He got it close and holed out and then the camera focused on Brian Harley, who had a slightly shorter putt.
The camera panned back as he prepared to play.
The ball went unerringly into the hole.
Harley was now three under par.
‘That guy's putting is uncanny,’ I said with not a little feeling and not a little envy.
‘Yes, it's that fabulous putter we sorted out for him.’
‘And a fabulous contract too, I hear?’
‘We do our best, Chris,’ he said smugly.
A little bit of flattery was now in order, I thought.
‘I imagine you do pretty well for Krantz.
What's he worth these days?
Apart from the odd fifty thousand pounds in appearance money.’
‘For a start, it's nearer seventy thousand in appearance money.
Let's see, from the top and grossing it up on a worldwide basis, it's roughly fifty for the visor, two hundred for shirts and sweaters, just under fifty for the golf gloves, and a hundred for the trousers.’
Andrew Storey was enjoying this and rattled off ‘the statistics.
‘Thirty thousand for socks, a hundred and fifty for shoes, and the big one — the clubs — seven hundred thousand a year.
These are all annual figures.
Then there's rainwear, and we have a deal on other casual clothing in the States, an arrangement with a bank, for cars, non-alcoholic beer and a breakfast food, various commercials, company days, a three-book deal with a publisher, and so on.
‘You're looking, Chris, at a golfing asset which turns over around four million pounds a year.’
I nodded admiringly.
‘And who's Harley's new caddie?
I hear he's an import.’
‘Yes, Mike sent him over.
Friend of a friend of a friend, I believe.
Nothing's too much trouble for Harley, at the moment.’
‘How come?
I thought you'd have bigger fish to fry with clients like Krantz and Marsh and so on.’
Andrew Storey looked over his shoulder, an agent's reflex action, I supposed and leaned closer.
‘Mike is treating Harley like a superstar and he's never looked like winning a major.
And we've been ordered to treat him likewise.
Frankly, he's a pain in the arse, but Martinez pays me a handsome amount of money and provides me with a very flashy car, which impresses the likes of young Lindy over there, so who am I to argue?’
‘It must be some contract with Supersight,’ I said casually.
‘We wouldn't know.
Mike handled the whole thing.
Anyway, I must circulate, Chris.
Nice to see  you.’
Storey moved off in the general direction of young Lindy.
I moved off to the PGA caravan to have words with Sally about our tentative arrangement for dinner at her flat.
I entered the spacious caravan and was about to ask for Sally when Oliver Moreton, the tournament director, appeared at an inner doorway.
‘What do you want?’ he asked stiffly.
‘I wanted a word with Sally.’
‘Now look, Ludlow, we are all very busy and this caravan is for PGA officials and tournament professionals.
You are neither, so I suggest you leave.’
He advanced towards me in aggressive style.
‘Mr Moreton, Sally is an old friend of mine and if I cannot speak to her I would like to leave a message.’
At this point Sally also appeared at the door and was able to intervene between the two bristling males.
She grabbed my arm and pulled me to the outer door.
‘What's the matter with that idiot…’
I began, but she cut me short.
‘Never mind about that.
I'll explain later.
I'll see you at my flat tonight.
Is nine o'clock all right?
By the time I get back and so on…’
‘Fine, I'll see you later,’ I said as she retreated briskly into the caravan.
I was still seething at the injustice of Oliver Moreton's attitude to me.
I hadn't, as far as I knew, done anything to harm him, and his words rankled.
I realised that I was driving far too aggressively for my own, and any other road user's, good.
I made myself calm down and Miles Davis's clear tones on the stereo helped a lot.
It was early evening when I got into London's vehicular scrummage and I had plenty of time to see Toby in hospital.
His face had now assumed many superb hues, a sort of fleshy palette of violets, reds and blue-blacks.
‘You're looking much better, Toby,’ I said encouragingly.
This didn't get a good response.
‘I look as though I've been on the wrong end of a Gestapo interrogation.
But however I feel, dear boy, I'm leaving this particular medical establishment on Friday.
It's like a very poor imitation of a boarding school, except that the discipline is much more severe and the food twice as bad.
They wake you at five a.m., which is when I'm often going to bed, and you're so knackered by mid-morning that you doze all day.’
He gestured at the cupboard.
‘Behind the books.
You'll find a bottle of Bolly.
One of the porters nips out every day at five thirty to the off-licence and gets me a cold one.’
I opened it discreetly, with only the faintest pop from the cork, and Toby asked:
‘What news of the world of golf and particularly of our friend Harley and his associates?
I see that he's two off the pace today, by the way.’
I took him through the events of the day and in particular Graham Fearnley's unpleasant tale of how Martinez had fixed the Curtis/Marsh contracts.
As he pondered, I said:
‘By the way, what's wrong with Oliver Moreton?
He ripped into me just now for going into the PGA caravan.’
‘A grammar school education and a captaincy in the Royal Army Pay Corps is what's fundamentally  wrong with Moreton, dear boy,’ said Toby magisterially.
‘And he wouldn't like a privileged and good-looking young man like you, who is clearly slumming it among the ranks of the caddies, to be on his territory.’
I still could not understand what Toby was driving at.
‘Moreton is obviously trying to make it with Sally Drayton, you idiot, and you are the competition.
At times, Chris, your innocence astounds me.’
Today was proving to be full of revelations, major and minor, and I sipped my champagne to cover my embarrassment.
Toby continued: ‘As for this Harley business, we now know that there has been a closer relationship between Martinez and Jefferson over the years than the normal one of agent and manufacturer.
We know that neither is averse to some dirty work to achieve his aims.
We know that there is something peculiar about Harley's contract with Supersight.
But we cannot yet assume that Froggy Davies was murdered by, or on behalf of, either Martinez, Jefferson or Harley.
He could have been done in by some thug who was after the money in his pockets.
Someone might have heard him talking in a pub about his sudden excess of money and decided to take it off him.
After all, I could have been beaten up because I hinted in the Daily News that there was something improper about the Harley/Supersight deal.’
‘Yes, but Froggy's murder was obviously planned, as Inspector Drew pointed out.
Nobody would be wandering about with the sharpened shaft of a golf club, just in case it came in handy.
It  was a premeditated and very nasty murder, and may well have been planned to throw suspicion on Harley or Jefferson.’
‘Or, more subtly, to divert suspicion from Harley and Jefferson.
Nevertheless, Chris, we are not much further forward.
We still need to know what is in that contract or we need to find out whether there is anything peculiar, and I mean illegal, about Harley's putter.
I agree with you that it's not feasible that Harley is on some kind of drug — even beta-blockers wouldn't help a golfer that much.
And we haven't got to the science-fiction world of brainwashing — in fact Harley came across pretty well at the last press conference.
He came out with some good one-liners, though I'm told that his agent employs a script-writer to cobble up these spontaneous flashes of wit.’
We finished the bottle of Bollinger and I promised to share another with Toby on Friday.
I headed for home, showered and changed.
It was a reasonably clear evening and since I had already had a couple of glasses of champagne I decided to cycle over to Sally's flat in Fulham.
I wrapped up a bottle of Grand Moulas in a newspaper for safety, put it in one of the panniers and went on my way.
I found her flat quite easily.
It was on the first floor of a late Victorian house in a road which was not too far from Craven Cottage.
Her warm and wide smile greeted me at the door and I forgot for a while the riddles and innuendos which surrounded Brian Harley and hid the killer of Froggy Davies.
I was in a comfortable flat with a friendly and attractive woman who was about to feed me.
What more could a normal and healthy man want?
Well, one other pleasure, but that might perhaps come later.
Which reminded me of Oliver Moreton.
as if by telepathy, Sally referred to his strange behaviour while I opened a bottle of Sancerre in the kitchen.
‘Oliver Moreton has been badgering me to have dinner since I started work for him.
I've made all the usual excuses.
I was nice about it at first and said that business and pleasure don't mix; and that I don't go out with married men and so on.’
‘Shades of your sales manager in the USA,’ I said.
‘Exactly.
Well, this morning he got very heavy and actually grabbed me and tried to kiss me.
His hands were everywhere, so I kicked him hard in the ankle and told him exactly where to go.
Of course, he knows that you and I are old friends and he transferred his anger to you.
Funnily enough, he's very good at his job, very efficient, but he's been spoiled by women, I think.’
‘Well, I wish he did have cause to be jealous of me,’ I said, and took the opportunity to draw her towards me and fold my arms around her.
‘Maybe he will, one day,’ she said teasingly into my shoulder.
We kissed and held each other and kissed again.
‘But not today,’ she said finally, grabbed the bottle of wine and two glasses and walked back into the other room.
Dinner confirmed Sally's blend of forward planning and sheer competence; iced cucumber soup was followed by steak Bordelaise and my favourite pud of crème brûlée .
She had remembered from our dinner the week before.
We talked continuously, ranging over many topics, and laughed a lot and I was mentally hugging myself merely for having the good luck to be with such a friendly, amusing and vital girl.
No doom and gloom, resentment or woeful tales of broken romances, no poses or pontifications here.
It was relaxing and reviving.
As we drank our coffee I outlined Toby's and my suspicions about Martinez and Jefferson, and I asked Sally whether she had got on well enough with Ed Grainger, who was Martinez' right-hand man in America, to ask him questions about the Harley contract.
‘We got on well.
He's pretty straightforward and has a nice sense of humour — almost British in fact.
Of course Ed was really peeved about how Martinez handled the whole Harley business.
He was cut out of it completely and he might be prepared to talk.’
She looked at her watch.
‘Let's see, it's about two o'clock in the afternoon in California.
I'll try him now.
You can listen on the extension in the bedroom.’
A few moments later, she was actually talking to Ed Grainger.
It's much easier to get through to the other side of the world than to the other side of London, and the lines are much clearer too.
After exchanging pleasantries, Sally asked: ‘Ed, would you be prepared to give me some information about the Harley/Supersight contract.
Just an indication of the terms, and entirely in confidence.
A journalist friend of mine is doing an in-depth piece for one of the Sundays on big agents in sport and what they do for their clients.
Obviously Harley is news here, although it's mainly  because of his caddie's death.
But he was risen from the golfing dead, so to speak, and my friend is interested in what an agent can achieve for minor stars, as well as superstars.’
There was a pause and I heard Ed say in his pleasant West Coast accent: ‘I shouldn't, but since it's you, Sally, and as long as my name isn't mentioned, I'll find out what I can.
But Mike handled this contract himself so I'll have to dig in the files and ring you back.’
I walked back into the lounge and said, ‘You clever girl’ to Sally and sat close to her on the wide sofa.
A long and heart-felt kiss was interrupted by the phone and I hurried back into the bedroom and picked up the extension in time to hear Ed Grainger.
Oh well, business first.
‘It's a peculiar thing, Sally, but there is hardly any sort of a file on Harley and I can't find an actual signed contract.
But that is explained, partly, by the fact that Mike did the negotiations himself and they were often done face to face with Jefferson.
As you know he was over here in California a lot.
So there were no proposals going back and forth.
‘The best I can do is a heads of agreement outlining Harley's deal.
It's pretty straightforward.
Harley gets a guarantee of fifteen thousand pounds to play Supersight clubs, including putters, with bonuses based on that sum for wins in certain specified tournaments.
‘As I say, straightforward except for one clause which commits Supersight to market a range of putters if Harley wins the British Open.
If so, the  guarantee will be renegotiated for a period of two years and Harley will receive a royalty on sales of two per cent.’
While Grainger was talking I had torn a page out of my diary and written on it ‘Why was Jefferson in California a lot?
Ask him.’
But I couldn't yet leave the phone and dash into the other room and give it to Sally.
Ed Grainger continued: ‘This clause about a British Open win would normally never be written into the contract of a no-hoper like Harley.
I know he's won some tournaments but he is simply not Open material.
It takes an extra special player, right out of the top class, to win an Open — I suppose on the eve of the Open there are no more than ten players, if that, who have the game, the will and the sheer bloody-mindedness to become the Champion.
Now, Harley is not, and never will be, one of these.
‘There are other peculiar things about this deal: the clause refers to putters.
Why not clubs?
It would be logical to put an Open Champion's name on a full set of clubs, not just putters.
‘And last, Harley's royalty is already agreed and it's far too low.
Mike would never agree to less than a six per cent royalty.
‘But that's all I know and, Sally, you must not quote any of those specific figures, OK?
I've just given them to you as background, and because you're lovely.’
I raced into the lounge and held my note under Sally's eyes.
‘By the way, Ed, why was Jefferson over in California so much?’
‘Oh, his latest putter was partly designed over here.
He wanted to give it a space-age look so, apparently, he went to one of the companies here which specialises in metal research for NASA.’
Sally put the phone down and turned to me.
‘Did all that make any sense to you?’
‘Only in the limited sense that this whole Harley set-up looks odder and odder.
From whatever angle you look things are wrong: even if Froggy hadn't been murdered, it was unheard of that he should be given so much money up front to caddie for Harley.
And then there is this long-standing relationship between Martinez and Jefferson, and the dirty work they got up to a few years ago.
Now this unlikely contract, with some unusual clauses, between Harley and Supersight.
As Graham Fearnley said, the one man who certainly won't come out ahead in the end will be Harley.’
Sally came up to me, kissed me firmly on the lips and said, ‘It's late, Chris.
You'd better sleep on the problem.
I've got to be up early — I must leave here before seven.
So I'll see you at the course tomorrow.’
She was right, of course; but as I cycled the short distance home I kept worrying at the problem, juggling the pieces frustratingly in my mind, and making no sense at all .
But one thing I was determined to do was to get hold of a Supersight putter and see what its secret was.
I met Jack Mason, as arranged, shortly after ten o'clock and he went through his customary practice routine.
There was a desultory air to the whole performance, and I knew that he was conscious of  his mediocre first round, which had put him some way down the field.
Since he didn't like the golf course either he was in no real frame of mind to ‘spreadeagle the field’, as a well-known golf pundit invariably and irritatingly puts it on television.
‘Come on, Jack,’ I said, as we walked towards the putting green, ‘there are lots of Ryder Cup points at stake here, and lots of lovely money too.’
‘I dare say, but I'd far rather be playing snooker with a few of the boys, accompanied by a few pints of beer — preferably Devil's Dram.
Four pints of that and I'm anybody's.
This is a bloody awful track, and I've no idea why the PGA ever schedule a tournament here.
Well, I have got an idea — it's because the sponsor wants it here, and they daren't say no to him, because they're a bunch of gin-swilling, arse-kissing prats.’
Jack's voice was as loud as usual, and several heads turned.
He didn't really mean it.
Many of Jack's forthright and colourful opinions were expressed for effect, and he was actually being unfair to the PGA.
But he was in one of those moods.
I hoped nobody had heard the full sentence and hurriedly changed the subject.
‘Have you managed to get a Supersight putter out of Jefferson yet?’
‘As a matter of fact I have.
He gave me one to try yesterday.
I had a few putts with it at home, but it's not for me, Chris.
You know the problem with putters, if they don't feel right as soon as you pick 'em up and swing them, you might as well forget it.
I'm not very keen on the shape, and the face seems to be a bit dead.
That metal compound on the head is  supposed to give you more feel, but it doesn't work for me.’
‘Do you mind if I borrow it?’
‘You can keep it.
It's in the boot of the car — remind me at the end of the round.’
I was duly surprised that the Fates had put the new putter in my hands so easily.
In my desperation I had been making plans to try and sneak the putter from Harley's bag to have a surreptitious look at it — a truly dicey plan because Harley rarely let the putter out of his sight and, when he did, his caddie obviously had instructions to guard it with his life.
My chances of getting my hands on it long enough to give it the once-over were minimal, and I didn't fancy trying to steal it off Harley.
But Jack Mason had solved the immediate problem for me.
I continued to encourage Jack whenever I could and to try to put positive thoughts into his head, especially on the greens.
After all, a round in the mid-60s might well bring him well up the field for a charge on the final two days.
He woke briefly in the middle of the round with an eagle and a couple of birdies, but eventually slid back into indifference and finished with a level-par score.
‘No good today, Chris,’ he said, ‘it's a rotten course and I've got no feel for it.
Tonight I shall have a few pints, take Jenny out to dinner, probably attack a nice bottle of claret, and sleep like a stone.
I'll grit my teeth and attack the course tomorrow — death or glory, nothing in between.’
He grinned amiably, and I knew he meant exactly what he said.
I reminded him about the putter and took possession of it in the car park.
I followed  Jack's Mercedes a short way along the side roads and he then headed due south while I shot down the motorway towards home.
I couldn't wait to get to grips with the famous putter and was duly grateful that the Friday afternoon traffic was reasonably light, with fewer than usual kamikaze lorry drivers about.
As soon as I got into my flat I looked at the Supersight club with great care.
Jefferson had obviously set out to design the ultimate high-tech putter and had, to a great extent, succeeded.
He had used a graphite shaft which, although rather thicker than usual, was of excellent quality.
This fitted flush into the centre of the putter's head a half inch or so behind the face.
The head itself, with a non-reflective black surface, was larger than normal and the back of it was formed into an oval shape.
It looked rather clumsy but, when I swung it, it felt quite light.
To relieve the monotony of the black head, yellow sighting lines had been painted on it to enable the golfer to line up his putt on the ‘sweet spot’— the dead centre of the putter head.
I putted a few balls across the carpet and rather liked the satisfactory clunk which the putter made on impact.
I then proceeded to vandalise nearly a hundred pounds' worth of golf club.
In the spare bedroom I had a demountable work-bench with a vice and an array of small tools.
Like many golfers, and professional golfers are particularly prone to this, I liked to alter my clubs occasionally — to change the lie of a wedge by a degree or so, or thicken the grip of a putter, or change the swing weight of a driver.
Some professional golfers become obsessional and  are forever tinkering with their clubs and ultimately it becomes a self-defeating process.
I took a hacksaw to the shaft and, starting at the top, cut it into three sections.
They were all quite normal hollow pieces of graphite tube.
I then severed the last piece of shaft as close as I could to the head, and again found nothing untoward.
With the head secured very firmly in the vice I attacked the outer edge of it, where the top section had been joined to the side, with a chisel and hammer.
Eventually I was able to lever the top section off and the mysterious internal design of the Supersight putter was revealed.
There was nothing at all mysterious about it — just an ordinary heel and toe construction, which concentrates the weight of the putter at either end of the blade.
This gives a much bigger ‘sweet spot’ for the golfer to use and ensures that the effect of a slightly off-centre strike is minimised.
Although I had been under no real illusions that an amazing secret would suddenly be revealed, I was nevertheless disappointed that my theories had proved to be groundless.
I wondered where to go from here.
Chapter 8
Mental confusion can be assuaged in many ways, and one of the best ways for me is exercise.
I gathered together the various sawn-up and wrenched-apart pieces of putter and put them in a drawer.
I then got into a tracksuit, donned a newish pair of expensive running-shoes, and set off towards Wimbledon Common.
Well, they were expensive if you had to buy them but they had been given to me, along with a pair of golf shoes, by the Italian company which supplied Jack.
One of the perks of the job.
An hour later I was back, blowing hard and running with sweat, but feeling virtuous and much more relaxed.
Running is a pretty boring way of passing the time, but is nevertheless a simple and effective way of staying fit.
There are even times when I enjoy it in a masochistic kind of way — those are the times when you are really running free, bouncing along in a relaxed and easy manner, with the mind and the body in tune.
Some runners talk in mystical terms of a ‘high’, but to me it simply resembles a perfect golf swing or tennis shot when you hit straight through the ball without any thought or any inhibition, and the result is invariably perfect.
I showered and then decided to lie in a hot bath for a few minutes with a cup of tea at my elbow and the latest Kingsley Amis in front of my face.
Virtue has its own reward, I thought smugly.
Despite the quirky characterisations of Mr Amis, my mind returned, albeit lazily, to Brian Harley and his omnipotent putter, but I could not see how to fit the various pieces of evidence together to form a coherent whole.
I lay in the bath daydreaming of putters that never missed and that were made of priceless and perfect metals unknown to man, of millions of pounds won on the fairways of the world, and of even more millions made off the course.
The coolness of the water roused me from my reverie, and I left the bath and decided to telephone Toby Greenslade.
A call to the hospital established that he had, as threatened, checked out.
I ate some fruit, followed by a tuna sandwich made with solid wholemeal bread and headed for Toby's house.
He took a long time to answer the door and his painful movements towards and into his armchair explained why.
He registered my look of concern.
‘It's all right, Chris, I'll be as good as new in a week or so.
I couldn't stand that hospital any longer, and I'm much happier here at home.
There's another bottle in the fridge; would you like to open it?’
We settled down with a new bottle of champagne on the table before us, and I summarised what I had discovered about Brian Harley's contract with Supersight and what I had not discovered about his putter.
Time and time again we  went over the information we had and what it meant, but made no progress.
An hour later, the bottle was finished, and Toby was too.
He said, in an unusually wan way, ‘The crux of this business is hidden far deeper than I imagined.
Froggy's murder, and even the attack on me, simply doesn't fit in with what we know of Jefferson or Harley or even Martinez.
At least two of them sail very close to the wind but I wouldn't categorise them as murderers.
It's beyond me at the moment, Chris, and I think we should stand back and see what happens.’
Nothing happened over the next two days except the conclusion of the Crystal International Tournament, and a win for the ever-consistent Jose Miguel by one shot from the imported American star, Carl Krantz.
The latter had certainly done the sponsors proud, whatever they had paid him to appear.
Of course he was the genuine article, a great champion whose pride would not allow him to give anything but his best.
Some lesser American golfers, lured over by the open cheques that sponsors often have available, had in the past performed less than satisfactorily.
One or two, accompanied by a wife and children, had seemed to regard the tournament as an opportunity for a free family holiday; and some had even managed to miss the halfway cut, to the great embarrassment of all concerned, except probably Mike Martinez whose twenty-five per cent commission was safe whatever happened.
Jack Mason had continued in his untroubled and uninspired vein of the first two days and had finished way down the field.
Brian Harley had seemed short of inspiration too, and his putting  had failed to compensate for a number of lapses in his long game.
He had also fallen foul of the rules, with a controversial decision over a free drop during the final round.
He had hit a drive off line down the left side of the tenth fairway — a crucial moment, since he was then lying three shots behind the joint leaders.
Harley's ball was lying a mere few inches from an out-of-bounds fence and was therefore unplayable by a right-handed golfer.
The hole was designed as a dogleg to the left, and in the trees ahead of Harley was a television camera tower.
He therefore claimed ‘line of sight relief’.
This is a local rule which is formed to take account of any obstructions caused by the camera positions — if they are in the way of a shot, the golfer may have a free drop.
Harley would, in this case, have been allowed to drop his ball two clubs' lengths away from the fence, and would therefore have been able to get a full swing at the ball.
But the rules official, who was summoned by radio, decided, after much argument, that Harley's claim was not justifiable.
Harley then insisted that the tournament director, who is the ultimate arbiter at professional tournaments, be summoned.
He upheld his official and Harley had to play the ball as it lay.
After a sideways hack, played left-handed, a poor shot into a greenside bunker and two putts, Harley had effectively played himself out of contention.
Next week's tournament was an unusual one in the golfing schedule, since it was sponsored by a number of companies and was fronted by a comedy team from television called Lumby and Titch.
They seemed to have a show every week or, if not, were invariably guests on other comedians' shows or the light relief on those interminable chat shows.
They always appeared in a ‘special comedy show’ on Christmas night — and perhaps the creaking and overfed somnolence of that evening was the best state in which to watch their predictable routines.
This was the tournament which most of the pros approached with trepidation.
Each of the four rounds was played as a pro-am four-ball, with a professional, a celebrity who was usually from show business and two amateurs, who paid handsomely for the privilege.
The motives were above reproach since a large sum was raised for deserving charities every year.
But the four-ball format was unwieldy and led to extraordinarily long rounds of five hours or more.
Nothing can test a professional's nerve and patience more than long waits between every shot.
It is bad enough for the club hacker in the monthly medal, but infinitely worse for a tournament professional when there is a great deal of prize money at stake plus those vital Ryder Cup points.
Another problem was that the show business element attracted a different kind of spectator.
It was a deliberate policy to appeal to the family and the television audience, who came to the tournament to see their stars, not the golf stars.
So there were large numbers of spectators who simply had no idea that you should be quiet when a golfer is about to hit a shot.
In fact the professional golfers almost took a back seat, and it always afforded me some wry amusement when Ryder Cup golfers of repute were ignored by the  spectators who were intent on getting the autograph of some star from a television soap opera.
Jack Mason was certainly far from his best in such a situation, and I was surprised that he had decided to enter.
But, since he was lying twelfth on the Ryder Cup points list and the first prize was £40,000, he could hardly afford to miss out.
The whole tournament was in effect a pro-am so the usual pro-am which precedes conventional tournaments was not required.
That gave me an extra day off, since Jack had decided that one practice round was enough for him.
Sally Drayton also had some time off early in that week and I suggested that we spend the Tuesday together.
After some discussion, we elected to play golf at a charming course in the Cotswolds, to have lunch in a nearby town and then go browsing amongst the many antique shops.
We played our match on level terms, with Sally having the advantage of playing from the ladies' tees, which can be anything up to forty or fifty yards ahead of the men's.
Her graceful swing was highly effective and her short game was deadly.
I was lucky to halve the match with her, and this flattering result was mostly due to a fortuitous birdie on the last hole, where I holed a pitch and run shot from short of the green.
Soon after the match we were strolling companionably through the handsome streets of the town, past a striking collection of houses and shops built from the mellow, biscuit-coloured local stone.
Even the local garage conformed to the general pattern and this was obviously one of those fortunate towns where the planners had insisted that the  character of the place be preserved, and not submerged by the usual welter of national stores.
We eventually picked a hotel which looked out over the main square and settled down in the bar.
After deciding on beer — a pint for me and a half for Sally — we chatted about our golf game and then Sally asked: ‘How are you getting on with the Brian Harley business?’
‘Quite honestly, I'm not.
I feel I've come to a full stop and so does Toby.
We're unsure in which direction to go next.’
Sally was looking thoughtfully out of the hotel window and at the steady procession of passersby, a good proportion of whom were visitors, to judge by the number of cameras to be seen.
She was in half profile against the bright windows, her face glowing in the background of light.
She turned to face me and gave me that vivid smile that transformed her already delightful face.
It was enough to captivate the hardest heart and mine took an uncomfortable, half pleasurable jump, and I knew I was lost.
‘Let's book a room upstairs,’ I said frivolously, if hopefully.
‘Let's have some lunch,’ said Sally.
‘I have a suggestion for you, which may lead nowhere, but may at least be worth a try.
As you know, Derek Jefferson is one of the sponsors of this week's tournament and one of his ploys to drum up a bit more publicity is to arrange a tour of his factory.
It's mostly for journalists, but there are some golfers and some celebrities.
You know the form: lots of booze on arrival, a tour of the factory and then a buffet lunch with lots more booze, and plugs for  Supersight products should duly appear in the trade magazines and maybe some of the newspapers.
Well, I suggest that Toby arranges to be on the trip and that you go with him, either as his close friend or in your professional capacity as a caddie, or a bit of both.’
‘You mean that this might give me a chance to do a bit of snooping,’ I said.
‘Exactly.
I think that the tour around the factory will be quick, but you may see something that will set your mental cogs turning again.
Unlikely, I agree, but worth a try.’
‘Unlikely that my mental cogs can turn or unlikely that I will see anything?’
I asked.
‘The phone is over there, Chris, and I suggest you try to reach Toby now,’ she said in her determined way.
‘I hate bossy women,’ I said with a smile, and headed for the telephone.
I got Toby on the second ring and explained Sally's suggestion.
With a grunt Toby agreed to arrange things and hoped that I would do the driving and that Jefferson intended to provide some decent champagne.
After lunch we walked around the town and marvelled at the prices which were being asked for some of the antique furniture.
Obviously this was no problem to the American buyers who were out in force and I wondered whether within fifty years all the antiques in Britain would end up in America and we would be confined to department-store replicas.
As usual I popped into the second-hand bookshops and, as usual, failed to find any old golf  books of any interest.
Sally, after much thought, bought a small rosewood clock for her flat and we eventually found the car and headed for home.
I dropped Sally at her flat and drove home.
No sooner had I entered my front door than there was a knock on it.
It was Mrs Bradshaw, smartly turned out and as well-groomed as always.
‘Hello, Mrs Bradshaw…’
I began.
‘May I come in, Chris, there's something I must tell you,’ she said brusquely.
I wondered what I had done wrong.
Mrs Bradshaw was a kindly lady, but half a lifetime as the wife of a top civil servant at the Ministry of Defence had given her an authoritative air which at times verged on the imperious.
She often made me feel vaguely guilty, as if I'd forgotten to clean my teeth or was wearing a grubby shirt.
I ushered her into my sitting room and she continued.
‘I was doing my usual Tuesday clean for you, Chris, when the phone rang.
Well I know that you use an answering machine, so I ignored it.
A man began to leave a message.
But it wasn't the sort of message you normally receive — it was a threat, and it sounded very unpleasant.’
I crossed to the machine and wound the tape back.
There were a couple of messages from the office, and then a voice, which was quite featureless, apart from some obvious London vowel sounds, came on.
‘You've caused me and my friends a lot of trouble and we are going to pay you back in full.
Soon.’
The voice stopped and I had a similar feeling to the one I had just before I found Toby trussed up in his cupboard.
My skin was crawling.
‘I'm sorry, Mrs Bradshaw,’ I began, but she interrupted.
‘Don't you worry.
I picked up the phone and gave him an ear-bashing.’
‘What did he say?’
‘Nothing, the little squirt.
He hung up on me.’
The machine had carried on recording when Mrs Bradshaw had used the phone.
Ear-bashing was an understatement.
Her stern and contemptuous delivery would have reduced Stalin to a jelly.
I laughed with relief.
Trust Mrs Bradshaw to bring me back to reality.
She had reduced the voice to something on the same level of annoyance as a heavy breather.
She looked at me searchingly.
‘Are you in trouble, Chris?’
‘No, of course not.
It's probably something to do with the Froggy Davies business.’
I then explained to her about the attack on Toby.
‘I admit that Toby has been stirring things up in his newspaper.
And I've been asking questions here and there.
But, if it is to do with that, someone or other must have a pretty good intelligence system to get on to me so quickly.’
‘Well, I think you should tell the police,’ said Mrs Bradshaw sensibly.
‘I don't think it's that important.
After all, why worry about a silly phone call.’
I sounded more confident than I felt and changed the subject.
On her way out Mrs Bradshaw again suggested that I phone the police, and I promised to think about it in the morning.
There was no time to think about it, because I  had to pick Toby up at ten o'clock — at the crack of dawn, as he put it — to drive down to the Supersight factory.
It was on one of the many new industrial estates on the London side of Newbury, a sort of silicon corridor along the M4, where the brave new world of high technology industry was booming away.
One of my father's laboratories was only a few miles distant.
We arrived on time at the factory, which was easily recognisable by the huge Supersight logo on the front of the building — one of those light industrial units, painted in bright primary colours, which litter the landscape of Britain — bright, satanic mills, I suppose you could call them.
The hubbub in the reception area was considerable among the gathering of journalists, show business people, and golfers.
I spotted several club professionals, who were clearly delighted to be out for a day's entertainment at the expense of one of the manufacturers.
There were one or two tournament players who were contracted to play Supersight clubs, among them Sam Ratcliffe.
He was the young player who had made such an impression on me during my year on the amateur tour.
He had grown quite a bit, both upwards and outwards and, as I shook hands with him, I reflected that it would not be long before he won a professional tournament.
We were ushered into the boardroom at the back of the building and were treated to a few welcoming remarks from Derek Jefferson, in his familiar, cheerful and very effective style.
He then waved us towards a table where large fluted glasses of champagne were already poured, and  Toby's experienced eye reckoned that there were sufficient reserves of his favourite tipple to get the three dozen or so visitors totally blotto several times over.
‘Let's wade in, dear boy,’ he said and led the charge.
‘Champagne is medicinal, you know.’
Within minutes the noise level had increased perceptibly as the champagne began to have its effect.
After half an hour or so, when some of the journalists' drinking arms were a blur, Jefferson banged on the table.
‘Gentlemen, and lady,’ he said with a gracious nod in the direction of the only woman present, a journalist with one of the golf magazines, ‘I don't wish to spoil your enjoyment, but I would like to give you a brief tour, and I promise it will be brief….’
He paused while an ironic cheer went up.
As usual, Derek Jefferson did not hold back in his praise of his own products.
No false modesty.
This was an enthusiastic salesman at work.
‘As you know, this is one of the most advanced assembly plants in golf.
We use the most advanced techniques to assemble our clubs, which have the best designs in the world.
‘Although we only assemble the clubs here the components are made by expert manufacturers in America, Japan and Taiwan.
Our new putter, which is about to go into volume production, is a triumph of modern technology and, as Brian Harley is already proving, is the best putter in the world.’
I nudged Toby and whispered: ‘This is the only chance I'm going to get.
I'll try to lose myself on the way into the factory.’
I realised that once the tour of the assembly area was over and the lunch began my chances of nosing around would be minimal.
Jefferson led the way, with his production director, out of the boardroom and across the corridor to the factory door.
I lingered, on the pretext of finishing half a glass of champagne.
I had noticed on the way in that Jefferson's office was alongside the boardroom and, as the last visitor went through into the factory, I turned sharp left and entered his office.
It was quite a large room, though the huge wood veneered desk seemed equal to the task of filling half of it.
There was the usual paraphernalia of filing cabinets and a large selection of framed photographs of Derek Jefferson with various stars of screen, golf and Parliament.
I was in two minds about closing the door, but decided that it would be safer to do so; if anyone came through it unexpectedly I would have a split second to look lost and nonchalant.
I had no idea what I was looking for and certainly no intention of starting on the filing cabinets.
I decided that a rapid look through the papers which were piled into two filing trays on Jefferson's desk was my best bet.
I went through the first pile, which seemed mainly to be stock orders from golf professionals around the country, and started on the next tray.
This contained miscellaneous correspondence, but near the bottom of the tray the letter heading of my favourite Sunday newspaper caught my eye.
I glanced at it quickly and saw that the advertising manager had written to confirm the booking of a  double-page spread in the colour supplement for six successive weeks, beginning on the Sunday after the Open Golf Championship.
The implications of this astonished me.
Even with my limited knowledge of the cost of advertising in a posh Sunday colour magazine, I realised that such an exercise would mop up at least twice Supersight's annual spend on promotion.
Advertising in the colour magazines is so expensive that their shiny pages are usually the preserve of manufacturers of cars, watches, television, expensive perfumes and the like.
I was standing motionless by the desk, and gazing vacantly at the letter, when I heard some footsteps outside the door.
I slung the letter back into the middle of the pile of correspondence and headed very quickly for the door.
As I was halfway there, it opened.
It was Jefferson's production director.
‘What the hell are you doing in here?’ he asked.
There was no friendliness in his voice.
‘Oh, I'm sorry, I was looking for the loo,’ I said as casually as I could.
He glared at me and then walked past and had a sharp look around the office.
‘Lavatories have WC written on the door where I come from, not Managing Director.’
‘Yes, I know, but I thought there might be one off the MD's office.
I'm very sorry.’
‘I suggest you rejoin the visitors and stay with them.
There are lavatories in the assembly area.’
He opened the door wider and followed me down the corridor to the factory door.
‘Who are you, by the way?’ he asked.
‘Chris Ludlow, a friend of Toby Greenslade's.’
With a nod, and another terse look, he walked off down the corridor.
I wasted no time in entering the assembly area and rejoining the cheerful gang of visitors, buoyed up by the welcome infusion of champagne and looking forward to more.
Derek Jefferson had certainly whizzed them round the factory, and was already in the final assembly area.
He was explaining how the finished clubs are matched for weight, and how precise this matching had to be.
He used the old but very effective trick of balancing a five-pound note on a club head to demonstrate how this changed the swing-weight quite significantly.
As we went towards the final stop on the factory tour, where the clubs were diligently checked by hand, I managed to edge alongside Toby.
‘How much does a double-page spread in a Sunday colour supplement cost?’
I asked him.
‘Oh, about thirty grand,’ he said.
‘Well, our friend is planning to spend over a hundred and fifty thousand pounds with just one of the Sundays.’
‘God Almighty, have you gone off your head or has he?
Are you sure?’
I whispered in his ear ‘I saw a letter from the advertising director of the Sunday Chronicle .
It confirms a booking of six double-page spreads, starting the weekend after the Open.’
Toby was doing his own brand of gaping by this time.
It didn't last long because we were back in the boardroom by now, and he quickly got another glass of champagne into his clutches.
‘Come over here,’ he said, ‘let's have a word with old Eric.’
Eric was the editor of a monthly golf magazine for which Toby wrote occasional feature articles.
After greeting each other warmly, Toby said:
‘How are Supersight doing?
I hear they're spending a lot of money on promotion.’
‘As far as I can tell their clubs are doing very well.
As you know they're designed for the middle to high handicap player, for the person who needs a bit of extra help.
Like me, but not like young Chris here.’
Eric grinned at me and I smiled back because I knew that, at well over sixty, he still played a very competitive game of golf off a handicap of ten.
‘And are they spending as much on promotion as Jefferson would have us believe?’ pressed Toby.
‘Well, of course, Brian Harley is doing the firm a hell of a lot of good with that magic putter of his; and, yes, they have booked some extra space with us from July onwards and up to Christmas.’
Toby looked meaningfully at me and changed the subject as we moved towards the table for lunch.
The table had been laid out as a T, with Derek Jefferson at the head of the table, flanked by his production director and, as yet, an empty space on his right.
As we settled ourselves, the boardroom door opened and in came the stocky figure of a man I had met, in quite different circumstances, a couple of weeks before.
It was Brian Summers, the Chairman of World Wide Insurance.
I nudged Toby and asked, ‘What's he doing here?’
‘I don't know, dear boy.
But he is a major golf  sponsor, and he's known Jefferson for years.
Maybe he insures Jefferson's company or something.’
Eric, who was seated opposite, caught the tail end of that remark.
‘It's a little more than that, Toby.
I'm told that Brian Summers put up some money to get the company started and now has quite a significant slice of the Supersight action.’
It was a pleasant and, for many of those present, a very convivial lunch.
The whole occasion was organised by Derek Jefferson with some style: from the brilliant white tablecloths and silver cutlery to the excellent food and well-chosen wines.
At the close, over the coffee and brandies, he thanked us all for attending, told one short and amusing joke and wished us on our way.
As we left we were all presented with a small package, wrapped in gold paper which sported the Supersight emblem.
As we set off back to London, Toby opened his parcel.
It was a leather-bound facsimile copy of Bobby Jones' famous autobiography,Down the Fairway .
‘The man certainly has some style,’ said Toby reflectively.
‘And money,’ I added.
‘Yes.
On the way out I had a quiet word with young Anna from the other golf magazine.
She told me more or less the same story as Eric — that they are reserving double the usual amount of space for Jefferson over the second half of the year.’
‘How on earth can he spend all this money?
I checked them out recently when I was doing an  analysis of the golf market.
The company only turned over about three million pounds last year, and made profits of just over a hundred thousand.
It's just not on.’
As we drove back into London and towards Toby's house we worried away at the problem, to such an extent that the issues became more, rather than less, obscure.
In the end, I refused Toby's offer of a drink, and we agreed to sleep on the problem and talk again sometime during the following day.