

SUNGATE: ADDAMAX LAWSUIT AGAINST OSF ‘HAS BEEN COVERTLY FUNDED’
The Open Software Foundation attempted to fan the flames of scandal at Unix Expo in New York last week when it broke the news that Sun Microsystems Inc has been funding the lawsuit brought against it by security software house Addamax last year (UX No 331).
Addamax, whose security technology was submitted but passed over when OSF selected SecureWare for its OSF/1 operating system, filed the $100m anti-trust suit in April 1991, also naming Hewlett-Packard and Digital.
‘Contrary to impressions created publicly by Addamax and others, the lawsuit was not the simple effort of a small, independent software house’, claimed the Foundation, which won a court order allowing it to reveal the information.
‘We are appalled by Sun's behaviour’ said OSF chief David Tory.
Sun says Addamax — a vendor to Sun — asked for a loan guarantee, and it agreed because the suit raised serious issues.
The sum is $7.5m, and Sun will only pay out the money if Addamax loses — it will not gain from any victory.
OSF is said to have got the go-ahead to reveal the agreement a few weeks ago, but waited to announce at Unix Expo.
It is thought to be unlikely that the action will be settled out of court, and prospects of a rapprochement between the OSF and Sun — that were just beginning to be talked about (UX No 379, 380)— now appear remote.
NOW UNIX INTERNATIONAL MAY BOW OUT OF X/OPEN
Like the Open Software Foundation before it, Unix International may be forced to relinquish its seat on the board of the X/Open Co Ltd because to the financial cost of membership.
UI's ticket runs to some $750,000 a year plus extras which brings the total up to around $1m it must pay annually, the same price point at which OSF retired,(UX No 356).
UI, an $11m affair, wants to retain its input into X/Open, but unless it can come to an arrangement over some other form of membership which OSF has so far failed to secure, it is likely to turn in its cards at the end of the year.
UI and X/Open were due to meet as we went to press.
UNIX SYSTEMS LABS TO FORM TUXEDO CLUBS, NCR'S TOP END STRATEGY REPOSITIONED
Part of Unix System Labs' push to make its Tuxedo transaction processing monitor a standard for OLTP will begin to happen next month with the inauguration of the Club (UX No 403).
Due to meet four times a year, the club will invite all 30 Tuxedo licencees to join though only 17 are active.
As well as a means of ensuring that interoperability and compatibility between different vendors' Tuxedo-based products, USL wants the club to clearly identify these products by stamping them with the Tuxedo brand.
At the moment, Unisys Corp's Unix OLTP for example, is not visible as a Tuxedo implementation: ‘we even used to charge companies to use the brand’ admits USL.
Speculation that NCR's own OLTP monitor Top End is likely to be squeezed out of the frame continues.
Latest word has NCR being given time to re-position its OLTP strategy for interoperability and compatibility before a statement is released.
NOVELL AND UNIX SYSTEM LABS —‘MERGER PUT ON HOLD’
Sources who, a few short weeks ago, said they ‘would have bet the farm’ on the Novell/Unix System Labs merger going through are now convinced the deal has soured.
They theorise that reason may have been the price being asked, exacerbated perhaps by personality clashes.
Other companies have run numbers on what USL would be worth and found it hard to justify more than $200m.
Novell could of course come back again sometime down the road, since its strategic interest in operating systems is doubtless unchanged, or another company could find the acquisition appealing (UX No 405).
However, right now USL is believed to be back on the road to going public.
IBM LAUNCHES 62.5MHz RS/6000s, UPS UPGRADE TAGS
IBM Corp is following up its summer drought of product announcements with a flood that will keep everybody busy until Christmas.
Last week it launched the RS/6000 Powerserver 980 — server only — and the 580, which comes in station and server versions.
Both use a 62.5MHz version of the Rios RISC.
The 980 is the new top end to the 19″ rack-mounted sub-family.
It has 32Kb instruction cache, 64Kb data cache, and two 80M-byte per second Micro Channel buses each capable of supporting eight input-output adaptors.
The second group of eight slots can be ordered with the initial machine or field upgraded later.
Base disk on the 980 is 2.74Gb.
Upgrades follow in November.
The 580 has the same processor configuration, 64Mb memory, 2Gb disk and one 80M-byte per second Micro Channel, and integrated SCSI-1 adaptor, costing $62,500.
Available from October 23, the 980 and 560 cost $114,500 and $62,500 respectively.
IBM also cut prices on the 220, 340, 350 and 560 RS/6000s, with the 220 cut 9.5% to $3,800, and the 560 cut 8.7% to $57,500.
But it increased the cost of almost all RS/6000 model conversions by some 15%.
The Model 220 will get a further upgrade to a higher clocked CPU next year.
The first Power PC chip, the 601, will become available for it and is expected next year, ahead of schedule.
The new machines have yet to be launched in the UK.
‘We are not ready yet’, claimed Clive Parminter, IBM's UK AIX/Unix manager, who denied that this was because of chip problems.
IBM and CICS — page 2.
IBM REVEALS CICS/6000 OVERLAY FOR ENCINA SYSTEM…
The new AIX CICS/6000 and AIX Client for CICS/6000 launched last week (UX No 402) will be available on June 25 1993.
CICS/6000 is really a CICS overlay for the Encina transaction processing monitor from Transarc Corp.
CICS applications and data can be distributed horizontally and vertically across TCP/IP only environments, SNA only environments or the two mixed over local and wide area networks.
Applications can be developed on CICS/6000 for execution on CICS/6000, or on any other member of the CICS family.
Existing CICS customers can use their investment in CICS Cobol programmers with no need for re-training and Unix programmers can develop CICS applications in C and use X Window or Motif functions to develop user interfaces.
IBM intends to extend the function of both CICS/6000 and AIX SNA Services to support option set 108 (Syncpoint Services) of Systems Network Architecture Logical Unit Type 6.2.
AIX CICS/6000 needs Encina Peer-to-Peer Executive for AIX/6000 and Encina Server for AIX/6000 and Encina Structured File Service for AIX/6000, AIX DCE Cell Directory Server/6000 and AIX DCE Security Server/6000 need to be accessible in a Distributed Computing Environment cell.
It costs from $3,700 on the smallest RS/6000 to $29,600 on the largest.
The Client for CICS/6000 is $300 on any machine.
Encina is also to become available in its own right on the RS/6000.
Users will have a choice of CICS/6000 or vanilla Encina from December 18.
Encina server for AIX/6000 licences cost from $1,800 to $14,400 with an annual charge of $270 to $2,160.
Encina Structured File Server for AIX/6000 goes from $1,400 to $11,200 with annual charges of between $210 and $1,680.
Encina Monitor for AIX/6000 costs $1,350 to $10,800 — annual charges are $205 to $1,620.
Encina Peer-to-Peer Executive for AIX/6000 is from $400 to $3,200 with annual charges of between $60 and $480, whilst Encina Peer-to-Peer Gateway for AIX/6000 is $400 to $3,200 with annual charges of $60 to $480.
IBM also announced its AIX Distributed Computing Environment products, based upon the Open Software Foundation's DCE technology.
AIX DCE Cell Directory Server/6000 is from $2,750, AIX DCE Security Server/6000 goes from $2,800 and AIX/DCE Base Services/6000 combined with Encina Base Feature starts at around $650.
IBM says that it will offer AIX CICS/6000 to vendors like Sun, Hewlett Packard and Digital Equipment Corp.
IBM claims surge in IBM RS/6000 sales
From 1 October, IBM's Advanced Workstation Division becomes the Advanced Workstation and Systems Division, to reflect, the company says, the expansion of the RS/6000 range.
IBM is still shooting for top spot in the league table of Unix system vendors by 1993.
Bill Filip, president of the Advanced Workstation Division says RS/6000 business has grown 50% in the first half of this year over the corresponding period last year, putting it right on course to achieve its target, he believes.
IBM's Advanced workstation division says its direct sales force accounts for 64% of the RS/6000s shipped.
30% go through resellers.
OEMS (like Wang and Bull) account for 6%. 70% of models shipped are desktops, 27% desksides and 3% rackmounts — although the latter accounts for 15% of RS/6000 revenues, it says.
IBM figures the commercial Unix marketplace is worth some $9.4b right now, 25% of which is accounted for by Unix OLTP solutions, a further 2% by Unix OLTP with a TP monitor.
It expects the commercial market to grow to $20.8b by 1996 with 25% accounted for by Unix OLTP solutions and a further 25% by Unix OLTP solutions with a TP monitor.
Independent software vendor support for IBM's OLTP on RS/6000 announcements included Micro Focus Cobol for Encina; Redbrick systems Gold Mine SQL Data Access and Retrieval database accelerator; JYACC's JAM graphical user interface builder for Encina; AMS Accounting for DCE/Encina and Informix and Oracle for Encina/CICS.
SUN AND CA TIE THE KNOT
Sun Microsystems Inc and Computer Associates International Inc duly announced their alliance last week (UX No 403), saying that CA-Unicenter will be fully available on Sun hardware within nine to 12 months.
Porting begins immediately for the Solaris 2.0 environment.
CA also promised to support an Open Look version of the product.
Although HP has already carried out the main task of porting Unicenter to a RISC platform, the Sun port involves the move from a Berkeley-based operating system over to V.4, as well as the work involved in supporting Solaris value-add.
CA will seed the new version into its commercial base, while Sun will provide free demonstration versions to its entire customer base on compact disk.
Commercial tools and technology manager Nancy Colwell claimed that systems management tools from a company with longevity such as CA was the most highly requested demand from Sun users, while Sun president Scott McNealy claimed that Sun would have up to 10,000 commercial servers out in the field by the end of the year.
Although the two companies hinted that further products might in future be ported to Solaris, nothing appears to have been agreed so far.
CA says its customers are particularly keen to see its IDMS and Datacom database products — out at 5,000 development sites and with 50,000 applications — ported to open systems — these should go into beta on HP next January.
HP has similar plans for CA's human resources, financial, graphics and decision support software.
Meanwhile Sun's Colwell hints that more announcements concerning ‘historic IBM-based companies with third-generation based traditional products’ would be the subject of a number of other announcements over the next four to five weeks.
…
AS CA AND OSF PROMISE DCE/DME COMPLIANCE
Separately, CA said that it was working with the Open Software Foundation to make Unicenter compliant with OSF's Distributed Computing Environment (DCE), and Distributed Management Environment (DME) technologies.
CA spokesman Kurt Seibert said the technology would be fully optional ‘The clients will have the choice’.
Work on DCE is beginning immediately, but DME is not likely to hit the market in any form for another two years.
OSF chief David Tory, of course, originally came from Computer Associates.
UI PUBLISHES TP GUIDE
In parallel with USL's initiative and in response to IBM's transaction processing announcements, Unix International is also throwing its weight behind the Tuxedo push with the publication of a guide for integrating USL's TP monitor with mainframe CICS.
Prepared by London-based Data Logic Ltd — the company that is doing the design and development of CICS/6000 for IBM —‘Open Enterprise Transaction Processing: integrating the Tuxedo System with Mainframe CICS’ describes several design approaches for achieving co-existence.
Meanwhile, Data Logic is also prepared to put together a guide for integrating Tuxedo with CICS/6000-effectively Transarc Corp's Encina if it can find backers.
OSF SETS BRANDING AND CERTIFICATION PROGRAMME
And in the general fever for branding schemes OSF is also introducing its own programme for vendors to badge their products ‘OSF certified’.
To be able to add this latest accreditation to what may already be a substantial collection of brandings and certifications, a vendor has to successfully complete a set of tests and checks, buy a distribution source licence for the specific OSF technology, and agree to a royalty structure for products shipped under the certification seal.
OSF/1 1.1 and Motif test licences cost $35,000 and $10,000 respectively.
DCE tests will be conducted at OSF's Cambridge, Massachusetts-based interoperability lab, and at a real-world site — prices to be decided.
For an extra $75,000 a vendor can use the OSF trademark for that specific product.
Source distribution licences: OSF/1 -$85,000, Motif — $15,000, DCE — $150,000.
Product Royalty: OSF/1 $65-$26, Motif $40-$10, DCE $15-$5 (all per unit based on volume).
Despite OSF's attempt to harmonise some of the products based upon its technology, it has come too late to net some of the larger fish.
Apparently, the DEC, Hewlett-Packard and IBM DCE ports do not interoperate, and OSF is more than fretful that users will find this out, putting it at severe risk.
…
AS FIRST ANDF APPLICATIONS ARRIVE
OSF says the Informix Wingz spreadsheet has been ported to its Architecture Neutral Distribution Format technology and was successfully installed on an IBM RS/6000: a DEC Alpha version will follow.
Other ANDF ports, including the Oracle database, are under way.
Oracle, which runs to some 1.3 million lines of code, compared to Wingz's 200,000, will prove a much sterner test of the technology.
The ANDF installer technology is now up on GCC, the Free Software Foundation's Gnu C Compiler, meaning, says OSF, that any vendor with GCC can now buy ANDF out.
The installer is expected to be featured in Unix SVR4 in future, following Unix System Labs' endorsement of ANDF.
…
OSF MICROKERNEL DUE FROM NEXT MONTH
Meanwhile, OSF/1 MK-AD, the microkernel version of OSF's operating system, based on Carnegie-Mellon University's Mach technology, will be available from October.
Intel Corp's Scientific Computer Division is expected to be first to market in December, with an installation at Oak Ridge National Laboratories in Tennessee.
OSF/1 MK, already available as a snapshot, was being shown last week at the Unix Expo show in New York by IBM, which is also to use the Mach microkernel in a future version of OS/2 (UX No 402).
IBM has been trying to negotiate a deal with the Open Software Foundation to buy outright re-distribution rights to an OSF/1 single server running under Mach 3.0 on PS/2s.
They complain that OSF's price list is meant for higher end machines and they are muttering something about ‘large volumes’.
The technology may also form the core of a specialised network server, with IBM expected to ship a Mach 3.0 implementation next year.
It's also rumoured to be interested in a single server version of OSF/1 running under Mach as a personality.
ANOTHER ONE FOR THE DIARY…
OSF'S CHALLENGE ‘93
The Open Software Foundation believes its technologies are now being used and marketed by enough sections of the industry to warrant an exhibition dedicated to its products.
Challenge ‘93 will be held in conjunction with OSF's member meeting in Boston next May.
OSF is clearly hoping to stake out its claim to a piece of the open systems marketplace with what is expected to become an annual event for both hardware and software vendors.
DEC, Hewlett-Packard, Hitachi, IBM and Groupe Bull have already signed on for the event.
UNIX INTERNATIONAL STARTS CAMPAIGN AGAINST MICROSOFT NT
Unix International has been arming itself for the war against Microsoft NT.
It has had Locus Computing Corp dissect NT and do a functional analysis comparing it to desktop Unix on both the client and server levels.
Unsurprisingly, it found Unix superior in networking, multi-user  support , support for industry standards and cost competitiveness.
Equally unsurprising, NT's advantage rests primarily, the study says, ‘in the strength of the marketing and sales programmes that support it.
NT is weak in not supporting Sun's NFS, supporting only multiple sequential users, not supporting XPG and being only minimally compliant with Posix 1003.1x.’
The study, dubbed the UI Windows NT versus Desktop Unix Comparison and available in October, also throws stones at NT's preliminary (and hence dicey) character and it's hefty hardware requirements.
MICROSOFT ADOPTS IXOS GRAPHICAL ARCHIVE SYSTEM FOR WINDOWS NT
Windows New Technology is now firmly on Unix specialist Ixos GmbH's agenda: Computerwoche reports that the Grasbrun, Germany-based company has signed an agreement with Microsoft Corp under which it will do a version of its graphical archive system for the operating system, which is expected to be released at the start of next year.
To this end, Ixos has been given a preliminary version of NT already.
Ixos's interest in NT stems from its 32-bit architecture, and Microsoft has gone to the lengths of creating a system with a sufficiently large directory to cater for both Intel Corp iAPX-86-based systems and Ixos's archive system.
At the present moment, the archive system runs in Siemens Nixdorf Informationssyteme AG environments under Unix with the OSF/Motif graphical user interface.
ENCORE INCREASES RISC LINE WITH INFINITY
Encore Computer Corp, Fort Lauderdale, Florida, introduced a new high end series of Infinity 90 minisupercomputers to its existing Motorola Inc 88000 RISC-based line.
The Infinity 90 is based upon the one-to-four CPU technology of Encore's 91 system.
Used as a subsystem in the Infinity 90, up to 512 of these units can be coupled and used in various configurations as communications processors input/output and general purpose compute systems.
Each subsystem runs a separate copy of Umax, Encore's Unix System V implementation, which are brought together by an RPC-based mechanism.
With from 35 MIPS to 70,000 MIPS performance the Infinity 90 uses the reflective (shared) memory technology that Encore derived from its Gould Computer  acquisition in 1988.
Storage capacity ranges from 4Gb to 200 Terabytes.
Each subsystem comes with from one to four 88100s and is rated at 35 to 140 MIPS, 20 to 80 MFLOPS.
It supports a full complement of networking, interface, development and database environments.
Encore says its current plan is to move to the next-generation 88110 RISC over time, but claims its architecture is CPU-independent and that it is evaluating other architectures.
Upgrades to its existing 91 and 93 systems are in the works and Encore says it expects its OEM, McDonnell-Douglas, to sign up for the new machine.
HYPERDESK LINKS HD-DOMS TO OBJECTSTORE
Westborough, Massachusetts-based Hyperdesk Corp and Object Design Inc in nearby Burlington have an interface between their products, incorporating Object Design's Objectstore database into Hyperdesk's HD-DOMS distributed object management system.
The HD-DOMS-to-Objectstore interface is claimed to be the first Common Object Request Broker Architecture-compliant interface available commercially and provides a shared repository for object types, object methods, and the instances of those objects.
UK SUN EXPO ROUND UP — AT THE NEC, BIRMINGHAM, ENGLAND
by Alison Hawkings
SUN PUBLISHES OGI LIBRARIES — DU PONT LAUNCHES FIRST OGI-COMPLIANT PRODUCTS
The Open Graphics Initiative launched by Sun Microsystems Inc more than a year ago to provide an interoperable interface between graphics applications and hardware in the Sparc-compatible market, has published its first complete set of foundation libraries for developers.
Designed to interface between the graphics application programming interfaces (APIs) and the underlying architecture, the OGI supports PHIGS, GKS, GL, Xlib, Iris GL and PostScript — Sun says, it intends to add support for PEXlib, XIE and PIKS in the future.
There are three components to the open graphics level: XGL, a 3D library for geometry APIs such as PHIGS and XGL; XIL, an imaging library for IPLIB, XIE and PIKS and X11/News, a window server.
Those companies who have signed up to the OGI include Du Pont Pixel, Evans & Sutherland, Tektronix Inc, Vitec Corp, Megatek Inc and Image Manipulation Inc.
Du Pont Pixel which has developed the XGL library for Sun, is already rolling out OGI-compliant hardware and software, and launched its Sbus accelerator board at the SunExpo last week.
A 24-bit, two slot Sbus for the IPX Sparctstation at the cost of £3,500, is claimed to outperform Silicon Graphic Inc's Iris Indigo workstations.
Du Pont Pixel says, ‘the OGI strategy is now operational and Silicon Graphics can't afford to take their markets for granted anymore, with this architecture once a piece or hardware or software has been modified it will run on full blown Sparcstations, clones, in fact anything that it is Sparc-compatible’.
SGI which has led a pretty much unscathed existence in the mid to high-end graphics market will begin to feel the pinch with ISVs lining up to modify applications to run on Sparc-based machines, the firm says.
Du Pont Pixel has begun modifying SGI-based applications and at the show last week demonstrated SGI's Iris Explorer running on a Sparcstation IPX — this will be available in the first quarter of 1993.
The company also showed its Fusion line of graphics accelerators, which will also conform to the OGI standard.
Evans & Sutherland is also expected this week to announce similar OGI-compliant graphics software aimed at the high-end graphics market.
READY SYSTEMS ROLLS OUT SPECTRA FOR REAL TIME EMBEDDED SYSTEMS
Also at the show last week, Ready Systems Inc launched Spectra, an open cross-development environment for real-time embedded systems software.
Spectra, supporting Motorola Inc' 68000 microprocessors at the target system end and Sun Microsystems Inc's Sparcstations at the host end, is designed to maximise host tool operations whilst minimising their dependence on the target system, with a host resident target manager controlling the debugging activity that would normally burden the target system.
The company claims that Spectra only needs 30Kb of memory to support the host/target communication and tools.
The ability to free-up the target system will, the company claims, allow the VRTX Unix-like operating system, VRTX/OS 3.0, to run up to 30% faster.
Spectra's features include Virtual target, which runs the embedded application on the host and permits debugging before the target hardware is available.
This is done by compiling the application on the host-x based version of the VRTX operating system.
An open Toolbuilder interface, which accesses up to 70 target functions to develop application specific tools.
It also sports OSF's Motif graphical user interface at the front-end.
The Spectra toolset includes a variety of ANSI C compilers from Microtec Research Inc, Oasys Inc and Sun Microsystems Inc in addition to assemblers, libraries, linkers and loaders.
Targeted at the cellular communication, military and flight control markets, Spectra is available direct from Ready Systems in the US and from its UK distributor Instrumatic UK Ltd, Marlow, Buckinghamshire: no prices given.
NOW SUN STRIKES A DEAL WITH ADOBE SYSTEMS FOR NEWSPRINT
Sun Microsystems Inc's SunPics division has announced a joint technology and marketing deal with Adobe Systems Inc, hoping to add value to its NewsPrint open network printing technology (UX No 360) with imaging technologies such as Postscript and Display Postscript.
In return, Adobe is promising to increase technology and application development for SunSoft's Solaris environment, including the porting of Adobe's Illustrator and Photoshop applications to Solaris.
Sun also promises to help Adobe to make its long-awaited Carousel document interchange format software successful in the Unix marketplace.
SunPics spokesman Kevin Olsen said that Adobe technology would be integrated within the four layers of its NewsPrint system, particularly the imaging and font layer where X11/News and its own well-established F3 scalable font format standard already reside.
Adobe (and third party) Type 1 fonts will be added, and Sun's Postscript Level 2 printing will support both Adobe Type 1 and Sun F3 font formats.
Sun won't let go of the advantages of its own technology, which include font maker  technology originally from its 1988 acquisition of Folio Inc (UX No 198) which speeds up font design, especially when big-alphabet Japanese, Korean, Taiwan and Chinese applications are involved.
But it admits that Adobe technology is often the default standard, and wants to make the technology available within NewsPrint.
It will also give Sun users more access to PC systems using Adobe, and full WYSIWYG correspondence between display and output through Display Postscript.
No products were announced.
Menlo Park, California-based, Gupta Technologies Inc, duly announced at SunExpo last week that it is making its PC-based SQL database server, SQLbase, available on Sun Microsystems Inc's Sparcstations running Solaris 2.0.
Stepping up its commitment to the Unix market, this announcement follows a stream of similar agreements including ports to Novell Inc's NetWare and Univel Inc for UnixWare.
The company, which claims it has saturated the PC LAN market with its database and peripheral software, aims to provide a front-end client/server oriented database across all leading desktop platforms from the laptop to the file server over the next two years.
Gupta says, it will be announcing further support for other platforms later in the year.
Available now, SQLbase for Sparcstations is priced at £1,000 for a 5-user edition and £10,000 for an unlimited user licence.
BrainTree Ltd based in Cheadle Hume, Cheshire, unveiled its Auditor Plus security management software under Unix.
Unix Auditor Plus analyses system and network parameters and security practises.
It also provides central security management for distributed networks.
The company also showed JobAcct., a new Unix-based resource accounting and chargeback system.
It can also be used as a capacity planning and resource management tool.
Newbury, Berkshire-based National Instruments UK Ltd launched a portable version of its LabView graphical programming tool for Sun Sparcstation workstations.
The product is aimed at engineers and scientists who can build software modules called virtual instruments instead of writing cryptic text-based programs.
At the front end Open windows or the X Window system can be run.
The software also includes libraries for instrument control, data analysis and data presentation.
Q Associates Ltd from Newbury in Berkshire were showing the MiLAN family of LAN communications products, transceivers and printer servers.
This included the Fastport 3000, allowing users to connect shared serial or parallel printers directly onto a Unix TCP/IP network.
The product costs £600.
Also being shown were the Xylogics Annex range of Ethernet terminal servers and a selection of NCD X-windows displays to be used with multiple or networked hosts or applications.
Recognition Research Ltd launched NetBuilder, a visual programming environment for neural networks and other pattern processing techniques.
According to the company, it allows the developer to graphically build information analysis systems using multiple neural network, data processing and statistical analysis modules.
The interface used is X Windows and NetBuilder can be linked to SQL servers and data visualisation software.
MICRO FOCUS PITCHES FOR CLIENT-SERVER MARKET WITH COBOL FOR UNIX
Having sewn up the Cobol development business in the IBM mainframe world, Micro Focus Plc is setting out to pull the same trick in the Unix world and is offering what it describes as a complex Unix application development environment optimised for client-server applications.
Version 3.0 of Micro Focus Cobol for Unix, Toolbox for Unix, Operating System Extensions for Unix, and Dialogue System for Unix, version 1.1 are claimed to simplify the typically complex process of developing client-server applications.
The company reckons that the kit will be especially useful for corporate data processing teams with existing Cobol development expertise, suggesting that existing Cobol applications can be rapidly configured as client-server applications.
Cobol application performs the data storage and retrieval on the server, while Dialogue System is intended to empower the way the human interface to the application is designed, implemented and maintained on the client.
Operating System Extensions for Unix provides the client-server network-enabling tools to ensure that all elements of the distributed application can communicate efficiently; it also provides network data integrity.
Micro Focus has defined Application Programming Interfaces between Dialogue System and the initialling Cobol program to separate the detail of the user interface from the underlying business application logic so that changes can be made to the user interface without impacting the Cobol program, making possible multiple user interfaces to the same application.
Micro Focus Cobol for Unix provides the highest level of ANSI standard Cobol syntax, IBM OS/VS Cobol, VS Cobol II, and X/Open XPG4 syntax and is fully compatible with the company's Cobol 3.0 for MS-DOS and OS/2.
The kit is shipping now; no prices were given.
OVER AND OUT — MOTOROLA 680X0 LOSES PRIME UNIX POSITION TO INTEL
Motorola Inc is about to lose its long-standing number one place in the league table of processors running Unix, according to IDC's European Unix Expertise Centre.
In 1991, Motorola won a 24% share of the market (in terms of system value) with the 680X0 family, closely followed by Intel Corp's X86 with 23%.
Sun's Sparc was third with 17%, MIPS fourth with 9%. while IBM's Power and HP's PA-RISC tied with 7%.
That left 13% of the market to others, mainly Motorola's own RISC, the 88000, and the Intergraph Clipper.
Motorola's share with the 680X0 plunged dramatically last year from a share of 33% in 1990, while RISC as a whole grew from 36% to 46%.
By 1997, says IDC, RISCs will account for a 65% share of the marketplace.
Intel is also expected to achieve strong growth, taking over poll position this year, growing slower than RISC, but still likely to win up to 29% of the market by 1997.
Aside from the chips from Sun, IBM and HP, IDC says that all other RISCs ‘are facing serious challenges keeping their market shares in an environment with increasing development costs for new processor generations and shorter product cycles’.
That includes the  beleaguered MIPS chip, which failed to increase its 9% market share between 1990 and 1991.
SOLBOURNE APPOINTS UK DISTRIBUTOR
Solbourne Computer Inc, following its grim decision earlier this year to pull the plug on its direct sales European operations,(UX No 396), has appointed Aylesbury, Buckinghamshire-based, Computer International Ltd to distribute its wares in the UK.
Solbourne, forced to reorganise its operations after struggling in an already overcrowded sparc-compatible market, cut its losses and now sells its Sparc-based systems through indirect sales channels only in Europe.
PARSYS SUPERNODE 2000 IS ORACLE-OPTIMISED VARIANT OF 1000
Parsys Ltd, London NW, has come out with a new version of its 30MHz T805 Transputer-based SuperNode 1000 parallel processor optimised to run the Oracle Corp relational database system and calling it the SN2000.
It is going into beta test now with ships planned for early next year.
It runs Oracle 6.0.36 with the parallel server technology.
The Unix-like operating system supports TCP/IP, SCSI peripheral controllers and an X Window interface.
The company reckons that the thing will work out at $1,500 per transaction per second in the TPC-B benchmark, and notes that by comparison, a shared memory multiprocessor does about $8,000 per TPC-B per second.
The machine is scalable from eight to over 1,000 processors, in the latter case theoretically doing about 10,000 transactions per second against about 450 for a large conventional mainframe.
A 10 processor system, 2Gb of disk, 5Gb tape and Ethernet would be £42,000 and do some 500 transactions per second; an 87-CPU box is some £265,000.
VI CORP OFFERS LOW-END UNDERCUTTERS — FOR GRAPH WIDGETS SUBSET OF DATAVIEWS
Question: What happens when you are very early into a market and you pile the functionality into your tool as the market grows?
Answer: Other companies follow you in and start nibbling away at your potential market share by offering specialised niche and entry level products.
This, it seems is what has happened in the X Window graphical user interface builder market, and VI Corp (Europe), based in Wokingham, Berkshire has appreciated that its DataViews product may be too comprehensive for a lot of potential customers and is responding by introducing entry-level graphical user interface development tools.
According to data collated from International Data Corp, Dataquest and CMP Market Research for 1992, the dynamic data visualisation tools market accounts for about 49% of the workstation graphical user interface market but is growing at less than 10% a year.
Meanwhile, the interactive development tool and user interface management systems sectors account for 47% of the market but are growing at 65% per year.
DataViews is very much a player in the more stable market sector, but it needs a stronger presence in more dynamic growth areas.
VI Corp has gone about addressing dynamic growth by re-engineering a subset of its DataViews graph components as X-widgets.
These are now for sale separately from the DataViews product as Graph Widgets.
They can be used with products from other companies such as TeleUSE and UIMX or they can be sold as a package known as DynaGraphX, which is integrated with X-Designer from Imperial Software Technology Ltd, which VI distributes.
Naturally, VI would rather sell X-Designer than enhance rival products, but in the US where X-Designer has only been sold for the past year, rival products have a much stronger hold and the separation of the Graph Widgets enables a toehold into these accounts for the VI sales force.
DynaGraphX provides eight types of graph widgets capable of generating 40 real time display formats and automatic C code generation, courtesy of CenterLine Inc's CodeCenter C. The development licence for this package is £4,600 with maintenance.
A development licence for the Graph Widgets costs £3,000.
CONSENSYS ‘FIRST TO SHIP SVR4.2 DESTINY’
Canadian firm Consensys Computer Inc, Markham, Ontario since 1985, a vendor of intelligent input/output cards, is laying claim to the first shipments of USL Unix SVR4.2 Destiny shrink-wrapped binary operating systems for Intel iAPX-86 architectures.
Prices go from $400 to $900 with development systems costing $1,000 to $1,500.
Disk mirroring, MS-DOS and Windows connectivity and support for RAIDS disk (for Consensys V4.2) array technology are planned before the end of the year.
Consensys, also with offices in San Antonio, Texas and Reading in the UK, already offers a standard SVR4 implementation, though it had previously spent a year getting that release into product shape after taking delivery from Unix System Labs.
It claims over 3000 installations of Consensys V4 in ten months, 800 in Europe and expects around 60% of those users to upgrade to V4.2, half of them immediately.
It's aiming for deliveries of 1000 copies of V4.2 a month for the first six months from October.
The company's only criticism is of Destiny's Moolit toolkit that doesn't provide for application development under the Motif graphical user interface (although it is compatible) as it lacks Motif libraries.
Consensys is looking to add a native Motif implementation for those that require it.
Consensys had taken on Interactive System Corp and SunSoft Inc refugee Doug Miller as vice president of European sales.
+1 416 940 2900 or 44 734 833241.
BULL TO PUT IMAGEWORKS ON RIOS-BASED DPX/20 AND MACINTOSH
Compagnie des Machines Bull SA will add versions of its ImageWorks document management system for the DPX/20, which is Bull's version of the IBM Power RISC architecture, and for the Macintosh, according to Najah Naffah, vice-president of imaging and office systems.
The DPX/20 version of ImageWorks should arrive early in 1993, and in an effort to spur ImageWorks sales, Bull has created centres for engineering ImageWorks systems in the US and France.
In November 1991, Bull set up Integris as a systems integration subsidiary in Billerica, Massachusetts, and half of Integris's 120-strong staff works on ImageWorks.
For France, Bull created the Centre of ImageWorks Engineering in March, but it has been in full operation only since mid-June, says its director, Thierry Labarre.
The centre, with sites in Paris, Lyon, Marseille, Bordeaux and Rennes, will be staffed with 25 people for 1992.
Each of the five centres intends to provide direct sales, demonstrations, project design and planning and systems integration.
Bull is also relying on three third-party systems integrators in France to market ImageWorks, SEPI SA, Extensive SA and E3X SA.
In Portugal, ImageWorks is sold by Papelaco SA.
CYBERSCIENCE SEES OPEN SYSTEM BOOST AT HIGH-END
UK fourth-generation language company Cyberscience Plc, of Hoddesdon, Herts, has spent the last three years making its transition from proprietary Data General technology over to open systems, and now reports that the majority of its sales are for Unix-based systems.
It's second biggest market is for DEC VAX/VMS.
Cyberscience, an 85-man, $14–15m turnover company that is not  publicly quoted, has subsidiary operations in Denver, Colorado and Sydney, Australia.
It now concentrates on reference ports of its 4GL technolgy for the major chip platforms rather than on specific machines, but of late has been winning downsizing contracts on HP, Sequent and Pyramid hardware.
The 4GL runs on top of multiple databases, including Oracle, Informix, Ingres and Sybase, as well as the Cobol-based flat file systems that still act as a base for the majority of installations out there.
Customers tend to use the product either as a report generator for existing, often highly complex databases brought down from the mainframe, or as a tool for the complete re-engineering of their applications, including prototyping.
Cyberscience spokesman Justin Wright claims that the difference in the market this year is that high-end Unix machines are finally being sold.
‘The high-end has now been legitimised’.
He claims, however, that few customers are dabbling with transaction processing monitors.
‘It can just add a whole level of complexity and extra load,’ he said.
FERNHART LAUNCHES HELPDESK FOR UNIX
UK-based, Beckenham, Kent-based Fernhart Computer Services Ltd has announced TSMDesk, the first of its new range of Total Service Management products.
TSMDesk is a Helpdesk management system, linking users and information support staff, and third party support agencies if required.
The system is a derivation of the 3GL, Cobol-based service management product sold by Fernhart since 1985.
In a move to upgrade to open systems last year, Fernhart opted for a 4GL, Ingres-based rewrite, compatible with Unix 5.4 and including the Ingres 6.4 relational database.
The new system logs, classifies, prioritises and allocates incoming calls as appropriate.
It features a call escalation process which monitors response times, identifies unresolved user problems and checks that service levels are maintained.
Statistics and surveys indicating trends and problem areas can be assembled from this information using the system's report generating tools.
A register of installed hardware and software — with associated common technical problems, and records of customers and users are also stored on the system's database, for reference.
The cost of the system depends on user numbers.
A 3–4 user configuration costs £8,000; a 20–24 user version costs £25,000.
Upgrade paths for existing 3GL users cost £8,500.
TSMDesk can be ported to an IBM RS/6000 and will run on any industry standard LAN and WAN system.
It can also be connected to the Symon LED panels that Fernhart distributes in Europe for Applied Micro Inc of Houston and Dallas.
The panels can be used as a visual communication system for stricken users when computer systems fail.
A number of TSMDesk enhancements are also in the pipeline.
TSMChange, which helps monitor and implement structural changes should be available by Christmas; TSMChange, a graphics tool for visually representing structures and their components is planned for March 1993; and TSMLevel, which warns when the targets and constraints laid down in service level agreements are threatened should also be available by March.
Fernhart estimates it will shift around 48 TSMDesk units over the next year, generating around a third of its total income and hopefully boosting its turnover from last year's £2.6m to over £3m in, 1992–3.
Also hoped for next year is an agreement with IBM for which Fernhart is hoping to act as a VAR: it has distributed ICL Unix boxes since 1985.
The company was established in 1974, originally as a software house developing applications for mainframe systems.
Its customers include Norweb, The Training Agency, Milk Marketing Board, C&A and the Ministry of Defence.
LYSIS HOTLINE SISTEM 2000 MAKES MOVE TO UNIX
Atlanta-based Lysis Corporation, a four-year veteran of the emerging Help Desk/Hot Line market, has made its fourth-generation Sistem 2000 available under Unix.
Previously it only ran on VAX/VMS and DOS-based LAN environments.
A proprietary Lysis access scheme forms the basis of its multi-function integrated groupware product.
It uses a natural language translation front-end to a dynamic non-linear case-based retrieval mechanism.
Call tracking/logging and answer collection or retrieval are linked.
Data entry to log a call is virtually eliminated.
Sistem is initially targeted at customer support Hot Lines and internal Help Desks much in the fashion of start-ups Aurum and ProActive Software.
Lysis can then be expanded into engineering, sales and marketing departments.
Features reportedly include comprehensive and flexible call logging and tracking, immediate access to customer information, configuration and histories, open call workflow management, electronic notification of escalations, fast answer retrieval, and reporting.
Sistem uses an industry-standard file manager, Informix's C-ISAM, in lieu of incurring the cost and overhead of a DBMS.
The company claims it can trim 10% to 15% off the time needed to resolve a customer call or problem.
It says its Mature Answer Bases make it possible for anyone to support an ‘Answer Based product.’
Lysis is supporting SCO and SVR4 on Intel machines and AIX on the RS/6000 to start.
It will port to Sun and HP in the future.
A basis Sistem supporting two concurrent users on a single server is priced at $6,000.
Each additional concurrent user is $1,500.
C-ISAM run-time licenses are required.
Lysis, a self-funded company, profitable for the last three years, sells direct in the US and Canada and through resellers in the Pacific Rim and South America.
It is reportedly putting European distribution in place.
+1 404 373 3359
TANDEM ENHANCES ITS FAULT-TOLERANT UNIX, ADDS INTEGRITY
Tandem Computers Inc has extended its fault-tolerant Unix line with a new release of its NonStop-UX operating system and a new CM-1300 system in its Integrity line of MIPS Technologies R-series RISC-based machines.
The new NonStop-UX 2.0 is designed further to minimise planned and unplanned system downtime.
New features include the Veritas file system, which is claimed to guarantee file system integrity and enable rapid file system recovery; a new user-level state-check program that monitors processes deemed vital to system operation and restarts them if terminated; and a new fast-reboot feature that enables upgrades to the Non Stop-UX kernel to be performed in less than two minutes.
Tandem also launched the Integrity System Management Suite, a set of system management applications designed to reduce administrative costs and minimise system outages.
From a single console at any point on the network, technical staff can manage networks of Integrity systems with the Suite: it is a graphical, object-oriented system management toolset, designed with icons, pull-down menus, and realistic depictions of system configurations and components.
The CM-1300 provides increased disk storage capacity up to a maximum of 48Gb and features an upright cabinet designed so that the system can be easily upgraded to higher performance RISC technology by exchanging processor boards in the future.
An entry-level CM-1300 is $179,800, now.
The Integrity System Management Suite begins at $5,000 for a base system administration facility, now.
The CM-1300 is the second system introduced in three months from Tandem's development partnership with NCR Corp and NCR added it as a new StarServer FT.
NCR EXTENDS ITS COOPERATION TO EMBRACE UNIX SYSTEMS
As a Unix-with-everything house, NCR Corp's initial launch of its Cooperation integrated software environment as an MS-DOS and OS/2 only product seemed a little odd, but the company has put that right with release 2.0, which adds support for Unix servers and multiprocessing.
Designed for financial, manufacturing and service organisations, Cooperation is designed to enable users to access massive amounts of data, to collect and manipulate data on the desktop, and share information across workgroup, departmental and corporate networks.
Cooperation 2.0 supports Unix servers and Windows-based client workstations and OS/2 servers.
Cooperation 2.0 also provides users with comprehensive network and systems management capabilities — Cooperation and NCR StarSentry products can now co-exist on the same network, and the network manager can configure, administer and manage a remote Unix server from a central StarSentry workstation, eliminating duplicate network management resources.
It also adds access to Informix DB/2, Oracle and SQLBase databases.
It runs on NCR's System 3000 family of general purpose computers and compatibles.
ADOBE BUYS INTO VERITY
Aside from its Newsprint deal with Adobe Systems Inc, Mountain View, announced that it has made an undisclosed equity investment in Verity Inc, a document-retrieval technology company and its neighbour.
The stake buys a seat on the Verity board.
Adobe will use Verity's Topic document-retrieval engine in future products based on the Carousel document system, which is being designed to enable users to communicate electronic documents between MS-DOS, Windows, Unix and Macintosh systems, regardless of the application or computing environment used for creation.
EUROPEAN SALES OF UNIX PACKAGES IS BOOMING, SAYS INTERNATIONAL DATA CORP
Sales of shrink-wrapped software for Unix systems is outstripping growth in shipments of Unix hardware by nearly two to one, according to a new report by International Data Corp's IDC Europe.
It expects packaged Unix software sales to grow by a compound rate of 22% a year between now and 1997 in Europe.
The overall European Unix software market increased in size by 25% in 1991 over the previous year, according to the report, while the Unix hardware market was pegged at 15%.
Unix tools saw a 28% growth — because of increased revenues from database engines, data access and executive information systems, says International Data.
Application sales grew 25% and systems software sales grew by 23%.
The value of the European database market increased by 37% to $231m and now constitutes 45% of the worldwide market (larger than the US share).
FRENCH ARIANA GROUPS OFFERS EURO ROUTES FOR SOFTWARE HOUSES
American software start-ups may now have a sure-fire way into the European market thanks to a new-fangled French vehicle called Ariana SA.
Ariana's mission is to take a lot of the risk and expense out of setting up in Europe by establishing the American firm's subsidiaries itself.
It will then focus on direct, VAR and systems integrator sales of the US product to large and medium accounts, take the organisation through the incubation process and sell the subsidiary back to the US company for cash or shares in three years time.
Ariana is the brainchild of Roger Haddad, who previously founded Metrologie, probably one of the most successful value added hardware and software distribution networks ever created in Europe, with sales worth some $1bn in 1990.
He estimates he can handle ten US concerns in the next five years and is particularly interested in partnering with leading firms, ready to ship beta-tested product, in client/server software, software tools for business applications, X-terminal and workstation software, wireless networks and software for networking and telecommunications.
It is looking for products with a worldwide sales potential of $30m to $100m in three to five years.
Ariana, initially started in France, has already  corralled one partner, the UK firm IXI Ltd, and expects to sign three this year including Network Computing Devices Inc, first for its PC Xview product and later for its full terminal line.
In the coming months it will expand out into Germany, Switzerland and the UK as a network of independently owned operations.
To start, Ariana will demand an exclusive distribution contract, co-operative advertising funds and a 50% royalty.
It will be paid a fee for its various operating services estimated at between $15,000 and $50,000 per unit per country plus a 5% sales commission at transfer cost.
A unit should be up and running in three to six months with sales of $1m forecast for the first year.
Profitability is forecast for the fourth quarter.
Buying back the subsidiary will cost the last twelve months in sales times a factor of 0.75 to 1.5.
Afterwards Ariana could remain the unit's distributor.
Ariana's board includes Bernard Giroud who started Intel France in 1971 and left the company last year a corporate vice president to become a venture capitalist, Gerard Yon, formerly sales and marketing manager of Chorus Systemes, the microkernel house, and now president of VST, a French start-up in electronic document management, and Pascal LeVasseur, technical director of Dell France.
+33 1 4772 0808
MINIGRAMS
Sun and Hewlett Packard will launch their object-oriented version of Unix, code named Spring, this Autumn, according to Microscope, two years ahead of Taligent and Microsoft's Cairo.
The paper claims this represents a serious challenge to other Risc vendors jostling for position in the software arena.
The project covers the production of an Interface Definition Language which will convert Unix-based systems to object-orientation.
John Cage, Sun's vice president, says that Spring was conceived as a backlash to the formation of the Open Software Foundation in 1989.
The OSF hindered Sun's production of a ‘standard’ Unix.
Sun and HP then secretly allied, bringing together expertise in the operating system and user interface respectively.
Frame Technology Inc believes the next generation of desktop publishing systems will utilise electronic document publishing as their cornerstone.
As such, it has introduced Frame Builder, a development environment for creating and using document applications that support the Standard Generalised Markup language.
Unix System Labs' top brass has been meeting with the Russian Minister of Higher Education about getting Unix made part of the curriculum.
Discussions are still ongoing.
Unix System Labs is under the impression NCR, a fellow AT&T subsidiary, is going to opt for Destiny.
We hate to burst their bubble but we hear it will be buying far more of Solaris-on-Intel.
User demand could see it use Destiny in spots of course, or maybe the Destiny binary UnixWare, but there's no love lost between Novell and NCR, which supports LanMan instead.
Anyway NCR, is doing an awful lot with NT.
Interested parties are now not expecting quantity shipments of 40Mhz Sparc Vikings until the first quarter.
Intel Corp has written an experimental DOS emulator to act as a server on IBM's Mach 3.0 for PS/2s.
DEC is rumoured to be pressing for a Unix SVR4 personality on top of OSF/1: remember it already has SVR4 for its telecomms stuff.
Microsoft Corp's NT is now being touted for the second quarter of 1993.
SCO's Doug Michaels is off to China to try and work out some of the copying and pirating issues, claiming that up to one third of PCs in the People's Republic run SCO Xenix.
The basis of Pink, the Apple/IBM (Taligent) object-oriented operating system of the future is understood to be a proprietary microkernel called Opus that began life in Apple back in 1988.
Some want Taligent to go with Mach 3.0 instead of Opus-for-openness, and to try and get the stuff out earlier, even if it were to mean having to tie up loose ends as it went along.
Despite its problems (see page 1) OSF says it is still shooting for self-sufficiency by 1994.
It says other small scale RFTs will follow in the fashion of the graphical user interface GAIA follow-on, but there is unlikely to be any more big and costly new technology requests.
OSF claims 75,000 OSF/1 binaries shipped this year; 100 DCE source licences and 100 user-level application developers with a further 100 to follow by the end of the year, it claims.
Ask/Ingres launched version 2.0 of its popular Windows 4GL environment at UnixExpo, which includes support for Open Look and Presentation Manager.
Version 2.0 comes with a new object-oriented graphical user interface debugger — the company claims the new release can offer up to four times the productivity of the previous release.
Windows 4GL 2.0 supports a range of databases at run-time, prices start at $1,000 with ships set for next month.
Chorus Systemes SA minority stockholder Unix System Labs has yet to state clearly what it intends doing with Chorus' technology.
Reportedly it is seeking fellow travellers and financing for a Chorus project lilting code named Amadeus, having already used Wolfgang and Mozart to christen other projects.
Unix System Labs expects to have beta versions of Tuxedo ready for IBM's ES/9000 AIX by the end of the year, with general availability scheduled for the first quarter (UX No 403).
Max Henry, who's kicked around NeXT Inc for the last four-and-a-half years in sales and software recruitment roles, mostly recently holding the post of VP and general manager, Asia Pacific, has jumped shipped to head up the American arm of windowing house JSB as president.
He has also been named a director of the UK parent.
Flush with success from its Object World show in San Francisco earlier this year, the Object Management World is going to stage an East Coast iteration in Boston at the Hynes Convention Center February 1–4, followed by another go-round at the San Francisco venue June 14–17.
Wearing its manpower resource hat, Pencom Systems Inc is recycling redundant and retired IBM employees back into IBM as subcontractors under what it hopes will become a US-wide outplacement program: It's starting with veterans of IBM's AIX and OS/2 environments.
Stratus Computer Inc now has the only Asian versions of Jyacc's Application Manager JAM NLS for screen development, priced from $6,000: It's been localised for Korea with Hangul, Japan with Kanji and Katakana and China with traditional and simplified Chinese characters.