

GALILEO GROUP PLANS COMMON INTERFACE FOR USERS
A group of users, integrators and vendors is, we hear, attempting to re-draw the laws of conventional computing in a effort to put users — rather than computers — at the centre of the industry's cosmological system.
Project Galileo (it was actually the Polish astronomer Copernicus who first proposed that planets, including the Earth, orbit the Sun) sets out to define and develop an overlay for current graphical user interfaces that operates and behaves the same way, regardless of which operating system and hardware lies underneath, providing a common working environment.
Starting point is a list of six features including icons for installation, files and home directories.
Some common elements, like drag and drop and point and click, have already found their way into most GUIs, and those involved in Galileo say it would be possible to get things up and running within a matter of weeks once agreement has been reached.
The initiative was touched off by at least four large IT users — one in Europe, the rest US — each with thousands of different systems, apparently unimpressed by technology standardisation efforts that actually make it easier for vendors to provide a variety of desktops (see opposite and page five).
Two US integrators, at least four of the largest US vendors, and a number of software suppliers — including, it is thought, the Santa Cruz Operation — are also involved.
Role model
Users insisted on taking the Apple Computer Inc Macintosh interface and IBM's Common User Access schema as role models.
It should be possible to run Galileo across different Unix implementations, as well as Microsoft Corp Windows and other graphics-capable proprietary systems.
Technology like the X.desktop manager from UK firm IXI Ltd already provides a common front end to a range of different systems, including the gamut of Digital Equipment Corp kit.
As well as‘a gloss over the top’ for users, the partners view Galileo as a welcome marketing tool for sales divisions and a means of delivering a long overdue common environment to the Unix community.
It would be easier to convince senior managers that Unix is a viable platform if all systems were seen to work in the same way, regardless of what was underneath.
The majority of the personal computer world is already happily at work with Microsoft Corp Windows, regardless of underlying technology.
Galileo development is initially being funded by vendors — under pressure to win new procurement contracts.
If successful, however, the likelihood is that users will contribute resources towards establishing a further six common features: talks begin again early next year.
IBM's AIX-OS/2 NETWORKED REPOSITORY ‘IMMINENT’
Sources extremely close to the development of IBM Corp's network repository claim that its is close to production status and an IBM announcement is imminent.
It is widely known that the new repository will run on AIX and OS/2, but it may surprise many that the thing is also up under OS/400 as well as on Ultrix, HP-UX and Solaris and that IBM has funded development work internally for it to appear on these non-IBM versions.
Meanwhile, as was already thought, previous work on MVS Repository has been scrapped and the mainframe software is being rewritten from scratch so it can integrate with the networked repository.
Few, however, expect that the development effort will survive the next round of cuts.
Pick an expected release date in the next ten years.
UNIX INTERNATIONAL WORKS ON UNIX BRANDING SCHEME
The net result of Unix International's latest Application Binary Interface effort may be the creation of a Unix ‘brand’ for operating systems that independent software vendors could use to develop common applications against.
The implication is that products like SunSoft Inc's Solaris, Santa Cruz Operation Inc's Open Desktop and Univel Inc's UnixWare — as well as Unix System Labs' SVR4.2 — would undergo a testing and branding process to prove their Unix credentials.
Unix International's chief executive officer, Peter Cunningham, says he is ‘just starting to investigate the technical possibility of such a scheme,’ and the idea is already doing the rounds of industry executives.
‘There is a reasonable chance of it happening and there is a collective will to support it’, Cunningham believes.
Like SunSoft (UX No 414), Cunningham says companies that might not have agreed to the effort in 1991 or 1992 are certain to be driven into the arms of the ABI 1993 by the impending Microsoft Corp Windows NT.
Marketing chiefs ‘have been looking at the mathematics and have worked out that volume counts,’ says Cunningham, pointing to Unix's one million a year run rate against the huge base of Windows users — increasing at one million a month — many of which will be targeted for NT.
Down the road, Cunningham hinted that UI, as reported (UX No 414), is likely to seek other partners for technology development work — it presently uses Unix System Labs almost exclusively.
He denied UI would be doing this to appease SunSoft and others reportedly unhappy about the situation, and refuted suggestions that SunSoft wants UI's commitment to use other suppliers and non-USL technologies as a pre-requisite for it signing off on the ABI effort.
‘There is no negotiation with SunSoft,’ Cunningham says.
He is well aware however, that ‘if USL were to hold the keys for an industry standard specification there would be problems,’ and concedes that ‘one supplier can't fill in everything — the USL issue is recognised.’
TEKTRONIX MERGES X-TERMINAL LINES
Wilsonville, Oregon-based, Tektronix Inc's Network Display Division (NDD) has merged its technical XP330 X Terminals and XP11 commercial machines into one family, TekXpress, and launched a 40MHz Mips Technology Inc R3000-based X Terminal — XP338P.
The division also announced the release of version 6.0 upgrades for its X Terminal range.
Tektronix's disappointing first quarter results, which included net profits down 1.5% at $9.5m, pushed the division to combine the two X Terminal lines in order to cut costs.
It also aims to eliminate potential product overlap.
As a result, the NDD hopes to improve market share and become more responsive to an increasingly competitive market.
The division is, nonetheless, one of Tektronix's most profitable businesses contributing 23% — $250m — to group revenues.
The X terminal market is now worth $400m, according to X Terminal watchdog, the X Business Group.
NWD snaps up 15% of the market, Hewlett-Packard and DEC have 17% apiece, IBM lags behind at 14%, while Network Computing Devices Inc leads the field with 25%.
TekXpress now comprises 11 monochrome and colour Mips Technology Inc R3000-based XP330s and Texas Instrument Inc 34020-based XP11s.
The new XP338P has a claimed performance rating of 105,000 Xstones — Xstones is a graphics benchmark — and clocks 100,000 vectors, 10,000 flat-shared triangles and 5,000 Gouraud-shared triangles per second.
It runs two- and three-dimensional graphics simultaneously in multiple X Windows, as well as distributing 3D graphics over a network.
The 19″ colour XP338P machine has a dual processor architecture: the R3000 to manage networking, 3D rendering and X Window functions; TI's 40MHz 342020 processor supports accelerated graphics, double buffering and z-buffering.
It comes with from 8Mb to 2Mb of memory and two single in-line memory modules slots for memory expansion.
XP338P supports a variety of host machines including Sun Microsystems Inc's Sparcstations, Digital Equipment Corp's Ultrix Unix boxes and VAXes — support for DEC's Alpha OSF/1-based AXP systems will be added next year — and IBM Corp's RS/6000s.
The XP338P X terminal is available now and costs £6,155.
NWD also released version 6.0 software upgrades adding two software optimisation kits for Sun Microsystems Inc Sparcstations and DEC Ultrix and VAX machines.
The Sun kit comes with a full implementation of Sun's Open Look window manager, support for native Sun scalable fonts and Network File System (NFS) boot capabilities.
This software is also coupled with Tektronix's Sun compatible 1152 x 900 resolution display and a Sun Unix keyboard.
The DEC software supports Open Software Foundation Motif, DECnet and LAT protocols, native DEC fonts, DEC VT220 X Terminal emulation and VT220 key board.
In addition, version 6.0 comes with document imaging capabilities, Simple Network Management Protocol for system administrators and a serial compressed X protocol for remote site access.
Version 6.0 upgrades are available now.
The Sun kit costs £65 and the DEC software is priced at £215.
SCO SETS NEW DEVELOPER PROGRAMME
Santa Cruz Operation Inc has also improved its services for developers by introducing a cheaper two tier support programme worldwide, to defend, it says, its position against its desktop Unix rivals.
Now developers have a choice of two levels of support: Partners and Associates.
Before, developers paid £600 for SCO Unix and Open Desktop source code, Partners now pay £450 and get source code, technical support and help in establishing market leads.
Associates pay £95 and get the basic documentation.
Both tiers have access to on-line SCO application directories, technical reference library, a problem and solutions database and a help desk.
SCO also offers 25% reductions on training costs and free entry to SCO-run conferences.
English, German, French, Italian and Norwegian versions of the documentation are available.
SCO hopes the new programme will help it focus on three markets — retail, finance and government — and its expects to sell 1,500 developers kits there in its first year — between 400 — 500 of them in Europe.
SCO claims 200 independent vertical market developers provide 5–6,000 applications, hardware products and services worldwide.
SCO has certainly taken its time in providing its developers with such services, it seems the rush by Sunsoft Inc and Univel Inc to get a piece of the Intel Corp Unix market has pushed the company to co-ordinate its efforts worldwide and pre-empt rivals.
Sunsoft Inc's Solaris 2.0-on-Intel product is still slated for release in April.
Univel's UnixWare was released in October.
MORE LAYOFFS AT DEC
Word is circulating that Digital Equipment Corp will be laying off 1,000 software engineering staff in Europe over the next couple of weeks on top of the 6,000 redundancies worldwide that were announced last week.
Software managers were said to be deciding which projects to kill at a Geneva meeting last week — one of those mentioned was the Network Application System.
The aim of the NAS project is to enable communication between different DEC machines as well as between DEC kit and other manufacturer's boxes.
A DEC spokesman said that everything was in the early stages, and that he wouldn't like to comment on numbers — not even the 6,000 proposed lay-offs, although software engineering staff would be among the casualties, he also couldn't say if they would be part of the wave of redundancies mentioned above.
To put this in context, he asserted, we should realise that DEC was refocussing its software product line and strategy.
Experts in the NAS team will now focus solely on DEC-to-DEC communications because DEC was trying to concentrate on what customers wanted.
Work on communications between DEC machines and other manufacturers' kit will go to internal systems integration teams.
VXM HAS POWERTOOLS FOR INTEGRATING TOOLTALK WITH PVM
VXM Technologies Inc, Brookline, Massachusetts, claims its latest PowerTools technology can integrate SunSoft Inc's object-oriented network data sharing software, ToolTalk, with the Parallel Virtual Machine (PVM) message passing system developed at Oak Ridge National Labs.
VXM says PowerTools can be used to create networked processing systems — not necessarily parallel in nature — which could be made up of heterogeneous Unix workstations and servers, including those from DEC, Hewlett-Packard, IBM, Silicon Graphics and Sun Microsystems.
VXM claims a CPU-intensive subroutine created using PVM and executing on a cluster of mixed network environments could be  accessed by a applications running on systems running ToolTalk services.
ToolTalk, part of SunSoft's Solaris operating system, is now supported by Silicon Graphics, whilst versions for DEC, HP and IBM systems are becoming available.
PowerTools will include VXM's Balans dynamic network load balancing software, which automatically finds and allocates spare CPU cycles on a network, from the second quarter of 1993.
A ten-node PowerTools licence costs $2,500 — ToolTalk developers kits for DEC, HP and IBM Unix systems are $300 — a site licence is $1,500.
PowerTools for SunOS 4.1. x is available now.
DEC Mips-Ultrix, HP HP-UX, IBM AIX and Silicon Graphics Irix versions are due in January, with Solaris 2. x and DEC AXP-OSF/1 implementations set for the second quarter.
Windows and Windows NT versions of PowerTools will follow in DDE- and ToolTalk-enabled formats, available in the first and second quarter of next year.
VXM's PAX-1 range of software tools for networked parallel processing based upon the Linda distributed processing protocols developed at Yale University have been dropped.
COMPUTERVISION HAS NEW COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN RELEASES
Bedford, Massachusetts-based Computervision Corp has a string of new computer-aided design and manufacturing packages, Windows NT versions of its existing packages, and expanded support for hardware and operating systems from Sun Microsystems Inc, Digital Equipment Corp, Hewlett-Packard Co and Microsoft Corp.
The company now has a version of the CADDS 5 parametric modelling software for the DECstation 5000 workstation — the first alternate Unix system on which CADDS 5 is supported: this version is out this month.
The Medusa two- and three-dimensional design and drafting software now runs on Hewlett's HP 9000 700 line.
Computervision has also been demonstrating a pre-release version of its CVdesign parametric modelling software running under NT — to be made available once Windows NT starts shipping.
NT versions of CVdesign, CV-DORS, CVware View & Markup and CVware Conferencing CAD/CAM products are promised for 1993.
IBM SEEKING BIG NEW ROUND OF CUTS
It has long been clear that IBM Corp's latest restructuring into 13 somewhat autonomous business units has taken too long and has not gone far enough, and the company has called an extraordinary board meeting for this Tuesday to decide what cuts need to be made to meet 1993 targets.
According to the Wall Street Journal, the IBM board does not normally meet in December.
The mainframe business and the chip business are expected to be the focus of the cuts, with further plant closures and property disposals thought likely.
It is also expected that IBM may want to shed up to a further 30,000 people from its 300,000-strong pay roll, with undisguised lay-offs clearly on the agenda.
The jobs that do seem to be safe are those of top management: an official familiar with the agenda for next week's board meeting said that it doesn't include any discussion of personnel changes involving John Akers or any other executive.
The biggest worry on Wall Street, where priorities tend to be narrowly focused, is over the dividend: if the company has to take another $1,000m to $2,000m of charges this quarter to cover further closures, it is unlikely to be able to meet the dividend out of cash flow.
‘We expect sweeping changes at IBM to be announced shortly and we believe that if possible, IBM will introduce changes in equity ownership,’ Merrill Lynch & Co analyst Dan Mandresh told investment clients in a report.
He postulates that IBM could create different classes of shares whose dividends would reflect performance of relatively healthy businesses such as the AS/400 and RS/6000, and possibly AdStar storage products, but many observers now believe that nothing less than a full break-up of the company would enable the better bits to prosper and restore shareholder value.
The halfway house of floating a part of the equity of the better businesses while retaining a majority is ruled out by the fact that the units so treated have to have a three-year separate trading record first.
The biggest shock in the new round of cuts is that IBM's forecasting last year was so abysmal that despite the fact that 40,000 people will have left by the end of the year where it was only counting on shedding 20,000, it still has to make more cuts.
SUNCONNECT EXPANDS, MOVES TO GRENOBLE
As expected (UX No 414), Sun Microsystems Inc's satellite business, SunConnect, is expanding and moving its headquarters from Mountain View, California, to Grenoble in France.
The idea is to expand its network business for the international arena, especially the telecommunications market.
SunConnect develops and markets products for using and managing global networks.
Sun vice president Denis Yaro heads SunConnect and will relocate to Grenoble by the middle of next year.
The unit is hiring extra staff that will boost its roll call from 130 to 150 all told: it already claims to have poached several engineers from Hewlett-Packard Co and Digital Equipment Corp research labs out in Grenoble.
SunConnect's biggest revenue earners are its SunNet Manager system — which is also being implemented on HP and IBM Corp Unix kit — its Open Systems Interconnection stuff and X.25 products.
There will be a new release of OSI technologies for Solaris 2.1 and probably some Intel Corp-specific products for SunSoft Inc's Solaris-on-Intel desktop.
SUN SIGNS COMPUTER SCIENCES IN SYSTEMS INTEGRATION PUSH
While standardising on its Solaris Unix, and, in-house, its Sparc RISC microprocessor family, Sun Microsystems Inc is determined to extend its reach into every aspect of the computer business, and its latest target for conquest is systems integration.
As a step in this direction, Sun Microsystems Computer Corp has signed a service alliance agreement with Computer Sciences Corp, El Segundo, California to pursue systems integration business in the wireless telecommunications market.
The agreement covers the full range of Computer Sciences' software and services in systems integration and technology consulting and all hardware products provided by Sun.
Both have agreements with Longmont, Colorado-based Coral Systems Inc, a specialist in Unix software for the wireless telephony world.
Coral's first product, FraudBuster, written to do just that, was launched in October.
HP UNLEASHES THIRTEEN NEW SERVERS
Hewlett-Packard Co last week introduced the latest swat of HP 9000 Series 800 business servers — thirteen uni-processor machines whose top ends are built out of the new 7100 PA-RISC chip.
HP has matched IBM Corp prices but can run rings around old Blue on performance, according to General Systems Division general manager, Bernard Guidon.
HP figures it has done the same against Sun Microsystems Inc at the low end, claiming Sun's attempt to break into the commercial market is based only on price.
It claims the new iron is three times faster than comparable Sun servers or IBM AS/400 equipment and twice that of an equivalent RS/6000.
It has designed the systems, available at five performance points, with mix-and-match options to appeal to a wide-range of distributed computing environments.
HP says all the boxes, priced between $11,250 and $103,000 — £9,180 to £88,480 — are immediately available.
They fall into four basic designs or classes: the two-slotted F — configured as 10s, 20s and 30s — the four-slotted G — 30s, 40s and 50s — the eight-slotted H — 20s, 30s, 40s and 50s — and the twelve-slotted I in 30s 40s and 50s.
Only the flagship 50 configurations use the 7100; the lower end boxes in each class using previous incarnations of the chip.
All are supposed to turn into multi-processors by the middle of next year when HP comes up with symmetric multi-processing upgrade packages that would boost performance at the top end by 75%.
As it is now, HP claims 150 tpsA in a host-based configuration, peaking at at 303.1 tpsA, $5,913 per tpsA, reportedly a new industry price/performance record for single-processor systems, a factor it says is important to the single-stream and batch-oriented applications common in most data centres.
HP envisages an on-site upgrade path that requires only a processor swap going, for example, from a 40 to a 50 and a chassis upgrade going from, an F to a G. The F class which HP has poised against Sun reportedly starts at 36 tpsA; the next performance point is 61 tpcA, available as an F or H, then 88 TPS, followed by 110 tpsA topping out at 184 tpsA.
The Fs and Gs are directed at small businesses, branch offices and workgroups in large companies; the Hs at mid-sized companies or large company departments and the Is at large company divisions.
…
WAITS FOR A NOD FROM MICROSOFT
Hewlett-Packard Co reckons an Intel Corp 80486 platform won't be enough to run Microsoft Corp Windows NT and, while it's watching how Pentium develops, is figuring Microsoft is going to need a better RISC processor than it's currently got.
It dismisses MIPS out of hand and writes DEC's Alpha off as too late.
It's betting neither IBM Corp nor Sun Microsystems Inc will play Bill Gates' game.
That narrows the field and HP does of course have the Hummingbird PA-RISC variant up its sleeve (UX No 414), but it's been burned in its dealing with Microsoft before so it's approaching NT rather gingerly.
It wants to see how badly Gates needs RISC and what unknown concessions he's willing to make before making any commitment.
It also says NT isn't viable as a server.
MOTOROLA's INTERNAL IT DIVISION IS ITS BIGGEST COMPUTER SYSTEMS CUSTOMER
Motorola Inc's internal IT General Systems Sector turns out to be its biggest Unix customer.
It has apparently bought Delta 8000 Unix systems worth the equivalent of $40m — 10% of Motorola's worldwide computer systems sales and almost half its European sales to date.
The machines have replaced $90m of mainframe equipment for the cellular telephone business over the past two years.
The Computer Systems Group responsible for manufacturing and marketing the 88100-based Unix machines contributes $400m annually to Motorola Inc's coffers — of which $100m is from in Europe.
Motorola's UK division of the Computer Systems Group sells a whacking two thirds of total UK system sales, the largest contributor to European sales.
The IT General Systems Sector involved in downsizing Motorola's internal computing operations — a part of which services the cellular business — itself contributes $3.5bn in revenues to Motorola Inc.
By the end of the year, it claims it will have saved $69m by junking mainframes in favour of home grown Unix.
HP MOVES TO PER-USER PRICING BASIS
All the tenets of software pricing, laid down by IBM Corp for its mainframes and slavishly copied by the rest of the industry, are being swept away with the erosion of IBM's dominance.
Now Hewlett-Packard Co is following Digital Equipment Corp in — as an option — charging for all HP 3000 and HP 9000 software according to the number of users on the machine, regardless of the processor size, the idea being that customers get to pay for what they actually use.
The company now offers user-based licences tailored to the particular software product and its possible usage patterns.
The licences correspond with the number of simultaneous users, and can be shared across the network or tied to individual accounts, depending on the software product.
User-based pricing is available for operating systems, application- and software-development products.
User-based pricing provides better utilisation of software, greater configuration flexibility and increased user access to software, the firm suggests.
For systems-oriented software such as data communications and systems-management products, the company has made the systems-based approach to pricing more flexible.
For HP 3000s, this software is priced per system, according to the number of users licensed for the HP MPE/iX operating system.
For HP 9000 Unix workstations and business servers, system-oriented software is moving from a seven-tier model to a three-tier structure based on expandability, not processor power so that in both cases, customers can increase processing power without incurring software-upgrade fees — eat your heart out, IBM AS/400 users.
Under the new three-tier structure, level one includes workstations and entry-level business servers; level two includes mid-range business servers; and level three includes the HP Corporate Business Servers.
Customers can also evaluate software free via use of temporary licences.
Once the customer decides to buy the software, Hewlett provides a password over the phone granting a permanent licence.
The company is also seeking to help customers manage their software assets by enabling its software products to take advantage of its NetLS technology.
NetLS is a vendor-neutral, client-server tool that manages software access based on systems, users, time or usage, and was chosen by the Open Software Foundation for the Distributed Management Environment and also has been adopted by the likes of IBM Corp.
And the company has simplified software-support pricing for new orders.
Support prices now are available on a product-by-product basis, replacing a more complex scheme based on categories of software.
The simplified structure offers customers telephone support, and software and documentation updates that can be ordered at the time of product purchase.
…
DEBUTS OPENVIEW 3.2
Hewlett-Packard Co is now shipping HP OpenView Distributed Management Platform 3.2, a release that lets it manage OSI as well as TCP/IP networks.
The new release includes Common Management Information Protocol (CMIP) services as an option plus other services to support further OSI specifications for event handling and addressing.
The software provides programmatic access to SNMP and CMIS services via X/Open's management procotol application programming interface, XMP-API.
The XMP-API is a key component in the Open Software Foundation's DME.
HP believes OpenView 3.2 is the first instance of CMIP management under XMP-API.
OpenView with the CMIP option conforms to the OmniPoint 1 specification and the US Government Network Management Profile (GNMP).
HP also offers the option of including a $5,000 Ingres SQL database as the data repository.
The CMIP option is $5,000 and requires OpenView 3.2 which is $8,000 unless a current user is upgrading.
A developer's kit with OpenView itself is $23,000.
SCO HAS LAN MANAGER FOR WORKGROUPS ON UNIX
Meanwhile, SCO has also introduced a version of Microsoft Corp's LAN Manager that supports Windows For Workgroups, LAN Manager for SCO Systems 2.2.
LAN Manager for Workgroups supports personal computer clients running Windows for Workgroups — Microsoft's peer-to-peer connectivity version of Windows.
It includes a number of improvements that enable users to interoperate between Windows, MS-DOS and OS/2 on a SCO Unix server.
The software's key features include remote boot capabilities, remote administration and increased security.
SCO has added support for MS-DOS and IBM OS/2 clients to its standard version of LAN Manager.
Prices start at $1,300 and $3,000 — both versions are available from the end of this month.
NOW LSI LOGIC SIGNS TO DO CMOS VERSION OF DOLPHIN's FAST BUS
The Dolphin SCI Technology A/S arm of Oslo, Norway-based Dolphin Server Technology A/S, already has an agreement with Vitesse Semiconductor Corp to make chips for its Scalable Coherent Interface high-speed bus in Gallium Arsenide — it runs at 1Gbps — and with Convex Computer Corp to use the thing.
Now Milpitas, California-based LSI Logic Corp has licensed the technology to do a CMOS implementation of the bus.
The new version of the bus, which meets the IEEE 1596–1992 interconnect standard, will be jointly designed by the two companies, and will be manufactured and marketed by LSI Logic, which plans to offer it as an ASIC core through its CoreWare Division.
’ APPLE, NOVELL HELD MERGER TALKS AT HIGHEST LEVEL’— SAN JOSE MERCURY
Apple Computer Inc and Novell Inc have been discussing the possibility of a merger between the two companies according to the San Jose Mercury News Apple declined to comment on the report, and Novell denied it, saying that ‘We're always in industry discussions with them, but we're not having discussions with them about merging,’ but the paper says that the talks between Apple chairman John Sculley and Novell chairman Ray Noorda were a closely-guarded secret and known only by an elite group of senior executives at the two firms.
The future of Novell is an oft-discussed issue because of Ray Noorda's age — he is in his late 60s.
HP WOOS THIRD PARTIES TO SOFTBENCH
Hewlett-Packard Co is going to third parties with its SoftBench CASE environment, particularly to get it up on Sun Microsystems Inc workstations.
It has set up a Channel Partner programme and signed Emeryville, California-based Basis Inc as its first reseller.
Basis has agreed to sell a half-million dollars worth of the C++ SoftBench 3.0 and SoftBench 3.0 products on Sparc machines.
Meanwhile, Paramax Systems Inc has picked the SoftBench framework to be part of the STARS software engineering environment project that is being funded by America's Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA).
IBM, Boeing and Paramax, a Unisys Corp company, are collaborating on STARS, which is meant to develop and integrate technologies in support of megaprogramming.
…
RECKONS ITS IN GREAT SHAPE
Having sailed past Digital Equipment Corp in terms of total turnover with embarrassing ease, Hewlett-Packard Co is poised for more success in 1993.
Not quite all of its $16,000m-plus annual turnover is computer-related, although computers are infiltrating all its non-computer businesses.
New chief executive Lewis Platt shows a welcome colourful turn of phrase as he says ‘We're about as well-positioned as anyone to succeed in the murky environment that fiscal 1993 looks like it will be.
Our new-product programme is incredibly effective, and that's how you win in this market.
We're getting out new products more rapidly than ever before.
We're cutting manufacturing costs, and we're doing a darn good job of applying HP technology in insightful ways.’
He is also firmly committed to proactive management: ‘This isn't the kind of business environment in which we can set targets and expect something to happen, and we're not waiting for an economic turnaround to provide us with the kind of results we want to turn in.
None of us thinks we can manage this business by putting it on autopilot,’ he says.
In a review of the business, other executives pointed out that in the fiscal fourth quarter, each of the major businesses showed record order levels compared with any quarter in recent years.
Acceptance of the mainframe-class Corporate Business Systems has exceeded expectations and the company had more than 200 orders by October 31 and will start volume shipments this quarter.
Orders for the HP 9000 multi-user Unix systems grew more than 40% during 1992 and although revenue for the HP 3000 declined, unit shipments of these systems increased about 20% for the year — striking given the move away from proprietary systems, but then the company is opening up an enormous Open bolt hole for HP 3000 users.
Despite its voluntary redundancy programmes, total employment for the year was up about 3,500 people, some 3,050 of whom were gained through the infilling acquisitions the company regularly makes.
Employment in the Computer Products Organisation increased by about 2,100 people in the year to meet expansion needs.
For the medium term, telecommunications is the key.
UNIX ABI PROMISED — FRONT-ENDS WILL STILL BE DIFFERENT
As reported (UX Nos 413, 414 and see front page), Unix International plans to specify a common application binary interface (ABI) for Unix implementations running on different CPU architectures.
This will allow independent software vendors (ISVs)— as far as is possible — to create one version of an application that will run under multiple, graphical-based Unix environments on the same microprocessor platforms.
Outstanding incompatibilities not resolved by the ABI — and there is little doubt that different look and feels will still prevail — are to be addressed by a streamlined porting environment that can be whittled down over time as more features are incorporated into the ABI.
What goes in and what gets left out depends on how much political ground is conceded between SunSoft, Unix System Labs and other UI members.
UI chief Peter Cunningham says UI is trying to push the ABI specifications ‘as high up the code structure as possible.’
The higher up it can be cut, the lower development and porting costs will be for ISVs, and quicker their time to market.
How far past the X-Windows level the ABI will go remains unclear.
Bits of both Open Look and Motif are already in there — and some features will be handled as objects — although Cunningham admits it is unlikely to make it up to the XT intrinsics level, on top of which the various interface look and feels are created.
How long it will be before branded products are on the market is a  function of how high the specification is cut and the time it takes to generate the test suites.
It ‘will be months not years’ claims Cunnignham, who is shooting for product implementations around the third quarter of next year.
The ABI won't be published as part of the next RoadMap because it is too big — although a snapshot is promised — but it will appear in the same timeframe.
The RoadMap is already out to members for review in draft form.
Other features also under consideration — which won't make it into the ABI this time around — include requirements for application-to-application communication and linking, updated networking topologies, common installation and system administration facilities.
As the ABI won't be updated until a year after its first edition, additional requirements like these will be published as addenda.
Cassoni
The project is being positioned as Rev 2.0 of the Unix ABI set.
The first ABI effort encompassed specifications for character-based implementations of Unix SVR4.0 across a range of CPUs and converged around the roll-out of SVR4.0 by the then AT&T Unix Software Operation at 1989's Unix Expo show (UX No 255).
A year earlier it was Vittorio Cassoni — then head of AT&T's Computer Group and the man who forged the deal with Sun Microsystems Inc which lead to the creation of the Open Software Foundation — who was sufficiently encouraged by the work of London firm UniSoft Ltd on a binary compatibility standard for Unix running on Motorola Inc 680x0 and 88000 CPU lines, to back the concept of Unix ABIs.
Borrowing from the Intel Corp/MS-DOS world, the idea was that character-based applications should run on an ABI-compliant version of Unix as easily on one machine as on another with the same CPU.
As well as Motorola CPUs, ABI Rev 1.0 was eventually implemented on Intel iAPX-86, Mips and Sparc lines too.
ABI 2.0 will address the same processors, plus the Hewlett-Packard Co Precision  Architecture RISC.
SEQUOIA TO SIGN INVESTMENT BANK IN QUEST FOR NEW CASH
Pole-axed fault-tolerant Unix systems builder Sequoia Systems Inc, Marlborough, Massachusetts has now decided to engage an investment banker to explore all available alternatives to resolve the company's immediate liquidity difficulties.
The company, which ran into big trouble after a couple of customers failed to complete big orders as expected — when the orders had already been booked as sales in the figures, says it is unlikely to be acquired because of a Sword of Damocles hanging over it in the form of outstanding class-action law suits.
It says it is not currently in active financing discussions with any strategic partner or third party, but is in default under its bank credit pacts and needs new cash now to finance its operations.
ERICSSON TO HOLD 60% OF ERICSSON HEWLETT-PACKARD TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Hewlett-Packard Co and L M Ericsson Telefon AB duly announced formation of their network management systems joint venture last week.
The new Ericsson Hewlett-Packard Telecommunications AB will be 60% owned by Ericsson; 40% by Hewlett.
No financial details were given; the deal is subject to European Commission approval.
The venture, headquartered in Stockholm with Gothenburg and Grenoble bases, is expected to employ 350 people, and will begin operations in first quarter of 1993.
As expected, Ericsson tosses in major parts of its Telecommunications Management and Operations Support family, of which it has sold 65 systems.
The products go through Ericsson channels.
SCO LOOKS TO UNIFIED SVR4 ES/MP
California-based, Santa Cruz Operation Inc is likely to choose Unix System Laboratories Inc's SVR4 as an upgrade for its current version of SCO Unix — if USL  fulfils its promise and introduces a unified version of SVR4.0, System V.4.2 ES/MP, next year.
The company said it will ‘seriously consider’ the software when it is available rather than the alternative Unix-based operating system OSF/1, from the Open Software Foundation.
SCO, which licenses its Unix code from USL, has been reluctant to name the successor to its version of Unix, SVRV/386 3.2.4, because it says it is unwilling to commit its claimed six million users to a product — SVR4 — which is at present available in four different versions.
USL currently ships the System SVR4.0 kernel; the desktop System SVR4.2; the security System SVR4.1/ES and the multi-processing version, SVR4/MP.
SCO claims to have the equivalent of all four in one version — SVRV/386 3.2.4.
SCO's main objection for licensing OSF/1 is not the technology but OSF's lack of market support.
A SCO spokesperson said ‘we will only license technologies that are widely accepted by our customer base’.
SCO said licensing SVR4.2 ES/MP would be a more viable option because USL already has the confidence of the market and shares many features with SCO Unix SVRV/386 3.2.
It also supports open systems standards such as X/Open Ltd's operating system and communications XPG Portability Guide version 3, the latest version, XPG4, and OSF's Distributed Computing and Management Environments.
SVR4.2 ES/MP would give SCO Unix users improved distributed computing tools and a greater choice of applications and hardware vendors, SCO said.
COMMERCIAL USERS STILL SHY OF UNIX WORKSTATIONS, SAYS IDC EUROPE
Unix workstations haven't made much headway into the European commercial marketplace, according a new report by IDC's European Unix research centre.
It says more than 80% of Unix workstations shipped last year went to sectors where they are most commonly used for technical applications.
According to IDC, only 3% of workstation kit ended up in the financial sector — which invests more heavily in high-end and on-line transaction processing multi-user Unix systems.
More than two-thirds of those workstations which did make it into that market were Sun Microsystems Inc Sparcstations.
In the commercial arena, 31% of multi-user Unix systems and workstations shipped in Western Europe last year went to the manufacturing sector, whilst the public sector accounted for 25%.
When multi-user Unix systems are included, the financial sector accounted for 8% of systems shipped, transport, communication and utilities 12%, wholesale, retail and trade 10%, services 10% and agriculture, mining and construction 4%.
IDC Europe: +45 3118 6344.
DEVELOPERS WARY OF OLE 2.0
Despite Microsoft Corp's efforts to promote Object Linking and Embedding 2.0, leading developers are resisting a move to the first beta version of the development kit for both technical and competitive reasons, PC Week reports.
Its object-oriented underpinnings imposes a formidable development burden that means it will be several months, if not years, before they can deliver applications that exploit its improved data-sharing capabilities.
But they are also nervous that Microsoft's applications group — responsible for OLE 2.0 — has had the specification, and code, since 1991.
Microsoft has been demonstrating prototype versions of Word and Excel that exploit OLE 2.0, leading many third parties to believe that it has a substantial advantage.
MINIGRAMS
Larry Michels, president of California-based Santa Cruz Operation Inc, has been charged with sexual harassment in a civil lawsuit filed by three former executive secretaries of the company in Santa Cruz County's Superior Court.
The suit, the subject of a lengthy and  embarrassingly explicit story in the San Jose Mercury News last week, charges that Michels repeatedly groped, propositioned and forcibly kissed the three women, all mature adults, at work.
Michels, who denied the allegations, told the newspaper he intends fighting the suit in court rather than settling privately.
In fending off the charges, the paper quoted Michels as saying, ‘Did it say I raped anybody?
Did it say I pinned anybody down?’.
When the Merc asked Michels to reply to accusations of hugging and kissing two of the women against their will during business hours, Michels, it said, replied, ‘How serious a crime is that?’.
Observers say that in today's social climate both the charges and story could have a negative impact on SCO.
Reading between the lines, insiders say Unix International needs its ABI and branding effort to succeed — see front page — to justify its continued existence.
Uxbridge, Middlesex-based, Kew Research Ltd has an informal agreement with Raidtec Inc's Irish subsidiary Raidtec Ltd in Cork and not its US operation (UX No 414).
Following reports in Unigram.X that Microsoft Corp is interested in making Windows NT interoperate with SVR4 (UX No 412), the two companies have set up lines of communication.
Now it will be interesting to see if they use them and how.
As anticipated, Unix Systems Laboratories Inc last week announced that it was joining X/Open Ltd under the new technical membership structure the consortium put in place in October.
USL said it will be taking full advantage of the new established Integrator Buyout Option, which will cost it $150,000, and will be participating in all X/Open technical programmes to influence future standards.
It intends putting its initial efforts into the Kernel & Commands, Security, Networking, Internationalisation, transaction processing, System Management and Test Groups.
Novell Inc Japan, which will be Univel Inc's distributor there, isn't waiting around for the Japanese version of UnixWare to start its assault on the market.
It will release the English version next month.
The Japanese edition is due in the second quarter.
InterOp 93 Spring is set for March 8–12 at the Washington Convention Center in DC.
X/Open Co Ltd is adding another tier of membership to its roster.
Companies that produce enough products to need in-house testing facilities can join a Verification Membership class which gives access to all of X/Open's existing and emerging test soft ware.
As well as testing for XPG4 conformance, X/Open's VSX4 suite also tests for Posix 1003.1 and draft FIPS 151–2 compatibility.
X/Open has also published its distributed computing frame work as the XDCS — X/Open distributed computing services — guide.
XDCS includes XPG4, the Object Management Group's Common Object Request Broker Architecture, the Open Software Foundation's Distributed Computing Environment and Unix International's Atlas distributed computing framework.
Quick on the heels of its release of the Windowing Korn Shell 1.0 a few weeks ago, Unix System Laboratories Inc has come out with WKSH 1.1 which adds the Tuxedo System Interface library for rapid prototyping.
WKSH allows programmers to write windowing apps in shell language, reportedly in about a tenth of the time of an equivalent C-based X Windows application.
It works with both Open Look and Motif intrinsics toolkits.
WKSH is available as source code for SVR4 from USL and as shrinkwrapped product for Sunsoft Inc's SunOS 4.1, Microsoft Corp's Open Windows 3.0, Santa Cruz Operation Inc Open Desktop 2.0 and IBM Corp's AIX via distributors.
Despite the University of California, Berkeley having voluntarily stopped distributing Network Release 2 (UX No 409), while it and Berkeley Software Design Inc and Unix System Laboratories Inc sort out their legal hassles, it continues to be available for anonymous ftp reportedly on over 66 sites and on various CD-ROM distributions.
There is nothing that USL can do about it at this point, it says.
Silicon Graphics Inc's new high-end multi-processing servers and workstations based upon its Mips Technologies Inc subsidiary's R4400 RISC (UX Nos 407, 409), are expected on January 26th: Electronic News hears they'll debut as the Axys line.
Matsushita Electric Industrial Co Ltd expects to start shipping two Texas Instruments Inc Viking-based workstations, co-developed with its investment, Solbourne, in February: a four-processor Series 6/700 and an eight-chip 6/900.
It figures they can get a thousand out over three years.
San Jose, California-based, Tatung Science & Technology Inc has cut prices on its COMPstation 40 Sparcstation 2 clones by up to 16%.
A high-end configuration with 520Mb, 16Mb RAM, 19-inch colour monitor, single-slot GX accelerator, Sunsoft Inc's Solaris 1.1, Motif, X11R5 and UK-based IXI Ltd's X.desktop 3.0 is now $9,000, down from $10,700.
Data General Corp is now saying its long-promised Motorola Inc 88110-based systems won't be announced until well into next year (UX No 394), but reckons this doesn't indicate any plans to switch away from the 88000 CPU line.
James Meehan, Lotus Development Corp former vice president and general manager, international operations, has been named president and chief executive officer of Cambridge, Massachusetts-based CenterLine Software Inc.
Sesha Pratap, who held those offices, will continue as chairman.
Univel Inc began delivering UnixWare in volume last week and endorsements are flowing in.
Vmark Software Inc is to port its uniVerse application development environment to the Novell Inc NetWare-ready Unix implementation.
Release 7.3 will be available in the second quarter of 1993 priced at $435 per user for up to 64 users, $365 thereafter.
Qume Peripherals Inc will support UnixWare on its QX15 ASCII-ANSI X-Windowing terminal.
Gupta Corp is to ship Gupta SQLBase for UnixWare in the third quarter of 1993 — the server will be priced at between $5,000 and $10,000.
Vmark: +1 508 879 3311.
Qume: +1 408 942 4242.
Univel: +1 408 473 8797, +1 415 329 0289.
Gupta: +1 415 617 4617
Digital Equipment Corp is setting up an AXP Design and Integration Services programme, armed with a portfolio of design services from gate array and board design to software and complete systems designs, to get OEMs and end users moving the Alpha architecture cost efficiently into their products and environments.
The scheme is also meant to assist customers with prototyping, testing, manufacturing, distributing and servicing AXP products.
SunSoft Inc is reportedly hard at work getting the object-oriented Distributed Objects Everywhere environment into product shape.
The Sun/video people Parallax Graphics Inc in Santa Clara, California, has named Frank Florence, former vice president, North America at Dataquest Corp, as president.
Melbourne, Australia-based, Computer Power Software Group Inc has set up a subsidiary, Today Distribution AB, Sweden, in association with its Swedish distributor, software house Arcad Technology AB.
The new operation will be headed up by Arcad managing director, Lars Andersen, to sell CPSG's application development environment, Today.
Scotts Valley, California-based Borland International Inc is moving into the Japanese market with its InterBase database.
It has hired Tom Laux, formerly head of OEM sales/strategic accounts at Mips Technologies Inc, to oversee efforts as director of InterBase Pacific Rim Operations.
InterBase 3.2 with support for Japanese, including Kanji and Kana, is scheduled to ship in the first half of next year.
The software will be sold direct and through OEMs and resellers including Cognos Japan.
It expects to leverage off Borland Japan and is looking for additional Japanese distributors.
A few weeks after announcing System V/4 for IBM's PS/2 Models 90 and 95 (UX No 412), Scotts Valley, California-based Microport's got its version of SVR4 ready for DEC Intel Corp 486 machines.
It says it's the first product to fully support the Intel Express motherboard architectures with DEC's high-performance graphics, SCSI and networking chipsets and adapters.
DEC is supporting Microport customers.
Microport is promising an optimised version of its software for the Pentium chip.