

NT's SHADOW FORCES UNIX BODIES TO SEEK COMMON GROUND, AS UI OPENS UP TECHNOLOGY SELECTION PROCESS
Microsoft supremo Bill Gates is doing more to unify Unix than any other single human being in the last five years.
Fears that Windows NT will knock the stuffing out of a fragmented Unix industry have galvanized Unix International to reinvent itself.
It wants to be the catalyst of a unified Unix industry.
If successful, its moves would also ensure UI's continued existence.
To arbitrate this unity, UI has, as expected (UX No 414), wrestled the authority to pick technologies above the operating system away from Unix System Laboratories Inc and opened up the selection process to the industry at large.
From now on the companies on UI's executive committee, currently home to the likes of Sun Microsystems Inc, NCR Corp, Unisys Corp and ICL plc and some of the Japanese firms, will select the reference technologies for items such as networking, object orientation and multimedia.
UI will no longer be just a requirements body or a marketing arm for USL.
It is hoping its embrace of a wider field of players, coupled with a commitment to encourage competing implementations, will find enough favour with the Open Software Foundation and its key members, IBM Corp, Hewlett-Packard Co, Digital Equipment Corp, Hitachi Ltd, Siemens Nixdorf Informationssysteme and Groupe Bull SA, for them to lay down their guns.
Reportedly UI has spent the last six months explaining its vision to these companies (UX No 391).
Apparently the response has been encouraging.
Under the threat of NT the current mood of the industry seems to be for one requirements body, a consistent set of requirements and one open system.
However negotiations could still take another six months and there are no guarantees.
It remains to be seen what would happen to OSF and its precious OSF/1 operating system under these circumstances.
Merger is of course a possibility and may be even desirable given OSF's financial distress.
Then too OSF and UI might divvy up the turf with UI handling requirements and technology selection and OSF doing development.
After all there aren't that many places that can do the sort of development work needed.
Most recently, the idea of joint RFT technology requests has been winning friends.
UI says that to be selected as a reference technology a company will now have to promise to provide snapshots for early access, follow established licensing and conformance guidelines which do not include pricing, and adhere to evolution requirements.
UI will oversee conformance testing via its Architectural Review Board and more than likely brand everybody's stuff.
It claims that its publication of the interface specifications, which include ABIs, will encourage multiple competing technologies to come forward.
All conformance testing will be handled by the reference company.
However, UI insists that internal procedures will level any bias.
APACHES DEBUT UNIX SVR4 BINARY  INTERFACE FOR MIPS CHIP
The Mips ABI group, the old Apaches, the last  vestige of the spoiled ACE Initiative, last week wheeled out its long-anticipated Unix SVR4-on-Mips application binary interface developed on a Risc/os 5.01-run Mips Technologies Inc Magnum 3000 reference platform.
The important compatibility advance will allow software to run unchanged on all Mips products regardless of supplier.
The cost savings accruing to independent software houses because they will no longer have to support multiple versions of their products is expected to entice others into the fold and redirect investment into added features and more robust programs.
The group believes that its collective strength will make it second in the software queue behind only Sun Microsystems Inc with its 141,000 seats to Sun's estimated 241,000 single-user systems.
Members such as Control Data Systems Inc and Silicon Graphics Inc announced their immediate compliance with what Mips ABI calls the Black Book.
Pyramid Technology Corp will adhere by next month, Siemens Nixdorf Informationssysteme AG by mid year and Concurrent Computer Corp by early 1994.
Software companies supporting the Mips ABI include Oracle and SAS Institute, who helped in its definition, IXI, Z-Code Software, Veritas, Syntax, Quadratron, Neuron Data, Mentor Graphics, Interleaf, Information Builders, Frame, Empress Software, Digital Tools and Acucobol.
In Japan, NEC and Sony have established the OCMP or Open Computing environment for Mips Platform specification for Japanese companies, a standard now supported by Sanyo, SNI, Sumitomo, Nihon Silicon Graphics, Olivetti of Japan, Tandem Japan and Pyramid.
NEC will be fully compliant by June.
DESTINY FOR SPARC, MIPS
Unix System Laboratories Inc will reportedly announce Destiny, aka Unix SVR4.2, for Sparc and Mips platforms at Uniforum with delivery to follow thereafter.
USL expects Sparc compatible builders like ICL plc to pick up the former, with the Japanese and maybe firms in the Mips ABI group going for the other.
SCO EYES MERGED UNIX
Meanwhile, Santa Cruz Operation Inc, which bit the ideological bullet, though not all the SVR4 technology, last summer (UX No 398), is thought to be eyeing USL's combined Unix SVR4.2 ES/MP release for future use, although that could be as far as two years out.
SCO has argued that adoption of SVR4 is not a price issue for it, but is dependent on USL meeting certain technology requirements, in multiprocessing for example, where SCO already has its successful MPX Unix-add on.
A combined Unix SVR4.2 ES/MP will apparently fulfill enough conditions for SCO to bring its MPX users over too.
…
AS USL AND SCO COSI UP
Meanwhile, news on the fly has Unix System Labs and Santa Cruz Operation Inc — plus at least one other ISV — preparing to lend their support to a common operating system interface effort, COSI.
Apparently the two suppliers are now agreed (or have at last been convinced by third parties) that a unified user environment for their respective Unix implementations, combining shared APIs and front-end elements — from desktop objects down to high-level system administration functions — makes sense.
COSI is thought to be part of a much broader technology effort now coming together that will likely involve IBM too in some way, though no-one we spoke to was prepared to elaborate further for fear of upsetting delicate negotiations.
Announcements on all or parts of the effort are promised this week as soon as parties sign off.
15 BID FOR OBJECT SERVICES
Fifteen companies combined last week to make a single joint submission to the Object Management Group in its quest for Object Services, its first such Request For Technology (UX No 420).
The RFT closed Friday February 19.
As we went to press, the OMG expected to have in hand eight submissions representing some 25 companies.
The 15 companies who banded together include Sun Microsystems Inc, Hewlett-Packard Co, Tivoli Systems Inc, Hyperdesk Corp, Novell Inc, Digital Equipment Corp and all of the object database concerns.
Many of them were involved in OMG's original object request broker selection.
Meanwhile, membership continues to build for the OMG.
It is now up to 305 members, the last five coming in last week alone.
UK RESEARCHERS ACHIEVE 1 ELECTRON GaAs MEMORY CELL
Researchers from Hitachi Europe Ltd's Cambridge Laboratory, working with Cambridge University's Microelectronics Research Centre claim to have fabricated a memory cell that uses a single electron to store one bit, vastly reducing the power that would be required by huge-capacity memory chips — a device the size of a silver dollar could store 1T-bits while drawing just 0.1W: in current technology it would be the size of a tennis court and dissipate 10KW.
The one-bit device developed by the Cambridge scientists utilises the so-called Coulomb Blockade Effect where, if an isolated area of conductor is made suitably small, the change of energy resulting from the gain or loss of an electron prevents further electrons from entering, and existing ones from leaving.
The memory node itself is a small conducting region connected to an external circuit by a  multiple tunnel junction and controlled by special gate capacitors.
Electron transfer to or from the node is only through the  tunnel junction.
Memory node voltage depends on the number of electrons at the node and the the voltage applied to the gate electrode.
When operating within the Coulomb blockade, the number of electrons in the memory is kept constant but slight increases in node voltage changes the boundaries to enable electrons to be transferred.
To discharge the node, added electrons must be removed one at a time, which needs a definite voltage change.
This leads to hysteresis, with two possible electron states for the same applied voltage, enabling the memory states to be defined.
The device is fabricated in Gallium Arsenide using electron beam lithography to define special side-gated channels.
The researchers have found that it is possible to control the movement of electrons by adjusting side gate voltage though they say it is an area that needs further research.
More work is also needed to reduce the memory structures to dimensions of below five thousandths of a micron and so enable it to operate at room temperature.
At present the device will only operate at around minus 273.05°C!
Indeed, the  researchers expect it to be another 10 years before devices using the technology can come to market.
STRATUS FINDS THE GOING TOUGH IN SPAIN
Outside the financial world, customers in Spain are ignorant of the advantages of fault-tolerant computers, and apart from government and telecommunications bodies, few are interested in Unix either, although this market is growing, according to technological consultant for Stratus Computer Inc, Carlos Morales.
He says even though his company as been operating in Spain for the past 10 years, it has found it difficult to establish a market there.
Users know little about fault-tolerant technology in general, he stated, and even less about actual hardware, although Tandem Computers Inc's offerings are somewhat more familiar.
Customers are also scared off by prices, he added, because some of them still believe that fault-tolerance means simply installing two machines that cost twice as much.
While financial institutions can see that such technology saves them cash, companies that find it more difficult to calculate the cost of a breakdown are more reluctant to commit.
As for Unix, Morales said that Stratus has met similar problems to other manufacturers — many customers aren't willing to alter systems in which they have invested a lot of money and personnel over the years.
Conversely, a number of companies that are starting from scratch actually insist on Unix, and Morales attests to a growing demand for open systems in Spain.
UK UTILITIES BEATEN TO REMOTE METER READING
Compania de Aguas de Sabadell SA, Cassa, and Telecom Valles SA have spent about $50,000 on developing a system for reading water meters over the telephone.
Sabadell-based Cassa's head of computing services, Jaume Matutes, said that the scheme was operated by three systems at company headquarters: an IBM Corp AS/400 for general commercial management; Data General Corp Unix machines, which connect to the AS/400 and manage the meters; and another unspecified Unix machine, used to control the supply network.
A Unix machine automatically makes a call to a meter, and reads the information stored there.
Any variations in data since the last call was made are checked on-line.
The information is then entered into Cassa's Oracle Corp database.
Each meter, Matutes said, has an impulse out-port, which sends signals to some 64 16MHz 80286 primary concentrators.
The primary concentrators process and store information, received from some 40 meters.
The primary concentrators are attached to secondary concentrators, which are, in turn, connected by a telephone line to the central computer at Cassa's headquarters.
Data is stored in the central system, where specialist software looks after billing.
Terrassa-based Telecom Valles, which provided 50% of the cash for the project, developed and installed the meter system.
ICONAUTHOR DEVELOPER AIMTECH CORP BUYS TIGER MEDIA AND ITS CATS MEOW
Nashua, New Hampshire-based multimedia company AimTech Corp has acquired the assets of Tiger Media Inc.
The Los Angeles-based developer has perfected the art of delivering applications developed on Sun Microsystems Inc workstations to other systems through its Cats Meow product — techniques considered of great strategic importance to AimTech which is keen to maximise the portability of its IconAuthor Windows-based authoring tools.
Cats Meow, which began shipping in 1991, is a system for building interactive information applications on Sun workstations using graphics, audio, text and video.
It is used by AT&T Co, Eastman Kodak Co, Merrill Lynch & Co and Toshiba Corp.
AimTech is planning to launch a revamped version of the system in April.
Also planned for around that time is a version for Silicon Graphics Inc's system offering users three-dimensional graphics.
AimTech's Tiger Media acquisition also ties in neatly with its planned excursion into the market for interactive home entertainment systems.
Along with Cats Meow, it is to add Tiger's best-selling CD titles: ‘The case of the Cautious Condor’ and ‘Murder Makes Strange Bedfellows’to its product line.
The two 1930s-style comic book murder mysteries are available on CD-ROM and run on Windows machines, Sparcstations and Amiga personal computers.
The main thrust of AimTech's business is to remain dedicated to marketing IconAuthor, however.
As its name suggests, IconAuthor is an icon-based programming system aimed at non-developers wishing to create interactive multimedia presentations for computer-based training, simulations, marketing and retail self-service terminals.
It presently runs under Windows 3.0 and upwards on personal computers; Unisys Corp ST-1000 kiosk terminals; DEC VMS and Ultrix systems and Hewlett-Packard Co 9000 Series 700 and Data General Corp AViiON workstations under OSF/Motif.
It has been used for a wide variety of projects so far.
The Department of Transportation in Maryland, for example, used it for an interactive touch-screen system providing tourists with video, textual, graphical and audio information about the city and its transport network.
The screen, which is located in a self-service kiosk near the Baltimore Orioles stadium at Camden Yards, has proven such a hit that a further 33 similar kiosks have been planned across Baltimore.
A computer-based maths teaching package is also being jointly developed by Apricot Computers Ltd and Birmingham City Council in the UK using IconAuthor.
And as testimony to its ‘user friendliness’, an enterprising British Airways employee — a cabin crew member rather than computer programmer — recently developed a safety training course in just 12 weeks using the system.
Further offices abroad
There are now around 2,000 IconAuthor users worldwide — including 100 application developers — which are spread across 25 countries.
This makes IconAuthor the leading Windows-based product in its field, according to AimTech.
The company also has a number of strategic distribution partnerships.
IconAuthor is to be rolled out under the auspices of IBM's Multimedia standard this year in the UK, for instance.
HSC Interactive in California has used the system to develop multimedia applications; NCR Corp will be shipping IconAuthor as a ‘recommended product’ for its new ‘learning stations’; and, as mentioned above, Silicon Graphics has also endorsed IconAuthor.
Though it has amassed just 48 employees since its formation in 1984, AimTech has spread its operations to Los Angeles; Denver, Colorado; Washington DC and London.
It is looking to open further offices abroad too, to complement the distributor network it has set up across Western Europe, the Pacific Rim and Australia.
The privately-owned company turned in $4m turnover last year, up 124% from 1991, and is expecting to double its figures again in 1993.
London-based AimTech Europe Ltd, which opened in 1991, currently contributes about 22% of total revenues.
Product sales accounted for around three quarters of its turnover last year.
However it seems likely that the firm's training, consultancy, courseware development and custom engineering services are likely to contribute an ever increasing percentage to company profits.
But this will not affect the pace of product development work.
IconAuthor was upgraded to version 5.0 last year; support for Microsoft Corp's Video for Windows and Tandy Corp's Video Information System was added; and a Macintosh player for applications developed under Windows was announced.
An SQL driver is planned for later this year along with Silicon Graphics and Sun system support.
HARRIS BACKS MOTOROLA 88110 ALONGSIDE POWERPC
Motorola Inc's 88000 RISC family seemed to have lost out at Harris Computer Systems Corp when the Fort Lauderdale, Florida-based firm announced it was switching  allegiances to the IBM/Apple/Motorola PowerPC architecture (UX No 407), however the company now says it will roll-out 88110 versions of its NightHawk real-time machines by the end of March.
Harris will market 88110 and PowerPC lines side by side.
Harris had scheduled the 88110 machines for release in December, but because of caching problems it was delayed.
According to Motorola, the function allowing the 88110 to switch between different caching modes — write-through and copy-back — was faulty.
The firm immediately re-spun a new batch of 88110s for Harris.
Another Motorola Inc 88110 user, Data General Corp plans to introduce its Motorola Inc 88110 Aviion machines this quarter.
Meanwhile, Motorola has at long last revealed its initial pricing for the 88110: 50MHz versions are $495 and a  40MHz parts costs $360 — both in quantities of 1,000-up.
…
AS 88OPEN SOLDIERS ON WITH NEW FUNDING
88open says it'll be in business for the new fiscal year starting in April.
Its members have paid all their dues, some $3.5m, so the operation won't have to do any trimming.
88open chief Tom Mace notes that a full subscription list means some of his members are pulling double duty joining other consortia as well.
88open's idea of licensing its compatibility technology however looks kind of stalled having managed to pull in only Hewlett-Packard Co as a customer.
Mace says part of the difficulty is that potential customers want the stuff customised and 88open won't do that for them.
We've heard the soon-to-be PowerOpen people are eyeing Mindcraft and Unix System Labs, while not having closed the door on negotiations with 88open, is looking to Unisoft Ltd.
Of course in both cases their technology covers system software not applications the way 88open's does.
MICROSOFT BRINGS NT TO UNIFORUM
First there was the Berlin Wall falling.
Then there was IBM Corp falling.
Now a third previously impossible-to-contemplate  occurence is about to happen: Microsoft Corp will be exhibiting at the UniForum Unix trade show in San Francisco between March 15 and 19.
Microsoft's Windows NT group has signed up for a 20ft by 20ft booth, claiming it doesn't have the budget for a bigger space.
Meanwhile, UniForum — the US Unix user group — has scheduled an executive session for Friday March 19 with Roel Pieper of Unix System Labs, David Tory of the Open Software Foundation and Paul Maritz of Microsoft Corp speaking for 10 minutes apiece then opening the floor to an hour's worth of questions and answers.
HP CUT 1,700 JOBS IN QUARTER
Hewlett-Packard Co accompanied news that it had made $261m net profit for its fiscal first quarter (a decline of 21% before a big accounting charge last time) with news that it cut 1,700 jobs worldwide during the period.
It said 1,200 of the 1,700 employees that left during the quarter did so after voluntarily accepting severance packages, and it expects more departures as the job-cutting programme spreads to new countries.
The payroll rose by 500 to 93,100 after consolidation of the 900-strong arm in Brazil.
Orders rose 24%, up 18% in the US to $2,100m, foreign by 28% to $3,100m.
DATA GENERAL WINS BULL FOR ITS CLARIION RAID DISK ARRAYS
Data General Corp's foray into integrated storage subsystems with its CLARiiON disk array has won Compagnie des Machines Bull SA as a customer.
Bull has signed for exclusive rights to offer the RAID disk arrays with its IBM Corp RS/6000-derived Unix systems and servers.
The two say they will also investigate areas of co-operation on future-generation storage products.
No value has been given for the OEM agreement.
KUBOTA READIES ALPHA WORKSTATION, GRAPHICS SUBSYSTEMS
Kubota Pacific Inc, Santa Clara, California, will next month introduce a new workstation and a family of graphics subsystems based upon Digital Equipment Corp's 64-bit Alpha AXP RISC.
The three-dimensional graphics and imaging workstation — provisionally known as Titan 2.0 (the name is to change by the March 30 launch date)— will be configured with multiple Alpha AXPs.
Kubota claims the box will outperform Silicon Graphics Inc's hottest new box, the Mips R4400-based Indigo2 Extreme, announced a couple of weeks ago (UX No 421).
There will be at least six new Alpha-based three-dimensional graphic subsystems housed in ‘pizza box’ casing, which will plug into TurboChannel slots on Alpha AXP workstations running Open Software Foundation's OSF/1 or Microsoft Corp Windows NT operating systems.
There will be no support for DEC's OpenVMS.
Kubota has stopped production of the Mips Technologies Inc R3000-based Titan 1.0 machines which it inherited from its now defunct Stardent Inc sibling.
The Titan architecture came originally from graphics specialist Ardent Computer Inc which merged with arch rival Stellar Computer Inc to form Stardent back in the autumn of 1990.
Kubota will honour existing support and maintenance contracts for the 1,200 Titan 1.0 users  worldwide .
…
AS DEC WINS BOARDMAKER FOR ALPHA; ENCORE UP IN AIR
Digital Equipment Corp has rallied a Laguna Hills, California start-up, Carrera Computers Inc to its Windows NT-on-Alpha cause and the company will begin selling motherboards built around the 150MHz Alpha AXP RISC chip in the third quarter, according to US PC Week.
Personal computer and workstation manufacturers are expected to be able to use the board to build powerful file servers in the $10,000 price bracket.
Meantime, the agreement under which Encore Computer Corp may switch to the Alpha from the Motorola Inc 88000 that it presently uses is apparently not a done deal yet.
According to Electronic News, the two hope to wrap up negotiations within 60 days, but that terms for Encore to do Unix System V.4 and Oracle7 reference implementations for the Alpha, and possibly license its Unix clustering capabilities to DEC, are not yet finalised.
DEC would also like Encore to buy some Alpha AXP systems and offer them in place of its real-time 91 and 93 systems, as well as building successors to its parallel Infinity 90 machines out of Alpha microprocessors.
NOVELL, AT&T SET DEFINITIVE AGREEMENT ON UNIX LABS
Novell Inc finally has definitive agreement with AT&T Co for its proposed acquisition of Unix System Laboratories Inc, which was announced just before Christmas.
AT&T owns about 77% of Unix Labs, Novell currently holds about 5%, with the 11 other investors sharing about 18%.
The total value put on the business is 12.3m Novell shares, giving it an indicated value of $323m.
In addition, outstanding Unix Labs stock options and other equity incentives will be exchanged for Novell stock, options or rights to acquire Novell shares.
The pact was approved by the boards of Novell and of AT&T but is still subject to regulatory and shareholder approvals.
CLOCK-TRIPLED 100MHz 80486DX3 TO FOLLOW LAUNCH OF INTEL PENTIUM
Intel Corp has no intention of consigning its 80486 processor to the scrapheap when it launches the Pentium, and later this year it will come out with a 100MHz clock-tripler 80486DX3 version of the part, US PC Week reports.
In early 1994, it will follow up with a bridge to the next-generation Pentium with the P24T, a 32-bit, Pentium-class upgrade chip for 80486 machines.
The clock-tripling 80486, called the P24C in development, is due out in the autumn.
It will operate at 3.3V and use built-in power-management logic to reduce the heat.
IBM MAKES A START ON OPENING UP THE AS/400
IBM Corp last week took its first step towards saving the AS/400 from going the way of the mainframe when it accompanied the new F models with a string of software offerings and initiatives designed to make the machine sit more comfortably as a database server in an open systems environment.
It also has a new non-upgradable entry model, the 9402 A02, which supports up to seven workstations and is about £6,000 with OS/400 — available only in the UK, Italy and one or two other European markets — not the US or Japan.
The new 2.3 release of OS/400, due to ship at year-end, is a prerequisite for most of the software improvements.
The four areas of software improvement are openness and Posix compliance; language support; distributed client-server computing; and systems management.
The structure of OS/400 and the hardware are being remodelled not only to look and behave more like Unix, but actually be more like Unix; with commitment to support the four basic level Posix standards, 1003.1 to 1003.4, IBM says Posix will be central to the re-design of OS/400, built into the licensed internal code beneath the machine interface level.
The proprietary AS/400 processes, which IBM says are more resilient, will be supplemented with Posix processes.
On languages, IBM is replacing its original program models for C and Cobol and its extended program model for RPG with the Integrated Language Environment, so that in OS/400 2.3 there will be a common block of routines and procedures that all language compilers use.
Dire C/400 performance should improve dramatically with compilation times at least halved.
The Environment will also make it possible to call up other programs faster, whatever language they are written in.
There are new ILE/C400, ILE/Cobol 400, and ILE/RPG400 compilers, but apart from C, not until next year.
The open client initiative involves co-operative development work and marketing agreements, primarily in the US, with many key personal computer software and hardware suppliers.
Showcase Vista from Rochester Software Connection Inc will make it possible to extract data and manage it using the Macintosh; and an IBM-Apple facility called shared folders will enable Mac and AS/400 files to be managed together on the desktop.
Access from Windows and MS-DOS machines will be possible from Oracle, using SQL*Connect, from Showcase using Microsoft Corp's Open Database Connectivity.
OS/2 machines will be able to access the AS/400 using enhanced Rumba and Showcase software, with other tools to be announced and the RS/6000 can connect as a client using the TCP/IP File Server Support/400 program and Connection Program/6000.
There is a new implementation of Network File System.
On management, IBM has been working with Candle Corp, and will be offering Omegamon/400 for monitoring AS/400 resources; Automated Facilities/400, for automatically managed AS/400 jobs; Omegaview/400, giving a single workstation view of the entire network.
On the F models, with the 9406 models using a new BiCMOS CPU, IBM claims performance gains of up to 60% — a 15% to 45% range is more realistic, with the F50 the star — at about the same price as the E models they replace.
CMOS models are out now, BiCMOS in May.
WILL SHED 1,200 JOBS IN JAPAN
IBM Japan Ltd is not risking the opprobrium that fell on Eastman Kodak Co when it fired two thirds of its Japanese researchers and withdrew offers of employment it had made to graduates, but it does want to get its 25,000-strong workforce down by 1,200.
It is offering its 3,000 employees over the age of 50 a voluntary early retirement programme under which they will get full retirement benefits and a year and a half of extra pay if they leave the company and start their own companies in businesses related to IBM.
IBM Japan said it will not consider measures that would force employees out despite its economic woes because of customary lifelong employment in Japan.
Some observers reckon Kodak's business will be so poor in the wake of its lay-offs that it might as well depart Japan altogether.
HP SOFTBENCH FOR ALL IBM SYSTEMS
Casting grave doubt on the future of any in-house repository at IBM Corp, the company has extended its existing licence for Hewlett-Packard Co's SoftBench Framework to include non-Unix IBM systems such as OS/2 — the original licence for the software engineering tools environment covered IBM's AIX-based development offerings only.
The SoftBench Framework technology provides the underlying tool-to-tool communication that IBM used in its SDE WorkBench/6000 and SDE Integrator/6000 products, and incorporating the Framework with other IBM systems will enable IBM's Systems Application Architecture users to participate with systems based on a Unix operating system in an open, heterogenous environment.
SoftBench Framework technology, has also been licensed by Informix Software Inc, Control Data Corp, Siemens Nixdorf Informationssysteme AG, Objectivity Inc, SAIC Inc and Taiwan's Institute of Information Industry.
SoftBench Framework is designed to provide user interface and tool communication services for the open integration of more than 70 software development tools.
…
BETA TESTS DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS OBJECT MODEL
IBM Corp late last month began beta testing its Distributed System Object Model, which is intended to provide the underpinnings for the company's future object-based software, US PC Week reports.
The Model builds on OS/2 2.0 and the System Object Model of the Workplace Shell, an object-oriented schema that provides a standard way to write class libraries and a general-purpose mechanism for communicating between objects.
The new Model extends the capability to a distributed environment, so that objects can be shared among networked systems.
Although the thing is initially being tested under OS/2 2.0 and AIX, IBM plans to incorporate it in future operating systems and to do versions of the Distributed System Object Model for other systems — and the Taligent Inc joint venture with Apple Computer Inc also has licence to the technology.
IBM is also working with Apple on Bento, Apple's format for identifying and interchanging objects, and is looking at using the two developments together.
TALIGENT TO SHIP TOOLS ‘THIS YEAR’
Although the Taligent Inc environment is not due to ship until late 1994 or early 1995, the Apple Computer Inc-IBM Corp joint venture faces heightened competition from Next Computer Inc now that its options have shrunk to making a success of its NextStep environment, and a hot wind from Cairo — Microsoft Corp's Cairo, that is, is blowing down their neck.
Accordingly, US PC Week reports, Taligent now plans to ship technology to developers later this year, starting with development tools for OS/2, AIX and Macintosh System 7, the idea being to get developers started with the new technology.
The Taligent environment, derived from Apple's Pink, has been designed from the ground up as an object-based system and includes a user interface, a development environment and operating system kernel.
DEC TO DEBUT SVR4 PERSONALITY ‘BY SUMMERTIME’
Digital Equipment Corp is expected to begin deliveries of its Unix SVR4 on top of OSF/1 version 1.2 running on Alpha AXP systems as soon as this summer (UX No 423).
DEC says it won't shy from promoting and advertising the add-on to potential customers, as it believes large corporates and telecommunications firms, some which specify SVR4 in any case, are already interested in the personality.
In the run up, DEC will put in place a campaign aimed at independent software vendors, OEMs and other technology partners which will stress the ability to run the catalogue of Unix SVR4 applications on the personality, plus OSF/1 software, from within the same environment.
DEC says it'll go along with the Open Software Foundation's choice symmetric multiprocessing technology and expects it to be delivered a new release early next year.
DEC says it has no plans to offer a similar personality for its OpenVMS operating system, but officials at the company's ‘Unified Unix’ briefing a couple of weeks ago admitted it would be ‘good marketing hype.’
UNIPLEX SEES GROUPWARE FUTURE, DEBUTS ONGO OBJECT-ORIENTED OFFICE SYSTEM
Uniplex Ltd, the Hemel Hempstead-based Unix office automation stalwart, has begun to  re-fashion itself as a groupware house, an effort that will take another 10 to 12 months to realise.
The first pieces of Jason, once also called Medley, its long-awaited graphical object-oriented next-generation product for client/server environments, is being rolled out as the tip of an overall strategy it has dubbed Nouveau.
Jason, now officially styled onGO, initially consists of two modular components: onGO Office, an X.400-based mail transport system with built-in calendaring and scheduling co-developed with Hewlett-Packard Co, and onGO Write/Paint/Draw, a WYSIWYG document publisher whose titling alone suggests competitor Island Graphics is next on Uniplex' hit list.
OnGO Office is the core element behind Uniplex's client/server architecture, providing enterprise-wide network and mail communications, X.500 routings and gateways, TCP/IP and open systems interconnect support and a set of object libraries.
It is also the interface to Novell NetWare, fax and telex.
Office is the transport mechanism that down the road will allow Uniplex to break into mail-enabled process automation, the true definition of groupware.
Before it gets to the groupware level Uniplex says it will have to license or acquire pieces of technology.
Already it has a license arrangement with object maven Hyperdesk Corp and apparently intends to use the Object Management Group's Object Request Broker.
In essence Groupware requires customisation since business processes differ office to office, industry to industry.
Uniplex is putting itself in a position to do that internally with the acquisition three weeks ago of IMI Consulting, a $2.3m Connecticut-based subsidiary of Uniplex's $1,500m parent company IMI plc specialised in downsizing, gateways, SNA and big IT environments.
It is now a part of Uniplex US and will be selling onGO.
Uniplex says it will provide application programming interfaces and gateways between onGO and its existing software to insure migration and coexistence.
Data General, which will be co-developing subsequent releases, has built its office strategy around onGO and so onGO will appear first in April on its AViiON boxes plus IBM RS/6000s.
HP9000s, SCO and Solaris 2. x machines will be added in the summer with Alpha/OSF and UnixWare for both Intel and MIPS coming in the fall.
It will start with X Windows and Motif clients, adding Windows, character-based, NT, OS/2 and MACs over the course of the year.
Uniplex probably rightly foresees Windows predominating at the client and Unix at the server.
OnGO's next enhancement should include multi-level security, X.500 standardised directories, database links, OLE support and intelligent filter capabilities.
Graphically oriented programming tools, APIs and cross-application macro  facilities will also be offered.
Office's price is $70 a user for 100 users; Write/Paint/Draw is $300 a user for 100 users.
HYUNDAI's AXIL UNDERCUTS SUN WITH SPARCLASSIC CLONE
Hyundai Electronic America's Axil Workstations Inc is bent on conquering the slippery slopes of Sun Microsystems Inc Sparc cloning, and last week announced the Axil-220, a MicroSparc knock-off of the Sparc Classic undercutting Sun by pricing it at $3,600 in single quantities and letting it run Solaris 1.1 as well as 2. x.
It says it is the lowest priced RISC colour workstation in the industry.
The San Jose, California-based outfit Axil is taking a leaf out of Compaq Computer Corp's book and will only sell through resellers under the direction of sales and marketing vice president Dan Shaver who recently left a job with Sun as director of its channels strategy.
The street price it put on the box is only a ballpark figure (a 10%-15% differential) and it will not reveal its dealer discounts.
Axil will also configure the machine to look like a Sun LX, the Classic's $8,000 big brother and price it around $7,000.
Although the company is on Sparc International's executive committee and Tsunami chips are reportedly available to firms other than Sun, the boxes will not be available until June.
In the interests of further added value, the Axil-220 can be expanded to 128Mb (Sun's at 96Mb maximum) and all configurations include fax/modem and ISDN options as well as two drives, larger screens and larger external storage.
Axil also introduced an Open Look-based fax/modem package called AxilEnvoy as the first in a series of software products to provide added functionality such as voice mail, conversation record/playback, multimedia document support, security, image filtering and editing and optical character reading.
All configurations can be ordered from the board level up.
Axil started recruiting value added resellers overseas and 24 are in place internationally.
Master VARs with Unix experience are still needed there.
The domestic programme kicked off in December and has so far rounded up 32 resellers out of a desired 50 with access to key accounts, Unix expertise and a vertical orientation.
They should also garner a  minimum of 35%.
It predicts that 50% to 60% of the workstations sold in the US will go through indirect channels by 1994.
IBM Corp and Hewlett-Packard Co distributor Dickens Data Systems has been signed as a master VAR.
Axil, which introduced other Sparc compatibles earlier on, says in has been shipping hundreds of units a month and is on the verge of moving to a thousand.
CHEN ABANDONS OLD FIRM, IMMEDIATELY STARTS NEW ONE
In a bizarre twist in the saga of the failure of Supercomputer Systems Inc, the company last week announced that it had abandoned efforts to find new investors to keep the company alive — and then Steve Chen immediately announced that he was forming a new company that will seek to create the world's fastest computer.
He reckons he needs between 50 and 100 people in the next few weeks, presumably all drawn from the 300 or so that lost their jobs when his first company closed its doors.
Chen said the new company will draw on potential investors located while he was trying to save his old company: ‘We will now apply what we learned in designing and building a new machine for early market introduction.’
That work was done on the nickels of a string of major investors led by IBM Corp, which is thought to have lost between $100m and $200m on the failed venture — but Chen's announcement that his new company, Supercomputers International Inc, will draw on work done by the failed one raises the question of who owns that work.
The new company, not surprisingly, will receive no funding from IBM; the old company failed because it couldn't raise the $60m it reckoned it needed to bring the SS-1 to market.
The company had a prototype built and running, and employees say it ran at 51.2 GFLOPS peak — three times the performance of the best machine commercially available.
BUSINESS OBJECTS LAUNCHES IN UK
As reported (UX No 422), database access firm Business Objects Inc, Menlo Park, California, has established a UK operation in Marlow, Buckinghamshire.
The company has a software package, BusinessObjects, which allows users to access relational database information without the need to know Structured Query Language, SQL techniques.
With the system, a customer's technical staff can create a range of objects which can be deployed separately, or strung together by users, to generate database queries.
The objects, which are selected by dragging and dropping from a menu, could for example, reference patient name, number and admission date in a hospital  administration system.
Hidden from the user, the objects generate SQL commands which are fired off to the database.
The resulting information can be displayed by the user as a mix of reports, graphs and tables.
Written in C and C++, the software comes with what the firm calls a universal dictionary — a set of object mechanisms which can be tailored to individual requirements — and an inference engine which generates the SQL statements.
The firm claims three of its objects are as powerful as seven handwritten SQL queries, with 50 objects combining for up to 1,000,000 possible queries.
All processes execute on the local client — not on the central host processor — and version control ensures the dictionary (list of objects) is only downloaded once to each client, on the first time of use.
Information from existing database CASE tools the customer may be using can be integrated into the BusinessObject dictionary at the entity level.
Dialects
The software recognises various dialects of SQL and is positioned as a data access tool rather than 4GL or executive information system (EIS), although it combines elements of each.
Information pulled from the database can be re-directed into other applications and EIS systems, but BusinessObjects does not update the database.
The software is available for MS-DOS, Windows and Apple Macintosh systems and supports Oracle, Ingres, Sybase, DEC Rdb and IBM DB2.
Unix, OS/2, OSF/Motif, Informix, Teradata, SQL/DS and SQL/400 support will be added this year.
The company is talking to Sun about an Open Look port and is currently testing a Windows NT version.
Specific device drivers are required for each relational database.
Prices start at £8,320 for an eight-user, one manager system.
50% of the firm's business is direct, the other half comes from ISVs writing database-independent applications using libraries of re-usable BusinessObjects.
Bridges
President and founder, Bernard Liautaud, and director of UK operations, John Powell, hail from Oracle Corp, and it's therefore not surprising the firm does most of its work at Oracle sites and with Oracle application developers.
It is currently building a bridge between BusinessObjects and the Oracle CASE dictionary, with others planned.
The three-year-old outfit started life in Paris, where 23 development staff are based.
The rest of the 70 employees are located at sales and marketing operations in Menlo Park, Dallas, Chicago and New York with 10 in Marlow, UK.
The privately-held firm claims turnover rose 250% to $6m in 1992 — £1m in the UK — and expects that figure to double in 1993.
It'll add some 40 additional staff over the period.
Two rounds of venture capital funding have netted $3m — investors include France Telecomm's venture arm and Atlas Venture, a Dutch concern that helped Sequent Computer Systems Inc into the world.
A third round of financing isn't planned as Liautaud is looking towards initial public offering in around two years' time.
BusinessObjects claims 60 UK customers and 400 worldwide with sites employing BusinessObjects on databases storing as much as 12Gb of information.
Work on new graphics, reporting and integration tools aimed at the EIS market is underway, but the firm is steering clear of application development per se for the time being.
+44 628 487722.
EURO REPORT SAYS DESKTOPS WILL PROLIFERATE
UK market research firm, Ovum Ltd, London, believes the European market for desktop computers will grow from an installed base of 22 million in 1992 to 46 million by 1996.
It reckons Unix will continue to dominate in the technical arena and says OS/2 will flourish at corporate sites where personal computer communications are important.
It expects the 78% share of desktops currently running by MS-DOS to fall to 29% by 1997, the Apple Macintosh to retain a 10% share over the period, Windows to rise from last year's 7% to 28%, Unix to grow from 4% to 10%, OS/2 to rise from 1% to 8% and Windows NT to grow from nowhere to 14% over the five years.
+44 71 255 2670.
SUN READIES MOSCOW OFFICE TO SERVE CIS
Sun Microsystems Inc will shortly open a wholly-owned subsidiary in Moscow, which will serve the Commonwealth of Independent States.
CIS includes the rump of the former Soviet Union, minus the Baltic republics and Georgia, though Georgia will come under Sun's CIS Region umbrella.
Managing director is Robert Hall, currently at Sun's Mountain View headquarters.
He will head a start-up team of seven staff which is expected to grow to a dozen or more over the next six to nine months.
Some will move over from existing Sun operations, like Sun UK's Andrew Rattigan, who will focus on business operations, and handle stuff like import licences and relationships with corporate CIS partners.
At least half of Sun CIS Region employees will be drawn from the local IT industry.
Bob Kloak is to lead a technical support team, staffed with local expertise, while Isaac Oak, a native Russian, will look after major accounts.
Hall says the operation will promote all of the Sun satellite business products.
Cheaper boxes
While the price of doing business in Russia is high — the cost of office space in Moscow, for example, is rocketing — Hall reckons Sun kit will cost less in CIS than it does in the rest of Europe, where customers are used to paying a premium for IT products.
There are some CoCom regulations concerning the export of high technology to CIS countries which affect Sun, although the majority of its product line, the Sparcstation 2 and below, is more or less de-controlled.
The export of superscalar technologies, including Sparcstation 10s and SparcCentre 2000 multiprocessors, is still problematic, though not unsurmountable.
Software project
Once installed, Hall intends to kick start a project which will encourage the development of software in CIS for the general Sun user community.
Applications can be given exposure via Sun's CD-ROM-based software catalogue distribution scheme.
The idea, says Hall, is to identify niche application areas not already being served by Sun software partners and encourage CIS developers to exploit those opportunities.
For example, at least some of the 50,000-odd Sun users in the telecomms sector could do with more advanced network management tools, he says, claiming there are already a couple of initiatives underway.
Local expertise includes financial and networking software.
CAD/CAM
The CIS unit also hopes to exploit the need for new or additional CAD/CAM systems and software.
It will work initially from a base of existing systems and CAD/CAM standards established by the former Soviet Union which were exported to the republics and East European satellites.
As in the West, Sun will also leverage scientific and technical sales from its exposure in academic institutions — it has a number of existing joint venture projects and agreements with Russian scientific and research centres.
Hall already claims to have customers downsizing from mainframes to client/server solutions based on personal computers and Suns using SunSelect's PC-NFS mechanism to migrate data.
He says there is a Sun-based banking network linking St Petersburg, Tumin and Moscow up and running with an electronic fund transfer link to the US, 40 Sparcstations at the Dubna Joint Institute for Research and a dozen running ComputerVision CAD/CAM software down in Taginrog at an engineering firm whose name in English means Red Boilermaker.
Cyrillic keyboard
Sun has some 500 machines installed across CIS — the new operation will start life with 12 distributors and 10 value-added resellers.
Four Moscow-based distributors include ArguSoft and 4i Datost — the latter also a ComputerVision reseller with a second outlet in Kiev, Ukraine.
There are two in St Petersburg, one each in Novosibirsk, Tumin, Minsk and Alma Ata and one under negotiation in Azerbijhan.
Hall expects 50% of Sun CIS business to come from Moscow and its surrounds.
Cyrillic versions of Western applications available for Sun users include FrameMaker, accounting, CAD/CAM and CAM and banking packages — there is some locally developed software around too and Sun has got development kits of Cyrillic alphabet system software out now.
It will show a Cyrillic keyboard at the Moscow ComTech show on April 27.
Sun CIS will be up on SWAN, Sun's internal worldwide area network, which now has some 22,000 nodes.
SUNSOFT BOSS URGES COMMON UNIX SPECS
SunSoft Inc president Ed Zander, speaking at the recent Unix International members meeting in New Orleans that was closed to the press, reportedly issued a call to arms against Microsoft Corp, making a strong plea for the industry to come together and adopt common interface specifications and common marketing programmes.
Apparently he suggested that the common Unix brand and the common interface specification be owned by the industry as represented by Unix International.
Of course that would have to mean Open Software Foundation founders Hewlett-Packard Co, Digital  Equipment Corp and IBM Corp taking part.
Our spies tell us HP and DEC would have come to the UI meeting if they weren't so afraid to being found out.
IBM unfortunately didn't respond to the invitation.
…
AS SUN AND ADOBE FORGE CLOSER LINKS
Sun Microsystems Inc is negotiating with Adobe Systems Inc on how to provide a tighter interconnection between PostScript and Sun's XGL and XIL graphics and imaging application programming interfaces, Sun officials said in a presentation at the Micad ‘93 show in Paris.
In a progress report on Sun's year-old Open Graphics Initiative, Doug Schiff, international director for the programme, said all of Adobe's products would be available for Sun Sparcsystems by the autumn, but that the two companies were still working out the details of providing PostScript as a ‘foundation library’ for developers on Sparc kit.
SQL ACCESS GROUP SEEKS SUPPORTERS, NOT NEW  TECHNOLOGY 
For the next two years, the SQL Access Group (SAG) will focus its efforts on getting the market to accept its its SQL standard specifications — the Call-Level Interface and Formats and Protocols — and not on technology development, it says.
According to SAG, current specification development for technology enhancements will continue, but new technology projects have been put on hold for at least 18 months to two years.
This year the organisation will unveil programmes for distributing copies of its SQL specifications and evaluating vendor products for conformance.
A vendor technology reference programme for product testing will be introduced by year end and SAG will embark on a sales campaign for the specifications.
Other SAG goals for this year include increasing European membership and establishing a user council.
It will also introduce a version of the ISO Remote Database Access standard that runs over TCP/IP this spring.
The current SAG version only interoperates with OSI protocols.
ACER AIMS AT VACATED MINICOMPUTER SPACE
Acer America Corporation, which really wants to be a player in the reconstituted ‘minicomputer’ market, will be busy this week shoring up its defences at the low end.
It will be introducing three fully integrated pre-loaded platforms it believes will set a new price/performance standard in the one-to-24 user Santa Cruz Operation Inc Unix marketplace.
The boxes will start as low as $3,325.
All are based on the personal computer technology Acer introduced last quarter, reportedly architected from the start to support Unix.
They include the EISA-based 50MHz 486DX2 1700 and 66MHz 486DX2 3500, based on the AcerPower 486e system.
The 1700, priced at $3,941, includes 128Kb of level-2 cache and a 210Mb drive.
The $5,595 3500 includes 256Kb level-2 cache and a 520Mb SCSI drive.
The very low-end 900 is based on Acer's popular 33MHz 486DX Acros ISA PC with 64Kb level-2 cache, support for a Weitek 4167 math co-processor and 210Mb IDE drive.
All feature 8Mb RAM, expandable to 64Mb.
They will come pre-loaded with the Altos/SCO System V/386 3.2 version 4.1 introduced this month and enhanced to include greater reliability under heavy user loads, autoconfig, a multi-volume back-up utility and disk performance improvements.
Packaged in two configurations and one upgrade option, it will allow users to choose between feature sets.
The base will cost $1,300 and the advanced for $1,650.
Upgrades will go for $700.
APPLIX PREPARES ARCADE RAD PACKAGE FOR UNIFORUM
Applix Inc, the Westboro, Massachusetts-based office software company, is ready to launch a new rapid applications development environment at the UniForum trade show next month.
Arcade, expected to include an applications builder, object editor and browser and SQL links to the big four databases, will share the stage with Asterix 3.0, the latest version of the company's integrated office automation suite, currently out on beta test at a number of customer sites.
The product includes a major extension to the scripting language capabilities of Asterix that allow the product to be customised for specific customer needs.
Asterix has been ported to UnixWare, and will also announce full support for Hewlett-Packard's OpenMail at UniForum.
Richard Davis, Applix executive vice president, said that the company had a separate development team working on Microsoft NT, but would not release anything until customers started asking for it.
Applix has now established offices in the UK at Reading in Berkshire, and a French office in Paris.
A German office, in Frankfurt or Munich, is also planned.
The company, which is challenging the dominance of Uniplex in the Unix office package market, is looking for European VARs and is expanding its staff.
UNISYS TO LAUNCH TIVOLI DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS SOFTWARE MID-YEAR
Unisys Corp will release Distributed Systems Management products based on the Unix System Labs/Tivoli Systems Inc framework in mid-1993, according to Unisys spokesman Joe Brown, speaking to European journalists in Nice last week.
Unisys will add its own management applications to the framework, including critical resource management and software distribution modules, which will be passed on to other Tivoli users, such as Pyramid and Tendem, through Unix System Labs (UX No 409).
The Open Software Foundation's Distributed Computing Environment (DCE), will be added as part of the environment towards the end of the year.
Other announcements forthcoming from Unisys include the expected desktop system configured for Univel Inc's UnixWare, due for announcement by the end of this month and shipment in April.
Based on the recently announced Unisys PC range (UX No 420), it will included on-board Ethernet, enhanced SCSI and graphics capabilities.
The first systems using Unix V.4-compatible micro-kernel operating systems technology from Chorus Systemes SA (UX No 406) could also emerge this year: in Japan, auto manufacturer Toyota is already running the software, but on Motorola 88000-based systems unlikely to appear anywhere else in the world.
Unisys has set in place its Colleagues developers programme, offering development and porting support to independent software vendors, plans to begin software distribution via compact disks during the second quarter, and will introduce network licensing software from Gradient Technologies Inc.
Once saddled with a seemingly insurmountable debt of $4 billion in 1989, Unisys has now reduced that figure to a manageable $1.6 billion, and recently announced its fifth consecutive profitable quarter.
INFERENCE HAS APPLICATION DEVELOPMENT SOFTWARE FOR 10 PLATFORMS
Inference Corp is developing what it calls an integrated multi-platform tool for building enterprise-wide applications.
Art*Enterprise, currently in beta for Windows, will eventually support more than 10 major platforms including NT, Macintosh, OS/2, MVS and Unix from Sun, HP, IBM, DEC and NCR.
The object-oriented software is targeted at companies that are rightsizing into client/server and distributed computing environments and re-engineering their processes.
Described as an upward compatible extension of the company's Automated Reasoning Tool for Information Management (ART-IM), it offers access to  reusable graphical user interface class libraries, data  modelling capabilities, intelligent processing technologies and automated integration with legacy systems and data.
Pricing will start at $7,000 depending on the platform.
MINIGRAMS
Digital Equipment Corp watcher Terry Shannon says an unnamed third-party software developer is thinking about porting IBM Corp's MVS operating system to the Alpha AXP platform.
DEC buried a little zinger in its ‘Unified Unix’ briefing papers from 10 days ago: ‘Given the recent plans for Novell Inc to acquire Unix System Laboratories,’it writes, ‘Digital believes OSF/1 is the only true open Unix technology in existence.’
BusinessWeek claims Compaq Computer Corp and its 80486 interests, not any technical or manufacturing woes, are behind Intel Corp's decision to delay the Pentium until May (UX No 423).
Well, schucks, that's not what we hear.
Our sources, who are cooling their heels waiting for chips, continue to think Intel is having problems making the parts.
Given the new timetable, it still say samples should be more available than they are.
Novell Inc's BrainShare ‘93 get-together in Utah March 22–26 is promising to come up with answers to questions like ‘Can Microsoft Corp NT and NetWare co-exist?’
‘What exactly is Novell's Unix strategy?’ and ‘What is Novell's vision of distributed computing?’
John Landry of Lotus Development Corp, Philippe Kahn of Borland International Inc and John Sculley of Apple Computer Inc are also speaking.
We have always said that it is not for nothing that the Unix prompts are dollar and percentage signs.
At last somebody out there has the common sense to recognise that fact too.
The new Unix Reseller Show, set for May 4–6 in Dallas, is blatantly promoting itself with the slogan ‘How To Make Money With Unix.’
If that doesn't bring them in, nothing will.
IBM will seek formal X/Open XPG4 base branding for a future release of the OS/400 operating system.
The Mips Technologies Inc arm of Silicon Graphics Inc is discussing the licensed production of R3000 RISC processors in Russia, according to the Business World newspaper in Moscow.
Mips already has a joint venture called Silikon in Zelenograd, near Moscow.
No-one at the Zeleograd plant was available to comment on the report.
Sycomore SA, the Paris-based services and consultancy company founded a year ago to specialise in open systems, will distribute software tools from Tivoli Systems Inc of Austin, Texas on the French market.
Founded by Jacques Stern, former chief executive of Groupe Bull, and Bruno Fontaine, former Unix product line manager at Bull, Sycomore will distribute, support and maintain Tivoli's line of system administration products — the Tivoli Framework system and its client tools, Tivoli/Works, Tivoli/Courier and Tivoli/Sentry (UX No 368).
Sources say Novell Inc has already sent scouts to David Tory at the Open Software Foundation with the message that it could not possibly sell Unix with Motif at the kind of price OSF charges for a licence: it says OSF is now doing its sums.
The Galileo group of end users and system integrators pushing for a common graphical front-end on different types of computers are to meet during the Uniforum show in San Francisco next month: a couple of the Baby Bells and Mitre Corp are said to be latest converts to the cause (UX Nos 415, 423).
A common application environment for a range of desktop interfaces, including Open Look, Motif, X.desktop, HP VUE and OS/2 is due at Uniforum next month (UX No 423): at the very least it will include specifications allowing independent software vendors to develop applications with features — such as install procedures — that are recognised and handled accordingly by each of the front-ends.
NEC Corp is to sample its low power VRX Mips R4000 derivative by year-end (UX No 377): a 100MHz R4000 implementation is also planned for 1993.
Unix Expo had an independent survey taken and found that its 1992 attendees represent a hefty $10 billion in purchasing power for Unix and open systems.
Networking is its strategic focus.
Thinking in some quarters is that Intel Corp's Pentium, if and when it does arrive, will be priced at $795 for the 60MHz species and $995 for the 66MHz.
Sun Microsystems Inc has denied that it has plans to develop a Sparc port of Microsoft Corp's NT operating system, as reported last week in the US paper Open Systems Today.
The paper quoted Sun president Scott McNealy as saying ‘NT needs to be ported to Sparc.
If they [Microsoft]don't do it, they are missing the boat’.
Despite the denials, observers hint darkly that some sort of effort involving Sparc and Microsoft is underway, and will come to the surface over the next few months.
X/Open Co Ltd has picked one of DEC's key transaction processing technologies as part of its standard for distributed transaction processing.
X/Open has licensed the company's Remote Task Invocation (RTI) technology, a protocol for implementing remote procedure calls developed for the Multivendor Integration Architecture consortium.
It is the basis of the Transactional Remote Procedure Call (TxRPC) X/Open released last week (UX No 423).
RTI unites OSI/TP and Open Software Foundation's Distributed Computing Environment.
That Fiber Channel Systems Initiative to standardise high-speed  fibre channel interconnects (UX No 414) will go public this week: apparently IBM and HP have managed to get Sun involved.
JSB Corporation, Scotts Valley, California last week announced MultiView Desktop for Microsoft Corp's Windows NT with a view to helping the Microsoft challenger co-exist with Unix.
The company says the product removes the potential for conflict by enabling users to run their existing Unix applications integrated with NT's presentation capabilities  preserving Unix as the central server.
Microsoft Corp's chief hatchetman Steve Ballmer has been telling people Windows NT will be available in May.
Meanwhile, Cairo is now apparently being referred to as NT Version 2.
The Windows interface looks to be as prolific as a Star Trek tribble: we hear Microsoft Corp is working with phone companies to embed Windows engines in dataphones.
The Open Software Foundation is trying to figure out how to import object orientation into its Distributed Computing Environment, but is having trouble getting a handle on it though part of its problem is thought to be attitudinal.
It  desperately needs an architectural and communications model.
It's been doing a lot of talking with the Object Management Group but it's reportedly still just that, talk.
After 10 months as Applix Inc vice president of marketing, DJ Long, up and quit last week citing philosophical differences with management.
Marie Burch, who back in the old days jumped ship from the forerunner of Unix System Labs to join the then-enemy Open Software Foundation as director, business area management, was one of those cut in OSF's recent reshuffle (UX No 423).
Intel is reportedly planning power-boosting Overdrive processors for the Pentium.
Our eyes are going: we printed Freedman Sharp and Associates' fax number rather than its phone number.
Try +1 403 228 1643 in Canada for its network load balancer.
We also gave a wrong number for Parallax: its 408 727 2220 and the company is in Santa Clara, California, not in New York.
Did anyone notice that the president of the Object Management Group wrote an open letter urging people to ask Microsoft Corp to have OLE adhere to OMG standards?