

COSE SHOOTS FOR BREADTH OVER DEPTH IN DESKTOP SPEC
With its self-imposed end-of-June deadline for publishing a common desktop environment specification now just six weeks off, the Common Open Software Environment firms — Hewlett-Packard Co, IBM Corp, Santa Cruz Operation Inc, Sun Microsystems Inc, Univel Inc and Unix System Labs — are circulating (internally) a draft form of the ‘Process Paper’ which covers the scope of COSE and describes who will do what for the first of its promised offerings.
The brief contains schedules and an organisational chart.
We understand the intent is to go for breadth first, and depth — how the application programming interfaces will actually work — later.
It plays hard on the so-called ‘90–10’ rule, claiming that 90% of the code is already out there and that only 10% needs to be written.
We understand they want to give the impression that the scope of the common desktop is well understood — but in the full knowledge that underneath, the details have not been fully worked out.
One insider said he could not believe the amount of code that will eventually be involved.
What his firm is worried about is how it will be able to meet its commitment to deliver an interim COSE-like product before the end of the year.
The most pressing requirement is for a COSE developers kit — existing customers of OSF/Motif, IXI Ltd X.desktop or HP's Visual User Environment desktops won't get upgraded until something is out — and the danger, according to the source, is that someone will break ranks and ship a developers kit without the blessing of the others.
Presently, each of the COSE participants is pledged to brief its partners and licensees on the ramifications of the COSE movement.
Unix Systems Labs, by virtue of its position as Unix mama, wanted to be first, and did its pitch the week before last with X/Open Co Ltd explaining the fast track process and HP observing.
Meanwhile Microsoft Corp is waging its own spoiling campaign and is going around trying to persuade small software developers to do Windows NT ports first.
The Tuesday morning session at June's Xhibition show, in San Jose, California — which will include all the COSE people and Microsoft (UX No 436)— will be the milestone event where all this is revealed.
Just don't ask any tricky questions about what the object model is or how the applications will communicate with the desktop.
…
DEC COSIES UP, MAY OFFER HABITAT PERSONALITY
Digital Equipment Corp also has a copy of the paper, and some of the COSE people think DEC is now only a photo opportunity away from announcing that it's becoming a COSE too.
DEC, on the other hand, which has been having COSE talks at both the strategic and technical levels, feels there might still be a few loose ends to tie up, some of them perhaps circulating around the ‘Process Paper’ expected to be made public soon.
DEC has found it has another piece of technology to throw on the COSE heap.
Besides its low-profile OMG Common Object Request Broker Architecture-compliant Application Control Architecture Service (ACAS) application integration scheme (UX No 435), it thinks COSE might like Habitat, its technology for allowing an operating system to take on the personality of another as it does with Unix SVR4 on its OSF/1 platform (UX Nos 423, 436).
It wouldn't expect fellow COSEs to implement it right away.
…
AS JAPANESE FIRMS START COSE INTEREST GROUP
And Japan is now in on the COSE act too.
Fujitsu Ltd, Toshiba Corp, Hitachi Ltd and Yokogawa Hewlett-Packard Co are forming COSE Japan Special Interest Group, a counterpart, they say, to the existing operation in the US.
The effort is apparently different from DICOP, an action previously undertaken by Mitsubishi Electric Corp, Unisoft Ltd, In C Olivetti & Co SpA, Novell Inc, Unisys Corp, Seiko Epson Co, ASCII Corp and even DEC to produce a Japanese version of the COSE desktop.
The firms were briefed on COSE shortly after the COSE announcement and reportedly encouraged to make their voices heard.
COSE Japan says it will make public the specifications for Japanese-language processing functions necessary for their domestic market.
Shipments of products meeting their standards are expected in the first half of 1994.
MICROSOFT TO DEBUT 30-WAY NT SERVER COURTESY OF SEQUENT
Microsoft Corp is going to pull out all the stops this week at Windows World, its launch pad for the infamous Windows NT operating system.
Last week, practically at the last minute, it reportedly decided to press the code for a 30-way system on to its first CD-ROM.
Previously it had only been expected to be able to offer a 16-way system in its first go-round.
Sequent Computer Systems Inc, a key partner in Microsoft's NT-on-multiprocessors push, is believed to have sent Microsoft the 30-way code changes a while ago but Microsoft was not expected to act on it so quickly.
The Beaverton, Oregon-based Sequent is also expected to have a few tricks up its sleeve for this week's roll-out.
It is rumoured to be ready to show two pre-production prototypes of its high-end WinServer 5000 series (UX No 434), one being the much-anticipated 30-way box carrying a mix-and-match assortment of Intel Corp Pentiums and 80486 chips, that in itself is a design feat, and the other an 18-way WinServer 5000 fitted out with only  60MHz Pentiums, a modern-day exercise in conspicuous consumption considering the rarity of the chips.
Sequent, meanwhile, is preparing for its early NT customers to start deploying soon.
To straddle the hurdle between its Unix commitments, where its revenues come from, and NT, Sequent last week reorganised its management to give it more strategic depth.
The general manager of its NT business unit Paul Gifford was named to the post of vice president, systems architecture responsible for bringing NT, the hitherto poor relation, into the mainstream and figuring out how it plays together with Unix.
It has also named former UK marketing director boss, Mark Miller, vice president of marketing and given the new post of vice president of corporate planning to Gael Curry, anticipating a quickening in sales.
Former senior vice president of marketing Dennis Peck is now consulting for the firm, mostly on large-scale Unix issues, as a result of both the merciless California real-estate market and a highly successful wife who sells computers for another company, two reasons that make his moving to Oregon impossible.
(Live with it, guys.
It's the ladies' turn — MO'G)
COMPUTER ASSOCIATES SHIPS CA-UNICENTER FOR HP UNIX BOXES
Islandia, New York-based Computer Associates Inc will begin delivering CA-Unicenter, its systems management product for client/server environments, on Hewlett-Packard Co HP 9000 800/700s this week (UX No 382).
It has also set up a worldwide VAR and distribution channel to market CA-Unicenter and a new line of Unix products.
CA-Unicenter will come in two parts: one configured for the server, CA-Unicenter/325; and CA-Unicenter/125 for the client.
The server software provides the core management functions including security, scheduling, print spooling, performance management, resource accounting, chargeback and report distribution.
CA-Unicenter/125, which operates on HP's series 700 workstations, includes file management automation, backup, restore and archiving and networked security functions.
CA-Unicenter will be made  available for Sun Microsystems Inc Sparcstations, IBM RS/6000s and AS/400s, and Novell Inc NetWare by the end of the year.
Support for Microsoft Corp's Windows NT will be added by the second quarter of next year.
Early CA-Unicenter kits have already been  delivered to more than 200 Unix resellers worldwide, its says.
Prices for CA-Unicenter start from $25,000 up depending on the number of modules required.
CA is also porting a string of proprietary software to Unix including: Masterpiece Financials, its decision support and accounting software; SuperProject, a project management tool; DataCom, a relational database and Telon, its own application development environment.
These products will be available on HP machines by the fourth quarter and marketed through its new third party sales channels.
+44 753 577733 or +1 619 452 0170.
ICL PITCHES IN WITH TEAMSERVER F5
It was Pentium day last week, and ICL Plc weighed in with the TeamServer F5, boasting a dual-bus architecture, specifically designed to loose the full processor capacity and high-speed caching architecture.
The company is positioning the box as a local network or Unix application server, but it chose to announce its ‘strategic support’ for Windows NT at the same time.
ICL is only announcing shipments of the 60MHz processor to start with — a pragmatic response to the shortage of the high speed parts.
Indeed, on the slower systems, Arnell, business manager with the company's Personal Systems division admits ‘we could not meet demand of any substance in the next month’.
Bulk ships will begin around the third quarter, he says, with an entry level server price of below $10,000.
At around the same time, the first 66MHz versions should begin to trickle out and the company says that we should also expect a Pentium-based desktop machine in the ErgoPro range.
Newer members of the existing FX server range are Overdrive upgradable.
…
AST RESEARCH HAS A FULL HOUSE
AST Research Inc announced the Premium SE P/60 server, Manhattan SMP multiprocessor and Premmia P/60 desktop.
Premium SE P/60 estimated retail prices will go between $7,500 and $9,500.
Manhattan SMP prices will range from $32,000 to $36,000, and Premmia P/60 retail prices will go from $5,500 to $8,000, with first ships in July.
…
SOME MACHINES MAY FRY CHIPS
Users planning to use the Pentium OverDrive upgrade socket on 80486-based machines should beware, says US PC Week (but apart from individual users with only one machine, who actually wants to upgrade rather than bequeath and buy new?): some machines with the P24T socket do not meet Intel Corp's requirements for cooling, and if upgraded could overheat and fail, says Intel.
Dell Computer Corp, Digital Equipment Corp, AST Research Inc and Advanced Logic Research Inc say they do meet the specs.
CST BOOSTS ALTOS SALES
UK, Leeds-based CST Distribution, the Acer Group Altos arm of CST Group Ltd has reported booming sales figures for the first quarter of 1993.
January sales to UK resellers rose 30% to £290,000 and February saw a record £350,000 turnover.
This was equalled in March with a gain of 45% on the same month last year.
Its the year-old mid-range 4500 system which has generated most of the sales — new configurations of the system are due late summer.
CST has joint marketing agreements with Norwich-based Foundation Systems Ltd, Nottinghamshire-based Systems Development Consultants Ltd, Select Business Systems Ltd of Dundee, Scotland, York Computers Ltd and Leeds-based LSI Computers Ltd.
PROPRIETARY AND NETWORK OPERATING SYSTEMS, NOT UNIX, WILL LOSE OUT TO NT, SAYS INFOCORP
Unix will continue to maintain its grasp on the high-end multiuser server market for the foreseeable future, according to a report by InfoCorp.
It says Windows NT will only have a 12% share of the server market — 11% in revenue — by 1997, by which time Unix should have 64%, or 62% by value.
It says Windows NT revenue will be won primarily at the expense of proprietary systems — which will slip from 29% to 22% revenue market share — and other network operating systems such as OS/2.
Proprietary systems will lose slightly in terms of units shipped — Unix will drop from a high of 70% in 1992 to 64% in 1997, while other network operating systems will slide from 20% to 15% in 1997.
InfoCorp expects shipments of multiuser systems with an average selling price between $15,000 and $1m to grow from 509,000 units in 1992 to 643,000 units in 1997 — a compound annual growth rate of 6%.
The server market where NT will be deployed is expected to have a compound annual growth rate of at least 21% up to 1997 — growing from 34% of the total number of systems shipped and 18% of manufacturers' revenue in 1992 to 67% and 34%, respectively, by 1997.
UK FIRM HAS COBOL-TO-UNIX TOOL
UK software house Northern Exposure Consultants Ltd, Manchester, has introduced AutoM-IX, a Micro Focus-based Cobol-to-Unix migration tool for financial and accounting mainframe software.
AutoM-IX is based on PowerDrive, the firm's own 4GL, and converts IBM MVS Cobol applications to Unix without modifying code, the company claims.
To do this, the tool strips the application of its database, graphical front-end, transaction processing monitor and recompiles it under Micro Focus Cobol.
AutoM-IX replaces application features, adding access interfaces for Sybase, Informix, Oracle and Ingres relational databases and other third party 4GLs to the code.
AutoM-IX runs on a variety of Unix platforms  including SCO Unix, AIX, Ultrix, Solaris 2.1 and HP-UX.
Northern Exposure has the stuff out at 26 reference sites across Britain including Somerset, Hatfield, Berkshire, Hackney and Tower Hamlets local authorities and at ICL plc, Westland Helicopters, British Steel, Racal Rediffusion and PowerGen.
An average migration contract costs £100,000. +44 61 236 0535.
PATROL HAS NEW SYSTEMS MANAGEMENT TOOL
Patrol Software Inc has put some new systems management software up on HP, IBM, Sequent, Silicon Graphics and Sun platforms.
The Redwood Shores, California-based company claims DDS/Patrol is an object-oriented systems management tool that can automatically monitor and management distributed applications, databases and systems.
It says the system can act as an interface to the Open Software Foundation's Distributed Management Environment and runs under Motif.
Patrol consists of a master console and an agent.
Agents run on each monitored machine gathering statistics and forwarding alerts and other requested information to the master console.
Object class descriptions and rules for monitoring are sent to the agents and are stored so that the agents don't need to communicate with the console except to report alerts and graphing data, cutting down on network traffic, the company says.
The Patrol console presents information from the agents.
The package can be tailored for a variety of databases and applications and comes with  variety of tools and libraries including Oracle, Sybase, Informix, Ingres, Oracle Financials, software distribution, security, batch management, backup management and help desk management.
+1 415 508 2900.
ODI DEBUTS OBJECT MODULE FOR NETWARE
Object Design Inc, Burlington, Massachusetts, has released ObjectStore NetWare Loadable Module Server, a version of its object-oriented database for Novell Inc NetWare networks.
NetWare is already available with HyperDesk Corp's Distributed Object Management System, HD-DOMS, which in turn is being integrated with ObjectStore, based around the Object Management Group's Common Object Request Broker Architecture.
Meanwhile, Cadence Design Systems Inc, San Jose, California, will use ObjectStore, to develop its next generation electronic design automation tools and Design Framework II products, and DEC has also taken ObjectStore as a data repository with its PowerFrame software.
PowerFrame is an EDA-oriented data management system running on Sun, HP, IBM and DEC boxes.
SIEMENS NIXDORF EXTENDS OEM PACT WITH SILICON GRAPHICS TO CHALLENGE…
Siemens Nixdorf Informationssysteme AG has extended its OEM agreement with Mountain View, California-based Silicon Graphics Inc to cover the Challenge and Power Challenge server lines, on undisclosed terms.
The German will add the Challenge network resource server to its line as the SC800 and the Power Challenge ‘supercomputing’ servers as the SC900.
The Challenge starts at $20,000, the Power Challenge at $100,000.
…
GETS CLOSER TO PYRAMID — WILL TAKE TOP-END MACHINES OEM
And Mountain View, California-based Pyramid Technology Corp will also benefit from the broadening of SNI's OEM position, this time on joint sales and support activities.
According to Computerwoche, not only will both companies' support teams work together, but the two also intend to set up a Competence Centre at Pyramid Technology GmbH's headquarters in Grasbrunn near Munich.
This will undertake technical sales support, look after both SNI and Pyramid customers, and provide staff training.
Project development, European sales co-ordination, customer requirement analysis and the subsequent development of tailored systems will all be carried out from there.
Also, while in the past SNI simply enhanced the functionality of Pyramid's multiprocessor machines, it will henceforth sell entire systems OEM under its own label.
This includes Pyramid's top-of-the-range Unix box with 24 processors, which can, in some cases, exceed the performance of the largest BS2000 mainframe.
Until now, Siemens Nixdorf RM600 Unix boxes incorporated a maximum of 12 processors.
…
BRINGS ONE-STOP-SHOP CONCEPT TO UK WITH SAP's R/3
Siemens Nixdorf Information Systems Ltd is extending its ‘one stop shop’ fixed price hardware-software-services resource  planning system, R/3 Live, to the UK.
R/3 Live, which was first implemented in Germany last year, combines Siemens own hardware and services with the modular SAP R/3 system software from SAP AG of Walldorf, with which Siemens has a European agreement.
According to the Gartner Group, the SAP R/3 system is destined to become the industry standard enterprise resource management system.
It is suitably complex to have taken 600 people five years to develop and succeeds its 10-year-old predecessor, R2 which has been installed in some 1,500 worldwide sites.
R/3 is a Unix-based client-server system that comprises components for handling general ledger, accounts receivable, accounts payable, consolidation, personnel management, sales and distribution, production  and materials control.
It runs under Sinix, BS2000, Ultrix, VMS, HP-UX, MPE/XL, AIX, OS/400, VSE/ESA and MVS and supports the Oracle, Informix, DB2 and SQL/400 databases.
X/Open specifications are used for low-level interfaces and communications standards include EDI, SNA-LU6.2, CPI-C and future OSF/DCE/DME elements.
It conforms to the Common User Access standard and Motif and fully supports Windows.
As part of Siemens' R/3 Live package, clients are offered a full business analysis and feasibility study on the basis of which a fixed fee is then agreed for system implementation.
It is hoped this will attract customers wanting to avoid the costs and anxiety of development.
The company is also setting up a dedicated R/3  ‘Live  Centre of Expertise’ in Manchester as part of planned network of some 20 international support centres.
It is anticipating that the majority of customers will not require a full hardware-software combination but will likely need R/3 Live built round their existing systems.
Typical projects are expected to be split fairly evenly between hardware, software and services.
Siemens is planning to extend the service to the Benelux countries and Scandinavia by the end of the year.
IBM ADDS SINGLE-CHIP RS/6000 230 AT $4,800
The process is painfully laborious, but with every announcement, IBM Corp is getting closer to acquiring the competitive edge that is the difference between survival and oblivion in the Unix business, and last week the company filled in a few gaps in its RS/6000 line, the most challenging development being a wind up of the clock on the single-chip Rios processor to create a 45MHz Model 230, which starts at just $4,800.
The 230 is designed to be an entry desktop workstation or server and has 8Kb of mixed instruction and data cache, and an additional 128Kb of level 2 cache.
It has integrated SCSI and Ethernet controllers, takes up to 64Mb memory and up to 1Gb of internal disk and can take up to seven SCSI devices.
The new Powerstation 23T is a workstation model with a Gt1x graphics adaptor with appropriate cable, 400Mb disk, keyboard, mouse and a new Powerdisplay 16S standard at $8,500; without the display it's a 23W at $6,700.
The 23S has 1Gb disk and eight-port RS-232 adaptor at $8,900.
The Model 23E is an upgrade from the 220 series.
The Gt1x 8-bit two-dimensional graphics adaptor offers two to three times the performance of the Gt1; most products ship May 28, but the 23T follows June 4, and the 23E upgrade and GT1x on the 220 are July 16.
The new Powerdisplay 16 is a 1,280 by 1,024 pixel flicker-free display with auxiliary power, video signal redrive and Premium OCLI screen coating at $2,675.
There is also a Powerdisplay 19 version at $3,950.
There are also new 50MHz Powerstation 36T and 62MHz 37T systems, packaged desktop three-dimensional graphics workstations for applications such as CADAM and Catia.
They come with Powerdisplay 16, Gt4e colour graphics adapter, keyboard, mouse, 32Mb memory and 400Mb disk; prices go from $12,950 to $25,070.
The new line-up is completed by the 550L entry-level deskside server with 41.6MHz processor, 32Mb, 2Gb disk and SCSI and Ethernet at $25,500, and the base configuration for the 580 is enhanced to include the SCSI-2 High-Performance Internal input-output controller as a standard feature.
The new Power display 16 and 19 are now also available on the deskside models.
A UK announcement is expected over the next week or two.
…
ADDS WINDOWS 3.1 SUPPORT IN OS/2 2.1
IBM Corp also duly announced the 2.1 release of OS/2 last week, describing it as an enhanced OS/2 32-bit operating system with support for Windows 3.1 applications, a new 32-bit graphics engine, 256-colour XGA and Super Video Graphics Adaptor device drivers, support for high-speed printers and some CD-ROM drives.
Multimedia Presentation Manager/2 is included and adds enhanced audio, basic image and software motion video playback capabilities.
The Developer's Toolkit for OS/2 2.1 contains bindings, tools, sample programs and documentation, and there is also a Multimedia Presentation Manager Toolkit/2.
All are out on June 14.
IBM claims that it runs Windows 3.1 standard-mode applications, including multimedia ones, and ‘major’ enhanced-mode applications; not requiring a VxD device driver, with performance comparable to that of native Windows 3.1.
Users can start OS/2 and MS-DOS applications from within a Windows application.
Performance of Dynamic Data Exchange is improved, and Level 2.5 Adobe Type Manager fonts and TrueType fonts are included.
OS/2 2.1 provides support for Windows applications with Object Linking and Embedding capabilities if they run in the same WIN-OS/2 session.
It costs $250, $200 as an upgrade, and the toolkit is $140.
BANYAN UP ON RS/6000s
As expected (UX No 436), Banyan Systems Inc has now signed with IBM Corp's Advanced Workstation Division to put its Vines for Unix network operating system up on the RS/6000 family — availability is slated for the first quarter of next year.
As with previous iterations, this version is a port of Banyan's Posix-compliant user services and streams-based protocol stack.
Until last year the firm Banyan's only offering was a native network operating system built upon a customised version of Unix V. 3.2 for Intel Corp iAPX-86 platforms, which hid Unix from the user.
Its first Unix port was to Santa Cruz Operation Inc Unix at the end of last year — Hewlett-Packard Co (fourth quarter), Sun Microsystems Inc (first half of next year) and now IBM RISC versions will follow.
Banyan users on these platforms will be able to take full advantage of local Unix tools and utilities.
Banyan claims some two million Vines users — Unix is less than 10% of its current business.
The company says it is looking at how emerging distributed computing and management technologies might be incorporated into its system, but says it will continue to use its own Remote Procedure Call mechanism for now.
Microsoft Corp Windows NT will be supported as a client — Banyan will wait to see how the market shapes up before making a decision to port to the server version.
HP HAS BIGGEST INSTALLATION IN EASTERN EUROPE AT HUNGARIAN STATISTICS OFFICE
Hewlett-Packard Co and the Hungarian Central Statistics Office have formally signed an $11m contract for the replacement of the Office's IBM Corp 4381 mainframe-based computer centre with an open system.
The deal was effectively concluded in November 1992, but had been pending final approval by the European Community, which is financing the project under its PHARE programme.
The Statistics Office will be supplied with a three-processor HP 9000/890 server with 512Mb along with Model 867, 847 and 817 dedicated servers, 50Gb of hard disk storage with optical and Digital Audio Tape back-up, and 210 personal computers and workstations.
Hewlett-Packard will also supply 19 Series 800 servers to the Statistics Office regional branches, each with 2Gb to 4Gb of disk storage, along with another 270 personal computers and workstations.
The systems will run Oracle and use the SAS System, Ami Pro word processor, and SPSS application tools with X25 links to the regional servers.
Hewlett-Packard is contracted to have the system up and running in six months.
Some 18 companies originally bid for contract, with Compagnie des Machines Bull SA, IBM, ICL Plc, IQSoft and VTSoft losing out in the later stages.
HP Hungary general manager Stojanov Rumen confirmed that the site would be the company's largest installation in the country.
He also claimed it was the largest open system to be employed at a statistic office in Europe, and announced that the company planned to use it as a reference site for national accounting offices in both East and Western Europe.
A project to computerise the national accounting system of Romania is currently under way, though Ruman expressed caution regarding his company's chances of winning that account.
The announcement of the deal in the ballroom of the Statistics Office in Budapest was temporarily hijacked by the European Community's ambassador to Hungary, Hans Beck, who used the occasion to dish out European Community tie pins, lecture the local press on the absence of a ‘Hungarian Way’, and launch a fierce attack on Hungary's decision to retaliate with tit-for-tat measures against an import ban on meat products introduced by the European Community two weeks ago following the discovery of foot and mouth disease in Italy.
However Hans Beck also spoke up in defence of the European Community PHARE programme in the face of attacks from local critics, many of whom view it as a means of circulating funds from the European Community to Western economic advisors and consultancy firms, delivering few tangible benefits.
Beck claimed that a stage had been reached where more cash could now be devoted to physical rather than intellectual aid and indicated that funding for the computerisation of Hungarian institutions would increase in priority.
INFORMIX STACKS UP ONLINE 6 AND 7
Informix Software Inc has unveiled technical specifications for its next generation multithreaded and databases, OnLine 6.0 and OnLine 7.0, which have been optimised for massively parallel processing systems.
OnLine 6.0, which goes into beta test in June, allows complex queries and other transactions to be subdivided across multiple processors.
It includes parallel index builds, archive and restore tables, a graphical interface for tape management routines and fault-tolerant back up functions.
Key to its framework are a series of ‘virtual processors’ that can be conditioned to handle communication, asynchronous I/O and administration transactions separately.
According to Informix, this more than triples performance because different transactions can be carried out on different processors simultaneously.
OnLine 6.0 is scheduled to ship by the end of year and will be available on Sun Microsystems Inc, IBM, Hewlett-Packard Co and Sequent Computer Systems Inc platforms.
OnLine 7.0 is Informix's full-featured massively parallel processing solution, which its co-developing with Sequent.
It is expected to go beta in March next year.
At the heart of Version 7 is the parallel database query (PDQ) technology, which enables the database to address simple and complex, CPU intensive and decision support queries.
To do this, PDQ structures data so it can be sorted, scanned and joined in parallel, breaking up large complex tasks into queues of smaller transactions that can be processed simultaneously.
OnLine 7.0 will be available exclusively for Sequent symmetric multiprocessing machines later next year.
NINE CONTENDERS FOR UI APPLICATION LINKING TECHNOLOGY REQUEST
Unix International has so far logged nine responses to its Application Linking request for technology (UX No 433), including Lotus Development Corp, which is submitting its Link, Embed and Launch to Edit (LEL) technology and Symbotics Inc.
The others are all shy about being named.
UI says most other submissions come from firms involved with COSE and the Object Management Group.
The technology, which is supposed to let users link, transfer and share objects between documents created by different Unix desktop applications and between Unix and Microsoft Corp Windows applications, is intended to become a standard feature of Unix desktop applications by the first half of 1994.
According to Mark Doran, UI's technical project manager, ALT won't be a full object-oriented specification and is only intended as a stopgap definition until the OMG delivers object linking and embedding guidelines in two years time.
However, the initial ALT specification will possess object-like characteristics to allow for further developments and support for OMG's Object Request Broker Architecture.
Application Linking Technology is similar in function to Microsoft Corp's Object Linking and Embedding specification, which allows users to cut and paste objects, text, spreadsheets, sound, video and graphics between different Windows applications.
But ALT will be designed to operate across distributed computing environments.
The biggest problem facing UI is Windows and Unix interoperability.
It is concerned about the lack of Windows technical expertise and the effect this will have on specification schedules.
Doran says ‘We haven't much technical expertise in the area of Windows and we're wary of being too invasive of its code.
If we don't get it right then developers will be very reluctant to integrate the technology’.
Other ALT concerns include developing real-time object linking and embedding techniques and improving the level of data exchange.
Full Application Linking Technology proposals will be announced on June 6.
COMPAQ, ORACLE ‘WORKING ON CLUSTERED SERVERS’
Strategic partnerships with software companies are the order of the day at Compaq Computer Corp as it tries to transform itself into a much more broadly-based systems manufacturer, and according to Computerworld, the latest is with Oracle Corp.
The US trade weekly says that Compaq and Oracle are putting together plans to develop clustered personal computer servers designed to run Oracle's Oracle7 Parallel Server Option, with first deliveries possibly as soon as the autumn.
The aim is to make clustered 80486- or Pentium-based servers an attractive alternative to systems such as the Digital Equipment Corp VAXcluster.
The concept of clustering would increase the input-output capability compared with monolithic servers, and would also enable users to consolidate proliferating local network servers, thus regaining some control.
NO SIGNIFICANT ALPHA REVENUES UNTIL 1994
Digital Equipment Corp now says it does not expect any ‘significant’ revenues from its new Alpha-based systems until the 1994 financial year which starts in July.
The rather disconcerting message comes from Bradley Allen, director of investor relations, in London last week to brief investors about the company's efforts to return to profitability through restructuring, cost-cutting and changes in technology.
He declined to make projections about fourth quarter earnings but noted that the US investment community ‘expects us to be profitable in the fourth quarter.’
He also said that customers were enthusiastic about the new Alpha-based systems, adding that five major database vendors had committed to supporting the RISC chip.
The company also reports continuing strong sales of its Mips RISC-based systems in Europe and Asia, even though it is moving its product lines over to the Alpha AXP RISC.
HEWLETT-PACKARD EDGES GINGERLY TOWARDS UNIX SVR4 COMPLIANCE…
By William Fellows
Hewlett-Packard Co, the company which has an evangelizing belief that COSE is the key to its future Unix strategy, is now confident enough to admit that it is  unlikely to incorporate any of the Open Software Foundation's current operating system technology into its own HP-UX Unix system software.
Future microkernel systems excepted — HP hasn't decided which flavour of that particular technology it will adopt — the firm says that it, like IBM Corp (both OSF co-founders)‘has no plans to move to OSF/1.’
Moreover, the firm has indicated an intent to move towards greater (if not full) compliance with the rival Unix SVR4 kernel from Unix System Labs, and adopt the System V Interface Definition version 3 in HP-UX 10.
(It's worth remembering that Unix System Labs has maintained from the beginning that COSE would eventually result in an agreement on the kernel, namely SVR4 or its descendent (UX No 430)).
Whether HP will actually licence SVR4 or a subsequent implementation from USL remains to be seen, but its intent is to step up from the current Unix V.3.2, SVID 2-derived HP-UX version 9.03 operating system — which includes multithreading support from AT&T Unix — to a COSE-compliant, USL Unix-based system during the first half of next year is clear.
It thinks it would still be able to offer OSF application compliance via the COSE specifications it'll implement.
HP-UX 10.0 had been scheduled for release December, but that was before COSE came along and re-wrote the rules of engagement.
HP refuses to be drawn into a debate about the kernel, insisting ‘it isn't the issue.’
HP expects COSE to deliver a measure of source code compatibility for applications across various Unix architectures in its initial guise — a binary compatible environment allowing applications to run on multiple platforms is seen as the net result of future COSE specifications.
…
MULTIPROCESSING ON THE DESKTOP IS HP's ‘BALANCING ACT’
Hewlett-Packard Co denies there is any pressure on it to deliver multiprocessing workstations despite the hype surrounding Sun Microsystems Inc's latest salvo of desktops and servers which use multiple SuperSparc CPUs.
It says Sun needs multiprocessing desktop solutions because the Mountain View, California-based company can't get competitive performance from uniprocessor implementations of the Texas Instruments Inc SuperSparc RISC, unlike HP's own 9000 series 700 top-end uniprocessor workstations which use the 99MHz PA RISC 7100.
Moreover, HP is not yet convinced that the market is ready for such advanced technologies on the desktop.
In its experience most workstations are employed as single-user (albeit multitasking) solutions and in any case — as Sun is only too aware (UX No 436)— there is very little application software around optimised for multiprocessing architectures.
HP does offer multiprocessing on the 9000 series 800 servers and although it already has multiprocessing desktops up and running in the labs, the company says it is still in the process of deciding whether to bring these to market sooner or later.
The company is cutting its multiprocessing teeth on this technology and the parallelising software it has developed for the clustering solutions it now offers.
A desktop multiprocessing campaign, however, will require much greater resources, the company believes.
‘Its a balancing act,’ according to HP's UK workstation business manager, Peggy Heppelmann.
She believes HP has now carved itself enough of a breathing space to be able to consider various options at both ends of the market.
If multiprocessing desktops are on the agenda, and all indications are that they will appear later — ie next year — rather than sooner, then they'll definitely use a higher performance PA RISC 7100 part (currently at 99MHz) that HP will first introduce in a new uniprocessor system.
Multiprocessors should perform at least twice as fast as the current top-end Model 755 workstation which goes to 150 SPECfp92 and 80 SPECin92.
HP says its current HP-UX 9.0.3 implementation already incorporates multithreading technology from Unix V.3.2, although that's not a full multiprocessing versions — like Unix SVR4 MP — that it would probably require.
…
HUMMINGBIRD TO FLY ‘BY JANUARY’ WITH MAC-LIKE ENVIRONMENT
Meanwhile, HP also has its entry-level, low-cost PA RISC 7100LC CPU on the burner.
The part was expected to have materialised in a low-end  50MHz to  70MHz Hummingbird machine that had been talked up for the end of this quarter (UX No 414).
Heppelmann says they will now appear anytime between September and next January, claiming HP's existing £3,877, low-end 715/33 desktop remains very competitive with other entry-level systems, including Sun's £3,655 Tsunami-based SparcClassic and IBM Corp's £3,664 RS/6000 220W.
As well as milking the 715/33 for all its worth, HP says it remains hard at work on developing what it says will be an Apple Mac-like Unix environment for the thing, in addition to the on-board multimedia hardware it is supposed to incorporate.
The 7100LC Hummingbird CPU has been configured for both big- and little-endian application software, encouraging speculation that is being styled to accommodate Microsoft Corp Windows NT — to which HP has not yet committed on its PA RISC lines — as well as Unix.
The mass market box is expected to come in well below the $5,000 — £4,000 — mark.
HP says it is preparing the appropriate  channels to move the volume box through, which it says must be in place before the thing is launched.
NEC HAS LOW-POWER VR4200 R-SERIES RISC
Out to do a bit of Pentium party-pooping last week were NEC Corp and MIPS Technologies Inc, with launch of the low-power 64-bit VR4200 RISC, which dissipates less than 1.5W, making it suitable for battery-powered portables capable of running Windows NT.
NEC said it plans volume production of about 10,000 units a month in the spring of 1994, increasing to about 30,000 a month by early 1995.
Samples due late this year will be $72.
T5 WILL BE R5000
Meanwhile, it turns out that Mips Technologies Inc's next generation T5 iteration of the R series RISC is what will be released next year as the R5000, not the R10000 as the company had previously indicated (UX No 377).
Mips has rallied all of its fabrication licencees to help with development of the T5, which, at least in its initial guise, is touted as a general purpose CPU for workstations and servers that'll be out next year (UX No 436).
In addition to the low-power VR4200 — see above — Mips and its Silicon Graphics Inc parent have already released machine based upon on a high-end TFP variant of the R4000 optimised for floating point performance (UX No 421).
Indeed, Silicon Graphics is understood to have added an instruction to the Mips architecture for TFP, allowing multiplication and addition functions to be performed in a single batch rather than as separate operations, speeding floating point throughput.
CDC WORKS WITH GRAU ON UNIX ROBOT LIBRARY
Control Data Systems Inc is working with Grau Automation GmbH to develop a Unix version of its Automatic Tape Library, Abba — Abba is also marketed by Hitachi Data Systems Ltd.
Although Abba is not restricted to any one medium, covering magnetic tape, VHS cassettes, optical disks and streamers, up till now, it has only been used in IBM Corp MVS mainframe and Siemens Nixdorf Informationssysteme AG BS2000 environments.
However, German and US software developers are currently working together to enable both Abba/E and newly-released Abba/2 to operate in Unix environments.
Control Data is using Openvision's — formerly Discos — Unitree distributed hierarchical storage management software and its own Aria Volume Manager, which controls the media and drives separately from Unitree.
According to Control Data, this should give customers the chance to use the most suitable medium for their requirements.
The first Abba/E systems running under Unitree are expected by the fourth quarter of 1993.
SUNSOLUTIONS OPENS UK ARM, HAS SHOWME 1.1
SunSolutions, Sun Microsystems Inc's desktop computer conferencing unit has launched version 1.1 of its ShowMe white board system for Sparc systems.
The shared conference board allows disparate users to simultaneously view and annotate documents and drawings over TCP/IP networks.
A ten user licence is $1,100, though free single user licences are being thrown in with every Sparcstation LX or SparcClassic bought before the end of June.
SunSolutions has also opened its first office outside the US — Andrew Rattigan is to head a North European operation based at Sun's UK headquarters in Bagshot, Surrey.
Rattigan will be responsible for ShowMe in Ireland, Sweden, Norway, Finland, Denmark, Belgium, Luxembourg and the Netherlands: he now won't be heading over to Moscow to work at Sun's long-planned Commonwealth of Independent States operation (UX No 424).
SunSolutions has some other workgroup conferencing packages in the works which it will reveal in a couple of months.
The company plans Solaris x86, Windows and Windows NT ports of these and the ShowMe system, versions for other RISC workstations thereafter.
It's currently recruiting a Paris-based Central European manager who'll be responsible for French, German, Italian, Spanish and other markets.
SunSolutions claims 900 ShowMe licencees across Europe.
EUROPEAN ROUNDUP
Sources say Unify Corp is trying to offset bad end of year results by cutting jobs in the UK and Germany.
Six people have been made redundant at its European Headquarters in Egham, Surrey and two sales staff have gone from its office in Munich already.
According to one informed source, Microsoft Corp partner Insignia Solutions Inc, has not done a stroke of work on its ‘WABI-like’ SoftPC native Windows-on-Unix solution (UX No 434) because it's been too busy  trying to fix NT.
Ten month old start up (UX No 433), OpenVision Inc, Pleasanton, California, is spreading its wings already and plans to open a UK office in September to market OpenV*OPSS, its Unix-based security systems management software.
I/O board manufacturer, Digiboard Inc has introduced a new Unix-based 2Port intelligent controller that supports SCO Xenix/Unix, USL SVR4, Univel Inc UnixWare and Microsoft Corp Windows NT.
Its priced at £235 and UK distributors include Ingram Micro Ltd, Milton Keynes, and InterQuad Ltd, Slough.
+ 49 2203 81083.
London-based Andersen Consulting Ltd has now released Foundation for Cooperative Processing 2.0, its client/server application development tool.
New modules include Foundation Design, a design and analysis tool; Foundation Construction, a code generator for target environments and Foundation Production, a Unix  communications module.
UK firm Scientific Software Ltd, London, has released B-GUL 2.1, an object oriented GKS-based graphics library for Unix.
Enhancements include drop down shadows for piecharts, bar charts, graphics backgrounds and note facilities for bar charts.
Ing C Olivetti & Co SpA has now sold a block of 5.6% of its ordinary shares to Digital Equipment Corp, bringing DEC's holding in Olivetti to almost 10% and fulfilling the agreement concluded last year, which gives the Italian privileged access to DEC's Alpha RISC.
DEC paid well over the odds for the shares — Olivetti says that 28.53m shares were sold to DEC at 4,547.4 lire per share, which compared with a lowly 1,340 lire price in the market at the time of the transaction.
DEC bought 4.03% on the original completion, and 1.89% on the open market last month.
PeopleSoft Inc, Walnut Creek, California, plans to open a UK operation over the next couple coming months.
UK systems integrator turned software developer Protocol Solutions Ltd, Fareham, Hampshire, has set up Protocol Graphics Ltd to market ProLink, its own MS-DOS-to-Unix emulation product.
According to Protocol Solutions, ProLink enables users to interoperate between MS-DOS and Unix operating environments, providing multiple window access to Unix, customised graphical front-ends, document image processing and distributed fax software.
Protocol Graphics expects to target health and local government markets.
Its scheduled for release in June.
No prices have been set.
+44 489 885950.
Logica Plc is letting the Callserver Unix-based speech and call processing activities developed at its Cambridge research lab go in a management buyout for £187,000 and up to £1.3m over the next five years.
The new Vocalis Ltd starts life with 13 employees.
It's thought Sun Microsystems Inc's long-awaited Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) wholly-owned subsidiary based in Moscow will be formally announced at the beginning of the company's financial year in August (UX No 424): headed by Robert Hall, the four-strong team is awaiting phone lines and the refurbishment of offices it has leased in the Russin capital — they're working out of their own apartments at the moment.
Hitachi Ltd is to plug SoftBench, Hewlett-Packard Co's CASE environment, into the next version of its ObjectIQ object development environment which runs on HP workstations (UX No 359).
Hitachi Europe hopes the move will double its 10 sales of the system over the coming year — it recently won Belgium's Bank Krediet as a customer in a $4.2m deal.
Santa Clara, California-based Mercury Interactive Corp has opened a UK subsidiary in London: Mercury International UK Ltd will market the firm's XRunner, an application test suite.
+44 71 329 8652.
Xylogics Inc has opened a new office in Munich, Germany, that'll serve the central European German speaking countries, including Austria and Switzerland.
The disappointing turnout of visitors to London's Solutions for Workstations Show earlier this month has led to redundancies at show organiser EMAP Exhibitions, including show manager, John Howe: Sun Microsystems Inc has already declined a space at next year's event — if it happens at all.
The Ford Motor Company, which two years ago chose the Motorola 88000 as the RISC processor for its electronic engine control modules in preference to Intel Corp (UX No 338), has, as predicted (UX No 374), switched its  allegiance to to Motorola/IBM Power PC architecture.
Ford says the electronics content in automobiles will double over the next decade, and that it is working with Motorola on future generations of PowerPC microcontrollers, including embedded controllers for engine management.
Next year it will launch EEC-V, its fifth-generation ‘powertrain’ control system.
The move is bad news for the future of the 88000, which saw the deal as the guarantee of its future.
X-terminal maker Tandbeg Data Display of Norway and peripherals-maker MacroTek GmbH of Dortmund, Germany, are also endorsing the PowerPC.
Intersel Inc, a joint venture of response fulfillment house Response Technology and market tester Strathmore Group, is getting out of the ground in Waltham, Massachusetts.
The 26-person start-up claims most computer companies aren't following up on their leads properly, blowing wads of money in the process.
Intersel, which is targeting software Ingres Computer Systems Inc's Ingres Corp has integrated Unix System Labs' Tuxedo transaction processing monitor in with its applications development tool, Windows4GL.
The work, done in conjunction with ICL, makes Ingres/Windows4GL-TP compliant with both Tuxedo and the X/Open XATMI and TX transaction processing standards.
UK prices start from £3,000 for a typical development licence, although existing Windows4GL users can upgrade for £400.
Stratus Computer Inc has opened a Unix Porting and Technical Center in Dublin, Ireland — it will offer customers and software developers the facilities and personnel to convert their applications to run under the Stratus FTX fault-tolerant Unix operating system.
UK firm Riverside Machines Ltd, Cambridge, has an Intel Corp i860XR-based Sbus accelerator card for Sun Sparcstations and compatibles — 25MHz, 33MHz and 40MHz versions with either 2Mb or 8Mb memory are priced at from £2,500. +44 223 321 083.
UK, London-based Communic8 Ltd has introduced PKZIP 2.0, a high speed file compression and decompression package for Unix.
Developer kits are available now for Santa Cruz Operation Inc Unix, IBM AIX, Interactive Unix, Sunsoft Inc Solaris and Hewlett-Packard Co HP-UX.
+44 81 878 0066.
Yacc consultancy, Leeds, is to distribute the Free Software Foundation's GNU source code CD-ROM in the UK: the compact disk includes Emacs — the extensible, customisable real-compiler; GNU utilities, MIT X Window X11R5 and MIT Scheme LISP dialect.
There are no pre-compiled programs on the CD except for some MS-DOS packages.
The CD costs £266 for commercial organisations, £66 for individuals.
+44 532 871414.
Bagshot, Surrey-based consultancy OutSource International Ltd is to establish and manage a network of UK resellers for Transputer-based massively parallel database systems builder White Cross Systems Ltd: the aim is to generate some £20m in revenues for White Cross over the next three years; OutSource is recruiting UK resellers through its ChannelSource Europe arm, and they will target medium sized customers in the finance, retail and insurance sectors; European White Cross channels in France, Germany, Italy and Switzerland are set to follow.
ACT Logsys, the systems integration arm of ACT Group plc, has appointed John Totman — formerly Director of European Programmes at X/Open — to head up open systems development in its local government division, DSS Information Technology Services Agency.
Silicon Graphics Inc's Iris Explorer 2.0 graphics application builder is now up on Sun Microsystems Inc workstations — versions for Cray, DEC, HP, IBM, machines will follow.
It's available from UK, Oxford-based Numerical  Algorithms Group, which is co-ordinating the porting work — prices start at $5,750.
Data Sciences UK Ltd, Farnborough, Hampshire, has introduced Murco, a stock-forecasting and inventory management tool for Unix.
+44 252 544321.
Hoskyns Group Plc, London, is to distribute New Zealand firm Pinnacle Software Ltd's a financial and manufacturing software tools in the UK.
TADPOLE SWINGS TO PROFIT, UNDERPINS SHARES WITH PLANS FOR ADR OFFERING
Following Tadpole Technology Plc's flotation on the UK Stock Exchange last December and due to interest shown in its shares in the US, the Cambridge-based company intends to appoint US financial advisors with a view to obtaining a New York listing for its shares in American Depository Receipt form.
Tadpole's US subsidiary generates approximately 85% of its turnover, while the rest comes from Europe, including the UK.
The UK handles direct sales for most of Europe, excluding France, where Tadpole has another smaller subsidiary.
And the operations in France support and work with the company's reseller community, which bring in the bulk of its European revenues.
For the first six months of its financial year, Tadpole turned round from losses of £1.4m last time to pre-tax profits of £26,800 this.
Turnover rose 93.5% to £8.9m, and the company's order book to March 31 stood at £5.5m.
Deputy group chief executive, J A Woan attributed its success to careful cost control, strong sales of its Sparcbook notebook computer, and a healthy OEM business.
In fact, Sparcbook sales were so good, Woan said, that OEM revenues have fallen as a percentage of group total to 37% in 1993 from 48% in 1992.
Tadpole sells board-level products OEM to the likes of General Electric Co Inc and Polaroid Corp.
In an effort to expand this business further, it has just signed a joint marketing agreement with the Sparc Technology Business Unit of Sun Microsystems Computer Corp, which sells Sparc technology and expertise to third parties, but will focus on higher volume, standard board designs, while marketing Tadpole's skills in complex custom board designs.
Still, the vast majority of Tadpole's profits come from its systems business, including Sparcbook product, portable computers, and fees from licensing deals.
And chief executive George Grey is confident that current growth levels can be maintained, ‘All the group's development projects are on track, including the notebook workstation being undertaken for IBM Corp.
The current indications for those projects due to bring revenues in the next financial year enable us to look forward to 1994 with considerable optimism.’
JAMES RIVER PLANS MP VERSION OF ESIX UNIX
Minneapolis, Minnesota-based James River Group Inc, the new owner of Everex Systems Inc's Esix desktop Unix, will release a new version of the operating system configured for multiprocessing in September.
The firm, which acquired Esix Systems Inc in January after Everex filed for Chapter 11 protection (UX No 421), is also setting up offices and distribution channels in Europe.
According to James River, Esix 2.0 is a character-based implementation of Unix System Laboratories SVR 4.2 MP aimed predominately at small businesses.
It'll include support for Novell Inc's IPX protocol and James River's own personal computer-to-Unix communication software ICE 10+ and ICE TCP, which lets users access Esix from MS-DOS personal computers.
An add-on graphical user interface is available.
The firm has also signed its first European distributor for Esix, UK firm Custom Business Systems Ltd, London, and will cut other deals in France, Germany, Scandinavia, Italy and Greece.
Two support and maintenance offices will be up and running on the continent by the end of year.
+1 612 339 2521 or +44 71 323 2297.
NIPPON DEC TEAMS WITH ASCII
Nippon Digital Equipment Corp has teamed with the Japan distributor for Informix Software Inc, ASCII Corp, to sell Informix relational database software and the Wingz spreadsheet on its Ultrix and Alpha systems.
New versions Informix 5.0 and Wingz 1.2J are to be converted for the Alpha AXP systems and will be announced this summer.
Sales and technical support for these two products will be done by Nippon DEC, which hopes to make 200 sales of each product in the first year.
ON TO $20,000m AS HEWLETT-PACKARD CHEERS WALL STREET WITH SECOND QUARTER
Despite storming figures that saw the company report its first $5,000m quarter, and just miss its first $10,000m half, putting it on track for close to $20,000m this year, chief executive Lewis Platt is not cheering his head off.
He says he believes ‘upward pressure on the cost of sales is likely to continue’ for the rest of the year and that the company faces a ‘very mixed and uncertain economic environment,’intense competition and rapid market changes.
Total orders for the second quarter, to April 30, were 28.5% up at $5,370m; orders for computer products rose 32.9% to $4,120m, making it clear that the company, where computers accounted for less than half of the business only a few years back, is continuing progressively to become more and more a pure computer company.
The rapid pace of growth remains crucially important, because cost of goods sold, as a percentage of net revenue, was 58.8% in the second quarter, compared with 53.6% a year ago, and put this down to to competitive pricing pressures, manufacturing ramp-ups for new products, and an ‘ongoing shift in revenue mix’ to products with higher cost of sales as a percentage of revenue.
Total employment during the quarter rose 700, but operating expenses went in the opposite direction from cost of sales, 30.3% of revenues compared with 32.5% in the year-ago quarter, as the company continued the remorseless cost-cutting drive.
Still, the $1.38 a share for the quarter was a pleasant surprise for most analysts, whose estimates ranged from $1.10 a share to $1.35.
Second quarter net profits were up 7.4% at $347.0m on turnover that rose 21.8% at $5,096m.
Mid-term net profit rose 107% to $608.0m on turnover that rose 20.2% at $9,669m.
HP says that in the UK, growth in orders was a 39%, and that orders for Unix systems are more than double this time last year.
Exports from the UK are up 16%, 80% of everything sold is now new business, and all new business is on the Unix side — as price-performance improves two-fold every year, it is selling four times as many Unix boxes each year.
HP may be doing very well with its Unix computers (it is), but its out-and-out winner is of course the printer business: printer orders in the quarter were up a phenomenal 33% on the 1992 second quarter at $4,100m.
YOKOGAWA HEWLETT-PACKARD WINS MITSUI TO MARKET OF SOFTBENCH
The traditional Japanese trading companies constantly flirt with the computer industry, and trading giant Mitsui & Co has signed up with Yokogawa Hewlett-Packard Co to market Hewlett-Packard Co's HP SoftBench software engineering system for integrating development tools.
With the agreement Mitsui becomes the largest distributor of SoftBench in Japan.
Mitsui already sells the language development environment from Xerox Corp spin-out ParcPlace Systems Inc.
Mitsui will sell and support SoftBench in co-operation with OGIS Systems Inc, an information systems subsidiary of Osaka Gas Co.
The price in Japan for SoftBench is $5,400, and the two companies hope to be able to sell over 2,000 copies a year.
…
AS FUJITSU LICENSES SOFTBENCH
All roads seem to lead to Hewlett-Packard Co these days, and the company has now also won Fujitsu Ltd as a licensee for SoftBench — the first licence on the thing in Japan.
Fujitsu will create software engineering products based on the SoftBench Framework for use on its own systems.
Other SoftBench licensees are IBM Corp, Informix Software Inc, Control Data Systems Inc and Objectivity Inc, Siemens Nixdorf Informationssysteme AG and the Institute of Information Industry in Taiwan.
MINIGRAMS
Mercury Interactive Corp, Santa Clara, California, has introduced a Microsoft Corp Windows NT version of its application testing environment, TestRunner: prices start at $3,000 per seat.
+ 1 408 987 0117.
MapInfo Inc, Troy, New York, is shipping its MapBasic Development Environment for Unix calling it the first programming language for GUI systems allowing corporate developers to customise desktop mapping applications for a given industry or department.
It also has its mapping application, MapInfo 2.0 up on Sun and HP platforms and supporting remote procedure call (RPC) operations.
MapInfo is currently priced at $1,800; $1,500 for each additional site license.
The development environment is $1,600. +1 518 274 6000
The Usenix Summer 1993 Technical Conference is scheduled for June 21–25 in Cincinnati, Ohio discussing areas such as the Windows NT architecture.
Objectivity Inc has integrated its Objectivity/DB database with Persistence Software Inc's Persistence application development environment, claiming at allows developers to write object-oriented applications that work will with existing relational and object databases.
UnixWorld claims that an IBM Corp project code named Renoir will produce a CMOS 390-on-a-chip that the company will start shipping as a cheap parallel processing database computer by the end of the year.
It's supposed to gang as many as 100 Renoirs together and come with its own parallel versions of IMS, DB2, CICS and MVS.
Initially it'll be connected to existing mainframes.
Supposedly it'll run legacy software without recompile though that would improve performance.
Hewlett-Packard Co has named Glenn Osaka general manager of its Cooperative Computing Systems Division, its integrated client/server business systems, replacing Carol Mills, now general manager of HP's General Systems Division.
Osaka remains general manager of the company's Commercial Systems Division, a separate business unit.
Sun Microsystems Inc promises new graphics and image processing subsystems that'll take  advantage of its new-found multiprocessing prowess.
Sun used to say ‘the network is the computer’— now it thinks ‘the network is the business.’
The organisation, administration and result recording of the 1994 World Cup, to be held in the US, is being handled by Sun Sparcserver 1000s.
Using the Public Windows Interface self-certification kits promised next month, independent software vendors which find their application(s) don't run are being asked look at the source, find the undocumented Windows calls being made and give them to Sun which will add them to the PWI specification.
Lucid Inc, Menlo Park, California, has appointed David Banks, president and chief executive officer of Versant Object Technology Inc, to its board of directors.
Its also hired John DeArmon as director of strategic accounts and Simon Clephan as director of  worldwide sales.
Denver, Colorado-based Unidata Inc has hired Allan Snell, former director of Intel software marketing at SunSoft Inc, as vice president of marketing.
Santa Cruz Operation Inc's cut-down version of Open Desktop, ODT 3.0 Lite (UX No 426), is priced at £500 — $700 — on CD-ROM, £700 — $900 — on tape or disks.
As expected (UX No 423), Pyramid Technology Corp has started shipping Valence Cluster, its clustered configuration of MIServer and ES Server machines supporting Oracle Corp's Parallel database server Oracle7.
Sun Microsystems Inc's SunPics printing and imaging planet has introduced the firm's first colour printer, the PostScript-compatible NeWSprinter CL+, for use with Sparc systems: users can adjust colours and tones on-screen with SunPic's BalanceTool software, which will be integrated with the Eastman Kodak Co ColorSense colour management system which Sun is integrating into future versions of Solaris.
The four-colour, 360dpi ink jet system includes NeWSprint 2.5 printing software and runs with Solaris 2. x — prices start at $4,000.
Samsung Software America Inc has spun out its Replix fax software solution into a separate business under Dr Hikyu Lee, former president and chief executive officer of SAA.
SoftLinx Inc, Westford, Massachusetts, is being bankrolled by the Samsung Group and will focus on developing fax, e-mail and voice solutions, including Replix.
SoftLinx will support Replix customers — SSA's non-Replix related activities will be folded into other Samsung US divisions.
Near-term plans include Replix 2.0, PC LAN, Windows client and SunSoft Solaris implementations.
PeopleSoft Inc is going for a secondary public offering of 1.55m shares for general corporate purposes including working capital.
Most of the shares are coming from stockholders.
Unix System Laboratories Inc is reportedly getting ready to do something serious with the Chorus Systemes SA microkernel.
ProActive Software Inc has named Pat Marriott vice president of market.
She had been director of market planning at Adobe Systems Inc.
Minnesota-based Norwest Venture Capital has opened a new California operation in Menlo Park under general partner George Still.
Its investment typically range from $500,000 to $5m.
It's interested in software, medical, retail and telecoms and has done PeopleSoft, Forte Software, Quarterdeck and Teradata. +1 415 854–6366
In the wake of falling attendance and other emerging Unix shows, Uniforum has switched its show management from Pemco to IDG World Expo for Uniforum ‘94 scheduled for March 23–25 at the Moscone Center in San Francisco.
IDG World Expo, part of the rambling Pat MacGovern empire, currently produces Object World, Sun World, MacWorld and Windows World international series.
Racing to catch up with the industry's evolution, Comdex’ owner Interface Group is launching Enterprise Computing Exposition and Conference set for Chicago's McCormick Place July 26–28 next year.
Its supposed to be focused on the seamless integration of applications, data, user interfaces and other computing resources among heterogeneous systems.
God willing, the industry might deliver on the promise.
Apple Computer Inc wants to be perfectly clear.
It's new-found strategy and alliances will make it a server player, not just a client.
Watch this space.
And people are making much of the fact the Apple's John Sculley said he expects to sell a million PowerPC Macs next year.
Market researchers focused on the firm figure it's more likely a half a million.
Microsoft Corp is developing tools to enable C and C++ developers building Windows-based  applications to also target the Apple Macintosh, allowing a common base of source code between the two systems.
The tools will provide developers the flexibility to also access APIs specific to Apple's System 7 in order to take advantage of unique System 7 features.
The toolset will include a layer that implements Windows APIs on the System 7 operating system.
Siemens Nixdorf Informationssysteme AG will show off its Unix SVR4-based DCE reference port this week at the Open Software Foundation's Challenge ‘93 meet in Boston.
This is the stuff Unix System Labs is distributing.
Meanwhile, SNI, armed with its new point-of-sale alliance with Sun (UX No 436), has picked up a $10m contract with US supermarket chain Kash n’ Karry Food Stores.
Remember we said Sun Microsystems Inc would likely trim staff?
(UX No 435) Well, it's come up with a variety of severance packages it's offering people.
One of them reportedly calls for two months severance plus a month for every year worked.
Although you have to be offered the deal, Sun could still lose some valuable people.
It apparently wants to cut a thousand from its rolls which stood at 13,381 at the end of March.
COSE has given over the organisation and running of the COSE Developers Conference, supposed to be in October, to Uniforum, leaving it to decide when and where to have it.
Theoretically, it could be held at the ‘Unix Perspectives: Conference for Enterprise Solutions’ get-together that Unix Systems Labs has in train for early November (UX 435).
We are now supposed to understand Enterprise Solutions less as a show than as a high-level executive meeting that might pass for a meeting of the Unix War College.
This is the week our sister publication, the ‘Unigram-for-NT’ goes live.
They've changed its name from the whimsical BillyGram of the beta to a more pointed ClieNT Server NEWS.
They say that aside from getting a few noses out of joint at Microsoft Corp, enough people felt BillyGram was a silly name and would prevent it from being taken seriously.
The name will live on as a department head.
Annual subscriptions are $595 in the US; £395 in the UK.
Call +1 516 759–7025 or +44 71 867 9880.
It'll make a great observation post.