

UNIX SYSTEM LABS PICKS JUNE D-DAY, WOOS IBM, HP, DEC
Unix System Laboratories Inc has picked Tuesday June 16 to launch Destiny, its desktop system now officially designated SVR4.2.
A roll-out is expected on the West Coast in either San Francisco or around San Jose, California, near the time of the Xhibition X-Windows show which will be held there that week.
USL is hoping to collect an impressive array of godparents to stand witness.
DEC, Hewlett-Packard Co and IBM have yet to agree to adopt the software, but USL is trying to get their representatives there in a show of solidarity and support for the operating system.
A magnanimous gesture from the founders of the Open Software Foundation is needed now to heal any lingering breeches in the industry.
Destiny is also their one chance to beat back the forces of the ‘Baron of Bellevue,’ Bill Gates, and his gathering Microsoft NT hordes.
Closed ranks would be USL's pay-off for recent concessions made to the Open Software Foundation's most important technologies.
USL is hoping OSF chief David Tory will make an appearance at the debut.
Definitely slated to be there are companies such as ICL plc, Ing C Olivetti & Co SpA, Unisys Corp and Univel Inc, the USL/Novell joint venture scheduled to introduce UnixWare, its own version of Destiny in September.
ICL, USL's porting partner for Destiny-on-Sparc, will reportedly take both the USL code for enterprise-style implementations and the Univel product for the low end.
Olivetti should show off Destiny on its MIPS Computer Systems Inc RISC-based platform.
USL has had Destiny, initially conceived for Intel Corp platforms, in beta test for some weeks and should start regular deliveries to its OEM customers in July.
Destiny will also represent a turning point for Adobe Systems Inc, whose Type Manager will now become part of the Unix operating system.
Adobe has always been highly protective of its source code, turning down deals rather than share it.
Although it is giving some of its ‘glue’ source to USL, most of what USL will have and what will be distributed is binary.
Adobe itself will reportedly do the ports to the various platforms for SVR4.2.
One of the items Unix System Labs and Adobe still have to sort out is whether to make Type Manager retroactively available to SVR4 licencees.
SILICON GRAPHICS GETS 10%, NEC MAYBE 5% IN NEW CONTROL DATA SYSTEMS — REST TO BE CERIDIAN
Control Data Corp last week announced plans to spin off its computer systems arm into a new company, Control Data Systems Inc, and rename the software and computer services rump of the company Ceridian Corp.
Bowing to the logic we have suggested here (UX Nos 381, 384), Silicon Graphics Inc will take a 10% stake in Control Data Systems, and NEC Corp may take a 5% stake to seal a deal under which the new company will commit to NEC's versions of the MIPS Computer Systems Inc RISC.
Control Data had been mulling the use of other RISCs, notably the Hewlett-Packard Co PA chip, but these machinations were, as the company admitted (UX No 384), a bluff to bring Silicon Graphics and NEC to the table.
The change of name to Ceridian Corp from Control Data Corp will become effective June 1.
The Control Data Systems name is effective immediately.
The split, which will be effected by issuing one share of Control Data Systems for every four Control Data held, is contingent on the agreement of Control Data's bankers.
The company is currently seeking agreement, and an extension of its credit agreement beyond the current June 30 expiry date.
Silicon Graphics has signed a letter of intent to buy 10% of Control Data Systems once it becomes an independent company.
Control Data Corp expects to record charges of about $400m against its second quarter, about $130m attributable to Control Data Systems — $115m in restructuring charges and $15m in inventory write-downs as part of the transition from the proprietary Cyber mainframes to integration of open systems and applications.
The $270m balance of the charges includes other expected losses and provisions.
Lawrence Perlman, president and chief executive, will hold the same posts at Ceridian and James Ousley, who has headed the Computer Products business for three years, will be president and chief executive of Control Data Systems.
The company plans to capitalise Control Data Systems with $50m in cash, payable when the spin-off occurs, and another $45m in cash payable in December.
There will be no material ownership or management relationship between the two after the spin-off, although they will continue to provide products and services to each other over a transition period.
Control Data Systems has applied for listing of its shares on the NASDAQ National Market System, and Silicon Graphics has entered new joint marketing and technology-sharing agreements.
It means the new Control Data Systems Inc company will start life as a $600m or so a year business, leaving its bigger sister, Ceridian Corp running at about $700m a year.
Control Data Systems will continue to sell and support Silicon Graphics and MIPS Computer Systems workstations and servers as part of its systems integration activities.
NEC and Control Data Systems intend to expand their current supercomputer marketing agreement — CDC sells NEC's SX-3 to its mainframe customers in the US and Europe — to include joint marketing and technical activities in the Unix RISC area.
IXI READIES LATEST BUNDLE OF DESKTOP TOOLS
UK company, IXI Ltd, Cambridge, will next week announce its latest product, Deskworks 1.0, a suite of integrated productivity tools targeted at heretical Sun Microsystems Inc Sparcstation users who prefer the Open Software Foundation's Motif graphical user interface over Sun's Open Look and have IXI's manager, X.desktop, installed.
Deskworks is also reportedly suitable for IBM RS/6000 workstations and file servers and the SCO Open Desktop contingent already fitted out with X.desktop.
The software includes a text editor, a time manager/calendar, a Unix mail front-end, a reminder, a calculator, a world time clock, a secure screen lock, a phone book and a chess game.
IXI is hoping to exploit corporate situations demanding a consistent Motif interface.
IXI will also be trotting out its latest release of X.desktop, version 3.5, which now supports video images so pictures of people can be encapsulated as icons.
The company says it has enhanced the user interface and reduced install time.
Deskworks will be available on Sun platforms next month and on DEC, HP and IBM systems in September, with licences ranging from $75 to $300 depending on the number of users.
The new version of X.desktop ships for Sun, HP and DEC systems in the third quarter.
DOLPHIN SPINS OUT SEPARATE UNIT TO DEVELOP SCI BUSINESS…
Following last week's licensing agreement with Convex Computer Corp, for its pioneering Scalable Coherent Interface bus architecture (UX No 386), Norsk Data affiliate, Dolphin Server Technologies AS, Oslo, Norway, has spun out a separate company, Dolphin SCI Technology AS.
Dolphin Server holds a 75% stake in the new start up — employees get the remainder — and aims to centralise all of its SCI interests in one division.
The new company is headed-up by Kare Lochsen, and the firm will operate out of its parent's offices with an initial head count of 20 staff.
The non-exclusive deal, for a few hundred thousand dollars, gives Convex design rights to Dolphin's three year old chip-independent SCI technology.
The SCI chips — made by Vitesse Semiconductor and due to prototype this Autumn — are claimed to deliver a sustained 1Gbps bandwidth between component nodes; Dolphin highlights its ability to be used both for tightly coupling processors (up to 1,000 RISCs) to memory (up to 100Mb) and input-output, and for loosely coupling distributed workstations and other subsystems, at backplane bandwidth.
In the latter case, SCI technology is described as a cheap and powerful alternative to expensive HIPPI, midrange-but-still-pricey FDDI and low-capacity Ethernet.
Initially the Dolphin SCI chip, implemented by the Norwegian firm for use with the Motorola 88000 RISC processor, comes in an 18-bit parallel copper version, but the company says several new SCI signalling schemes are currently being defined, such as a serialised fibre optical version, and a low signal swing, narrow version.
It is the interconnect's design, however, that Convex has licensed; the Richardson, Texas firm will not be buying in its chips from Dolphin, according to Convex European vice president John Hughes.
This is because Convex wants to be able to implement the technology in future generations of its proprietary C Series moderately parallel systems as well as its Hewlett-Packard Precision Architecture RISC-based massively parallel products.
Convex reckons its machines will contain some form of SCI technology by 1994.
With Convex already under its belt, Dolphin is now understood to be courting Data General Corp, and already selling SCI simulation systems and high level design language implementations to the likes of Apple Computers Inc and the Centre for Research into Nucleonics, Geneva, Switzerland.
To some extent, SCI has a rival in the Futurebus+ architecture, also an IEEE standard, born in the 1970s but only now gaining recognition: both are set to hit the market at the same time.
Dolphin admits that its going to be tough marketing two standards to the same set of people.
It believes the two will operate as hostile, parallel technologies for the time being, but anticipates some kind of interoperability between them in future.
Claiming SCI is five times faster than Futurebus+, Dolphin marketing director Lars Lauritzsen says ‘Futurebus+ has been quite a disappointment…for us the questions it set to answer remain unsolved’.
…
BUT LACK OF CASH FORCES ITS OWN SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT ON TO HOLD
However, with cash in short supply, Dolphin has had to put some of its own SCI product development on hold for the time being, until, as it hopes more cash comes rolling in.
Dolphin recorded a loss for 1991 but expects to break even this year on revenues of around £10m.
Dolphin's Motorola Inc 88110-based Triton SCI Server, which was scheduled to ship in the first quarter of this year, will be kept under wraps for at least another year, the company says.
It needs hard cash from its SCI spin-out venture to get that effort going again.
AUSPEX DOUBLES THROUGHPUT OF NETWORK FILE SERVERS
Network server manufacturer Auspex is boasting that the latest addition to its product line can process more than 2,250 NFS input/output operations per second — five times the maximum NFS performance of Sun's Sparcserver 690MP.
Holding the same price as earlier models, the new Auspex NS 5550, shown at the recent Interop conference in Washington DC, doubles the throughput of the older NS 5000.
Auspex says it needed to boost the power to keep ahead of the demand of the latest high-powered workstations, such as the HP 9000/730 and Sun's Sparcstation 10s.
The increase has been achieved through upgrading the Ethernet and file processors used in the machines from 20MHz Motorola 68020s to 40MHz 68040s.
Up to four Ethernet processors (supporting eight Ethernets), one or two file processors (with 16Mb metadata cache memory) and up to three storage processors (for 30 SCSI I/O channels and 81Gb storage) can be configured into the servers, which also use a Sparc-based Unix host processor.
Field upgrades are available.
The machines now offer optional redundant power supplies, along with standard fault-resilient features such as disk mirroring and hot-pluggable tapes and disk drives.
US price is £124,900 for the base configuration.
For existing users, $10,900 buys a file processor upgrade, $12,900 for Ethernet processor upgrades.
UK distributor is Thame Microsystems (UX No 384).
XBASE STANDARDS PUSH ‘WON'T SOLVE dBASE COMPATIBILITY PROBLEMS’, CLAIMS RECITAL
With the dBase world now concentrated in the powerful hands of Borland International (since its Ashton-Tate acquisition), Microsoft Corp (with its pending Fox Software Inc acquisition) and Computer Associates International (which made a move on Clipper developer Nantucket Corp at the beginning of May), efforts to develop the various languages into an ANSI standard under the Xbase tag have now begun at the American National Standards Institution in Scottsdale, Arizona.
Some estimates say that up to 9.5 million people are now using some type of dBase, yet the three main variants are not cross-compatible.
Xbase is being coined as a generic name for ‘dBase compatibility’, the aim being that all compiled forms of Xbase will be compliant.
Aside from the big three, the move is being supported by Wordtech Inc, Emerald Bay Group, Dvorak Development Corp and Recital Corp.
Bracknell, UK-based Recital (which has a US subsidiary in Boston), which started off back in 1988 with the aim of helping dBase, FoxBase and Clipper users to migrate to Unix and VAX/VMS platforms, welcomes Xbase, as it removes the possibilities of legal threats over dBase.
But as for cross-compatibility, Recital already has it.
The latest release, Recital 7.2, offers a ‘GUI-like’ front-end to the 4GL and database product for character-based terminals.
An X-Window version is under development.
Meanwhile, Recital has launched its first client/server version, allowing DEC users to use the Recital 4GL as a front-end to an RdB database.
Unix versions will follow at intervals of eight weeks for Oracle, Informix (C-ISAM), Ingres and Sybase.
Recital is also working on a version for Microsoft's NT.
European general manager Barry Betts hints darkly that Microsoft has great plans for a combination of NT and FoxBase, and wonders whether the current compatibility problems will ever be sold, Xbase or not.
‘If you're HP, and you haven't got a guarantee that it will run, then get Sybase’, he says, optimistically.
KODAK's INTERACTIVE HAS PORTABLE TCP/IP CODE
Interactive Systems Corp — the Naperville, Illinois-based end of the dismembered company and the bit that still belongs to Eastman Kodak Co, has come out with Streamware TCP, a portable implementation of TCP/IP aimed at designers and integrators of distributed systems.
Streamware TCP is a processor- and operating system-independent source code protocol.
It includes the Streamware Kernel that enables the networking protocol to be used in proprietary and embedded environments, the firm says.
Streamware TCP is a full Streams implementation written in ANSI C and includes source code for TCP/IP, ‘most’ popular TCP applications, an SNMP agent, a Streams emulator for non-Unix operating systems, and also a skinny real-time executive for use in intelligent board-level products that are missing an operating system.
It is currently available and tested on Intel Corp iAPX-86, Motorola Inc 68000 and 88000, Advanced Micro Devices Inc Am29000, and IBM Corp System 370.
The firm says it has been adapted and tested for the MTOS, VRTX, VMEexec and other real-time operating systems.
Chase Research, Formation and Specialix will be integrating it.
ALLIANT FIRES 165 EMPLOYEES, FILES CHAPTER 11 BANKRUPTCY
The announcement a week ago that the company was seeking new equity financing made it pretty clear that the end was nigh for Littleton, Massachusetts-based massively parallel systems builder Alliant Computer Systems Corp, and the company announced last week that the boom has fallen when it fired all but 50 of its 225 employees and filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.
The company, building massively parallel scientific Unix machines around the Intel Corp 80860 RISC, will suspend development and most direct sales of new computer systems, while continuing to provide service and sales of systems and expansion products to its installed customer base of some 600 worldwide.
About half the 60 remaining employees are at the Massachusetts headquarters, the rest are in worldwide service locations.
A small management group will remain to prepare and manage a reorganisation plan while the company is in bankruptcy court protection.
A small European operation remains in the UK, the French office is likely to close.
The decision to go chapter 11 was made on the 21st of May — the company's 10th birthday.
SUN's SUNEXPRESS TO MARKET TADPOLE SPARCBOOK DIRECT
Tadpole Technology Plc, Cambridge, UK reports that its Austin, Texas-based US operation has won a singular accolade from Sun Microsystems Inc: Sun's Lincoln, Massachusetts-based SunExpress unit is to carry the Sparcbook Unix-based notebook computer, offering it to end users and resellers via its SunExpress telemarketing sales operation.
The Sparcbook will be promoted by Sun Express via its quarterly catalogue and outbound telesales force.
Orders are being taken now with typical delivery of three to five days.
Sparcbook runs Solaris 1.0 with Open Windows 3, and costs $4,950 with 8Mb CPU, 85Mb disk and grey scale display; 16Mb and 32Mb CPUs, 240Mb disk and colour are also available.
Tadpole is offering a free copy of Lotus 1–2-3 with its Sparcbook notebooks as part of a Power Perks promotion.
And Tadpole is opening up Australia and New Zealand for its SparcBook notebook, signing Sydney-based UniXpress Pty, a Unix distributor, to handle the market.
IBM AND APPLE SEEK PARTNERS FOR MULTIMEDIA STANDARDS GROUP
IBM Corp and Apple Computer Inc are trolling Japan and Europe looking for folks willing to join a consortium to create a multimedia standard around a cross-platform compound document specification and ‘Kaleida Script,’ a common scripting language based on AppleScript that would be co-developed, according to Electronic Engineering Times.
They are also being offered a piece of the IBM/Apple multimedia joint venture Kaleida.
NEC, Matsushita, Hitachi, Sony and Sharp have all confirmed that they have been approached, the paper said, with Philips and Thomson pegged as likely candidates.
The aim is to set up a core consortium group by the end of the month.
Dues are said to be $3.8m a head.
SQL GROUP SHIPS SNAPSHOT OF ITS ACCESS SPECIFICATION — OTHER DEVELOPMENTS ON HOLD
Following news that the SQL Access Group is slowing down work on Phases 3 of its SQL  Specification (UX No 385), the group now says it is changing direction to focus on market demands, and admits it got carried away with the academics of development.
Taking a leave of absence, SAG says all work on versions three, four and five of the SQL specification have been put on hold for the next nine months.
Now six months behind in getting version one out the door, SAG has just pulled together the first snapshot of technologies which the specification will use.
That has begun shipping to members, and SAG optimistically expects products complying to the specification to be around by the end of year.
SAG vice chairman, Howard Cohen says ‘it wasn't the smartest thing to do, pushing ahead with the specifications, but we're now concentrating on market requirements.’
Work on version two is continuing and will, the group says, include TCP/IP and Ethernet functions as well as the Common Level Interface, part of its strategy to get the two protocols interoperating with each other.
CLI has been strongly promoted by Microsoft Corp, which SAG says, will be at the heart of Microsoft's Open Database Connectivity (OBDC) data accessing system, running under Windows.
CLI is currently out in review form at the moment — the group says it has to be fine-tuned before it can be released to members in July.
NOW DEC PLANS PARALLEL CLUSTERS OF ALPHA STATIONS
Digital Equipment Corp is only a few strides behind IBM Corp in the concept of clustering workstations to create highly parallel configurations.
IBM has got to the point where it has baptised the concept of the RS/6000 Cluster Service Offering, but a twist in DEC's plan is to enable alien workstations to be included in the cluster — according to Electronic News, it conceives of creating clusters of Alpha-based workstations within one to two years and then to move on to embracing alien machines, with the benefit that stations could be used as stand-alone units when no parallel work was running.
The company is banking on communications technology arriving in time so that the dispersed machines can be linked together at a speed of at least 100 Mbytes per second — FDDI runs at 100 M-bits per second, and the company is looking at Asynchronous Transfer Mode, the emerging broadband fixed-cell packet system for the links.
DEC suggests that in the second generation, workstations from Sun Microsystems Inc, Hewlett-Packard Co, IBM and Silicon Graphics Inc might all be included in the clusters, which suggests that the Open Software Foundation's Distributed Computing Environment will play an important role.
The company even acknowledges that its software might one day be used to cluster workstations that were all alien, with no Alpha-based ones in there.
Following its agreements with Maspar Computer Corp and Intel Corp, DEC now has three more conventional massively parallel streams on the go — the Single Instruction-Multiple Data machines that it will build using MasPar's chip, the Multiple Instruction-Multiple Data machines it plans using Intel's 80860XP chip and technology, and an Alpha-based massively parallel machine set for 1995.
DEC PUTS ON ITS TUX TO DO TP BUSINESS
Last week DEC stopped flirting with Unix System Labs Inc's transaction processor monitor, Tuxedo, and officially became part of ‘the club,’ a die-in-the-wool Tuxedo reseller in hot pursuit of the commercial user.
Initially TPframe 1.0 is coupled with DEC's Ultrix/SQL relational database, incorporating technology from Ingres, and client code to speed OLTP application development.
Currently it supports a single host system.
DEC plans to offer a multiple-host distributed client-server version.
The software runs on DECsystem 5100s, 5000s Models 200 and 240, 5500s and 5900s with pricing starting at $3,530. 4GL tools are expected.
The company also introduced a high-capacity Ultrix/RISC-based StorageServer 100 fileserver combining re-writable optical and magnetic media with storage management software for an NFS-run hierarchical storage management system.
Total storage ranges from 20Gb to 125Gb with dynamic file partitioning.
Most frequently accessed data are stored on the magnetic media and less frequently on the optical media with backup also on the optical.
The system does not need dedicated hardware because it uses a standard DECsystem server.
Clients can include Unix machines, PCs, Macs and VAXs.
Pricing starts at $66,700.
HP DELIBERATES WHETHER TO CALL OUT THUNDERBIRDS
Hewlett-Packard Co vice president, Lew Platt, has confided to Wall Street analysts that the company will be introducing Snake workstations and upgrades run by its PA RISC 7100 chip, Thunderbird, by late summer and will start delivering them before its fiscal year closes in October.
There appears to be some internal debate going on down in Palo Alto about how much damage Sun Microsystems Inc's recent Sparcstation 10 announcement is doing to its own workstation efforts.
HP seems to have at least a couple of options: an immediate Thunderbird response, levelling the playing field with Sun right now — with ships in October — or a big splash in the Autumn, with immediate deliveries.
SUN SPOTS
Putting its money where its mouth is, Sun Microsystems Inc is downsizing its internal computer operations to the client-server model using Sparcstations and Sparcservers and is yanking out its mainframe.
It has signed on undisclosed terms to use Oracle Corp's manufacturing and financial applications, including software engineering products worldwide; Oracle Manufacturing will be installed in Sun Microsystems Computer Corp manufacturing plants worldwide and Oracle Financials will be installed throughout Sun's subsidiaries, including sites in Europe, Asia and North America in what is claimed to be the first-ever distributed system to address multi-site, multi-plant, multi-country, and multi-lingual requirements; the value of the pact to Oracle was not given.
Meanwhile, Oracle has plucked top product designer Karl Hageman from ASK and named him chief design architect of Oracle Manufacturing.
Palo Alto, California-based J Frank & Associates last week announced MVS/NFS, a software product co-developed with Sun Microsystems Inc that is designed to increase data sharing between mainframes and workstations through on-line access to MVS files from NFS networks.
It is a full implementation of NFS under MVS bridging mainframes and Unix networks and from there to other NFS platforms such as PCs, Macs and VAXs.
Workstation users can access and create files on the mainframe without knowing MVS or compromising MVS security, effectively making the mainframe a huge file server.
MVS/NFS ships in June with prices ranging from $18,000 to $62,000.
Sun Microsystems Inc has an OEM contract from Fanuc Ltd which it estimates at $10m a year: the Japanese robotics and factory automation company plans to create turnkey systems out of the workstations by bundling them with computer-aided design software from Cadkey Inc and sell them worldwide; it looks for $330m in business over three years.
SunSoft Inc has adopted London-based Alex Technolgies Ltd's graphical user interface tool for use with Solaris 2.0 in its master developer series on Intel and Sparc platforms: Alex allows users to transform their character applications to run under Open Look without modifications to the code.
HaL Computer Systems will sell NetLabs Inc's NetLab/Manager software as an option on its Sparc machines when they arrive: HaL apparently intends to build applications on top of the basic network management tool.
Datacraft, a $70m Australian integrator, is also picking up the stuff.
San Francisco, California-based Young Minds Inc, the CD-ROM software vendor, has released CD Studio — its second generation software and hardware solution for creating CD Write Once discs.
CD Studio includes its Unix-based Makedisc premastering software, MakeCD controlling software and a 1Gb hard disk.
Available on Sun Sparcstations it costs $18,500.
Pacer Software Inc, La Jolla, California, has released DAL, its Data Access Language server for Sun Sparc and Hewlett-Packard 9000/800 systems: DAL provides transparent data access to Macintosh applications from Oracle, Ingres, Informix and Sybase.
Prices start from $4,000 for 16 users.
ICL Ltd has announced the availability of Fibre Distribution Data Interface (FDDI) network for its range of Unix Sparc-based DRS6000 systems: prices start at £8,000.
Version 5.1 of Orem, Utah-based WordPerfect Corp's word processing software will be available in the UK on Sun Microsystems Inc workstations from the third quarter.
SyQuest Technology and Control Concepts — a federal government integrator and manufacturer — have introduced the first SyQuest  removable drive for Sparc machines.
Two versions offer either 88Mb or 176Mb of storage.
Control will sell them into the federal market.
SyQuest has also signed a licensing agreement with Delta Microsystems for them both to sell the $350-per-workstation Delta software driver, needed to support SyQuest's 5.25-inch 44Mb and 88Mb removeable cartridge drives on Sparcs.
AION DEVELOPMENT SYSTEM UP ON SUNS
Palo Alto, California-based Aion Corp is diversifying from its IBM Corp MVS roots and has announced availability of the Aion Development System, a knowledge-based system designed specifically to automate business processes such as scheduling, configuration, monitoring, diagnostic, decision support and service, for Sun Microsystems Inc's Unix systems.
The version for SunOS supports all features and functions found in the Aion Development System Version 6.0, including the Aion High Performance Option for faster and leaner compiled knowledge bases; relational database interfaces, providing direct access to external databases; and an application programming interface for linking to external programs, specialised data and different computers.
Knowledge bases developed on other Aion-supported systems are portable to and from the Sun version of the system, the company claims.
No prices given.
MATSUSHITA SHOWS VIRTUAL REALITY SYSTEM,
Unigram's Tokyo bureau has been looking at some of the research work being developed by Matsushita Electric Industrial Co at its Tokyo Information and Communications Research Laboratory.
Researchers have developed a three-dimensional direct manipulation interface, fancifully called ‘Zashiki-Warashi’(a Zashiki-Warashi being an imaginary childlike creature in Japanese folklore, which plays unseen in a room, bringing happiness to the house it inhabits).
The system developed aims to provide a three-dimensional means of manipulating a virtual reality scene, with a pen-type stylus used in place of a mouse.
A further feature enables the manipulation of lighting and a camera, and with display of solids and use of simulated gravity to position objects.
A Silicon Graphics Inc Iris workstation displays a scene of a room with furnishings, created with DesignBase, a three-dimensional computer-aided design database system from Ricoh Co, while the three-dimensional digitiser hardware, provided by Polhemus Inc, is able to manipulate objects by measuring the position and orientation of the stylus with six degrees of freedom.
Matsushita researchers have developed ‘beam cursor’ software for the interface of the stylus beam with the objects displayed, which is also used for re-orientation of the entire room itself.
Features are similar to, but easier to use than, those obtained through the use of the glove and glasses of the system from VPL Research Inc (which sister company Matsushita Electric Works licenses for work on kitchen design simulation system).
NEC HAS WORKSTATION-BASED NEURAL NET
NEC Corp has developed a neural network systems that detects similarities in share price patterns.
It claims it has given very similar results to patterns determined by stock price chartists, charlatans or alchemists depending on your viewpoint, whose work is very popular in Japan.
The system was developed on a NEC EWS-4800 Unix workstation and uses a Dynamic Programming Neural Network, which incorporates features from a neural network and a Dynamic Programming matching method.
Until development of this system it was difficult to do pattern matching if movements being compared were over varying time periods.
The database for the system contains data on the price movements of 1,700 companies listed on the Tokyo Stock Exchange over the past 15 years.
The system will be presented in detail at the International Joint Conference on Neural Networks 92 to be held in Baltimore, Maryland next month.
NEC says that it is planning to create artificial neural network systems to analyse exchange rates and interest rate fluctuations as well.
SEQUOIA TAKES CLEARSPRING LIGHTSOUT SYSTEM
Sequoia Systems Inc is joining the rush to fit out Unix systems with all the aids and facilities that mainframe users take for granted, and reckons that it is one up on its competitors with software that continuously monitors all the functions of a computer system and immediately notifies operators of problems in operations or applications — even if it did have to go out-of-house to get it.
It believes that the new LightsOut software is the first unattended event monitoring program from a supplier of Unix-based fault-tolerant computers.
It is designed to enable system administrators to identify and fix problems before they come to most users' attention.
It monitors all local and remote elements in a computer system, including attached devices such as printers, terminals, administrator consoles and communications links in addition to cost-system functions.
LightsOut was developed by ClearSpring Technologies Inc of Burlington, Massachusetts.
Performance information can be viewed in real time or collected and archived at a single location to be used later for systems and capacity planning.
For Sequoia users, LightsOut is available from either Sequoia or ClearSpring at prices from $12,000.
SAS SHOWS ITS EXECUTIVE INFORMATION SYSTEM TO EUROPEAN HOI POLLOI 
William Fellows
SAS Institute Inc — it likes to be called sass, not SAS as in the UK's Special Air Services — held its tenth annual European User Group meeting, SEUGI ‘92, in Vienna a couple of weeks ago.
The event was primarily a homage to the long-awaited SAS Executive Information System, which hogged centre stage during the opening proceedings of the conference.
On the evidence of its showing, SAS/EIS is certainly the kind of tool that will empower decision makers with the ability to study their companies and markets in new ways, with only minimum recall to the services of in-house software engineers —‘even a CEO can use this because it only takes one finger,’ claims Jim Goodnight, SAS chief executive officer.
SAS/EIS, however, is not a revolutionary departure, more a (welcome) common sense approach to the problem of coalescing disparate information sources into a practical, easy-to-use analysis and reporting environment.
Turning numbers into graphs and simple pictures, it borrows conventions from car dashboard displays and suggests the use of simple colour/performance indicators such as red, amber and green.
SAS/EIS uses object-oriented techniques and offers a fourth-generation language, enabling non-techies to get meaningful use from the system.
It's currently at beta sites and staggered launches will begin in the fourth quarter with a version for IBM's MVS operating system.
Also previewed in Vienna was version 6.08 of the SAS system, the company's collection of statistical, analysis and reporting packages — what it calls its information delivery system — which will be available from the fourth quarter, or the beginning of 1993 in Unix flavours.
Version 6.08 will include support for OS/2 2.0, Microsoft Corp Windows, IBM's VSE/ESA and the CICS transaction processing environment, plus gateway access to AS/400 systems in client/server set-ups.
SAS doesn't run native on the AS/400 ‘because of technical reasons, but also because users tell us its not the platform they want to run applications on,’ it says.
‘In most cases AS/400s are full of data, and users want a delivery system that can access this data via OS/2 or Windows.
We prefer OS/2, because it's a better operating system, and it is becoming the preferred choice for large commercial users, but Windows is most popular for the standalone.’
SAS supports access to a range of mainframe, personal computer and Unix database managers and spreadsheets and will run from day one on DEC's Alpha RISC boxes under Open VMS and OSF/1 when they are launched.
Determined not to undermine his DEC marketing team's present offerings, Goodnight makes big beef about the fact that it has sold some 3,500 versions of SAS in the last three months.
Religion
SAS isn't religious, he says and will port to any volume platform whenever it is able to.
So why a version for the NeXT Computer Inc NextStep environment?
Goodnight says Steve Jobs had promised him that the NeXT boxes would sell in serious numbers, but now admits that that particular offering ‘isn't making us any money.’
Why no Apple Computer Inc Macintosh SAS system?
The firm has a non-mainstream product called Jump available for the Mac, but there are no plans for a vanilla version of SAS software on that box.
Goodnight discounts rumours that his company couldn't actually get a version of SAS to work on that particular platform, saying the firm isn't working on such a port now, and has no plans to do any other Motorola Inc 680X0 implementations besides the Unix one it offers currently.
A version for the IBM/Apple Pink object-oriented operating system isn't ruled out though.
In the UK, SAS has been trying to build a relationship with ICL plc for the last three or four years — with little success.
However, it thinks some kind of contact will be forged over time and expects a port to the company's DRS6000 Unix box to materialise in the not too distant future.
Future additions to the Cary, North Carolina-based company's product suite will include SAS Trader (for the financial markets), Geographic, Publish, Render and Image — all fairly self-explanatory developments.
They'll include a mixture of voice, graphics, video and other multi-media features.
Some of this experimental technology will go into SAS release 6.09, most will roll into version 7.0, which isn't expected for a couple of years yet.
All development is now done on Hewlett-Packard Co PA RISC Snake workstations running Unix — SAS has taken $5m worth of the things — the SAS system as a whole now runs to over four million lines of code.
Privately-held SAS ploughs an estimated 40% of its revenues back into research and development — its 1991 figures of $295m were 23% up on 1990, it says, with the European sector accounting for 178m Deutschmarks, up some 34% on the previous year.
SAS claims three million users and 100,000 installations worldwide — around 11,000 of them are Unix — with 35,000 European sites.
Having focused on the more traditional computer platforms in the past it's no surprise that Unix is SAS' fastest growing market — 20% of new business in the UK is Unix, it says.
Sales of its Unix products will, for instance, outstrip revenues from the DEC versions that it markets over the next year or so, it reckons.
SAS' current UK business is split 35% on IBM systems, 37% on PC/MS-DOS, 15% on DEC and less than 10% on Unix.
SAS brought in Cap Gemini Consulting vice president, Patrick Amzallag, to add a slightly more objective tone to the proceedings — SAS is not a Cap Gemini client, we are led to believe.
Amzallag says that to be successful ‘it is not enough to be technically good.
A company must be predominant in the eyes of decision makers.’
SAS?
‘They're doing OK,’ he says.
TWO-THIRDS OF LARGE UK USERS WILL HAVE UNIX WITHIN TWO YEARS, SAYS NEW REPORT
A new report from IT specialist Dr James Martin and London-based Applied Learning International finds that amongst the largest user organisations in the UK and Ireland, IBM still leads the way as far as mainframe, mid-range and personal computer installations go.
Its systems are in use at 69%, 47% and 83% of sites using those respective technologies, although many have machines from two or more suppliers.
Caution seems to be the watchword for major IT investment decisions at present.
51% of managers said they were playing it safe and upgrading their current central processing system, 29% said they are sticking with what they already have whilst some 16% said they would be downsizing to a mid-range system.
The following table shows the take-up of latest technologies and future plans for 512  respondents of the 2,000 largest IT sites polled.
DUN & BRADSTREET ADOPTS GRESHAM TELECOMPUTING TP+ WORLDWIDE
The successor to Telecomputing's TPM, the TP+ transaction processing monitor for Unix from UK firm Gresham Telecomputing Plc, Southampton, Hampshire, has at last found its place in the sun with the signing of an agreement under which Dun & Bradstreet Software will market the product worldwide as a key element in Unix line initially for Hewlett-Packard Co, ICL Plc, Data General Corp and Digital Equipment Corp machines.
Dun expects at least 20% of its 14,000 customers worldwide to downsize their computer operations to Unix systems.
MINIGRAMS
IBM Europe's clone subsidiary, Individual Computer Products Ltd, due to be launched on June 4, looks to kick off with at least three new systems: sources say that there will be a desktop, a notebook and mini-tower, the first two using the 80386SX, the tower an 80486SX; all may be bundled with Microsoft Corp's Windows and use the AT bus; there are rumours of a degree of channel conflict with suggestions that the systems will be sold not only through the direct channel, but there are no details yet about alternative distribution; the launch will be phased across Europe and France will be next in line.
In the UK, ICL plc has previewed its Search Accelerator for the Informix relational database running on Unix SVR4.
Already available for Ingres (UX No 350), the Informix Accelerator is being piloted with six local councils and government agencies before its release this September.
Derived from the Content  Addressable File System (CAFS) hardware database search engine, the accelerator consists of a CAFS board, an interface which decides whether the accelerator should be activated, a device driver and a relational database management system accelerator to control the searches.
The company says that in the last six months it has sold over 600 Ingres Search Accelerator add-on boards.
The Informix version is priced the same as the Ingres board at £10,000.
DEC is trying to to gain visibility for the 661 companies it says are converting programmes for Alpha RISC.
Oracle Corp will announce version 7.0 of its database system on Monday June 15.
Interactive Development Environments has set up IDE Canada in Toronto to handle direct sales and support operations for its CASE products.
The move towards open systems is increasing security risks, according to the Commission of the European Communities (CEC).
To raise industry awareness, it is revising its Information Technology Security Evaluation Criteria (ITSEC), published last June, with the help of SD-Scicon Ltd's Systems Assurance Division in Milton-Keynes, Buckinghamshire.
Rather than taking as gospel what the manufacturers tell us, SD-Scicon is busy researching what levels of system security users actually want so that CEC can make recommendations.
Brixton Systems, the first company to route TCP/IP over SNA, is teaming with Bull-owned integrator Integris to develop a series of mainframe-specific SNA products for Unix.
Integris will integrate these new SNA products with its UniRix CICS and market Brixton's Brx3270 and BrxSNA/IP router plus other Brixton products later on down the road.
SNA-on-Unix is seen as a downsizing vehicle.
Unix System Labs Inc is currently evaluating the Architecture Neutral Distribution Format work done by the UK's Defence Research Agency, according to marketing vice president Joe Menard.
AGE Logic is to bundle Novell's TCP/IP PC-to-Unix connectivity software with its XoftWare family of Windows, MS-DOS and TIGA/DOS X-Windows server software: AGE will offer Novell's TCP/IP stack simplifying the installation issues normally associated with integrating X and networking software.
Despite a disconcerting 85% plunge in net profits to just $94.5m, Fujitsu Ltd, bolstered by the acquisition of ICL Plc is putting rapidly increasing distance between itself and the other contenders for the title ‘world's second-biggest computer company’: some commentators illegitimately eliminate Fujitsu's semiconductor sales from the total simply because the company sells more of its chip output on the merchant market than do IBM Corp, Digital Equipment Corp and Hewlett-Packard Co, but all of Fujitsu's $26,640m annual turnover is information technology-related — and the company is now nearly twice the size of the $14,000m-a-year DEC, and well over a third the size of IBM; only a decade ago, IBM was more like 10 times the size of the next biggest computer manufacturer.
 Shaky multimedia start-up Tiger Media has lost its president Laura Buddine.
USL expects that its brand new Tuxedo joint venture with Steria in Paris (UX No 385) will also peddle Destiny.
‘We're not out to position Windows NT as a replacement for Unix.’
Thus spake Microsoft NT director Dwayne Walker in ComputerWorld.
He also said NT will also be able to host guest  operating systems like Unix.
One of DEC's principal Alpha RISC architects, Richard Witek, has reportedly bolted to Apple Computer Inc.
Gain Technology, the multimedia start-up partnered by Matsushita, has acquired New Mexico's Santa Fe Interactive as the nucleus of a Gain business unit called Gain Interactive.
Terms were not disclosed.
Santa Fe Interactive is a developer of customised multimedia business systems with a high degree of user interactivity for corporate clients such as American Express.
Gain says the acquisition positions it to take on the full scope of designing, building and delivering large-scale multimedia systems.
Emulex's new Tri-Protocol Release 3.0 allows Unix, Novell and DEC users, connected on a network, to share printers and transparently queue print jobs: the software also has a facility for Netware, Unix and DEC hosts to share printing services.
The British Broadcasting Corporation has extended its 30-year relationship with ICL Plc with two new contracts for the provision of services over the next six years: first, ICL's CFM facilities management subsidiary will run the Beeb's mainframe bureau operation in Feltham, West London on ICL Series 39 SX mainframes; second, the BBC is taking advantage of ICL's Open Hire agreement in its move to a distributed Unix computing environment.
British Telecom plc's BoaT project, with 50,000 users potentially the biggest office automation scheme currently afoot in Europe, has picked StaffWare as its workflow standard: BT is the first organisation to adopt the new Windows client/Unix server version of StaffWare.
StaffWare will be adding some BT-specific features such as the ability to implement a corporate-style graphical user interface and to pick any database of choice.
Stone Systems, the would-be Sparc merchant from Hong Kong (UX No 358), has turned tail and fled the US marketplace shutting down its one American office last week.
Silicon Graphics Inc has picked Pericom Software's teem-X 340 emulation package, reportedly the first VT340 terminal emulator for the X-Window environment, for use with its Indigos.
Aurum Software Inc, Santa Clara, California, has announced the Aurum Customer Resource Planning system, a suite of client/server Unix applications which support all major databases and GUIs: the four are TeleTrak, a telemarketing package; SalesTrak for field sales; SupportTrak, for customer support; and QualityTrak, for quality management — prices range from $10,000 to $200,000.
Wang Laboratories Inc plans to lay off more than 1,000 more people from its 13,500-strong workforce — a pale shadow of the 31,500 in March 1989, and says that even more cuts may be needed in the next several months.
MIPS Computer Systems Inc took another hit when OEM sales vice president Stratton Sclavos jumped ship to join the PenPoint operating system designer Go Corporation as vice president worldwide sales.
Progress Software plans to port its 4GL, RDBMS and associated tools over to Alpha under VMS, OSF/1 and NT.
Bell Labs Software Technology Center is to promote Procase's Smartsystem — a five-module development and maintenance environment integrated over an object-oriented database — to AT&T development organisations under a cooperative purchase pact: the Center has developed interfaces linking Smartsystem to AT&T's own software engineering products which Procase itself will peddle to C developers.
Procase recently closed $3.8m round of financing from current investors bringing total investment to over $20m.
Progress Software Corp (no.24) and Sequoia Systems Inc (no.62) made this year's BusinessWeek list of the 100 Hot Growth Companies.
Sources claim Samsung is the company Hewlett-Packard CEO John Young was referring to when he told Wall Street analysts that one of his PA RISC partners was doing a port to SVR4 (UX No 386).