

OLIVETTI TO ENTER WORKSTATION MARKET — CONFIRMS PLANS TO USE DEC ALPHA RISC
Ing C Olivetti & Co SpA plans to pitch at the top-end of the volume workstation business with high-performance machines built around Digital Equipment Corp's Alpha RISC that will compete with the likes of Sun Microsystems Inc, Hewlett-Packard Co and IBM Corp — if it can figure out how to market the things.
Talking to Unigram at Olivetti's week-long promotional fair in Rome last week, Lucino Pinto, research and development director, said the Italian group ‘will sign an agreement with DEC for Alpha,’ though full details of the deal have not yet been worked out, and no time scales were offered.
Pinto confirmed that a prototype Alpha box would be around by the end of the year (UX No 376)— other officials said the emergence of shrink-wrapped non-proprietary Unix environments — with the added incentive of Unix System Laboratories Inc's Destiny and Microsoft Corp NT already scheduled for Alpha — will open up the workstation market sufficiently for it to stake a claim.
Indeed, Pinto said Olivetti is working closely with Microsoft on a client-only version of NT.
It sees no problem with adding the Alpha architecture to the MIPS Computer Systems Inc and Intel Corp-based systems it currently offers, a trail that DEC is already blazing in any case, but it has to figure out whether and how it will be able to address the window of opportunity it reckons the industry is now creating with the latest round of hardware and software announcements, and of course, how deep it would have to dig into its back pocket.
Olivetti said its use of Alpha would definitely be restricted to the high-end workstation market: it ‘has other designs’ when it comes to servers, hinting that it may bring out a product in that area based on the parallel processing technology of Kendall Square Research Corp, the Waltham, Massachusetts-based company in which it has a stake (see page three).
The Alpha project replaces an Intel Corp-based i860 workstation that Olivetti built in prototype quantities and originally planned for volume manufacture.
That effort was shelved when the future of Intel's RISC became clouded.
Whatever happens, Olivetti's commitment to the MIPS-based technology it already employs is not in question.
New R3000A, R4000MP Pyramid machines — details on page three.
$2,000 POWERPC ‘BY YEAR-END:’ PORTABLE, DESKTOP AND SERVER SYSTEMS TO FOLLOW
Following the news that the IBM Corp and Apple Computer Inc PowerPC RISC effort is coming on in leaps and bounds (UX No 384), rumours floated on the airwaves last week that the first boxes built around the architecture will be out by the end of this year.
By all accounts there are initially four implementations of the PowerPC in models 601, 603, 604 and the 620.
The 601 — to be released in limited quantities by the end of the year — is the low-end desktop offering, a slower machine than the recently announced IBM RS/6000 220 desktop, with a performance rating of 40 SPECmarks and a price tag of $2,000.
It is still not clear whether the PowerPC has had the multi-processing guts ripped out of it, though Michael Slater editor of Microprocessor Report informs us modifications made to it include having 38 opcodes deleted, which means that all instructions that use multiply and quotient register, difference or zero and three integer operand instructions have all been wiped out.
It's been done to make room for the Motorola Inc 88110 Mbus input/output interface and increased cache.
Meanwhile, Apple is predicting that it will have at least 70% of Macintosh applications recoded in time for the first batch of volume PowerPCs to hit the streets in 1993, using AT&T Bell Laboratories spin-off, the Holmdel, New Jersey-based Echo Logic Inc, to do the recompiling.
A model 603 will be a cheap, low-cost portable system appearing sometime late in 1994 along with the mainstream desktop PowerPC iteration, the 604.
A high-end offering, the model 620, destined for the workstation and server markets, will apparently have a performance rating of 100 SPECmarks and is expected to rollout the door mid-1993.
The PowerPC, says Slater, will not turn too many heads in the desktop arena, however, he believes the Apple contingent will be its guiding star ‘it won't be in the SuperSparc league, but on the matter of price alone it will definitely make an impact’.
DAY OF DESTINY: ROEL REWRITES THE RULES
Unix System V Release 4.2 — now the official name for Destiny — the desktop version of Unix from Unix System Laboratories Inc — finally saw the light of day at a full-dress industry event in San Francisco last week.
What emerged, aside from the technology, which has been widely previewed (summary inside), was a seminal move by USL president Roel Pieper to unify the industry around a desktop Unix to challenge Microsoft Corp NT — threatening to sweep the boards when it finally arrives.
As such, it was an impressive effort, marred only by the glaring absence of Sun Microsystems Inc (about to launch its own competitive SVR4 Solaris operating system this Tuesday), and the Santa Cruz Operation Inc, whose leadership position is severely threatened by Destiny's imminent arrival.
IBM Corp was also absent, while Hewlett-Packard Co contributed only a lukewarm endorsement, with no precise commitment to implement the technology.
However, USL believes that HP will adopt it within the next three or four months.
DEC surprisingly came out with the stronger, if more bewildering statement that it ‘will be working with USL and their technology partners to combine Digital's Alpha technology with Unix SVR4’— seemingly contradicting its position of the day before (see page five).
Nonetheless, USL believes that their collaboration, awkward perhaps for DEC's press agents, will be serious, in depth and direct.
USL won the day by persuading Open Software Foundation chief, David Tory, to speak, revealing that USL and OSF were working together to ensure that the OSF Application Environment Specification and SVR4 would be aligned and compatibility maintained.
USL again endorsed OSF layered products such as Motif and DCE, and has even taken the baton from OSF for the commercialisation of ANDF — the Architecture Neutral Distribution Format, see below.
OSF's singular appearance changes the rules the industry has been playing by for the past few years, narrowing the gap between the two camps, and allowing more room for the players to manoeuvre.
Apple Computer Inc, a new face in the crowd, also sent observers.
USL is believed to be near to an unprecedented agreement with Apple for the Macintosh interface.
…
ADOPTS DRA's TEN15
USL has taken up the baton of Architecture-Neutral Distribution Format technology from OSF, and has signed with the UK's Defence Research Agency — the originator of the ANDF technology — to commercialise it for release with SVR4.2.
The goal is to market and distribute technology with SVR4.2 enabling software vendors to write, package and distribute one single version of their applications that can run unchanged on laptops, workstations, servers, mainframes and even supercomputers, from different vendors and based on different microprocessors.
USL the DRA intend to make TDF specifications publicly available.
USL LAUNCHES DESTINY AS SVR4.2 — PREPARES WAY FOR ENTERPRISE VERSION
The lineage of Unix System V Release comes from the SVR4.1 Enhanced Security release, from which it inherits B1/B2 security, but SVR4.2 extends the modularity of that release with the isolation of processor-specific source code modules from the main body of common code.
Accordingly, SVR4.2 will support multiple articles from a single source tree.
It will be the code base for SVR4.2 ES/MP (Enhanced Security/Multi-processing), aimed at enterprise computing environments, which will add multi-processing support.
Dynamically loadable modules allow printers, disks and other devices to be installed while the system is running, which also reduces RAM requirements.
SVR4.2, with its integral desktop manager, optimised performance, and modularity that allows it to run as a client in only 4Mb memory, 60Mb disk — highly impressive when compared to its current competitor, OS/2 — ships in July in source code form for OEMs, in its Intel version only, for AT, EISA and MCA buses.
Sparc and MIPS versions are due out by the end of the year.
USL declined to reveal pricing until Univel Inc — joint-owned by USL and Novell Inc — rolls out the end-user shrink-wrapped Unixware version in September-October, but as Unigram reported last week (UX No 389), OEMs are expected to be able to get it out of the door for around $350.
USL, FUJITSU AND TANGENT TO FORM UNIX ON-LINE INFORMATION COMPANY
A worldwide on-line information systems network for the Unix System V market is to be established as a joint venture between Unix Systems Labs, Fujitsu Networks Industry, Stamford, Connecticut and Tangent International, New York City.
The three plan to form a new company, Unilinx, aiming the service at end-users, hardware and software vendors, system integrators and the like.
What's on offer will include information on Unix hardware and software products, service providers, systems integrators and consulting organisations.
Peter Watts, currently the president of Tangent, will head up the new venture, which will use ISDN technology, allowing for electronic software distribution and simultaneous voice, data and image computer conferencing, all areas on which Unilinx has it long range sights.
It claims it will stick to commercially-led Unix information not treading on the toes of existing non-commercial Unix networks such as Usenix, or more broad-based commercial services in the PC world.
Unilinx services should be up and running by the first quarter of next year.
GRAPHICS, EMULATION AND DATA INTEGRITY MAKE UNIX MORE PC-LIKE
Included within the SVR4.2, Moolit (Motif/Open Look Intrinsics Toolkit) allows developers to build applications that can switch dynamically between Open Look and Motif look and feel.
It is  conforment with the Open Look Intrinsics Toolkit (OLIT) already in use by Sun Microsystems Inc.
The desktop manager supports drag and drop, and includes graphical file systems management and administration.
The optimised X-Winserver speeds up the performance of X-Windows: DOS and Windows emulation facilities have been built into the kernel.
Inclusion of the Adobe Type manager and Type 1 fonts allows for the use of existing Adobe fonts from DOS disks, and makes it easier for developers to port over applications from Windows, OS/2 and Mac's.
And the new journaling file system (from Veritas), ensures that, if the machine is shut down unexpectedly, the file system is not damaged.
It also reduces startup time to under 40 seconds.
For the software developers, there is a new C optimised compilation system, R2.0 for Intel, a graphical debugger, and the Windowing Korn shell extension.
Bundled in is an application builder based on Builder Xcessory from integrated Computer Solutions of Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Also included are software drivers supporting SCSI host adaptors from  Adaptec Inc, Milpitas, California, masking SCSI peripheral integration more simply.
HAL TO PROVIDE 64-BIT VERSION, AS HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE VENDORS CAST THEIR VOTES
The most interesting of a myriad of other partnerships and endorsements comes from HaL Computer Systems Inc, which is working with USL to make the future versions of SVR4.2 into the 64-bit world.
HaL will provide the reference 64-bit implementation on its proposed 64-bit implementation of the Sparc processor.
The task, said HaL VP of sales and marketing, is ‘a considerable one’.
64-bit Unix impementations will still run 32-bit software.
Aside from DEC and Hewlett-Packard Co (see front page), other endorsements from hardware manufacturers included ALR, Apricot, Data General, ICL (providing the Sparc reference port), Intel, MIPS, NEC, NCR, Olivetti (doing the ACE/ARC port), Sequent, Sequoia, Siemens Nixdorf, Stratus, Unisys and Wyse.
Dell helped port Motif for SVR4.2, but isn't saying if it will use the product.
Software supporters included Banyan Systems, Microport, Software AG, Uniplex and Unisoft.
A list of 80 plus independent software and hardware vendors also registered support.
Leaving no stone unturned for its Destiny launch, the telephone company offshoot went so far as to score still another first, announcing SVR4.2 simultaneously in Europe, the Far East, the US and Russia, reportedly at a Unix user group meeting, facilitated by the famed Esther Dyson.
It seemed an altogether fitting happening, considering the same day George Bush and Boris Yeltsin were applauding each other in the White House rose garden.
According to a study Unix International commissioned from Dataquest comparing OS/2 and SVR4.2, OS/2 Unix shipments will be higher than Unix shipments on the PC platform, if for no other reason than IBM is bundling it.
However, Dataquest predicts that Unix will gain market share from the OS/2 in the desktop workstation market, because it will gain a greater share of the i586 market.
Most i586 systems will be used as workstations, predicts Dataquest.
OS/2 will get 8.5% of the total workstation market by 1996, it says, with Unix coming in at a hefty 47% and Windows NT possibly capturing 30–40% of the office desktop/workstation market.
Meanwhile, Dataquest forecasts $10bn worth of Unix PC and workstation sales in 1992.
The Santa Cruz Operation was taking a bullish attitude towards the launch of Destiny last week, pointing out that it was a technology, not a product announcement, and saying that it would be a long time before the package would support the large range of peripherals in the SCO catalogue: SCO also claimed to offer pretty much everything offered by Destiny, including DOS/Windows emulation and Motif — which SCO ships, not just supports — claiming its distribution network was mature and widespread, and said it was more interested in the networked and multi-user system market than the PC and Mac replacement that USL is interested in.
DATA GENERAL BUNDLES SOFT-SWITCH
Wayne, Pensylvania-based Soft-Switch Inc is claiming an industry first with its Enterprise Mail Exchange (EMX) hardware/software electronic-mail gateways running on Unix machines.
Soft-Switch's existing products run on IBM mainframes.
EMX is based on the 1988 versions of X.400 and X.500.and connects proprietary E-mail systems based on distribution protocols like the TCP/IP Simple Mail Transfer Protocol(SMTP), IBM's System Network Architectural Distribution Services(SNADS) and Message Handling Service(MHS).
The switch is bundled with five models of the Data General AViiON family of symmetric multi-processor servers running Unix SVR4.
Denying that EMX would be fettered by its platform, Soft-Switch president, Michael Zisman, said that running the software on multiple platforms was ‘too support intensive’.
There is also an add-on module, the Enterprise Mail Manager (EMM), a graphical management system for network configuration, operation and maintenance running in an X-Windows and Motif environment.
The EMX directory is built on a relational database management system from Oracle Corp.
The first release has not implemented all of the X.500 standard's protocols: the Directory Services Protocol, Directory Access Protocol, directory synchronisation, and document translation facilities will be provided in a release at the end of 1992.
Prices start at $40,000 for an unlimited number of users.
Larger configurations range in price from $60,000 to $300,000.
Availability in the United States is third quarter of 1992, and fourth quarter worldwide.
HIGH AVAILABILITY DUAL RS/6000 CLUSTERING SOFTWARE
Sufficient unto the day is never the evil thereof when it comes to IBM Corp, so not content with giving its large systems users pause for deep thought, the company also announced the AIX High Availability Cluster Multi-Processing/6000 software for the RS/6000 Unix box.
Multiprocessing is a misnomer, because the software ties together only two RS/6000s, enabling each to back the other up.
IBM also announced that it will begin distributing the AIX/6000 on compact disk.
The new HACMP/6000 software enables users to choose from three levels or modes of high availability support: in mode 1, it provides fallover to a back-up idle RS/6000 for quick restart of an application or subsystem if there is a failure with the primary processor.
Each RS/6000 is active in mode 2, running its own applications, but enabling one system to dump its load onto the other should a processor fail.
In mode 3, the systems run concurrently, enabling single image access to data from both computers.
This concurrent processing requires the 9333 disk subsystem.
HACMP/6000 is supported by the new AIX/6000/3.2 release and uses the Systems Management Interface Tool for installation, configuration and maintenance of the RS/6000 clusters.
ClaM Associates Inc in Cambridge, Massachusetts, is working with IBM to provide customer installations and support for HACMP/6000.
Planned availability is September for modes 1 and 2, and March 1993 for mode 3.
Price will depend on the RS/6000.
IBM SELLS UNIX MAINFRAME TO POLISH POST
The Postal side of the Polish Post, Telegraph and Telephone company, which was split off from the Telecoms side back in January, is to become one of the earliest recipients of an IBM mainframe running the firm's AIX Unix implementation.
The machine, an ES/9000 9121 Model 190 is to be used in conjunction with RS/6000s as front-end processors and 150 PS/1s and PS/2s as data entry and enquiry terminals, and replaces an ageing key-to-disk 370-type clone system from Rjad.
It's task is to run the clearing house for monetary transactions being wired in and out of the country, and will provide on-line facilities for the first time, as well as better monitoring and tracking facilities.
According to an IBM spokesman, AIX on a mainframe was chosen because requirements are expected to grow, with other postal functions likely to be taken on.
Skilled Unix technicians are also easier to find in Poland than traditional systems people.
Both AIX on the RS/6000 and OSF/1 on the mainframe have full National Language Support, as does Oracle Forms and SQL, which is being used to write the software.
IBM says it competed with Amdahl Corp, Unisys Corp and some of the top-end Unix vendors over the contract, which was signed last December, but won out because of its integration skills.
Training is currently taking place, with delivery this month to the headquarters in Bydgoszcz, in the north west of the country, with installation next month.
RUSSIAN UNIX WORKSTATION VENDOR SAPSAN OUTSELLS THE COMPETITION
Speaking at the Expo Comm International exhibition, Sapsan, the only Russian manufacturer of Unix workstations, says it has sold some 1,500 Unix systems in the former Soviet Union since 1989.
That is many times more than any Western vendor.
Sapsan says its main customers have been in the defence industry.
Some 90% of sales have been for databases, electronic mail systems and Computer Aided Design.
Sapsan sells only for roubles and uses its dealers to develop software solutions for individual customers.
Gregory Ivanov, developer with Sapsan dealer Irbus, says no foreign company yet competes with Sapsan on price or customer support.
OLIVETTI DEBUTS TOP-END PYRAMID BOXES…
As expected (UX No 386), Olivetti used its event in Rome last week — see front page — to steal Pyramid Technology Corp's thunder and introduce a 24-CPU version of the MIPS R3000-based LSX 6500 transaction processing systems which are rebadged MIServers from the Mountain View, California-based company.
Previously limited to 12 CPUs, Pyramid has effectively doubled its top-end capability by employing two 37.5MHz R3000A processors on each board.
Olivetti said that stringing 24 CPUs together was as high as Pyramid could go with the R3000.
New to the line is an FDDI controller, and two of the models — Olivetti's LSX 6540 and 6550 — can now be configured with IPI mass storage subsystems.
An early developer release of Oracle Corp's latest database — version 7 — is already available for the 6500s.
…
AND REVEALS PYRAMID R4000MP EFFORT
Perhaps a more interesting development is the likelihood that Pyramid will now recast its image as a supplier only of high-end transaction systems.
Olivetti unveiled Pyramid-developed boards with from one-to-four high-end MIPS R4000MP CPUs which can plug into its previously announced Advanced Computing Environment LSX 5030 multi-processor, which currently uses up to four 33MHz Intel 80486 parts.
Pyramid originally designed the thing as a one-to-eight-processor affair, but scaled back to four CPUs, presumably at Olivetti's request.
The R4000 system, based on MIPS' MP multi-processing version of the part, won't be around until later in the year when volume deliveries of that chip are scheduled to begin.
Pyramid, which currently offers some MIPS-based Siemens Nixdorf Informationssysteme AG boxes lower down its line, apparently hasn't decided whether it will actually offer its new R4000 architecture as one of its own products yet.
In addition, a new LSX 5040 system with up to four 66MHz 80486s is now on offer, and LSX 5000 series customers will in future be able to configure a system of their choosings with Unix, OS/2, MS-DOS, Intel and MIPS options.
The R4000 architecture is also compatible with Olivetti's existing M700–10, a MIPS R3000-based RISC offering compatible with ACE's Advanced RISC Computing specification.
The 25MHz and 33MHz 80486 LSX 5015 and 5025 models get upgrades to 50MHz and 66MHz respectively — they're rated at $1,968 and $1,702 per transaction per-second according to the TPC-B benchmark.
The LSX 5000s also get the multi-processing version of Unix which currently runs on the LSX 6500 line, as well as Unix System Lab's Tuxedo transaction processing monitor which it uses up there.
Destiny will figure further down Olivetti's range, on personal computers and the M700.
Next year it'll put USL extended security/multi-processing version up on its kit, but what with Destiny coming out as SVR4.2, Olivetti reckons that'll be SVR4.3 ES/MP.
For fault tolerance, Olivetti has extended its relationship with Stratus Computer Inc to include the company's two Intel 80860-based systems, to be sold as the LSX 4500 worldwide — with the exception of the UK.
KENDALL SQUARE FORMALLY LAUNCHES ITS PARALLEL KSR1
Kendall Square Research Inc, the Waltham, Massachusetts start-up formed by Data General Corp alumnus Henry Burkhardt to deliver highly parallel processing to the commercial market, last week formally unveiled the KSR1 multiple instruction-multiple data parallel machine that has been extensively previewed.
The KSR1 is scalable to 1,088 custom 64-bit CMOS processors and the company claims it to be the fastest computer currently available and deliverable, a full KSR1–1088 configuration delivering peak performance of 43 GFLOPS with 34Gb of memory.
It runs under a Unix implementation described as compatible with OSF/1 and the company has adopted Unix System Laboratories Inc's Tuxedo transaction processing monitor for it.
There is already a KSR1 at Manchester University and the company has established a UK subsidiary; it is now opening for business in Germany and France.
It says that several customers have placed orders for KRS1 computers with more than 32 processors, including one from the Cornell Theory Center.
It has the capacity to build four KSR1 systems a week, which would represent $200m or so in annual sales, which implies an average sale price of about $1m per machine, although the firm sets $1m as the entry price.
DEC CLARIFIES ITS OSF/1 ON MIPS PLANS — WON'T PORT DESTINY
Following last week's confusing turn around over its OSF/1 for MIPS policy, DEC organised clarification sessions for journalists in Boston and Palo Alto last month ‘to set the record straight.’
The sessions largely consisted of assurances from DEC of its continued commitment to the OSF/1 operating system on the MIPS line, in the face of surprisingly strong customer reaction to the news of DEC's recent pronouncements that it would only offer OSF/1 for Alpha (UX No 386).
David Stone, vice president of software engineering, claimed that customers wanted to keep their options open, either moving to OSF/1 and Alpha in one fell swoop, or doing it piece meal, changing operating system and chipset one step at a time.
Alpha customers are likely to be those wanting high performance workstations for demanding applications such as modelling that need a large address space.
Ultrix on MIPS customers are those with existing applications who want upgrades to new chips with minimum hassle.
OSF/1 on MIPS customers are mostly policy-led companies who want the operating system to come from an independent source, although there are reasons for changing, according to Stone, including loadable drivers for accommodating new graphics options and shared libraries that reduce the size of the applications.
Daughter board upgrades
Stone also said that DEC would offer daughter board upgrades for its R3000 customers, and would offer similar upgrades for future MIPS generations, such as the R5000.
Using daughter boards, he said, protected customer investments in the box and power supplies: it means that DEC has to redesign the ASICs on the motherboard, but leaves plenty of room for additional cache on the back side of the board.
Availability dates for OSF/1 on MIPS, he said, had been re-targeted until after the Alpha version, but as the developers version is already shipping, the date change should not impact ISV and customer development schedules too heavily.
On support for Unix V.4.2 — Unix System Laboratories Destiny product — Stone said ‘we have no intention of supporting it.’
He welcomed the endorsement by USL of OSF layered products, said that DEC's Network Applications Support (NAS) services would be ported to the system by autumn of next year, along with versions for HP/UX and AIX and said that both USL and DEC would be prepared to help anybody who felt like porting Destiny to the Alpha chip.
Availability of DEC's Unix system software is as follows:
VXL OF INDIA TO BUILD EUROPEAN BUSINESS WITH LOW-COST UNIX TERMS
Indian computer terminal manufacturer VXL Instruments Ltd has set up base in Rugby, Warwickshire in the UK.
The 26-year-old firm, which started out making customised process control systems, now claims to own 80% of the Indian terminals market, specialising in Unix-based terminals and terminal servers.
The firm now believes it has virtually outgrown its market and is seeking to supplement its fortunes overseas.
VXL has over 200 employees and turned over the equivalent of £3m last year.
It sells its products primarily on an OEM basis, its customers in India including the local subsidiaries of Digital Equipment Corp, Hewlett-Packard Co, Groupe Bull SA, Ing C Olivetti & Co SpA, ICL Plc's International Computers Indian Manufacture Pte Ltd affiliate, and Unisys Corp.
VXL is also currently supplying terminals for use in a large CMC Ltd project to computerise the Indian Railways.
In the UK, the company will offer its existing Unix terminals, such as the five-session VM 2745, and within the next six to 12 months will add a full range of ASCII Unix terminal servers and X-terminals ‘at a price that they're worth’.
These will be sold directly to OEM customers, and via distributors and value-added resellers to end-users.
VXL is aware that breaking into the UK market will not be easy, but the firm says that its products are priced below that of the competition, since all its products are made very cheaply at VXL facilities in India.
For this reason also, the company has no intention of setting up a local manufacturing outfit in the UK — the emphasis here will be on sales, marketing, software and support.
The UK operation will be headed by a three-man team made up of marketing director Jay Savoor; financial director Dipak Rao and sales director Chris Gamble.
FUJITSU HAS OFFICE AUTOMATION SOFTWARE SUITE FOR ITS ICL-SUPPLIED SPARC LINE…
Fujitsu Ltd has released an open office automation system, based on an integrated system called IFOS-Lite.
The hardware used for this system will be the DS/90 7000 series from ICL Plc, as the server, while clients running IFOS-Lite software can be one of a number of personal computers including the IBM Japan Ltd PS/55 and NEC Corp 9800 series as well as Fujitsu's own FMR series.
The system offers electronic mail, electronic diary and schedule management services at the corporate, departmental and individual level and can be configured with six different options including gateway services to other mail centres and host computers.
The server with four-line support is priced at $11,627, rising to $70,000 for a system with 60 line support.
A full package of software options and services is also being configured for it.
…
OPENS OPEN SYSTEMS INTEGRATION CENTRE FOR ITS VENDORS
Fujitsu Ltd has opened an Open Systems Integration Centre in its Systems Laboratories in Kamata on the outskirts of Tokyo.
The centre has been opened to provide facilities for third parties to validate and convert their software for a number of different multivendor systems, including 27 types of workstation — DS/90 series, the S Family bought OEM from Sun Microsystems Inc, Fujitsu's proprietary A series, the FM G series personal computers, as well as Hewlett-Packard Co Apollo, IBM RS/6000, and Sony News, a number of different personal computers including Apple Computer Inc Macintosh and NEC Corp machines, and various local and wide area network software.
HITACHI LAUNCHES BIBLIOTHECA/TS TEXT RETRIEVAL SYSTEM FOR UNIX STATION…
Hitachi Ltd has developed a high-speed text retrieval system for the company's 3050 Unix workstations.
The new system is called Bibliotheca/TS (Text Search) and integrates with Hitachi's new systems concept called Forefront.
Bibliotheca has a number of features which are improvements on existing text retrieval systems, including the non-necessity for indexing, the non-occurrence of retrieval noise and suitability for general users since any word can be retrieved.
Hitachi says that Bibliotheca is based on Hitachi-developed technology called the hierarchical pre-search method.
The system uses X-Windows, and Hitachi's version of Motif; it also includes an application program interface that enables C language programs to be interfaced with the system.
The system is available for client-server systems, or stand-alone.
It can also be interfaced with Hitachi's Hitfile optical filing system, and its Floraword processing hardware.
The price of the client system is $3,875 while the server version is $11,627, and both will be available in December.
…
MANUFACTURING SOFTWARE FOR SPARCSTATION
C Itoh Techno-Science, a distributor of Sun Microsystems Inc workstations in Japan owned by the giant C Itoh & Co trading house — which is changing its name to Itochu — has developed a Japanese version of computer-aided manufacturing software from US company Point Controls Corp.
Advanced Three-dimensional Machining, part of the integrated SmartCAM package, now runs in Japanese on Sparctations and the NEC PC9800 series, priced at $31,000.
It will go via 23 software firms and machine tool dealers.
SUN OPENS TOKYO TECHNOLOGY CENTRE
Sun Microsystems Inc's telemarketing and catalogue operation, SunExpress, has expanded to Japan starting with the end-user education market: Sun says Japan is its fastest growing geographic market.
Meanwhile, the firm has opened a technology engineering centre in Kanagawa Science Park, Tokyo.
Under the charge of Ed Ng, it'll build upon Sun's Japanese-derived products and will explore joint development projects in peripherals, displays, input devices, portable products and consumer electronics integration.
METROLOGIE LETS TOPLOG GO IN MANAGEMENT BUYOUT
Paris-based distribution company Metrologie International SA has let TopLog International, its Unix software business also based in Paris, fly the nest through a management buyout.
Brian Mulligan, the managing director of Toplog Ltd in the UK, said the reason for the parting was that Toplog wanted to capitalise on its Unix software while Metrologie wanted to concentrate on hardware.
He denied that the decision was a result of Metrologie's lingering debts.
‘Metrologie is very much out of the woods now’, he claimed.
TopLog says there will be no changes to how its subsidiaries operate in France, Benelux, Germany, UK (TopLog Ltd) and Spain (DSD).
Terry Donovan, managing director of Metrologie UK, said there would be further divestments — to be announced in the next few months — of operations which did not fit the company's corporate focus on hardware solutions.
Metrologie's DEC business manager, Phil Goodman, said that now TopLog is out on its own there will be no obligation for Metrologie to buy its products.
By the end of 1992, Metrologie claims it will have reduced its debt burden from £122.26 million to £59.77 million.
In order to simplify the company's structure, Donovan said the same product lines would be sold in the UK as well as via the European subsidiaries.
Sales would be customer rather than product led in future.
He stressed that Metrologie UK's four trading divisions: Metrologie Corporate, Metrologie VA, Metrologie Volume Products Division and Metrologie Services, would remain intact and that this structure would be copied across the company's other arm's as far as possible.
Metrologie is also jostling to be one of the two Solaris 2.0 operating system distributors: it already distributes Interactive Unix.
HEWLETT-PACKARD ADDS BOTTOM-END HP 9000 1210 FAULT-TOLERANT MODEL
Hewlett-Packard Co has extended its HP 9000 Series 1200 line of fault-tolerant Unix systems sourced from Sequoia Systems Inc downwards with the launch of the entry-level HP 9000 Model 1210, claiming that it substantially outperforms fault-tolerant offerings from Tandem Computers Inc, Stratus Computer Inc and Digital Equipment Corp by as much as 100% in transaction processing work.
It uses 25MHz 68040 processors for two- to four-way symmetric multi-processing, and can support up to 192Mb of shadowed memory, mirrored disks up to 52Gb and up to 900 users.
It is pitched primarily at telecommunications companies and the medical  market .
The HP 9000 Model 1210 is $165,000 and it performs up to 40 transactions per second.
MIPS ROUNDS UP SUPPORTERS TO PLOT R SERIES FUTURE
MIPS Computer Systems Inc is desperate to be seen to be non-aligned once it is part of Silicon Graphics Inc, and to that end, it has rallied 12 of the computer industry Great and the Good to help guide the future directions of the MIPS microprocessor architecture and help ensure that it remains competitive and open.
The Executive Advisory Board will become part of MIPS Technologies Inc, the wholly owned subsidiary to be created once the acquisition is completed; the board will propose and review enhancements to the R-series architecture and evaluate microprocessor development programmes to help ensure continued technical competitiveness.
The 12 worthies are Stan Shih, chairman of Acer Inc; James Ousley, president of Control Data Systems Inc; Paul Maritz, senior vice-president, Microsoft Corp; Robert Miller, chairman of MIPS, and John Hennessy, its chief scientist; Hajime Sasaki, senior vice-president, NEC Corp; Elserino Piol, vice-chairman and chief operating officer, Ing C Olivetti & Co SpA; Dr Thomas Longo, chairman of Performance Semiconductor Corp; Dr Horst Nasko, vice-chairman, Siemens-Nixdorf Informationssysteme AG; Forest Baskett, senior vice-president, Silicon Graphics; James Treybig, president of Tandem Computers Inc; and D. Hideharu Egawa, vice-president and director, Toshiba Semiconductor Group.
SEQUOIA TARGETS HEALTH CARE
Fault-tolerant Unix system builder, Sequoia Systems Inc, is going after the health care market in collaboration with its partner — Hewlett-Packard — and DataTree and Greystone Technology as the first of several vertical sectors it expects to pursue.
It builds on Sequoia's pact with HP to sell Sequoia's series 400 as part of the HP 9000/1200 product line.
The four companies will integrate mainframe and personal computer technologies to provide fault-tolerant open systems platforms for 24-hour-a-day processing of patient records, insurance claims, lab data and the like.
They will be based on MUMPS database and programming language, using DataTree's client/server software and Greystone's host-based system software which  wlil be adapted to Sequoia's systems (UX No 386).
COMPUTER ASSOCIATES TO BUNDLE UNIX SOFTWARE ON HP KIT BY YEAR-END
Following its decision to move into the Unix arena (UX No 317), Computer Associates International, is angling to get its first batch of Unix-based applications out the door by the end of the year.
In a strategic alliance with Hewlett-Packard Co, CA will bundle its systems management software, CA-Unicenter on all HP Unix systems running HP-UX, with a free 120 day site licence.
HP has by all accounts spearheaded the firm's move into the Unix world, according to Mike Maunder, general manager of CA's mid-range products,’ HP is the powering force behind our move into Unix’.
CA-Unicenter will operate under OSF's Motif graphical user interface and includes features such as single point security; performance monitoring, which will identify bottlenecks and analyse service levels; report distribution; workload scheduling, enabling the system flexible batch queuing functions; tape management; user administration; resource accounting and problem management functions.
CA intends Unicenter to be marketed at the mission-critical applications, particularly in the financial and corporate sectors.
In a move by the company, it says, to wean itself off relying on the IBM mainframe market, it also hopes to break into the VAX and Unix commercial market by opening up its CA-IDMS and CA-Datacom non-relational database packages.
According to CA this can be done by bolting on its recompiled Unix-based relational database CA-DB on to the front of other databases, in effect making the non-relational database function as a RDMS without any rewriting taking place.
These two databases will appear in early 1993.
CA has also set up a similar bundling agreement for CA-Unicenter with Sequent Computer Systems Inc, however, this version still has a lot of work to be done on it and isn't likely to appear until this time in 1993.
To guarantee integrity and fault tolerance, CA has ambled down the road to Tandem Computer Inc, and is currently in the labs developing a Unicenter version for Tandem's Guardian, fault-tolerant operating system.
CA-Unicenter is due to go to beta test in July on HP systems — the first releases are expected in October this year on HP's Unix 9000 series 700/800 workstations and servers.
Pricing will depend on the number of modules picked up, entry level price is £5,000 and up.
MICROSOFT LAUNCHES ITS SQL BRIDGE FOR BUILDING CLIENT-SERVER SYSTEMS…
Microsoft Corp says it is now shipping Microsoft SQL Bridge, a protocol gateway for building distributed client-server systems in Windows, MS-DOS, OS/2, Unix, Macintosh and VMS environments.
SQL Bridge is designed to provide seamless integration of Microsoft and Sybase Inc SQL Server applications, databases and gateways, independent of operating systems and network protocols.
It routes client-server requests across networks having different protocols, such as named pipes, TCP/IP and DECnet.
It eliminates the need for client workstations to add libraries or protocols in order to access SQL Server data on Unix systems, the company quotes a user as saying: ‘a single workstation configuration can obtain data from both Unix and OS/2-based servers.’
It enables Excel, Visual Basic and more than 150 other Windows- and MS-DOS-based tools written for SQL Server to connect to Sybase on Unix and VMS machines using native PC-LAN protocols.
Unix- and VMS-based clients on Sun Microsystems Inc, IBM Corp RS/6000, Digital Equipment Corp, Hewlett-Packard Co and other workstations can access SQL Server using the Sybase Open Client interface.
It also enables Microsoft SQL Server and Sybase SQL Server to exchange information using remote stored procedure calls and will support all new Windows-based Open DataBase Connectivity — ODBC — applications as well as current SQL Server applications.
A release later this year will add support for IPX/SPX and TCP/IP on NetWare and Vines networks and a version of the product for Windows NT is planned.
It is available for $2,500.
…
CLAIMS ICL, OLIVETTI, SIEMENS SUPPORT FOR WINDOWS NT
Microsoft Corp has been banging the drum for its forthcoming Windows New Technology operating system in Europe and says it has won ‘broad support’ for it from ICL Plc, Ing C Olivetti & Co SpA and Siemens Nixdorf Informationssysteme AG.
Microsoft claims that the support anticipates Windows NT as a strategic operating environment and endorses its Windows Open Services Architecture.
Microsoft said that it is working with the European manufacturers to combine its operating system with the existing hardware architecture of each.
ORACLE SEEKS TO PUT THE FEAR OF RETRIBUTION UP RIVALS WITH ORACLE7
The razzmatazz and hype that will attend the roll-out of version 7 of Oracle Corp's eponymous relational database — the company seems to want to call it Oracle7 — has begun in earnest, and last week's blast comes with the announcement that the thing embodies ‘a revolutionary new technology called a co-operative-server database’.
The company explains this by saying that a co-operative-server database hides the complexity of a computer network by enabling applications to access data located on multiple computers as if all the data were stored on a single computer, thus simplifying application building and — it is hoped — improving decisions by making access to information easier.
The mechanism is claimed to address the problem that a first-generation client-server database does not support a standard SQL query or a standard SQL update transaction that accesses data on more than one server.
The Oracle7 co-operative-server database has been designed to support SQL query and update transactions that automatically retrieve and modify data on multiple servers, and to enable a group of low-cost servers computers to outperform the largest mainframe, which will not make the thing very popular with IBM Corp, and should offer high reliability because there is no single point of failure.
The intention is that users should be able to increase their system capacity and performance simply by adding another server to the network.
A group of low cost server computers running the Oracle7 co-operative-server database can easily support thousands of users running thousands of transactions per second, the company claims, in theory making the system infinitely scalable and addressing the market for emerging very large databases that contain image, text, voice and other multimedia data.
Open and programmable gateway alternatives to reach alien systems
Oracle7 does support both database remote procedure calls and programmatic two-phase commit, but only for use with Oracle7's open gateway and programmable server.
Oracle7 provides two types of gateways to non-Oracle data: automatic and programmable.
The automatic gateway supports standard SQL operations on many non-SQL systems, such as IBM Corp's IMS database and Digital Equipment Corp's RMS file system, as well as most SQL systems, such as IBM's DB2 and DEC's Rdb databases, the company says.
The programmable gateway supports native access to ‘virtually any’ data source via database remote procedure calls.
The automatic gateway supports automatic distributed queries and automatic distributed transactions that span Oracle and non-Oracle data sources, so that the savings account described above could be moved to a DB2 database on an IBM mainframe in Los Angeles, and the same SQL query and update transactions that worked when all of the data was in an Oracle database will continue to work.
As for the programmable gateway, this is designed to be used when there is no automatic gateway available for a specific non-Oracle data source, such as a file system on a microcomputer robot controller.
In that case, the application developer should use tools that are provided as a part of the programmable gateway to write a program to access the data in the robot controller.
The tool kit includes a database remote procedure call facility to simplify writing the program when the application program and the non-Oracle data source are on different computers.
To resolve the problem that most organisations have multiple networks that communicate using different network protocols, the multiprotocol networking software in Oracle7 is designed to enable any client computer to communicate with any server or group of server computers in the network, regardless of network protocol.
Benchmarks
Oracle reports TPC-A benchmark results of 605.27 transactions per second on a Sequent Computer Systems Inc Symmetry 2000/750, simulating 6,050 users for a $10,919 per transaction per second cost; 560.87 tpsB at a cost of $2,970 per tpsB on a Digital Equipment Corp VAX 6000 Model 660; 100.85 tpsB on a Data General Corp AViiON 4635 server for a cost of $1,588 per tpsB; and 578 tpsA on a Hewlett-Packard Co HP 9000 Corporate Business Server 890 with four processor boards for a cost of $11,901 per tpsA.
BULL INTRODUCES UNIKIX IN UK
Unikix, the 18-month-old CICS-for-Unix product pioneered by Unicorn Systems Inc and now owned by Groupe Bull SA, is now being launched into the UK for the first time by Brentford, Middlesex-based Bull Information Systems Ltd.
Unikix, acquired back in January by Bull's US systems integration arm, Integris, is expected to boost the group's drive towards being an out-and-out systems integrator.
Unikix, installed in only six sites in the US although available over there since late 1990 (due to a failure by Unicorn to market the product effectively, says Bull), is a development environment and transaction processing environment for Cobol-based applications developed to run under CICS on IBM mainframes.
It provides the capability to implement CICS applications for various Unix environments without source modification, and enables the development of new applications to run on both IBM mainframes and Unix systems.
The usefulness of having transaction processing applications down on the workstation, the company says, is to bring for example sales order processing information closer to the salesperson, who can play around with the data in a windows-based environment, oblivious to the complex processing going on behind the scenes.
Unikix currently supports Pyramid, Sun, Bull and IBM RS/6000 Unix workstations; further implementations will be directed by demand, says Bull's UK systems integration director Phillip Crawford — a Hewlett-Packard version being the next likely port.
Bull says it has invested heavily in getting the product up to date.
By enabling IBM Cobol/VSAM CICS applications to run on Unix systems, says Crawford, users are offered the first easy step in moving off their proprietary mainframes; he reckons Unikix facilitates 200–600% long-term cost-of-ownership savings for a typical customer.
Aggressively
Unikix is positioned aggressively against IBM's announced-but-not-available CICS for AIX.
Brian Gunn, Bull's business manager for systems integration in Livingston, Scotland, says it could be up to two years before IBM brings out its AIX offering, by which time Unikix will be far ahead in terms of added value.
(Our sources say, however, that CICS AIX will be out within the next six weeks, which could shed a different light on matters.)
It is Unikix's ‘openness’ which is expected to best differentiate the product — while CICS AIX will support only IBM Unix, Unikix is easily ported to any flavour of Unix required.
The product costs anywhere between £4,000 and £250,000; Bull has set up a freephone number to deal with customer enquiries.
Bull does have another transaction processing product, BOS/tp, which is Bull's Unix implementation of Tuxedo — this has nothing to do with CICS; it enables existing Bull and RS/6000 customers to run Unix applications with Oracle and so on.
Bull says it offers Unikix and BOS/tp to suit different needs, or to users who want both, under its Distributed Computing Model.
The firm claims that a good deal of interest has already been shown in Unikix, which is described as the essential tool in Bull's SmartSizing programme — Bull's alternative to rightsizing or downsizing.
Bull differentiates its approach saying it concentrates on getting the best business productivity from information technology installations, rather than just scaling down bad jobs.
Bull reckons its systems integration business is growing at three times the market rate and claims to be the fourth largest systems integration business in Europe.
It has 2,000 staff dedicated to systems integration, some 450 in the UK.
Fifteen percent of group revenues are systems integration based; last year related revenues grew 67%, and a further 54% growth is expected in the current year.
The group's long-term aim is to get into non-Bull sites to deliver its consultancy and networking services.
This goal is apparently already being achieved — Gunn is currently working with a Hewlett-Packard site, an IBM RS/6000 and an IBM mainframe site.
Alliances are high on Bull's list of priorities: the group wants to talk to any consultancy firms, independent software vendors and systems integrators.
Key to Bull's systems integration strategy, of course, is its DCM Distributed Computing Model, based on the Open Software Foundations' Distributed Computing Environment.
Crawford claims the Gartner Group rates Bull's model the most open and complete of those available.
Unlike IBM's SAA, he says, DCM is open and flexible enough to be customised for each particular site; it allows for customers wanting to integrate other vendors' hardware, which Bull will try to supply if necessary.
Crawford notes that while the architecture is useful to represent the business strategy, and while the associated products are necessary building blocks, the model is useless unless it allows for services to put the various pieces of the puzzle together.
Bull thinks it has got the mixture right.
We'll see.
XHIBITION ‘92 ROUNDUP
NEW TI CHIP HOLDS PROMISE OF LOW-COST, COLOUR TERMINALS
Texas Instruments Inc is now sampling a new chip that it says will allow colour X-terminals to be sold below the $1,000 price line — its first product specifically aimed at the X market.
The 340X — a streamlined version of the established TI TM34020 graphics chip, offers, according to TI, ‘all the processing horse power of the 32-bit TM34020, but has been stripped of the 34020-based peripherals designed specifically for PC-based graphics subsystems.’
The result is significantly lower pricing — $75 for sampling and below $40 in volume.
Used with the TLC34075 palette chip, supporting various colour combinations and resolutions — including 1600 x 1200 at  60MHz refresh rates — the 32MHz part can be used as the basis of low-cost colour terminals.
For mono and grayscale models, there is an optimised version, of the palette chip, the TLC34074.
Faster clock speeds are expected later this year.
At Xhibition, Tektronix, a TI user for its low-end systems, cut the price of its 77,000 Xstones rated X11 with 15″ mono monitor to $995, and the 14″ colour XP17 to $1,995.
Colour systems below $1,000 could be feasible within a year.
NorthWest Digital Systems, Seattle, California, was demonstrating an X Terminal design based around the new chip, called Wildcat 2 — the second generation of its original Wildcat design launched at last year's show.
It is said to be the smallest complete X Terminal design available, covering just under 50 square inches of broad space.
NDS has signed a licensing agreement for the technology with X Terminal manufacturer Hyundai electronics Corp of Korea.
Other TI partners likely to take on the new technology for X-Terminals include C.Itoh, which launched the CIT-XE+ range at the show, ADDS/NCR, DEC, IBM, Megatek, Princeton Graphics, Sun River, Tandberg Data, Visual and Zentec.
NEW X-TERMINALS FROM JAPAN COMPUTER CORP
Japan Computer Corp, based in Tokyo but with a US office in Fort Lee, New Jersey, has introduced a new series of X-terminals.
The GlobalX series brings the company into the 3D market for graphics, engineering and business users.
They include monochrome and PEX colour X-terminals using the MIPS R3000A processor, with local support for Motif and X11 Release 5.
The JCC GlobalXM mono system uses a 25MHz R3000 with JCC-designed ASIC as an X-Server accelerator — it is rated at 120,000 Xstones. 17″, 19″ and 21″ 1280 x 1024 monitors are supported.
The JCC GlobalPEX, a colour PEX terminal, uses a 40MHz R3000A with choice of 17″ or 20″ monitors — but is only available in limited quantities as an evaluation machine, while work on PEX continues.
RISC processors are needed to support the additional functionality of R5, it says, which includes additional security, internationalism and localisation, scalable fonts and PEX — the Phigs extensions to X. The company's first R3000-based products were launched onto the market last summer.
Prices start at $2,650 for the XM-17.
JCC, a 14-year old company with 100 staff, originally started out as a high-end workstation manufacturer.
Its products are distributed in the UK by Chernikeef.
WHITE PINES EXPANDS X-SERVER RANGE TO WINDOWS, NeXT
White Pines Software Inc, Nashua, New Hampshire, which started out offering X-server software for the Macintosh, has now introduced new X-server products for both Microsoft Windows and the NeXT computer, under its brand name eXodus.
The Windows product is the result of an OEM agreement with VisionWare Ltd, of Leeds in the UK.
EXodus for NeXT, which the company admits ‘has a relatively small installed base compared to Windows and the Macintosh,’ is all its own work, and was released in April.
It assumes that a user wants to work only within NeXTstep, not on a Unix command line, something it claims other products have failed to realise.
Optimistically, the company says it expects the business to really take off once NeXTstep ships for Intel platforms later this year.
The company has also upgraded its Macintosh server to version 4.0, claiming better performance.
Price for the Microsoft Windows version is $450, and $300 for the Macintosh — no prices for NeXT.
CONGRUENT INTRODUCES X IMAGING EXTENSIONS FOR IBM RS/6000
IBM demonstrated imaging extensions to its X-Window software in an implementation produced by the New York-based software house Congruent Corp, The X Imaging Extension (XIE) is the imaging software for X submitted to the X Consortium by DEC as a proposed standard.
It speeds up graphics applications by enabling X terminals to manipulate images locally, and includes image rendition facilities supporting bitonal, grayscale and colour images.
The work is currently in a review process, expected to be completed by the end of the year.
Congruent Corp licenses XIE for the RS/6000 from $500, and licensees wil receive free of charge software upgrades as the standards process progresses.
Aside from XIE, other work at Congruent includes high-performance Windows display drivers with Asian language and multimedia extensions.
WINDOWS VERSION OF ALEX GUI TOOLS
UK, Leeds-based VisonWare Ltd's mystery announcement (UX No 389) turned out to be a technology partnership with fellow UK company Alex Technologies Ltd, Ealing, West London: the two are working on a Windows version of Alex development environment, which currently allows an X-Windows front end to be added to character-based applications.
Meanwhile, VisionWare Ltd says release 4.1 of its XVision Microsoft Windows-based X-server software is now shipping: according to figures from the X Business Group, Fremont, California, it enjoys a leading 39% share of the MS-Windows X-server market.
SUNPRO HAS C TRANSITION PACK
Readying itself for the next release of Solaris this week, SunPro, a division of Sun Microsystems Inc based in Mountain View, California, will ship its C Transition Pack on July 1.
Combining SparCompilers and SparcWorks development tools from the SparcWorks Professional family of products, the pack helps migrate C applications from version 1.0 to 2.0 of the Solaris operating environment.
The announcement is a gentle nudge to developers to move over to the new version of Solaris.
Until the end of September this year, the product will be specially priced at £618, which SunPro claims is a 70% saving.
Transition Packs are also available for other languages like Fortran (£1,365 — $2,200), C++ (£1,240 — $2,000) and Pascal (£1,365 — $2,200), at a 35% saving.
The transition packs include CD-ROM media, user manuals and online documentation.
The enhanced SparCompilers have optimisation techniques and parallel instruction scheduling to enable developers to get an 8–12% improvement from the SuperSparc RISC.
However, the C compiler now has to be bought separately as it is no longer to be bundled with Solaris: SunPro claims that it is no longer a necessary item for customers.
The company has also introduced a network licensing scheme to enable tools and compilers to support different versions of the Solaris environment interchangeably.
Version 2.0 of SparcWorks, a set of six development tools for all SparCompilers, will also support Solaris 1.0 from September.
SunPro is setting up shop in Europe to market software products geared towards software development.
Velizy, France is to be the European headquarters with around ten staff and other offices will open in London, Northern European Office, and Munich, Central European Office, by the end of this year.
The company is also predicting European prices will come down to the same level as in the US.
ACER ADDS TO ALTOS 80486 LINE
San Jose, California-based Acer Group subsidiary Altos Corp, has announced the addition of two Unix-based workstations to its Altos System 4500 product line.
The Altos System 4500–50M and 4500–50E, both built on Intel Corp's 50MHz i486 DX part, have 256Kb of high-speed, 8Gb of disk storage and level-2 cache.
Both systems feature 16Mb of memory, Altos SCSI channel adaptor, 525Mb cartridge drive, VGA controller, SCSI-2 hard disk drive and 14″ colour monitor.
All Altos System 4500 systems built on i486SX or 33MHz DX parts can be upgraded to the 50MHz version, says the company.
Running Altos/SCO Unix system V/386 Release 3.2, which is also fully compatible with the Santa Cruz Operation's SCO Unix 3.2 version, the 4500–50M and 4500–50E systems have six EISA slots, 33Mb-per-second EISA I/O bus and SCSI-2 hard drives.
Both systems will be expanded to include 256Mb of memory and 16Gb of disk storage by the end of the year.
Available now the Altos System 4500–50M and 4500–50E are priced at $16,700 and $15,800 respectively.
SUN's SPARC WEB DRAWN TIGHTER WITH VERSION 9
Version 9, Sun Microsystems Inc's specification for the next generation of Sparc architecture, which includes 64-bit requirements, has been rubber-stamped by Amdahl Corp, Ericsson, Fujitsu Ltd, HaL Computer Systems, Hyundai, ICL, Interactive Systems, LSI Logic, Matsushita, Oracle Corp, Philips International, Ross Technology, Texas Instruments and Sun itself.
After taking account of relationships between the various firms in the list, we're left with a core number which can almost be counted on the fingers of one hand.
Sun put out the wire to its community describing Sparc as ‘an open evolutionary process…the only cooperatively-developed, royalty-free architecture in the world.’
Sparc International — ostensibly there to serve this process — didn't get a look-in on the announcement, and the only contact listed on the message is a Sun flak.
MINIGRAMS
The ANDF installer for Sparc produced by Praxis Systems Plc (UX No 389), was not done for the Open Software Foundation but for the DRA, which owns it.
DRA says, however, that Praxis is doing ANDF work on a mystery chip for OSF which it declined to identify, except to say it wasn't the Transputer (the 88000 perhaps?).
DRA itself has done installers for the Transputer, 386/486, MIPS, 68K, VAX and is looking at HP's PA-RISC.
Computer Associates is co-sponsoring ‘The Great Debate’ at Alice Tully Hall in the Lincoln Centre in New York on June 22, discussing the need for a US technology policy: Speakers include Gordon Bell, Larry Michels, Roger Sippl, Morgan Stanley senior economist Stephen Roach, Senate Defense Industry and Technology subcommittee chairman Jeff Bingaman, and Harvard University JFK School of Government moderator Marvin Kalb.
IBM Corp is to begin distributing AIX/6000 on CD-ROM, making the product easier to install, it says: IBM has also announced price reductions on memory upgrades for the RS/6000 of up to 41%.
Informix Software Inc has opened an office in Prague, Czechoslovakia: others are said likely to follow in Poland, Hungary and CIS.
UK manufacturer, Cambridge Micro Computers Ltd, has introduced an Intel Corp 80486-based server system running Santa Cruz Operation Inc Open Desktop which it says can support up to 100 workstations — the 20 MIPS, 50MHz machine comes with up to 6Gb disk and will integrate with Novell Inc NetWare, TCP/IP and Microsoft Lan Manager networks, no prices given.
Dell and AST have apparently been working closely with Sunsoft, say sources, and might be a good bet for the mystery OEMs Sunsoft is to trot out this week.
Island Graphics is set to become the first — and so far the only — application for Solaris-on-Intel, to be announced this week at PC Expo.
Solbourne Computer has plucked Charles Barbour, a founder of both Apollo and Stellar, as its vice president of engineering.
Solbourne is figuring it'll ship its Viking-based Series 6 in the fourth quarter.
Aachen, Germany-based Parsytec GmbH's US subsidiary in West Chicago has announced Parix, the ‘second-generation’ parallel Unix-based development environment developed for its indefinitely-forthcoming GC Series of T9000 Transputer-based MIMD supercomputers by Amsterdam-based Associated Computer Experts BV: aimed specifically at scientists and research engineers, it can be used on any Parsytec system with 16 or more nodes, which is hooked up to a Sun Microsystems Inc workstation as a front end; a Parsytec 62-node MultiCluster I with Parix is from $100,000.
Japan's ASCII Corporation has picked up Japanese and Korean distribution rights to Santa Clara, California-based Nimbus Technology Inc's new Mbus board for would-be superscalar Sparc cloners (UX No 383) and other products: ASCII, the lead investor in Chips & Technologies Inc back in 1987, is also considering taking a minority stake in the start-up though that part of the equation has yet to be nailed down.
ASCII is run by the man who first brought Microsoft Corp to Japan.
Now he's quoted as saying, ‘Sparc is the way to go’ in the workstation market.
Sunnyvale, California-based Ashlar Inc has opened up as Vellum Software Ltd, Cambridge, to sell its 3D CAD applications in the UK.
Tadpole US has picked up a new president, Kenneth Cannizzaro, previously the firm's director of business development: he's responsible for operations and market expansion in the Americas and the Pacific Rim.
Founder Bob Gilkes is now simply chairman.
Tadpole has also moved into new quarters so it can start manufacturing stateside for orders worldwide.
IBM Corp has an OEM pact for its RS/6000 and AIX Unix from employee-owned Versyss Inc, Westwood, Massachusetts, which will call it Solution/RISC.
Financial terms were not given.
Versyss builds integrated multi-user systems with its own vertical software; it is active in the Eastern European market.
The aggregate turnover of the Indian computer industry rose 27% in the year to March to reach $1,000m, according to the Manufacturers Association for Information Technology; exports of hardware and software totalled $105m, up from $88m.
DEC, making a play for the desktop market, has completed its acquisition of Richmond Point, California-based 800-Software, one of the largest PC software distribution houses in the US.
With revenues of $77m in 1991, 800-Software will maintain its current management infrastructure, becoming a wholly owned subsidiary of DEC. 800-Software will continue to market the 12,000 non-Digital products already on its books.
Cisco Systems Inc, the internetworking routers company, has spun off a Japanese subsidiary Nihon Cisco Systems K.K, Tokyo .
Heading up the operation, Cisco has brought in Takatoshi Matsumoto as general manager, who  previously headed up similar startups Nihon Sun Microsystems K.K. and System Software Associates K.K. The Japanese office will be responsible for supporting sales and maintenance services for its Japanese distributor Net One Systems Co and OEM partner NEC Corp.
Sequent Computer Systems Inc is apparently more than interested in sticking Microsoft NT on its Symmetry platforms.
Ing C Olivetti & Co SpA and Novell Inc duly announced the signing of a Master Business Agreement, which covers full support of NetWare within the Olivetti Open System Architecture and joint marketing activities between the two: Olivetti is taking NetWare for Unix and will do a version for System V.4 on Intel Corp iAPX-86 and on its MIPS Computer Systems Inc RISC-based machines; it will also take Novell's System Fault Tolerant III technology for some servers, including multiprocessor machines, and they will be fully integrated with Novell's NetWare Management System.
Emeryville, California-based Sybase Inc bought all rights to the SQR, Easy SQR, and Easy SQR for Windows SGL-based proprietary language reporting tools developed by SQ Software Inc.
Sybase has been selling and supporting the tools since 1988 under the SQR Family line, which also includes the SQR Developer's Kit developed by SQL Solutions, through its SQL Solutions consulting organisation, but it says that by merging SQ Software's tools directly into its SQL Lifecycle tools product line, it can more effectively support and enhance them.
The SQR Family supports Sybase, Oracle, Rdb, Ingres, Informix, SQL Base and SQL Server.
Network Computing Devices Inc got its initial public offering of 2.5m shares, all new, away at $12 a share, and plans to use the $28m or so net proceeds for working capital.
OK, so will it be in the next announcement or is it in there already and IBM Corp just hasn't told anybody about it yet?
The company reportedly plans to add a Power RISC to the AS/400 processor complex, not to be used as a Unix CPU or anything like that, but in order to soup up performance where the machine is weak — doing complex sums and handling image processing.
A very unhappy MicroMuse Ltd was bemoaning the theft from its stand of a Toshiba Corp laptop computer at the Software Tools show in Wembley, London last week: the machine looks identical to a Toshiba 5200 but was in fact a Sparc LT engineering sample with Solaris loaded and the company warns the thief that it is the only one of its type in the UK and is very traceable.
Several glitches in the slide/film presentation that Olivetti executives made at their bash in Rome last week prompted chief operating officer, Elserino Piol to promise that ‘next year everything will be handled by Olivetti multi-media devices:’ we'll remember that.