

THE HOLE IN THE FLOOR
At first, writing a personal experience of cancer seemed little different from writing a thriller.
There was the opening trauma, the suspects, the who-done-it, and even a form of denouement.
There was ‘the moment of truth’ and ‘it can't be happening to me…’feeling.
It's all a dream, in a few moments all will be streaming sunshine again.
But that is a superficial similarity.
I may now have an inkling of what has happened to me over the last few years; I may have lined up a few suspects, even tentatively put my finger on ‘who done it’; I may have my own private detectives working alongside the regular police, and we may have made an arrest or two, but the file has not been closed.
Nor can it ever be.
In the cancer patient's world, the moment of truth, the hole in the floor is called the diagnosis.
With me it happened on an ultra-scan.
I had felt ill for several months.
I had grown more and more tired, energy seeped away and I had begun to sweat at night.
Up until then I had seldom visited a doctor and prided myself that most things that went wrong I could put right myself.
I had a supreme belief, without any resource to health books, that in medical matters I was a born DIY man.
I saw my body very much as an empty container.
What was visible was all there was.
If a corn was offensive it could be tackled with a razor blade; a nasty spot attracted the iodine bottle or a dab of TCP; fever could, in my father's words, ‘be sweated out’.
I suspect that my attitude is not unique.
In internal matters ‘out of sight, out of mind’ must be more pertinent than ‘absence makes the heart grow fonder’.
When our internal organs, lungs, liver or kidneys, are like the far side of the moon, never visible, how can we possibly have any feeling for them?
Indeed, for many of us there is a deep revulsion to seeing the body's organs.
(A close up of a TV operation always sets my fingers tingling.)
Given that the empty bottle feeling is perfectly normal, then not unreasonably, most of our concerns are simplified into how to cover it.
Over the years my health had always been good.
Everything inside me seemed to be fine.
No one had ever wanted to probe my appendix, hernia, gall-bladder or spleen.
So far as I was aware, my functions had been reasonably normal.
My one great experience with the medical world had been a wartime wound, a shattered knee and leg, that although it incurred many months in hospital, to a young man of twenty-two, seemed to be totally external.
So I was the owner of an empty container in which were things that I have never seen nor wished to know about.
My own diagnosis — male menopause with too much of the flesh pots — failed most miserably.
My daughter told me that I was chrome yellow, and a glance in the mirror proved her right.
My appetite dwindled and even my favourite food, milk chocolate, failed to raise my morale.
My fingernails went white and the moons were eclipsed.
Then there were the scales.
Like all bathroom scales, ours are trod with hope and trepidation.
The small magnifying  lens is opaque with Scholl's Athletes Foot Powder, and progress up or down is difficult to discern.
For years I had stood upon those scales and willed the reading down.
At twelve and three-quarters stone, and on rare occasions touching thirteen, the load upon my one good leg had been considerable.
Not to mention my heart.
Knee and hip joints were creaking and it seemed that the prophecy made by doctors forty years before, that one day my legs and hips — the war left me with a short, stiff left leg — would really begin to seize up, was about to come true.
So I tried half heartedly to diet and each week put the results to the test.
The results stayed gloomy until the winter of 1984–85.
Even with the other symptoms, the loss of a couple of pounds in a week seemed fine.
After all, that was what I had been aiming at.
But then came the deluge.
With every visit to the scales another three or four pounds had vanished.
It was hard to believe twelve stones and I tried to clean the lens.
It was impossible to believe eleven.
At that point, I hid the scales; they no longer existed.
They were the harbingers of something terrible.
I had a piranha inside me, I was being eaten alive.
At the same time there was that great act of faith, the blazer.
The most elegant of all man's wear is the English summer blazer, now alas almost completely relegated to the period film and the jazz band.
I had four, all of Indian silk, and three were now threadbare.
A new one was promised as a Christmas-  cum -birthday present.
As they no longer seemed to exist as ready-made garments, my wife bought the material.
The tailor measured me at the height of the deluge.
He had my old measurements and I apologised for all that I was doing to his calculations.
We decided that I would live and split the difference between then and a projected now.
I am glad to say that this act of faith has since been amply rewarded and the blazer's fit is perfect.
But I have jumped the gun.
Even before the blazer, I had very reluctantly decided that the time had come to visit my doctor.
The normal processes of consultation took place, and after one or two false alarms, during which I kidded myself that I was perfectly all right, I ultimately found myself in the regulation NHS nightshirt, sitting amidst expectant mothers, in the gynaecology section of the Royal Hampshire County Hospital, waiting to sample the wonders of the ultra-scan.
When I am not writing I draw.
My visual eye is both a joy, and a burden, for with it, and my writer's mind, goes imagination.
Now, at last, I was really beginning to imagine.
Something inside that empty bottle that I had ignored for so long was hitting back.
My skin was no longer the limits of my known world.
There was something inside me after all, and whatever it was — to my untutored mind it seemed that it must be exceedingly unpleasant, even hideous —it was not well .
The walls of the ultra-scan room were covered with ‘sonar’ pictures.
To the layman they were neither beautiful nor exciting, but redolent of the search for the Loch Ness monster, sunken ships and hidden treasure.
And that was exactly what the radiologist was doing as he slowly ran his sensor over my stomach.
‘You've complained of pain in your side?’
‘Not really, I haven't had any pain at all.’
A bit of a cheat that, being in here without pain.
Still, I'm not swinging the lead, my GP sent me here.
Each time I had tried to discharge myself from his surgery, he had reassured me that I was not shamming, there really was something wrong with me.
The radiologist was obviously getting good soundings on the right of my stomach, for his sensor was traversing backwards and  forwards like a frigate on a sweep with a nice, fat positive response, from a holed-up submarine.
‘You've got something…?’
I felt very important when I asked that.
They were only three words but at that moment they were as pertinent as the universe.
I neither looked like John Wayne, nor sounded like him, but I did feel like him.
The sparsity of the dialogue pleased me.
‘You've got something in that there stomach of mine.’
I hoped the radiologist would respond.
Thankfully, he did.
‘There's something there…’
‘In my liver?
My doctor thought it might be my liver.’
‘Your kidney.’
‘My kidney!’
I had never before consciously thought about my kidney — or rather my kidneys — hardly realising that I had any.
Now I looked up at the ‘sonic’ photos on the wall.
Without my glasses I could see very little, certainly insufficient to tell the difference between a good kidney and a bad one.
(No doubt what I was squinting to comprehend were various distortions of the human foetus.)
I may have asked a few more questions; I can't remember now.
I still didn't realise what the trouble might be, although I dare say the germ of cancer may have nestled for the first time in my mind.
I was at once despatched to X-ray, and there in a different NHS nightshirt, things took their  confirmatory course.
There were injections, X-rays and much to-ing and fro-ing.
Another radiologist confirmed that my kidney was in trouble.
To my question, how much trouble, the answer was: ‘You will need some treatment.’
‘How much treatment?’
‘Treatment…some treatment, your own doctor will tell you.’
Up until that time, treatment meant a bottle of pills or at most a rub with embrocation.
Yet I think that was the moment the penny began to drop, although the ultimate confirmation came from my GP.
I now realise that one has to ask the questions oneself.
I had a large tumour on my right kidney, it would certainly need an operation.
‘Is it benevolent or malign?’
I always get things wrong at moments of crisis.
‘Most certainly malignant.’
‘You mean I have cancer ’
My GP nodded.
I don't remember the carpet coming up to hit me, nor finding it hard to breathe, nor at that moment did the judge put on the black cap and say that I must swing by the neck until I was dead.
All that was to come later.
I remember rather the opposite.
I was a someone at last.
I had had a whole afternoon spent upon me, been the centre of attention, cost the State a fortune and my wife had given up a whole day of precious work to be with me.
I was actually important .
And in spite of cancer,it was good to be important .
As I left my GP — he was passing me over to a surgeon — and he shook my hand and wished me luck — that in itself was a bad sign — neither the truth nor the meaning had really sunk in.
I was going out to tell the world and I must have walked from his room pumping pure adrenalin through every vein.
Looking back upon that exit, I am reminded of a particularly nasty afternoon forty-two years ago, when as a young subaltern cowering in a ditch, the sole survivor of a shattered Churchill tank crawled from his steel tomb and offered me a cigarette.
CANCER, THE SIX LETTER WORD
Just as my tankman, when we had smoked our cigarettes must have begun to realise the horrendous trauma he had just been through — so, upon reaching home and spreading the news — I too began to dwell upon that single notorious word.
The first thing I did was to get used to it.
I had cancer, and that is what I had.
It wasn't a four-letter word, although when one uttered it, one might have been forgiven for thinking that it was.
It was a six-letter word and I knew absolutely nothing about it.
I had used it only in reference to the night sky and the Zodiac.
It was a faint constellation lying between Leo and Gemini, and a twelfth of the world's population born under its sign had long pincers and never let go.
My mother, now some years dead, used to breathe the word in the same hushed tones she bestowed upon jews, Asians, and Natives.
When she did breathe ‘cancer’, in her muffled contralto, the implications were of something exceedingly unfortunate with a strong hint of divine retribution, more often than not accompanied by a sharp, righteous, ‘be sure your sins will find you out.’
My grounding in cancer therefore was thin.
Besides my mother's whispered asides with their garnish of guilt, I had only brushed with two cancer sufferers in my life.
When I was a boy, a great uncle-in-law died of cancer, as did my mother-in-law in later years.
In the first case, I remember watching the old man come slowly down the stairs after ‘a secret operation’ never openly discussed but which I now take to be a colostomy.
He was white faced and moved very slowly and painfully.
It was whispered that he would soon die and he did.
My mother said it was due to eating imported meat, particularly Argentinian.
She always had British.
My mother-in-law's death, seemed to have been a long, lingering and painful end, bravely  borne .
As she was a devout Anglican, somewhat callously I may have thought that death to her was not the ‘end’ it might be to others.
Anyway, her cancer as such was not actively discussed, so only her loss and not the cause of her loss was ever aired.
Cancer now became the biggest thing in my life.
I remembered others who had died of it: a sister-in-law, a colleague at work in the days when I commuted to London, and two neighbours.
One had had such widespread cancer, after her operation she was just sent home to die.
I also remembered those who had had cancer and were still alive.
My first shock was that in England there was a whole legion of one-breasted women.
I had lived in the midst of the Amazons without knowing it.
Full of admiration as I was for these brave, sturdy survivors, it was kidneys I was now interested in.
Indeed, since I was to lose one of mine, the kidney had become the most treasured and important of all my organs.
I began to be conscious even of the kidney shape.
We don't have a kidney-shaped swimming pool, but I do possess several palettes.
Then there's a three-piece hall table with a rickety leg that when put together is a perfect kidney.
I heard of people with only one kidney and enquired eagerly whether they had lost the other through cancer.
But alas, most seemed to have been born with only one or just mislaid the other on the way.
I saw the surgeon who became my surgeon.
He was exceedingly businesslike and exuded confidence.
He examined me and my X-rays.
‘Do you know what you have?’
I nodded.
I had the answer and the word.
‘I've got cancer…’
He rang up the hospital and got me a bed for the next week.
I was to have a blood transfusion before he could operate.
He shook my hand, wished me luck and said, ‘You'll be a new man.’
At that moment, for all his professionalism, he had no idea how right he was to be.
Waiting to go into hospital was devoted largely to the consideration of this strange disease that had so suddenly materialized from nowhere, secreted itself in my hitherto unglamorous, unblemished, unconsidered inside and now threatened me.
With exactly what I wasn't sure.
Death still seemed impossible but then I suppose it always does.
But I had learned my first lesson.
The surgeon's knife was to be the first act, and possibly the only act, of that no one could be certain.
But if cancer wasn't to consume me, mentally as well as physically, then something else must also share my mind.
At this point a job that I had thought a burden, turned out to be a fairy godmother's wand.
For the past three months, as the illness slowly overcame me, I had struggled to start a new novel.
One just finished was already with my publisher waiting to go into print.
All inspiration had vanished, my mind was arid.
As creation was my occupation and livelihood, depression and anxiety grew.
It was while I was in this slough of despond that my publisher rang to ask if I would like to read a manuscript that needed transforming into a readable book before it could be published.
It was the story of an Anglo-Dutch boy caught in the espionage trap in the early part of the Second World War.
The story was a good one though hard to believe.
I had long ago sworn never again to write ‘another person's’ book, but that was when I had felt hale and hearty, which was no longer the case.
After a little consideration I decided to take the job on.
Two days after seeing my surgeon and exactly a week before going into hospital, aided by my wife, I crawled up to London and met the hero of the book.
As my wife said later that day, ‘One look at your face and I wouldn't have given you a job.
Certainly not one that would take seven months to finish.’
I went into hospital with a blank jumbo pad, a pencil so as not to mark the NHS sheets, and the hero's manuscript.
I was exceedingly lucky, I had something to fill my mind, a commitment for the whole of the spring and summer, a signed contract and a small advance to work off.
In the next few weeks the writing of that book was to be a lifebelt.
So far I have said nothing of my family nor of my friends.
I have a small, immediate family and up until my cancer I would say that I had very few friends.
I have always chosen solitude.
If there is an empty carriage on a train I will make for it.
Many years  ago at Woking Station I saw a full train and an empty one both apparently on their way to London.
I chose the empty train and after going through the washing machine, ended in the Wimbledon carriage sheds, to be ignominiously helped down onto the track by two lady cleaners.
Whether I became a writer because of my desire for solitude or whether, being a writer I became more solitary, I still do not know.
What I do know is that, faced with cancer, the desire for solitude was somewhat tempered.
So my cancer became a subject for discussion, not only in my own mind, but with and between my family and close friends.
They too had to cope with it.
This, I think is something the cancer sufferer often forgets.
The illness can be so obsessive, it becomes fearfully boring — in the correct sense of both words — and its effect on loved ones can be missed or even forgotten.
We are perhaps a somewhat blunt family.
In my children, then aged between thirty-one and twenty-two, I sensed a certain ghoulish concern.
The old man could be on the way out, and anyone on the way out is inevitably a centre for drama.
My middle daughter, Lal, sweetly and most touchingly offered me one of her kidneys, an offer I declined as decorously as I could.
My youngest daughter, Fleur, perhaps as a defence and because being the youngest she couldn't conceive of a world without her father — I hope I'm not kidding myself here — gave the impression that all was well.
Cancer was something you cut out and that was that.
My son, Robyn visited me and peered with a concerned, academic interest, and we came closer together than ever before.
My wife, Joyce also came close and peered, but in her case I believe she was looking for a miracle.
For a while, she was to be disappointed.
At this point the telephone started ringing far more than was usual even in this house.
In spite of my debilitated state, I was not fooled.
From the hushed tones of the conversations, I knew what was happening.
The myriads of Mafia to which I am linked by marriage had been alerted.
The alarm bells had been sounded, the news was being fast disseminated.
My vast in-law family, my vast in-law friends, a seemingly endless flood of the salt of the earth, were concerned.
So was that individual Mafia, the local Quakers.
But there were personal calls to me, it wasn't all done secondhand.
The few people I treasure were in touch and I told them exactly what  was wrong.
They thought as I thought, and cancer and one kidney was something to be talked about and shared.
I have already said how little I knew about cancer, and I now began to brush up on it.
Suddenly the newspaper seemed to be full of the latest ‘hopes’ or expected advances.
There were cautious rumblings about the possibilities of new drugs, methods of giving chemotherapy in gentle dribs rather than massive doses, people looking into the effects of stress — with quite opposite results — and the need for computerized arrangements for regular cervical smear testing.
There was everything but how to save a kidney.
Being a very visual person, and unable to see inside me, I wanted to know exactly what this ‘thing’ looked like.
I found an excellent microscopic representation of a cancer cell, used by the Cancer Research Campaign in their appeal advertisement.
It was entitled ‘The Condemned Cell?’ and I cut it out and for some while it was on my desk.
Just as Montgomery kept a photo of Rommel beside him in his desert caravan, so I now had my cancer cell.
This was my new enemy.
It replaced all those stale, old foes of the past.
Gone was my loathing of the Inland Revenue, VAT, all forms of Government, the Law and the Establishment.
Even the Anglican and Roman Catholic churches had a reprieve.
I had a new and most exciting adversary, a traitor in my midst.
I got to know the blobs and wiggles in that rough circle that looked like a sample from an oil slick, until I could draw them blindfold, and I began to visualize them inside me.
At that time they were merely unwanted parasites and I was little more than a puzzled observer.
Then, with perfect timing, another element entered my life that was soon to prove so important.
THE OLD TESTAMENT
‘You are now thirteen and a half…’
‘Yes, sir…’
‘Thirteen and a half is a responsible age.
You're growing up Hitchcock.
You will soon Be a man.’
‘Yes sir.’
‘It's time you thought about these matters.’
‘Yes sir.’
‘Have you thought about them?’
‘Yes, sir.’
The School Chaplain, his hands loosely clasped over his private parts, the fingers pressing slightly into his black cassock, leaned back with a look of contentment.
He was about to save the soul of a little boy.
He gave a kindly, beaming smile:
‘Good.
Excellent.
I am so glad.
So now you can join the others.
We shall meet here three times a week after chapel.
Your house prefect will give you leave of absence…’
‘I still don't want to be confirmed, sir.’
I knew nothing then of that great cartoonist H.M.
Bateman.
I was to meet him in later years, but I am sure that the reaction in the chapel of all those within earshot, and particularly of the School Chaplain himself, exactly mirrored ‘The Guardsman who dropped his rifle on parade’ and the man who lit his cigar before the Royal toast together with his great friend who ordered a double Scotch in the grand pump-room at Bath.
The worthy School Chaplain was not, alas put off.
He had a job to do and by God he was going to do it.
The moment he recovered, he launched his two-pronged attack.
What would my father and mother say, and wasn't it time I took upon myself the responsibility of my spiritual life at that time held in proxy by my godparents.
My father and mother were five thousand miles away in Jamaica.
I had no brother or sister and spent my holidays with my great aunt in the Isle of Wight.
She was elderly and although she went to church on a Sunday, I didn't feel that I could trouble her with my religious affairs.
Rumour had it that my father and mother met in a Methodist Chapel where both were in the choir.
That may be so, but when I first knew them there had been radical changes.
My father, after the experience of three years on the Western Front in the First World War was no longer a chapel man.
He was a very vulnerable hard-swearing, full-blooded agnostic, or possibly an atheist.
He only went to church when he took church parade — he was what we then called a Regular — but he shed buckets of tears when he heard the Last Post.
His greatest concern was that I should be strong and brave, good at games, good at work, and that he should get his money's worth from my education.
In moral matters he confined himself solely to warning me of the dangers of masturbation.
So far as he was concerned, I could become a Muslim or a Jew, provided I got good School Certificates.
My mother's attitude was more ambivalent.
She still went to church occasionally, she loved the singing, and in spite of her husband's example, she still told me ‘Not to take the Lord's name in vain.’
In her later years she never missed a hymn session on television or radio.
But she was inherently an unhappy woman, who had had an unhappy childhood, and possibly an unhappy marriage, although she would never have admitted it.
In her experience, rigid and unloving church-going had given her no comfort, no sustenance.
One of her last utterances in hospital just before she died was, ‘Don't talk to me about God.’
In her way she kept faith, and I was proud of her.
With a background like that, that poor old School Chaplain had little hope.
The other prong of his attack was equally ineffectual.
In telling me that, until my confirmation, my godparents were, by proxy, responsible for my sins, merely drove me to keep it that way.
What sensible young thirteen-and-a-half-year-old would wish to take on board all those terrible sins like gluttony, cheating and the first inklings of immoral thoughts?
The old order seemed fine to me, and I left it that way.
But I had one further arrow to my bow.
In the first initiation talks, we had got onto the matter of the Trinity.
That one God could be Three made no sense to my logical or visual mind, and I made that my main, and most genuine stumbling block.
In the end, I promised to be confirmed when all became clear.
The fog has never lifted.
So upon this, my third post-chapel ‘chat’ of my first Lent term, ‘The boy who refused to be confirmed at a Woodard School’was launched, and the annual, ‘All those who haven't been confirmed, stay behind after matins’was to go on for four more weary years.
By the time I was myself a prefect, the penny had dropped.
Together with a Jewish refugee from Hitler's Germany, I was at last excused that introductory' talk, and the appointment with the Bishop of Lichfield.
I was reminded of those days in the school chapel and of that battle to hold my integrity against a most well-meaning person, by my experience with the chaplain at the hospital eighteen months ago.
On his Saturday evening visit, while he was canvassing for Communion, I had to tell him that I wasn't confirmed.
I recalled those days at school and looked for a sympathetic response.
The only one I got was that in his view thirteen and a half was too late for confirmation; it was best done as a sort of early ‘double shot’— like a jab of cholera with typhoid — along with baptism.
God save me from missionaries!
Over the years, I seem to have had more ‘associations’ with God — and I have the greatest difficulty in saying or writing the word — than there are vineyards in the Medoc.
As the reader will have realised, I went to a Woodard School — Denstone in Staffordshire — where the chapel was the hub of our existence.
We went there morning and evening every day, and on Sundays we were there for the lengthy session of Sung Eucharist.
Being one whole arm of the ‘H’ that makes the old school, to a small boy the chapel seemed massive.
Even now it is pretty impressive, and if you don't want to go north, have a look at Lancing.
Although I may not have got near to the ‘God’ of that particular place, those hundreds of hours spent in chapel were not wasted.
I heard the words of the Bible so often — in those days we also had RI, Religious Instruction — I came to love the stories and the literature.
Years later when I became a painter, many of my subjects were Biblical.
Angels posed obligingly in front of my easel and it was nothing for Christ to stand on the river in front of this Mill.
My pictures of that time were really unknown Stanley Spencer's.
Even  with abstracts, the theme was, more often than not a Biblical one.
So there I was, steeped in the stories but lacking an understanding of what men called ‘God’.
But unfortunately, even ‘God’ wasn't enough.
‘God’ was like mustard without cress.
Coupled with ‘God’ went something else that I could never find, and which was much talked about.
It was called Faith.
There are certain things that grate upon us.
That set our teeth on edge and bring our goose pimples rising like porpoises after mackerel.
For me, one of the deepest of all embarrassing irritants is to hear a priest talking about God or ‘Our Saviour, Jesus Christ.’
I have two instant reactions.
How can anyone be so arrogant as to talk about this Creature, this Thing, as if they knew It, as if they had just had a letter from It or had chatted to It over the phone, when the It cannot be conceived, understood, described, or even proved to exist.
And the second feeling is one of extreme envy at their apparent cosiness.
For me, when man (or woman) talks of ‘God’ he just gets in the way.
And the more he talks, the more he explains, the more he drapes the It with dogma and symbolism the more he dims whatever light there is.
But, of course there have to be paradoxes.
The goddess of fertility is invariably served by eunuchs and virgins.
Like most normal good born Englishmen, I love an old village church.
It is redolent of everything that is England, a wonderful example of continuity in a disjointed world, and more often than not an exquisite expression of art.
On most journeys of pleasure I make a point of visiting one.
In a sense I love ‘Christianity’.
Indeed, I am probably a lover of ‘Christianity’.
That is organic Christianity, the ‘Christianity’ before any mortal man, including St Paul, had a go at it.
I am sure I would have gone to the Crusades and done my bit, although that might just have been the racist in me or my natural desire to loot.
I might well have got myself burned upon a stake, although in those days that wasn't all that difficult.
To defend one ‘faith’ is to deny another, and so the stake must have been all too easy a rendezvous for anyone who tried to maintain their integrity.
Nevertheless, that I may be privileged to tread upon flagstones that worshippers have trod for centuries is a joy.
That I may be able to go down into the Saxon crypt of a cathedral, a tiny, exquisitely rude little chapel, where a thousand years ago my forefathers knelt in  prayer, is a draught of pure oxygen.
And yet I still have no dogmatic faith.
I still cannot go to a service, nor say the Creed.
So when I knew I had cancer and was facing death, I still couldn't pray to the God I associated with the churches.
How then to face the future without faith?
One of the burning questions as I slowly began to learn about the disease, was how widespread was it within me?
It was all very well to have what appeared on the X-ray cut out, but no one had yet looked inside me.
What if, like my poor neighbour, I was to be so riddled with cancer, that after cutting me open, they just sewed me up and sent me home?
How would I cope with that?
What, if, after taking out my kidney and pronouncing me as clear as could be seen, a dreaded secondary was to occur?
One blow without faith was hard enough, what about two, one after the other?
I was afflicted with a disease bent on destroying me.
How was I to combat it, physically, menially, and although I hadn't thought of it in those terms, spiritually as well?
I had never consciously associated with what is called complementary medicine, and as the reader will have discovered, I have had little to do with any form of medicine.
Of course we have books on herbs and mediaeval remedies, and my middle daughter is a vegetarian who grows her organic vegetables in the form of the letters CND and recycles her night soil, but I had never consciously meditated, relaxed, watched my diet, had any particular way of eating, consulted an acupuncturist, nor thought in holistic terms.
I may well have had holistic tendencies for I am both an artist and a writer, but all that was subconscious.
My early training was in the sciences.
In spite of the occupations I have followed for the last thirty years, shreds of science remain.
Nevertheless, I knew that I needed something far beyond that which could be offered by the NHS.
I had heard that there were ‘places’; the Bristol Cancer Help Centre was one.
It was a growing thought in my mind.
Before I went into hospital, a close friend sent me the ‘brochure’; from a Quaker I got the pamphlets.
My introduction had begun.
The It never changed all that much, but it did get a great deal closer.
It was the ‘me’ that changed and became a shade clearer.
SCARS
If you live in one place as long as I have, then unless your family is immortal, inevitably the local hospital will figure in your life.
My father and mother both died in the Royal Hampshire Country Hospital; my second grandchild was born there; my daughter had her appendix removed there and my wife had an MOT there.
So I had been a visitor, and an occasional attender at the X-ray Department, but all that was spread over many years.
Although the old Victorian building with its spine of hutted wards was a vaguely familiar place, it was by no means home.
Yet, in the back of my mind, as I was driven to reception, clutching my overnight bag, was the memory that a hospital had once been home.
In 1944–45, the old hutted Emergency Hospital at Hexham near the Roman Wall had been the only home I had.
It was my home for many months, so much so that when at last I was discharged, I was loath to leave.
Another hospital near Worcester became another home a year later.
So hospitals had been home and although my stay at the Winchester one was not to be long, I saw no reason why it shouldn't function in exactly the same way.
I had forgotten age and illness.
In 1944 we may have had shattered limbs and horrendous wounds but we were young and until we were wounded had been fit.
We may have had gangrene, amputations, even paralysis but, too young to see any futility, we were only too glad to be alive.
This looking back over forty years had been sharpened by the filming of a TV play of mine only a few months previously.
The play had been set in a military hospital in England in 1944.
Although the story was my own, the background was very much as I had remembered it, the characters very much as I had remembered them.
The cast was young, and only the producer and myself had seen any of those days.
To heighten the nostalgia, to sharpen  the irony, the play was transmitted ten days before my return to the wards.
So I walked down the steep corridor to the huts that looked outwardly like the huts of both my TV hospital and the real one forty years ago.
The nurses looked much the same, although, of course hair styles had changed dramatically.
Bedpans had gone from earthenware to papier-mâché, bottles had progressed from glass to plastic, but there was the same kindly welcome, much the same decor except that the photo of George VI had been replaced by a poster on the etiquette of urinating.
The old smells were there, ‘Itma’ had been  superseded by ‘Coronation Street’in the Rest Room, and there were ‘No Smoking’signs — unheard of in my young days — but one thing was missing.
Where were all those young hopefuls, who even in their crippled state had left death behind them and saw nothing but a future?
As I undressed, I saw myself in the mirror.
White-haired, yellow faced, thin and haggard, as were so many of those lying in the beds that lined both sides of the long hut.
For me, it was an astonishing double take.
The young actors with their dummy drips, plasters and splints of ‘The Unknown Soldier’, the young officers in my long-ago-real-ward had faded.
This was a place where, with all the care in the world, one had to dig down and find one's own hope.
Then I remembered.
In my long journey I may have acquired illness and age, but I had gathered something too.
Experience and, most precious of all, wisdom.
I was fortunate: the ward had two small side rooms and I had one of them.
I settled in with my new, blue Marks and Spencer's pyjamas, my jumbo pad, pencil, the hero's manuscript, and after a short time, a blood drip into the back of my spare hand.
While I acclimatised myself to the changes over forty years, I went into my own world, back even further than that first hospital.
I began to write the book that had become my lifebelt.
But even with a lifebelt on, one is not unaware of the ocean around.
The writing of that book in hospital, I now realise, came close to a meditation.
My real interest — beyond my own cancer — was the world I had just entered, those twin factors that made this visit so very different from my last one, age and illness.
Not everyone in the ward was in late middle age, but a fair proportion seemed to be.
The few in their thirties were well balanced  by those of us close to being geriatrics.
At our average age, many things inside us that had worked away uncomplaining for decades must have been getting worn out.
At first I thought I was the only patient with cancer, for no one else ever spoke of it.
I knew of only one other certainty and he had no knowledge of his disease.
Asked why I was in, I always said exactly what was wrong with me.
It was the reaction to my answers that interested me most.
With hindsight, I now reckon that half a dozen of my fellow patients had cancer, but were ignorant of it.
Until then, it had hardly occurred to me that if one had cancer, one might not know.
I assumed that even if the words weren't actually pronounced, one sensed it.
The reality of this ignorance was brought home to me one lunchtime when a fellow patient, learning of my condition, asked with a look of horror whether I thought he had cancer.
I couldn't possibly know, but that outburst, understandable as it was, greatly disturbed me.
If you don't know you have cancer, how can you possibly help in the fight against it ?
Soon after my operation, I was to have another experience of this ignorance.
In the other little side ward next to mine was my one certainty, a patient of my age, generally believed to be in a terminal condition.
He had cancer of the prostate but didn't know.
That evening the man emerged from his bed and came and sat on mine.
He was obviously ill and in great pain.
We discussed many things from his favourite pub and his favourite brew to his days in the army.
Naturally, we discussed his illness.
His state of mind swung wildly.
We would be talking of the iniquities of bottled ale when a shadow crossed his eyes.
I desperately wanted to give him hope — by then I had begun reading the ‘complementary’ literature and was coming to realise all I might be able to do for myself.
‘But look at me!
I have can…’
I blurted out and stopped.
He didn't know he had cancer.
It was not for me to tell him.
Looking back on that episode, I often wonder.
To tell or not to tell.
‘You can't know because you can't handle it.’
Are we really authorized to judge, to say that?
Do we really know anyone well enough to make up their mind for them?
Of course, to know you have or have had cancer, can mean that thereafter every little ache, every little pain is a secondary on its way to catch you.
This happens to me regularly.
For some, ignorance may be bliss, but in  a matter as vital as this it seems very negative.
Later I was to meet a woman at the Bristol Cancer Help Centre who didn't want her youngest child to know what she had.
I understood her desire to shield, although I couldn't agree with it.
Her approach seemed to me to negate all that was good in illness.
The blood transfusion brought colour to my face and I am deeply indebted to some anonymous donor.
On my first Sunday, two days before the operation I was let out to family lunch.
It was a delicious reunion and everyone thought I looked amazingly well on my borrowed blood.
The next day I told my surgeon how well I felt.
This was an act of sheer bravado, to which he merely smiled politely and pointed at my stomach:
‘But we know there's some trouble there, don't we?’
I had to admit he was right.
I dare say that for surgeons, operations are like buses at a bus depot.
You see them in and you see them out.
For the trolley orderlies they are like a quick dash with a rickshaw down a Singapore street.
To the patient, they are a journey into the unknown.
For me, it would be a moment of revelation.
In spite of all the soundings, all the X-rays, my stomach was a secret, virginal place.
No one had ever been there, no one had ever seen inside.
Now, for the first time, man would explore it.
A quite minor act of consideration, given the right timing and circumstance can assume a major significance in the mind of the recipient.
Saved from the snapping jaws of a crocodile, and your gratitude will be abundant and evident.
But in a moment of anxiety, a kind smile can be just as lasting.
I was given my pre-op by a ‘bank nurse’.
I had never seen a bank nurse before and assumed she came from the Natwest.
In fact she came from a pool of nurses, hence ‘bank’.
While she was helping me into yet another nightshirt, we talked.
She was a mother, nursing, but also studying sociology.
Before she gave me my jab, she asked the most pertinent question that anyone had so far posed.
I had cancer.
Was I bitter that it was me?
It surprised me to say that I wasn't.
I analysed that into two quite separate elements.
Exactly as had happened in Normandy forty years  before, I was quite sure it wouldn't happen to me.
This must be a universal human feeling.
We may see a road accident but we shall never be sprawled out on the tarmacadam like that.
While we may not believe in everlasting life, while we have it, we do believe that our life is everlasting.
Presumably natural death is the acceptance of everlasting sleep, hence the euphemism about ‘falling asleep’.
So in war one may see dead bodies all around, smell the cordite and hear the shells, but it just won't happen to me.
And when it does happen, then we have a ready answer.
It had to happen to someone.
It might be the proverbial bullet with your name on, or a bunch of cancer cells that someone has ordained for you.
Whether you feel in any way responsible depends on your viewpoint.
So I wasn't bitter when I put myself into the hands of the surgeon and that splendid bank nurse was so thoughtful as to ask me the question.
I hoped the exploration would go well and that the cancer would be confined to the kidney I had already rather sadly signed away.
It was quite odd signing a bit of paper agreeing to have the whole of your right kidney out:
‘Must it be the whole?
Can't it just be a piece, the bad piece?’
‘I'm afraid it must all come out.’
‘Every little bit?’
‘Every little bit.’
Did Mary Antoinette sign anything before she went to the guillotine, I wondered.
‘I hereby agree to the severing of my entire cranium and should anything go wrong on the way hold neither the executioner nor his assistant in any way responsible.
Only in French, of course.
I lay on the trolley and the bank nurse put my papers by my side.
As I was wheeled past the linen cupboard with its shelf marked ‘Shrouds’, the contents neatly folded, the bank nurse smiled.
Although she probably forgot me before I even reached the corridor, that smile was worth Sir Henry Morgan's fortune.
‘Oh, look, he can pee!
His one kidney has taken over!’
The voice came through the haze.
It might have been the ward sister or the staff nurse.
Who held the bottle, I have no idea, but my inside worked and I didn't need a catheter.
The Lord be praised!
At some point a man in a neat suit materialized.
My focussing was so bad, my mind so fuzzy, he was like a shot from a Renoir film, He had a most serious smile and I think I just recognized him as my surgeon.
‘I took out all I could find.’
The words I had wanted to hear.
When I could move, I discovered that I had been cut nearly in half.
I already had a stitch scar running the greater part of my left leg.
With my new kidney scar, I only needed a hernia to link them up.
MORE SCARS
I have never enjoyed playing party games.
Cards, charades, even blind man's bluff left me cold.
One game I do remember enjoying, however, was Grandmother's Footsteps.
Somehow it fitted into my stealthy, secretive nature.
I would enjoy creeping up upon someone and freezing when they turned their head.
I enjoyed getting closer and closer without being spotted.
There is something cruel in the game, that responded to the cruelty in my own nature.
The name of the game, ‘Grandmother's Footsteps’ is already a hint: the young and fit creeping up on the old, the halt and the lame.
But I am sure that the origins were far more serious than that.
My bet is that it was started by one cave dweller stalking another through the gravel of Peking or Java, his stone club at the ready.
I enjoyed being the creeper, but not the victim; now my role was reversed.
As I lay helpless in my hospital bed, the various Mafia moved in.
They moved in subtly, gently, like hyenas waiting for the carcass.
A few steps and then that freeze while the dying buck twitched its ears.
Then, when the buck lay still, another stealthy pace or two before the next freeze.
In the good old days, the days I now call BC, Before Cancer, I had kept these Mafia, these hyenas at bay.
Proudly and angrily, I had maintained my independence.
No one could approach me without my authority.
Now here they were: in-laws, out-of-laws, Quakers, Uncle Tom Cobley and All.
To understand this feeling of outrage, you must understand the imbalance inherent in my marriage, and no doubt in many others.
It started on my wedding day.
It is conventional for the bride's family to occupy one side of the church and for the groom's family to occupy the other.
I had three relatives including my parents, but by commandeering old comrades from my service days managed to increase my representation to eight.
Against this Joyce's family had to shut the gates at two hundred and twenty-six.
Of course they  couldn't all be allowed to hide behind the columns of the nave or squat upon the font, and so the stewards took down the barriers and let them flood into my side.
As they were richer, better dressed, louder, knew one another but above all were on their home ground — like home football supporters — they soon flooded out my own small, heroic little band.
That experience, that some might have taken as a manifestation of great love, I took as a warning in much the same way as a sentinel on the walls of Roman must have shouted: ‘Take cover, here comes Attila!’
I was frightened.
I was awed.
I was about to be taken over.
The essential me was about to get smothered.
Above all I was threatened.
I was back to that school chapel with the chaplain doing his Goddest to get me to sign on the dotted line and hand over my soul.
From that bad start, many little rotten apples grew.
No one was at fault; it was simply the result of putting together two people of totally different conditioning.
Joyce's family is numbered with the grains of sand in a thousand egg-timers.
People went in and out of her home in a never-ending procession.
If her father found himself sitting on his own, he would look up in terror and cry for humans.
They belonged to every organization, social club, old comrades association, and church for miles around.
They ran the major businesses in their town and kept the band in instruments.
They inter-linked into a plasma of enormous strength, and to me as a young man they formed a Mafia that made the Sicilian one look like choirboys.
That is how I saw them — and indeed how they were presented to me — when in fact, of course, they were just as vulnerable, just as sane and insane, just as full of gloss and blemishes as anyone else.
No doubt I was jealous, and I was certainly intolerant, but it is no good denying that was how I felt.
It was not a good start.
As I choose solitude, so Joyce chose activity and friends, both With a small ‘f’ and with a capital.
As I grew further and further into middle age, spinning stories for myself and my typewriter, so Joyce spun webs from which Mafias sprung in magical profusion.
That may not be real but it was certainly my perception and it is the perception that counts.
If a man perceives a necklace placed about his neck to be a noose, then he will expect to be hanged.
He has to see with his own eyes that the object he takes to be a rough piece of hemp, destined to choke the life out of him, is in fact a string of priceless pearls.
So there I was lying in bed as the Mafias slowly closed in on me.
The most immediate Mafia at that time were the local Society of Friends, the Quakers.
Joyce was a long standing member and an Elder.
I had no quarrel with them although I was suspicious of them, and doubtless jealous that they had so much of Joyce's attention and that they could wish to band together with one another.
Unable to abide groups, upon seeing one I have always had an urge to tear it apart.
Above all I treated the Quakers with respectful wariness.
I respected their lack of dogma, the quiet way they went about their business, but I was wary of their earnestness — and still am — and I perceived them as far too good.
However, I was not above using them.
When confronted with Plymouth Brethren or other sects at the door, my major defence ploy was to claim that I lived in a ‘Quaker house’.
The phone calls had started before I left for hospital.
The cards and flowers arrived when I got there.
It was a topsy-turvy world.
To understand, you must picture my Christmas, a time of dread, a time when nothing real ever came through the letter box, only cards.
A week before the Feast itself there would be a family discussion about the despatch of cards.
The previous year's list of those received would be consulted.
I would be apportioned my six — half of which would be business — Joyce would set about her one hundred and sixty-six.
And here was I lying in bed counting my fifty-seven get well cards!
The Mafias were sending their tokens.
Dear people who could hardly write for arthritis, who had to send aged husbands staggering out in the frost to find something suitable, people whom I had hardly seen and had exchanged no more than the  shiest of glances were sending me pictures of daffodils, valleys, seas and mountains.
Then, for the very first time in my life, a faint light flickered somewhere inside me.
The tokens were not of bondage, no one was trying to trap me, to possess me, to take me over.
No one wanted to own me or even to capture my soul.
All they wanted to do was to send me love.
‘No one will every marry you with a leg like that.’
My dear mother's optimism had to be heard to be believed.
She had come north, summoned by a War Office telegram to see me that first time.
She had delayed coming for twenty-four hours because she had a hair appointment.
Or maybe that is an apocryphal story and she thought about delaying the journey for twenty-four hours because she had a hair appointment.
At the time she was lodging with two ladies who had lost their brother in the First World War.
They are reputed to have said, ‘If we'd had a telegram like that, we'd have gone to the moon.’
My mother didn't go to the moon but she did come to my bedside.
After presenting me with a bag of tomatoes, she glanced at my mangled leg and made the pronouncement.
She later embellished it with a few words about my inability to dance again — which I'd never indulged in — and proposed that the girls would be driven even further away.
My first experiments with love, were like everyone else's, with my mother.
She loved me all right and I was her only son, but oh, what a struggle she had to show ii.
And I, foolish man, felt so rebuffed that I hardly ever tried to go through the barriers.
And the barriers were real, sometimes formidable.
She had to be careful of kissing because her own mother had died of  diphtheria caught by kissing one of her grandchildren.
I had been born in India, which was troublesome.
I had caused her further troubles by having boils and having to be brought back to England earlier than planned.
On the ship I caught whooping cough.
As no one wanted me in the cabin, my poor mother, who hated coal dust, had to sleep with me on deck while thousands of ‘natives’ ran up and down the gangway with baskets of nutty slack on their heads.
All that happened at Port Said.
Then there was the resentment over the fur coat she was deprived of because I was sent to a fee-paying school.
Yet she meant well and one night went out in a fog to look for me.
But it wasn't a good start in the lessons of love, and left me very arid in such matters.
I knew sexual love and had a love for those very close to me — perhaps half a dozen people in all — but for the rest of the world, well, they really were just the Mafia.
By now you will be screaming that you've been conned.
You've picked up a book — you might even have bought it — that you thought was about cancer, but all you're getting is an incoherent autobiography about an unknown.
‘What's all this got to do with cancer?!’
I can hear you shouting.
I heard a man at the Bristol Cancer Help Centre say the very same words when we were discussing ‘Who am I?’
He ran out of patience too.
Maybe it's not easy to see what all  this has to do with cancer, but you must bear with me if I tell you that it has.
You see, finding your healing, not just curing the disease, is about many things, but one of the most important of those is love.
I never loved others because I never really loved myself.
And that's a chicken and an egg.
Not loving myself I could never love others.
And not loving others…
THURSDAY'S CHILD
On the day I was born, Thomas Cook and Son's were offering an all-in holiday on the Riviera for twenty-eight pounds and sixteen shillings: there were outrages in Ulster, and the Secretary of State for Air said that he saw no future for commercial aviation in Europe.
On that same day in a letter to The Times the President of the Imperial Cancer Research Fund, announced that work in their laboratories had proved that the danger of contact with cancer patients was negligible — we were not contagious — and that ‘the importance of early diagnosis, the local character of cancer at its start, and the possibility of permanent cure by early operation are now the accepted basis for the treatment of this disease.’
So after a fortnight in hospital, minus the kidney I had arrived with, Thursday's child went home.
The ward had been full, the nurses worked off their feet, but their care for me — and as far as I knew for the others — had been magnificent.
So had been the doctoring and the surgery.
Although the cut across my stomach might not have had quite the artistry of Michelangelo, it had been well sewn and healed well.
But for the painful bout of constipation, the aesthetics of mass eating — coping with hospital food when sharing a table with sixteen others most of whom are also carrying some form of umbilical, from blood to urine — everything was fine.
I was weak, highly emotional, but as far as I knew, well.
I had had the surgery and my surgeon had taken out ‘all he could see’.
What more did I want?
It seemed to me then that I wanted everything, a whole new world, but could define no part of it.
I was to have one visit from the district nurse and, of course, check-ups from my GP and surgeon.
So far as I remember, I had no conversation about me .
When he had first examined me, my GP had suggested vitamins and we discussed the facts that I hadn't smoked for years and that, on the whole, my food wasn't too bad.
But every  minute in his consulting room I was conscious of the dozen or more, far sicker than me, waiting outside.
This is no criticism of my GP nor of the Health Service, far from it.
In my case both were splendid.
Doctors are under great pressure and no longer come around in pony and trap and stay for a round of golf and two glasses of sherry.
Later we were to have several talks, but when I first arrived sick and ill and my GP went through the diagnosis, his greatest concern was to get me into the hands of a good specialist which he did with the utmost speed.
All very proper.
But I still needed to know about me.
Why had I had cancer?
Was I likely to have it again?
It so, was there anything I could do about it?
But above all, I needed something that at that time I was quite unable to put into words.
Since my own cancer, I have met or heard many cancer sufferers who appear to see ‘God’ as a help in their affliction.
Whether they were believers BC, I have no idea, but a corollary to their belief must be, why did ‘God’ let them get the disease in the first place?
If that seems too simple, then let me put what I believe to be a far more cogent argument, By bringing ‘God’ into this, are we not merely shifting something off ourselves?
Are we not ceasing to be in charge?
My experience has been that for many people there is not all that difference between bringing ‘God’ in and touching wood.
To me there is not.
But then as I said before, I don't have faith.
I don't have faith because I have always refused to hand over my reason.
Although lacking orthodox faith, I have my impossible-to-define It, which is an amalgam of childhood Biblical stories and the Nature I see all around me, best personified in the trumpet of a daffodil, the Dorset coast or the rings and mounds of Hambledon Hill in the same county.
Without a belief in the ‘God’ that others talk about, I had no church, priest, nor guru to turn to.
It seemed that all I had was myself, and those few very close people called my loved ones.
So Thursday's child who still had far to travel, left the security of the hospital and came back home.
The daily, reassuring visit from the patrolling doctor was no more — as if by merely walking the rounds he or she had some magic formula that made us safe.
Staggering over my own threshold again released a torrent of emotions.
I had survived, not that I thought that I wouldn't.
I was weak but alive.
I phoned two people who are particularly close and couldn't  speak for tears.
I didn't want to go to bed, because I didn't want to miss anything.
Although I was hungry, I had great difficulty in digesting and so my nights were bad.
And with bad nights can come bad thoughts.
My wife is a business woman with two shops and I came out at the height of the rag trade jamborees.
This meant that I had a variety of other ‘close ones’ to look after me, and a rota was instituted.
It is no criticism of them to say that I felt a bit of a nuisance.
That came straight from my early conditioning, my relationship with my mother and the fact that I have always found it easier to give than receive.
Receiving for me always contained a degree of embarrassment that I am only now beginning to come to terms with.
The extreme condition of this is for someone to tell me that they loved me — few ever did — or to thank me.
Either compliment can bring tears and do for me what the Last Post did for my father.
The Last Post also does it for me!
My dear mother's statement years ago that I deprived her of her fur coat and that I wasn't much to look at — she once actually pronounced me ugly — bit deep.
While in hospital I had mentioned to my surgeon that I intended to go to the Bristol Cancer Help Centre, although at that time I had not actually made up my mind.
I suppose I put it to him hoping for some response.
My trust and faith in him was, and still is enormous.
As far as I remember he nodded in his own particularly grave yet twinkling way and that was that, I may have mentioned it again, in which case he said very little more than, ‘We've already discussed it.’
So my first tentative Effort to tell the medical powers of the further help I hoped to seek, had met with little enthusiasm.
My GP visited me and I still have the drawing he did of the cancer they had found in my kidney.
It was large and of long standing.
Later my surgeon was to tell me that the cancer had been growing away for many years.
He had seen cancers like that taking ten years to mature.
The kidney being a discrete organ, there was every chance that the cancer had been contained.
I told my GP that I intended going to Bristol as soon as I was well enough.
My mind was still not fully made up and I dare say that that was yet another exploratory move in my search for reactions.
My GP, a vegetarian who has put a seeking ear in the direction of Krishnamurti, was not unsympathetic, although he did express concern at the very  stringent vegan diet.
After a heavy operation, it might well prove counter productive.
Wise words that I was later to remember.
So I had opened the shutters on what is called complementary medicine with a slightly heavy heart for it seemed such an indictment of our present specialized, technological society when all medicine must simply be ‘healing.’
But such was my orthodoxy, my conditioning, my belief in the norm — the system of NHS doctor, surgeon and hospital — I had not completely committed myself.
Although it was my health I was considering, and no one else's, it was still difficult to step out on my own and leap the bounds of convention.
No machine yet devised can emulate the human hand.
We are the most complex living system so far known.
We have more facets than a hive has bees.
To function properly all these facets have to be in tune with each other, yet modern medicine has pulled us to pieces and left us like a dismantled Meccano.
Limbs here, organs there, thoughts upstairs, emotions downstairs.
This is a nonsense.
We are a whole and this is the me that I am now writing about.
It was I, the me, that now needed to be diagnosed.
I had dis-ease, manifest by cancer, but my mind, my attitudes, my lack of love for myself and for others all needed attention.
I was at a point of crisis, lost, paralysed in the midst of a dense fog.
Sooner or later I would have to accept that I needed to look elsewhere.
I had to lift my gaze from the old dashboard that I had sat in front of for more than sixty years to a new one, and the only new one I knew of displayed the dials and instruments of what is called holistic medicine and which at that time I took to be something I knew virtually nothing about.
That is, nothing about consciously.
I had read the pamphlets and knew of relaxation, meditation, imaging, healing and counselling but they meant little to me.
My father had relaxed on a Sunday afternoon, either listening to the band on Southsea Common in his later days or with a paintbox in his younger days.
Meditation was something that only happened east of Suez and although imaging was something I did every time I wrote a book, play or did a drawing, I had not associated it with my cancer.
As for healing and counselling, both sounded dark, ominous and alien, an intrusion into my existence and most certainly not me.
I had read enough to know that the way the Bristol Cancer Help Centre promulgated was a considerable challenge, although how hard a challenge I was only to appreciate later.
Taking some responsibility for your own health and well being in an age of ‘national health’ seemed a revolutionary concept.
Taking your ‘life’ in your own hands when prescription pads were as plentiful as railway tickets at Waterloo and drugs and pills the larder of every bathroom, was quite bizarre.
Most concrete of all, most easy to talk about and to understand was the diet.
Everyone can talk about food, everyone can read about it and thousands can write about it.
Food, as one of the great sensual experiences is always uppermost in our minds, and at Bristol, amongst new intake it seemed invariably the priority subject.
but this is not a book about diet for I am neither a dietitian nor a cook and many good books already exist.
Diet will obviously get its mention for it is an exceedingly important part of the therapy, nevertheless, important though it may be, other attitudes, other therapies provided my hills and ultimately my vistas.
We were already beginning to try and live by the diet.
This in itself was a considerable undertaking.
Earlier I said that on the whole our food was not bad: salads, fruits and nuts were plentiful but I had taken on my parent's tastes.
My father and mother would hunt the highways and byways of Leicestershire for a good pork pie with that particularly rich, crispy crust.
There was no roast to compete with loin of pork with kidney.
There was nothing like a chocolate gateau with cream; Elysium was to be found in a glutinous, fat dumpling; and a good pastry was a walk in Arcadia.
We didn't have many chips, but that was because my mother didn't want to go to the bother of making them, nor did she like the mess that boiling, spluttering fat can make.
Salads my father dismissed as ‘grass’ and my mother as ‘rabbit food’, yet she lived to be eighty-four.
For a quick snack I turned to milk chocolate.
For me, going on a strict vegan diet where all animal products were banned, where there was no place for tea   or coffee, where even fish, eggs, salt and sugar were forbidden, was like leaping from a warm bed into the icy seas of Antarctica.
The idea of the diet was to detoxify the body.
For more than sixty years my poor old liver and kidney — 1 now had only one — had struggled valiantly to act as a purification plant and sewage works.
One reading of Dr. Alex Forbes',Cancer and its Non-toxic Treatment , coupled with Ute Brookman's The Diet , both Bristol Cancer Help Centre publications, and I was  persuaded that the purposes of the diet were absolutely reasonable.
I had no idea that the greatest single factor causing cancer, 350% was diet.
Nor that diet ranked above tobacco which was only 30%.
Nor did I know that our intestinal tracts are those of a herbivore, 32 feet long and that if we were meant in enjoy Contre-filet braisé à l'ancienne they would be only a quarter of that length.
So the diet made sense and I began to live on it.
My family supported me, but as natural salads and bean eaters, to my astonishment they rather enjoyed it.
Later, when I got to Bristol I was prescribed the vitamins and mineral supplements such a diet needed, but to even start to get used to it was a formidable struggle.
For one who, when left alone would get out the frying pan, pour in a little oil — I had converted from lard — and then proceed to fry a mixed grill of bacon, eggs, bread, mushrooms and tomatoes, the idea of pulses and sprouting beans were as alien as the little bug-eyed monsters from outer space.
But I was obsessed with the idea of detoxifying myself.
Because I enjoy bathing, washing up and hosing down the car, the concept appealed to me.
I was cleansing myself, and although it was torture, it was exciting torture.
I had to make up for the ravages of time.
All those goodies from pork pies to chocolate biscuits had to be atoned.
In fact, my recent diet hadn't been quite so reckless.
I knew of the need for fibre, fresh fruits and vegetables — even if I didn't much like them — and I knew of the dangers of saturated fats and too much salt.
I was persuaded long ago to use Flora instead of butter.
Nevertheless, such is human weakness and the pull of gluttony that when no one was about, or I could ride the chiding of my family, I would creep into the kitchen, cut a slice of butter and then find a crumb or two to go with it.
On the positive side, I drank in moderation and never spirits, and I had virtually given up smoking many years ago.
I had convinced myself the diet was necessary even though I found it tough going and particularly rough after a major operation and great weight loss.
Quite early there came the contradiction that anyone who takes on an extreme diet must meet.
A dietitian suggested that I had milk shakes with raw eggs to build me up, yet, the Bristol diet denied both ingredients.
So my skin began to look better, my guts were giving a great, big heartfelt vote of thanks, but I went on losing weight that it seemed to me I could ill afford to lose.
This was still very much the situation by the time I went to Bristol.
More about diet later.
At that time it was but one element in the whole decision-making process of what was I going to do with my life.
Two years ago I didn't know that we had an immune system.
I knew that we could get an immunity, normally by going to the doctor and having a vaccination or inoculation, but I never knew that right inside every one of us there was a built-in fire brigade, a whole troupe of Red Adair troubleshooters just waiting to be called upon to do their stuff.
It never struck me that every time I cut my finger and the cut heals, something other than a piece of Elastoplast has rushed to the rescue.
Of course, I'd heard of AIDS and the destruction of that immunity, but somehow that was happening to homosexuals in LA or Brighton and not here with me, deep in the pastoral Hampshire countryside.
Nor did I know that, in the normal human body, up to 100,000 cells can become cancerous every single day.
I know nothing about cells but it's still a pretty horrendous figure, and yet, apparently most people so smitten have absolutely no knowledge of what is happening within them because everything is being taken care of by that wonderful, benign, unpaid fire brigade of ours, our immune system.
That may be the norm, but, of course, there is also the abnorm when things go wrong, when the fire gets out of control, when, perhaps, the fire brigade has been over worked, or couldn't find their way for cigarette smoke, or for all that saturated fat that clogged up the wheels of their tenders.
Or, perhaps, it was in  some way due to the directions we gave them?
To our own state of mind?
Our negativity may have sent the fire brigade on strike, or even made them uncouple their hoses from that hydrant that gave all that lovely, cool life-giving water that would have quenched the fire and instead couple them to the nearest petrol tank.
We may clear away the smoke that suffocates and remove the saturated fats that clog by making certain reasonably simple decisions, but giving the right directions, was a very different — and in my case — a far harder problem.
TO BE OR NOT TO BE
‘If ever you feel you would like to have healing, let me know.’
A long pause and then a very half-hearted, ‘Yes…’
‘It's up to you.’
‘Of course.’
Another long pause, then: ‘Exactly…what do you do?’
‘It's simply the laying-on of hands.’
‘Simply…?’
My friend nodded.
‘I see…’
I didn't, of course see, and my face showed it.
‘If you want me, just let me know.’
Although I did the lights for Hamlet at school, I never understood the play, thinking at the time that it was much ado about very little.
My own soliloquy, my own trial came with that offer.
The person was a friend and I knew she was a healer — although, as you will have realised, I had little idea what a healer was or did.
I knew too that that invitation was bound to come and I was dreading it.
Me, the loner, the person who had rebuffed everything from confirmation onwards, was now being offered the laying-on of hands.
At first I had no idea what to make of it.
I thought of Biblical characters dressed in white flowing robes walking about the arid plains of Palestine or striding along the shores of the Sea of Galilee, making lepers leap into the air and hurl away their bells.
Or spitting in the dust and rubbing the resultant cement upon blind eyes.
My friend didn't fit the image at all, although she did often wear a small gold cross about her neck.
Was the healing to be a Christian healing?
Was she going to ask that the ‘Grace of Our Lord, Jesus Christ’ should come down and settle upon me?
Or did she have some other ‘Thing’ to invoke?
It was all exceedingly puzzling, and alarming.
Anyway, why compromise myself when my surgeon himself had assured me  that he had ‘cut out all he could see’, and the diet I was already on was all I really needed to stay well?
Nevertheless, I was left to ponder whether to have healing or not to have healing, and so concerned did I become that in the end, a wise man from the Quakers was summoned to give a judgement of Solomon.
He listened, summed me up and nodded wisely.
He appreciated how difficult it was for me ‘to give way’, what a wrench it was for someone who always operated on his own to cooperate with an act he neither understood nor, at that time, actively sought.
And besides, did I not have a scientific mind and training?
Of course, he could make no pronouncement.
He was there merely to look wise and let me talk.
I made my own mind up.
I would take one more gentle little plunge into this strange world where neither the Laws of Newton nor of Thermodynamics seemed to apply.
Except for one or two people very close to me, my mother or perhaps my ayah when inspecting for cradle cap, no one had ever laid their hands upon my head, and stood silently, mysteriously behind me while I visualised some wonderful, luxuriant Shangri-la, in the middle of which, on a mahogany table stood my typewriter, beside it a glass of sparkling Perrier.
I felt no great surge of power, energy, nor even warmth, but I did feel soothed, relaxed but above all moved.
I now thank that friend who first put the direct question to me and made me make the decision.
I would have come to it all in due course, but it was good to be hastened.
That first healing led the way.
As time went on and I knew that I had a fight on my hands, healing became as important to me as my new diet or the other new therapies.
It also finished all the shilly-shallying and finally triggered off my firm decision to go to Bristol.
I now took the first positive steps, although still not without considerable misgivings.
All this time I was working on the hero's book.
Like the writing of all books there are times of great enthusiasm, of heavy going and quite often real blockage.
With a ready-made story, it was impossible to have ‘writer's block’, but that didn't stop the work becoming a chore as the pages increased.
I was already behind my own timetable, but still well within the delivery date at the end of September.
The question was, how to fit in a fortnight at Bristol and at the same time finish the novel.
Getting into the Bristol Cancer Help Centre as a resident patient wasn't quite so easy as I had imagined.
I assumed that the major problems would be financial — the Centre now has to make a considerable charge to cover their costs — and one of occupancy.
With 33% of Britons likely to get cancer and with cancer being the fear it is, I expected the queue to stretch to Weston-super-Mare and beyond.
But those weren't the impediments.
Money was certainly needed, but there was a warning to be heeded.
The intending patient must know what the Centre was about, the challenges that would be met, the changes to one's life that might well be necessary.
So very sensibly, before admission one has to offer proof of understanding.
This is done by listening to a tape and writing on your application form a magic number.
Only after that, and with a few facts from your GP, plus half a page on your stresses during the last five years — I had to overflow onto the back of my page and with a little encouragement could easily have made it a 100,000 words — can you go through the eye of the needle.
Just as with healing, I had no idea what to expect.
I had read the literature, listened to the tape and examined the glossy brochure.
I had noted the Clifton Suspension Bridge, a few jolly people sitting in the garden, a row of salads in the kitchen — a good photo can make a sprouting alfalfa seed look nouvelle cuisine — and the Prince of Wales signing the visitors' book.
Physically I felt well and most of those on the brochure appeared in the same condition.
What exactly was I letting myself in for?
A sort of boarding house where the food was ‘wholefood’?
A form of hospital where the predominant smell was dettol?
Or, as at least two people suggested, a place where one learned to die?
With my form filled in, I phoned: ‘I want to come for a fortnight, but the problem is, I have a book to finish.
Can I come and do some of the work there.
That is to say, will there be a table in my room on which to put a typewriter, and can I bring an anglepoise?’
A disembodied voice, that later I was to learn belonged to Cynthia, gently but firmly began to explain: ‘I'm not really sure that you should bring your work here.
The therapies are fairly  tiring, and you will need all your energies if you're going to get the full benefit.’
‘Ah…‘
I was threatened.
My precious work, my mainstay that I carried everywhere with me — even into hospital — was about to be taken away.
If I went to Bristol it looked very much as if I would have to go without my prop.
And what about that delivery date?
I was alright at the moment, but to lose a whole fortnight…
‘Why not give yourself a rest from it?’
A very doubtful, ‘Yes…’
‘Or perhaps you'd rather finish the book and then come?’
That would be to postpone something that was already a considerable difficulty.
So I decided to draw a line across the book and finish the last few pages when I got back.
That settled, I booked myself in for the first two weeks of August, five months after my operation.
To my surprise, the queue I had expected to stretch to Weston-super-Mare was far more modest.
LOVE
‘Are you Harry or Ray?’
A fearful chill froze my inside.
I had driven 80 miles on the wettest day of the summer.
I had driven into Bristol, an unknown city and twice lost my way.
Three times on the motorway I had wanted to turn round and go home, not even caring whether my deposit was forever forfeited.
All that was in my mind was to abort this mission.
The only reason I was here was because Joyce, who was to spend the first two days at the Centre with me, had continuously reminded me on the journey that the decision to go to Bristol had been mine and mine alone.
And now here I was, faced with a total stranger asking me whether I was Harry or Ray.
It reminded me of all I disliked so much in the United States, of being called Ray before even shaking hands.
Oh, why did I come here?
Why did I leave my normal, safe, lonely life for this?
‘I'm Raymond…’
You could have chipped the coldness with an ice pick.
We shook hands and mine were freezing.
‘You must keep your hands warm.’
I stuck them under my armpits.
‘Let me carry your bag.’
I decided that Pam was frailer than me and carried the bags myself.
‘Now come down and have a drink.
You must be dying for a drink.’
It was only five in the afternoon, early for me but a drink might help.
Certainly I needed something.
Not a stiff gin, nor a whisky, but a Cinzano, or a glass of good wine.
We went down to the dining room.
Half a dozen others were sitting in desolate stillness, three with cancer — indicated by the colour of the labels they wore — three anxiously doing the accompanying.
The drink, of course, was a choice between herb tea, apple juice or straight  spring water.
At that moment, only one thought went through my head: however was I going to survive?
but Pam was a wonderful hostess, and she had a great secret: she exuded love without noticing it.
Then there was Reg, a tall, sturdy six footer, with a stock of strong hair, piercing eyes and the voice of Somerset.
He'd had cancer — melanoma, skin cancer — apparently a massive dose of it, and now he looked as if he could have taken on Frank Bruno.
Reg apparently came most Sunday afternoons to help welcome the anxious new arrivals.
Reg's confidence with Pam's love began to melt even my frigid soul.
I peered at the labels and too began the Harry, Frank, Charlie, Mabel way.
I never did learn their surnames.
And, of course, in no time at all , we were talking about the one thing that obsessed every one of us, cancer.
We were talking openly and freely, swopping stories, experiences, weight losses, problems with the diet, and troubles with the doctors.
That was the first wonderful release, others were to follow in rapid succession.
One of my several worries about going to Bristol was thy feeling of being a bit of a fraud.
I had little idea at that time of the pernicious nature of cancer.
How it too played its own form of Grandmother's Footsteps.
My surgeon had told me that he had taken out all he could find.
I assumed, in my usual mechanistic way that that meant that everything that looked like being cancerous had been cut out.
The whole of that crab, every single pincer and leg, however long, had been excised with the knife.
I was therefore free of cancer, coming to a Cancer Help Centre as a form of insurance and perhaps also assurance.
I was certainly not ill, although I had yet to recover from the effects of the operation and was far weaker than I had been BC, but I was well.
Or, at least, I thought I was bodily well.
Now, for the first time, I was surrounded by people who not only had cancer, but unlike those in hospital, knew that they had it.
They knew a great deal about their cancer, and several of them were quite evidently very ill with it.
It was a whole new experience, and at first it made my own feeling of being a fraud even more acute.
It was here, at the BCHC that I first began to hear the dictionary of cancer, to see the effect of the disease and to learn about it in any useful and positive way.
I discovered that there were a whole family of cancers, more than two hundred different types.
What I thought of as mainstream cancers were called Carcinomas and they developed in the lining layers of the organs, such as the lungs, the  bowels, and the skin.
Cancers that developed in the bones were called Sarcomas, those that affected the blood were called Leukaemias and it was Lymphomas that attacked the lymph system.
I learned all this in the most natural way of all by talking to other patients.
It may sound naive but I was largely ignorant of the effects of either Radiotherapy or Chemotherapy.
Here I was with people who knew both intimately.
Neither therapy was enjoyed and I listened to the catalogue of side effects like a reporter who had just pierced the darkest Amazonian forest and was observing a new race for the first time.
I was apologetic that I was apparently so inexperienced and free of everything.
That I had suffered neither Radiotherapy nor Chemotherapy made my fraudulent feeling grow by the minute.
I knew that both those therapies were designed to attack the cancer cells, the ‘rogue’ cells in the body; what I did not realise was the cost at which they can do it.
The destruction of beauty, in any of its forms, is sure to bring up wrath and sadness.
What man isn't susceptible to a beautiful woman, believing that she both graces the Earth and helps to civilize it.
Now I saw a beautiful woman who always wore a hat because she had lost her hair.
I spotted unexpected wigs and learned — with surrealistic horror — that you could get a wig on the National Health.
Chemotherapy is the application of cytotoxic — cell- killing — drugs!
I was angry that humans should be subjected to such degradation and I realised just how lucky I had been so far.
Although surgery was a mutilation, and I had just lost a kidney, that seemed nothing compared with the loss of a beautiful head of hair.
Slowly, even reluctantly I began to integrate with the idea of Bristol.
I began to smell the warmth and the love, and feel the peace, but above all I began to see the inspiration of the human spirit.
It was watching others, physically far worse than myself, watching their reactions and often their ‘progress’, that was to have the most profound effect.
What was this very special place that only a few hours ago I had cursed myself for entering?
We have become a nation of takers for granted.
We fly across the world without a thought for Orville Wright, and whoever remembers Daguerre when taking their holiday snaps?
Before I actually went to the Bristol Cancer Help Centre and learned a little of its history, I took it all very much for granted.
I was expectant  of something being done for me, it might even have been a creation of the DHSS.
Books and tapes of TV programmes record the genesis and growth of Grove House, The Bristol Cancer Help Centre better than I ever could.
It was conceived in love and sacrifice, and like so many good things, sprang from the smallest of seeds.
It's mentors are now well known: Christopher and Pat Pilkington, Penny Brohn — herself a cancer sufferer whose story is told in her book Gentle Giants — and Dr. Alec Forbes.
When I went to the Centre, Dr. Alec Forbes had left, but his stamp lay everywhere.
Preventative medicine and good health rather than repairs were his philosophy.
In state medicine he had observed that for chronic diseases like cancer, the responses to the repair syndrome were not good and decided that the most important factors causing such diseases were psychological and nutritional.
But to me as I struggled with his detoxifying diet, he was a disembodied, stern sounding voice, a god who had handed down the law.
These next few pages are the reactions of one who went to the Centre, came away evangelical and kept saying to himself, ‘All shipshape and Bristol fashion’, only to fall from the crest into the deepest trough, but thankfully to climb up again to a sensible plateau and finally discover that he had been fortified in more ways than he had expected.
But first there was the assimilation of my new, and in psychological terms, bewildering home.
NANCY
A true inspiration should appear unheralded, and preferably through a mist.
My first sight of Stonehenge was on a still January morning soon after the war.
The roads were empty, tourists non existent.
I have seen the Stones hundreds of times since, but no sighting has ever touched that first one.
Nancy didn't appear through the mist, and my first sight of her was nothing like so romantic.
It was while being given an introductory tour of Grove House.
Nancy — of course that wasn't her name — lay on the couch in the sitting room.
She said something, I no longer remember what.
Indeed, I probably didn't understand her at the time.
My abiding memory of that first encounter is of a slight, pale yet exceedingly determined looking woman whose high pitched voice was that of a female George Formby.
It is not a fantasy to say that Nancy has now come close to being a myth, and with a fiction writer that is exceedingly dangerous, for sometimes I ask myself, did Nancy ever exist?
Was she real, or have I created her, or transmogrified her to suit a desired image of my own?
In this I may be vulnerable, for I was on the lookout for miracles and it was while watching Nancy, listening to her and eventually breaking my own icy shield and talking to her, that I came close to seeing what I was looking for.
Nancy was in her second week.
That made her to me, a mere new boy, a prefect.
I remember her at my first supper at Grove House and it was evident from listening to those in the know that Nancy was not just a someone, but a very special someone.
Yet I dare not approach her, for with my regular middle-class, musty Oxbridge voice, I felt miles from her vernacular.
But I did observe her, learn about her and discover that she was extremely ill.
She had come to the Centre in the depths of despair, weeping, gnashing her teeth and venting her hatred upon the doctors who  had told her, at the eleventh hour that she had cancer and nothing could be done.
Then one day, before breakfast, I found her in the sitting room, and no longer had to rely on hearsay.
Having washed his hands of her, her GP expressed the view that her visit to the Centre was both a waste of money and time.
Perhaps that GP was thinking solely in terms of a cure?
Fortunately, she ignored his opinion and came to Bristol.
When I first spoke to her she was well into her second week, and her personal weather was changing.
There was still plenty of bitterness and anger, but other emotions were surfacing through the hurts.
The seeds of peace and love were germinating fast.
Her bitterness was divided equally between the medical profession, who she felt had let her down, and her sister, who although living nearby, had left her to look after their mother while the old lady died slowly of cancer.
After telling me her story with all those rumblings of resentment and flashes of only half-buried hatred, Nancy's blue eyes suddenly lit up, her pinched face broke into a smile, she sat up and cried, ‘It's me sister!’
I nodded.
It certainly was her sister, the woman was obviously a pain in the neck.
‘The very first thing I'll do when I get 'ome is take her a bunch of flowers.
She only lives around the corner.’
Were we talking about the same sister I wondered.
The one she hadn't seen for twelve years, had been ranting about, who never raised a finger to help and left it all to Nancy?
Or was there another sister, one I hadn't heard of?
In fact, it was the one and only sister.
‘She lives near enough,’ said Nancy thoughtfully, ‘but we've not seen one another for years.
It's not right not to see your sister.’
Her face clouded, then suddenly her eyes shone again.
‘A nice big bunch, nothing skimpy, something she'll really enjoy.
Red roses, she likes red roses, always has.
I'll take them round meself.’
A bunch of flowers, a dozen red roses, a tiny, unimportant little gift, but not to me at the time.
That morning it was a matter of blinding, shattering, choking importance.
No present had ever been better gift-wrapped.
After the storms of bitterness, this really was a tremendous volte-face, but no more than a barometer of the changes within Nancy herself.
A dab with a handkerchief and an early morning sniff was my subterfuge.
This frail, little woman, pronounced by doctors to be in a terminal condition had decided, gone through the age-old barrier of forgiveness.
She had a breach to heal, and although she was the sufferer, in more ways than one, she was determined that she would do the healing.
Lesson number one: there are moments when a seemingly insignificant act of love can appear splendid and magnificent.
The bank nurse all over again.
That lunchtime we walked up to the shops.
The slope from Grove House is steep and Nancy, greatly concerned for my ‘lame’ leg wanted to do my shopping for me.
She look my arm, not for her sake but for mine.
Every step we took together, she talked with hope.
Ii was a wonderful tonic for one with his own fears and doubts.
She had a new child's seat for her car, the moment she got home, after the flowers for her sister, her young grandson was going for a drive.
Then there was her holiday.
Illness had prevented her from going to Tenerife this year, but now there was always next year.
‘Next year …’ she murmured, ‘next year …’
Delicious words to a cancer sufferer.
It was the memory of the sparkling waters of Tenerife that helped her with her imaging, and her joy in at last succeeding in that therapy was immense and infectious.
In her mind she went to that island and it was there that the ‘shower’ played upon her cancer cells ‘and washed them away.’
More of imaging later.
On Nancy's last night at the Centre, half a dozen of us went to the pub.
It was bizarre, surrealistic, a little enclave of cancer patients in a noisy, crowded bar.
Sufferers, seekers, avoiders of pollution, ardent proponents of detoxification amongst the hedonists.
Wreathed in trails of cigarette smoke, I had a burning desire to leap upon a chair and harangue the multitude.
‘Put out your fags, you foolish, thoughtless clowns or you too will have tumours in your lungs like poor, old Harry here!’
A long, shocked silence, then a man smoking ten cigarettes at once and glaring his indignation, splutters, ‘Who in the hell do you think you are?’
‘I am the Cancer Man!,
‘The what!?’
‘The Cancer Man and all these fine people with me are cancer people , particularly Nancy.
And if you're sensible and watch her closely you could learn a thing or two.’
The man shrugs, spits into the  spittoon , mutters, ‘Stupid meddling fool!’ and turns his back on me.
All but we half a dozen cancer patients laugh.
I had a divine right and a solemn duty to warn them, but failed miserably.
I saw Nancy once the following day and then she was gone.
Wherever she may be now, on this earth or not, she has my eternal gratitude.
She will have no idea what she did for me, nor for many others, but I still give thanks and a great cheer for the privilege of meeting that little grandmother from Lancashire.
She was a very simple heroine who did nothing spectacular, never rowed out to a shattered vessel in a Force 10 gale nor carried a lamp amongst the cholera, but she was my inspiration at a very low moment.
That was enough.
The memory of Nancy brings me back to the question that occupied me so much, what was it about the Centre that could transform misery, bitterness and hatred into love and hope, and possibly even happiness, all in the space of fourteen days?
As a boy, much of the Bible puzzled and disturbed me, it was read daily in chapel and much of it seemed astonishingly unchristian.
A bastard, a man with ‘injured stones’ or no privy parts was denied from entering the congregation of God.
Yet hadn't they suffered enough already?
But worse was the fearful breath of vengeance.
As I read and understood, you could be punished not only for your father's sins, but those of your grandfather, great grandfather and great, great grandfather as well: ‘…for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, and visit the sins of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation ’.
The idea of God pursuing a whole family like a demented genealogist seemed grossly unfair, but as it was a commandment all I could do was hope that neither my father nor any of my immediate ancestors had done anything really sinful, and that if they had, God didn't know of my relationship.
That I took the commandments quite literally was not surprising.
Not only did my mother regularly quote them, but on joining my public school for my very first term, the house I was in was actually punished for slack behaviour the previous term —when I had not even been at the school !
It was later, in my wartime hospital that I first realised that the Second Commandment had  not been given to Moses on Mount Sinai but to an Irish priest upon the Mountains of Mourne.
Three hundred years after the events, our Irish nurses were still being exhorted not to consort with their British patients but to remember Drogheda and Wexford.
Cromwell's sins had travelled far.
The Second Commandment was alive and well.
But as a boy the cloud hung over me.
It was always hard to get going, for if I didn't carry my own sins, and hence guilt, then my dad's sins were always about to be draped around my neck like a dead albatross.
It wasn't until years later that I discovered that there are no sins of the father, that it was all one great big con trick.
It is only recently that I discovered that we are all born potentially good, demanding love and wanting nothing more than to give it in return.
I had no idea that Hitler, Stalin, and even Genghis Khan were all born brimming with the possibility of goodness wishing to hug their fellows and lavish them with love.
Unfortunately the trouble started the moment they were born.
They were instantly hurt.
They wanted to hug, cuddle, kiss, make daisy chains and watch the ducklings running on the surface of the lake, but one was told to grow up and pay back the beastly Jews who were wicked people and had put daddy Schicklgruber out of work, another that anyone who didn't enjoy riding bare back across Asia splitting skulls was a sissy, the third that all Mensheviks carried a knife up their sleeve and needed purging.
As the trio grew up, so the hurts piled up until they were stacked upon them like old 78 records, each playing the same dreary old repetitive tune.
We start not with the sins of the father within us, nor with the sins of anyone else, but as crystal clear water, into which dirty sump oil is poured.
By the time we are grown we are a badly mixed solution, but if the water can resurface, where it rightly belongs, then we will be as we once were, before all those hurts arrived.
The Centre does nothing magical, nothing unscientific, nothing really extraordinary, it merely helps you to start filtering off the oil and getting back to that crystal clear water.
And the water is always there if we take the trouble to find it.
Grove House had once been a convent with a chapel.
That room still exists and although the crucifix has given way to an omnidimensional cross cum globe, for twenty minutes every morning, before our  regular sessions started, Christopher Pilkington led a quiet period of meditative prayer.
It was not my instinct to go, but the group — including my wife who was with me for those two days — set the example and I grudgingly, guardedly accompanied them.
There was nothing alarming in the proceedings and my abiding memory is of the closing act, being exhorted to greet and hug one another, something I found exceedingly strange.
Joyce left and to my surprise, I continued to go to that quiet room every morning.
The weeks changed and for the last two days of my stay, I was the only attender.
Christopher pondered the dwindling of his flock, I pondered my staying powers.
Did I stay out of loyalty to the priest, the human being, or was there something else that compelled me to remain there, when all the more ‘Christian’ elements had long ago fled?
I remember a discussion on my last day.
Whether it was during a healing, or during one of those morning meditations, I can't remember, but I had to assure Christopher that although I had stayed to every meditation and seen it through to the end, and although he had brought God, and probably Jesus Christ in upon several occasions, my original It was as intact as it had ever been.
Then he very cleverly started talking about love.
Had I seen love at Bristol?
‘Oh, yes, I've seen love.’
‘A lot of love?’
A great deal.
An astonishing amount.’
For a start there was Nancy.
Then the penny dropped.
‘You're saying that if, with my mathematical mind, I can say that I have seen five percent of love at Bristol, why couldn't one person contain one hundred percent of love.’
Christopher smiled.
I choked back the tears and mumbled that I was glad I'd had cancer.
Quite a statement.
For every Nancy there was a Tom, Dick and Harry, and together and separately, each with own degree of commitment, hopes and fears, we struggled with the various therapies.
When we saw a doctor, the doctor, having read our notes, asked about us as a person.
Indeed, it was difficult, if not impossible to tell a doctor  from a counsellor.
Counsellors and doctors seemed to overlap, and the unburdening was manifold.
Counselling was a completely new world to me and although in the past it had been suggested that to combat my periods of depression I might well think of having psychoanalysis, I am now glad I resisted.
Counselling is a very human, very ‘loving’ experience.
Whether the same can be said for sessions with the shrink, I'm not sure.
I was led to see that there was much dis-ease within me, and exhorted to have my own counsellor when I left the Centre.
My book of personal stresses was examined and discussed, and it was revealed that I neither loved myself, nor saw myself as at all worthwhile or even worthy.
It was extremely difficult for me to write down one good characteristic about myself, let alone ten, and it was quite evident that whereas I saw myself as perpetually black, I saw my wife, Joyce as shining white and a lot of other people in the same colour.
With the best counselling in the world, it isn't possible for a person like me, sometimes feeling guilty at even being alive, firm in my belief that I have only to breathe to be a nuisance, to suddenly switch through 180 degrees and see myself as white or even grey after seeing myself as black for sixty years.
Nevertheless, the process started at Bristol was a beginning and has since been continued so nobly by Jo, that there are occasions now when I not only know that I am good — getting close to the shining white — but even a benefit to society!
It was trying to love myself, the starting point of it all, that seemed to lead me in so many strange directions.
To love myself appeared to go against all that old upbringing, all that old training.
From the moment I could understand the human voice 1 — and I expect most of my generation — was told to be ‘seen and not heard’…‘consider others before yourself’…‘never complain' and if you were a boy child, then you were exhorted to be a man, to show no emotion, and not to be a sissy.
Indeed, the epitome of an English gentleman was one who stood on the deck while his ship sunk beneath him, his upper lip stiff, his cap straight and his right hand at the salute.
Now here I was, thinking of myself, considering myself and crying like a baby.
There was another side to loving myself, that for me seemed to bear directly upon my cancer.
All through life one sees the effect of   the human mind.
We call it will power, and are conscious of it within ourselves.
When things are difficult we summon our will power, and override the difficulties.
Or at least we try to.
We admire this characteristic in others.
Watch a legless man in a wheelchair completing the London Marathon and we cry, or at least I do.
On the other hand there are times when the difficulties appear too great and we just throw in the towel.
It has been my observation that when we do that, far from disappearing, the difficulties actually seem to grow.
So, to a certain extent, our mind controls our difficulties.
Earlier, I mentioned discovering that I was the owner of an immune system.
Obviously mine had gone awry.
Reverting to my analogy of the fire brigade, either my brigade went on strike over all those pork pies and rich, creamy cakes I used to eat, or they had the wrong directions.
It was the directions that I had been giving them that I now began to consider.
I have described myself as a loner with the profession of an artist-writer.
This really is the top of the saltcellar falling onto the bacon or heaping Pelion on Ossa.
The very occupation of artist or writer is, by its nature, hazardous.
There is no regular pay check, no regular employer, no guarantee of work, and the strong likelihood of rebuff.
Get a book published — that is hard enough — or a TV play produced and it's straight to the newspapers to see what the critics say.
If you are ignored you are bitter; if you are criticised you are bitter.
If you are good, then the reviewer has to make his name and that will almost inevitably be at your expense.
To survive is to dig into the pit of your own resources over and over again.
Years of effort can find no other home than the darkness of a filing cabinet.
Yet we go on and on, driven by some creative demon, or perhaps even vanity, but the cost may be high.
For three long periods during my time as a writer, now coming close to twenty years, barrenness and depression have gone together.
They seem to have peaked in the winter when nature itself can be grey enough, or maybe I just remember them as peaking in the winter.
I am fortunate to live in a beautiful mill that spans one of the great chalk rivers of Hampshire, the Itchen.
Everyone who comes here at once delights in the surroundings, and yet when those periods were upon me, nothing could brighten my day nor lift the gloom.
I remember those times and shudder.
More to the point, I shudder at what I was doing to myself.
I used to walk between  the two parts of the building — that is between my studio/study and the main house — and stare up at the pulley that hangs over the hall, an imitation of the one that hung there in the days when a real miller hoisted his sacks of grain.
‘I'll hang myself,’ I used to mutter over and over again, or for a change I would stare at my shotgun and wonder at the sort of mess I could make of myself.
Sometimes I braved the elements and went out to the garage and thought about a hosepipe on the exhaust of the car, but I was never brave enough to face real oblivion, although when I went to bed at night, I used to refer to it as slipping into oblivion.
So the days were unhappy and the nights a bleak nothingness, and although I never actually put a rope around that pulley, nor loaded my shotgun and went out into the field and dug my own grave — as I had visualized so often — nor started my engine in the garage, yet I thought about all three, and on occasions I thought about one or other for days at a time.
Now, when life is so precious, I can look back on that period with shocked amazement.
I can also look back on it as a terrible warning.
I know what I was saying to myself,but myself was also my body ?
To hate yourself is to hate your body.
Might not that message been taken up by my immune system?
A conversation between two T-lymphocytes or a couple of my white cells at the height of that misery is easy enough to picture.
‘That guy up there doesn't like himself.
Have you heard what he's been saying?’
White cell 007 nods: ‘You can't help hearing it, the way he keeps on mooching about the house, hating everything and everyone.
All he wants to do is knock himself off.
The only thing he can't do is make up his mind how.’
‘I reckon we've been wasting our time.’
‘You can say that again.
Racing about doing overtime all because of that rotten food he's eating.
And that's all the thanks we get.’
White cell 007 stops and looks thoughtful.
At last he says, ‘You know that right kidney of his?’
White cell 99 nods.
‘I was down there yesterday on patrol.
Happened to notice a bunch of cancer cells.
Squatters…hippies.
They'd only just pitched camp, but I soon had them on their way.’
White cell 99 nods again, this time sympathetically.
He knows exactly what it's like to have to keep an eye open in every dark, steamy nook and cranny for cancer squatters.
Especially when you're tired.
‘I've been thinking, supposing they were to come back.
It's a nice spot…for them, I mean…’
As the meaning of 007's words dawns upon White Cell 99, he gasps.
‘You mean…?’
‘Exactly.
Next time they come there, I just leave them.
Let them get on with it.
So far as I can see, we'd be doing him a favour.’
‘Brilliant!’ cries 99 excitedly, ‘Quite brilliant!
It's exactly what the old chap wants.’
Delighted to be helpful, the white cells rub their genes together in glee, and for the rest of their lives curl up in their DNA sleeping bags.
There is a stress league.
I take its quantitative values with care.
For most of us, the thought of having to climb Everest would induce a heart attack.
For others it is a challenge to be relished.
I think that to be a loner and a writer is hell enough, but many would instantly tell me how horrendous it is to work in a factory — 1 did it for three months and loathed it — or to go to their office and stop from biting their nails when their boss has to score petty points off them.
In my day in an office my boss and I shared a telephone.
Every time there was a call, although 99 times out of a 100 the call was for him, he pushed the phone in my direction.
Then, of course, there are the normal, daily stresses of just being.
Financial stresses, sexual stresses, the stresses of being a child, an adult, a mother, a father, a son, a daughter, a husband, a wife, a lover, and an unloved.
We live much longer than we did.
If we don't get divorced, marriages last longer and yet we have no idea how to deal with them.
There should be a chair at one of our universities researching solely into coping with long marriages.
I slip into the pitfall of subjectivity with trepidation, but observing my fellow patients, I seemed to discern a distinct pattern so far as stress was concerned.
In almost every case, there was burning resentment at a stress carried that the bearer was quite unable to disregard: bad marriage with one partner far too strong; a dominant sister whose very existence seemed to crush; an authoritarian mother  who apparently allowed her child no freedom even in adult life.
In every case the cancer sufferer seemed to accept their role as victim, to be acquiescent and quite unable to take action.
If there is a cancer personality, then I would suggest it is a person who lacked love in infancy, whose sense of inadequacy was high, who harboured their resentments without seeing a way of changing their situation — even in their mind — and who felt badly done by.
Me, of course.
Maybe it is helpful to forget.
So Tom, Dick, Harry and I saw doctors and counsellors, received healing, tried out the biofeedback, did art therapy and had group sessions of relaxation, meditation and guided imagery.
We visited the kitchen, were lectured to diet, closed our eyes and expressed ourselves to ethnic music and discussed who we were.
Not all did as well as Nancy, both for themselves and for the rest of us.
Harry didn't really have his heart at the Centre and was only there to please his wife.
Dick really couldn't make head or tail of the place and resorted to believing that he had no personal problems, and that the Centre had little to do with cures, which was true.
As for myself, I arrived at the first weekend in a state of high evangelism that must have bored everyone I met.
AGINCOURT
I come from a military family, that is to say a family that has always followed the drum, and probably had to carry it too.
My paternal grandfather was a petty officer who, after keeping Edward the Seventh's Royal Yacht spick and span — his trade was painter — died early from an illness acquired at the Defence of Ladysmith.
My maternal grandfather strained his heart hauling guns up the face of the Maltese cliffs.
My father, by his own efforts, got into the commissioned classes, but lack of a private income forced him to leave his chosen regiment and find a less fashionable, less expensive one.
Six years of my childhood was spent in Catterick Camp, now Catterick Garrison; khaki, puttees, gun carriages, and those early tanks — relics of the Somme and Cambrai — that looked like moving lozenges were my friends.
Later, I too escaped from school into the army, and the four years of war service seemed at the time, perfectly natural.
It was therefore not the least bit unnatural that, when I had cancer and started to visualize, I should revert to war games.
Relaxation, meditation and guided imagery — called here visualization — were my new bedfellows.
Relaxation and meditation were, I thought, quite new to me, but not guided imagery.
I used it every day in my writing and after reading the Simontons' book Getting Well Again , had started toying with it as an anti-cancer technique almost as soon as I left hospital.
But it was meditation that puzzled and eluded me most.
I associated it with bald, saffron-robed monks sitting cross-legged, mesmerized by yak candles, stretching their legs only to beat dreary gongs.
I did understand that we had different levels of consciousness and that we normally run on what are known as beta-waves.
But it was getting out of those beta-waves, down into the alpha-waves and into what is called  the fifth state of consciousness — the healing state — that was so difficult.
For twenty years I had trained my mind that when not preoccupied with washing up, searching the window frames for rotting wood or examining my bank statements, it was to work on plots, characters and the general creation of fiction.
Since it was essential that the moment I awoke each morning, the first words, sentences, if possible, paragraphs came readily to mind, last thing at night, instead of my prayers, my mind was instructed to grind on with the pages.
With this as the acquired recording, it was exceedingly difficult — or so it seemed at the time — to slip down from the stress-filled beta-waves of everyday living, to those desired alpha-waves of mental quiet and healing.
Of course, all these titles like meditation, relaxation and visualization are no more than labels.
There is no one, correct definition of meditation anymore than there is any one correct method of meditating.
If meditation means achieving a state in which stress is reduced — which I believe to be the case — a state in which the self-healing processes of the body may be encouraged, then there may be many channels through which to achieve it.
If you are a countryman, you may sit by a stream and contemplate a may tree just coming into blossom, or climb up on the ramparts of an iron age hill fort and let your soul soar with the wind.
All that is a way of saying that I found, and still do find, the conscious act of sitting down to meditate — in the accepted way of the word — an exceedingly difficult act.
The mind has an astonishing aptitude for skating off at tangents.
When I try and empty my own mind, every bit of detritus in the world sails by.
My mind is like a stage, with the actors, their costumes, props, scripts and agents all streaming on from stage right.
Originally I tried to label each unwanted artifact and thought and send them off again through stage left.
Sort of re-post them.
But my stage tended to turn into a revolving stage and I became the recipient of endless encores.
The whole process became disheartening and, although I tried various mantras, from words I repeated endlessly to candle flames that I stared at, my thoughts always got the better of me.
It was perhaps because of this, and because I tried to foster the whole idea of positive thinking, that I began to concentrate more and more on visualization.
For years visualization has been an everyday part of my life as it is an everyday pad of every writer's day.
To write a scene is to visualize.
Whether it is the Lusitania steaming up the Irish coast towards her doom or a couple of one-legged dwarfs drinking in a bar in Paris, the processes of imagination in the form of characters, clothes, setting, and action are all clawed out of the mind.
We all have an imagination, but some have learned to develop it more than others.
Writers who get cancer are obviously lucky, they have a head and shoulders start on everyone else.
As my living was eked from my imagination, it now seemed sensible to link that imagination to my own healing.
I had, of course, been told by my surgeon that everything he could see he had taken out, On the other hand, I had chosen to explore further on my own and I was learning that cancer has this nasty habit of playing possum.
The word, ‘secondary’ had entered my vocabulary and its meaning had become clear.
I decided that there might well be a few odd cancer cells lurking about that my immune system hadn't spotted or had been too demoralized to deal with — and anyway, wasn't I, like everyone else, making thousands of cancer cells every day?
It may not appear to be strictly in keeping with the true spirit of love, but there is a great deal of useful ‘good’ to be learned from a military background.
After his retirement, my father no longer found himself in command of an Ordnance Base Depot supplying the whole of the 8th Army, but merely a small cottage in Hampshire.
His three thousand men and army car with driver had dwindled to my poor mother and a bicycle.
No wonder men who retire like that just die.
My father did.
Three years after giving all that up he had a heart attack.
Nevertheless, in his retirement, he continued his old army ways as best he could.
The Bren LMGs Mk I for the 8th Army were now no more than soap, toothpaste or toilet rolls, but the progression was just the same.
There was a Base Depot under the stairs where the requisites lay in bulk.
As the piece of soap in the bathroom began to diminish or a toilet roll grow thin, so the replacement would be moved from the Base Depot to the Command Depot — a cupboard upstairs.
Only when that bar in the bathroom was wafer thin or the toilet roll down to a few sheets, would the replacement be moved to the Forward Depot — the bathroom cupboard.
Even to remove an item from the bathroom cupboard to the wash basin or lavatory  required authority.
Woe betide anyone who moved that bar forward without first indenting on stores.
With a background like that, when under threat from cancer, I too began to move my resources forward, slowly, methodically, with each move carefully considered and with reinforcements available just behind the lines.
I reverted to my own adaptation of that simplest of all codes of operation, the ‘0’ Group.
Intention…
Information about Enemy…
Information about Own Troops…
Method…
Any Question?
The intention was simple, to destroy or deactivate any cancer cells in my body.
If they couldn't be destroyed then they must be neutralized or kept in a stage of siege.
At the very least they must be contained and never allowed to sally out.
Not being a cancer expert, my information about the enemy was scant, and this seemed my weakest point.
The information I had on my own troops was also of a general, somewhat amateurish nature, but I did know that, put in its simplest form, my immune system was a collection of several kinds of cells designed to attack and destroy foreign bodies.
This is the system that has to be suppressed to allow a transplant to succeed.
My immune system was on my side but needed support, just as I needed its support.
I was already giving it my support with diet and positive thinking; now I would add an overwhelming direct frontal assault with thorough, serious visualization.
I reckoned that I had at least one brigade of white cells on the start line with other brigades available as required.
As to the method, I would visualize the total victory of my immune system over the cancer cells.
As the immune system was largely composed of white cells, whatever I visualized would have to be white.
Indeed the whole healing process should be shining white.
Any questions?
There were dozens, but in essence they boiled down to only one.
Would ‘Operation White Knight’ be a success?
Here I had reason for hope.
I was just beginning to understand the power of the mind.
The initial problem seemed to be what part of my anatomy to visualize.
I have already mentioned my ‘empty bottle syndrome’, and without a wall chart, I still have only scant knowledge of the   lay-out of my interior.
I decided therefore to make a general image of flesh.
A surface like a quilt, interwoven with patches of dark and light — blood cells, veins, muscles etc. — but with the whole canvas painted with a flesh-coloured brush.
Into this I placed little ‘oily’ pools where cancer cells were setting up their colonies and I imagined the cells themselves as amoeba or tadpole like creatures, smooth, slippery and with large eyes.
They were a mid grey, neither too aggressive nor too dormant, and they tended to stick their little round heads out of the ‘oily’ pools like hungry fledglings in a nest.
As time went on this picture changed and I gave the cancer cells more cunning characteristics.
Having created my opposition, I had to decide what I would do to them.
Counteracting my cancer cells has been an evolutionary process in which a whole series of different ‘attacks’ have been launched depending upon the information I have on myself, how and what I feel.
I started in a very modest way with the healing ball, an object that must surely figure in all cancer visualization literature.
In my case it really was a form of celestial cannon ball.
About the size of a sixteen pounder, but infinitely lighter — in fact it had no weight at all— it stood in the heavens shining as white as anything that ever came into a television advertisement.
More often than not, it was accompanied by the sort of halo that I once put around others' heads, and now often wear myself.
Having created and found my healing object, I next set about using it.
First I would relax, lie upon a bed, although not the bed in which I normally slept, go through the breathing exercises until I felt that I was part of the bed, weightless and sinking through it.
Then, in my mind, I reached up to the heavens, held out my hands, grasped the ball and brought it down.
Then I'd slip the ball into my abdomen and gently roll it about inside me.
So far as I knew I covered the area around my bowels, liver, one kidney and all the other bits and pieces that make up a living abdomen.
Although I tried to do this visualization several times a day, I found it best and most rewarding first thing in the morning when I and my mind were fresh.
I would imagine the ball — it had this intense whiteness and a sort of vast, perpetual unburning non-consuming heat — rolling over the quilt of flesh that was my inside.
As the ball came to a group of cancer cells, and passed over them, the cells reacted in dismay.
They squirmed, shrivelled and after a brief  struggle, gave up the ghost.
After that I would shower them away, and peering over my side — all in my mind — would watch them being swept down a hillside in a cleansing torrent of water.
There were times, however, when I felt that something, more active, more positive was needed, to be much used later in the year.
Why I thought this I don't know, but I did.
Remember, I was operating in the dark at that time, with no precise information on my enemy, no positive place of attack, motivated by what I sensed or feared.
Surgically, I suppose I was clear.
This doubt of not quite knowing so worried me that I sometimes approached my visualization as if addressing a public meeting.
‘If there are any cancer cells in my inside not being attended to, will they please stand up.’
Being cancer cells, shifty by nature, there was usually no response.
I would immediately have another go.
‘In case my digestive juices were making so much noise that none of you heard what I said, I'll repeat it.
If there are any cancer cells not yet being attended to, I will give them just one minute to stand up .’
I might see a bit of shuffling amongst all the cells but nothing else.
‘Come on, it's no good hiding!
I can spot one of you lot a mile off.’
I would point, ‘You there, with your head down pretending you're not here.
Aren't you a cancer cell?
You look exactly like one.’
It was all very reminiscent of Peter in the Garden just before the cock crowed.
There might be a shamefaced nod.
‘Then stand up!’
Only with every identifiable cancer cell standing would I begin.
Feeling one day the need for something more aggressive than the healing ball, I again turned back to my military roots.
Tanks and guns bombarding one's inside seemed totally out of place, so I sought inspiration in earlier times, in the knowledge that what was once just as hideous has, over the years been softened by children's books,Morte d'Arthur and the legends of chivalry.
Pikemen attacking cancer cells seemed altogether too slow and cumbersome.
I remembered my own boyhood watching cavalrymen sticking tent pegs at the gymkhanas, and tried knights on shining white chargers, complete with shining white  bascinets , breastplates, leg armour and gauntlets doing the same thing to my inside, but they never really  filled the role.
Tent pegs were not cancer cells.
Even in my mind I found it extremely unwieldy trying to lance one — let alone 100,000 — from a charging steed.
In the end I turned to the longbow of England.
The victor of Crécy and Agincourt.
Had I not gone to Normandy just over forty years ago wearing on my shoulder the same emblem, that mythical beast, the Wyvern of Wessex, half dragon, half eagle, that had fluttered over the heads of the English at both those battles?
So I lined up my archers on a hill of my own flesh, dressed them all in white, blancoed their arrows and set them off.
The arrow showers fell upon the cancer cells, and in the immortal words of Corporal Jones of Dad's Army : ‘They didn't like it!’
I had taken the Big C to Agincourt.
THE ROAD TO DAMASCUS AND BACK
By my first weekend at the Centre I was that very dangerous creature, one worse than a missionary, a convert.
The Saul Syndrome had settled upon me and I was wrapped tightly in his mantle.
The answer to everything, not only cancer but life itself was to be found in our own hands.
There was no reason why any one of us should ever be unhappy again.
No reason why even the most unfortunate mortal should ever have a breath of depression.
And there was absolutely no reason why a single cancer cell should ever be let loose in any part of our body.
There was certainly no reason why cancer should ever return, and the dreaded secondary was forever expelled once one had started the prescribed path.
In short, I entered complementary medicine's cloud cuckoo land where the sun shone everlastingly and love oozed from every portal.
I left for my weekend break after those first five days wanting to hug everyone I met.
A woman with a vacuum cleaner whose tube I fell over, the man who sold me withered flowers, even the couple who let their dog foul outside the gate were all candidates for a warm hug and a deluge of good wishes.
Nothing could daunt me and I talked to everyone with the same message: ‘Cancer was absolutely great because it put you in touch with yourself and the world.’
Three who suffered particularly at the time were Richard and Phoebe Winch who lived just below the Centre and in whose house I often took my evening glass of ‘allowed’ claret, and Ann Willson who looked after me for the Saturday and Sunday.
I must have been the greatest bore ever, and it's a wonder that those I inflicted my views upon didn't rebel.
But they didn't, they were too kind.
Indeed, with hindsight and viewed from a far cooler and more rational climate, my astonishment is now all the greater, because many of those I evangelized to, far from rebelling, seemed to respond.
They caught the sparks that showered from my own tiny anvil and I failed to think it odd.
I had broken one of my own golden rules.
In one week I had been transformed into the two personae that I had always sworn to avoid: the preacher and the missionary.
It was the braces that brought my first step back to earth.
I was now so thin, so tubular that I could no longer wear a belt.
With a belt, my trousers fell straight down, so now I wore a pair of red braces instead.
I was proud of the braces for not only were they colourful, they were very modern with all the latest adjustments.
However, I had failed to see what I looked like in them.
It was when I took my jacket off and stood before a mirror and saw for the first time that all I was was a pair of scarlet braces, that I realised that evangelism wasn't enough.
When I dared to go to the scales I discovered that I had lost a further ten pounds in five days.
As I used up my energy, telling everyone how great the world was, so there seemed to be no replacement.
And with no replacement I was just shrinking away.
It seemed a very odd way of getting better.
Nevertheless, I left the Centre after my two weeks, still evangelical, feeling extraordinary well but seeming to lack a body.
I returned home floating on air and went on preaching.
But now, beyond my cancer loss, I had forfeited a further three-quarters of a stone.
I looked and felt a walking cadaver.
As I lay on my back and tried to visualize those brigades of white cells marching to my rescue, all I saw were those other cadavers so plentiful in our ancient cathedrals.
There are several in Winchester, mostly mediaeval bishops whose stone effigies look like undernourished third-world corpses after a visit from the vultures.
It was the way that their shoulder bones and ribs stood out, and their stomachs fell right into their backbones that reminded me so much of myself.
So great was the similarity that I dared no longer lay upon my back.
All this time I was putting the finishing touches to our hero's book.
It was a considerable struggle but with my co-author agreeing that he liked the work, I was able to deliver the typescript to my publisher three weeks before the delivery date.
I had already begun an outline for another book and for that I needed some local colour in an Eastern bloc country.
I decided that in my present state I couldn't face Moscow, and having discovered about the hot, spring baths of Budapest and the chess players who stand in water  at 76 degrees Celsius, leisurely moving the pieces, decided that it was the place for me.
Not that I wanted to play chess nor even to frighten the good citizens of Budapest with a glimpse of my bare cadaver — my bathing trunks now also fell off me — but rather that the idea of a character — perhaps fleeing from something or someone — standing in those steaming baths moving queens and pawns, fitted perfectly into the outline I had.
I thereupon resolved to go and see whether the Danube really was blue.
However, before going to Budapest I had one more evangelical function to perform.
In a moment of high fervour I had offered to talk to that Mafia of old, the Winchester Quakers, on my experiences at the Bristol Cancer Help Centre.
I talked to them in the Friends' Meeting House on a dark and stormy summer night.
I thanked them for praying for me and seeing me now, hoped they thought their efforts worthwhile.
I told them all the positive things, of the love I had seen, of Nancy, of Tom, Dick and Harry and of my various forms of visualization.
Then, even as I talked I began to see, for almost the first time, some of the negative factors that I had suppressed or disregarded.
I had or had had cancer — a most serious disease — yet I had been talking as if it was all a joke.
Now, suddenly I had to remind myself of the truth.
Cancer was dangerous, deadly dangerous.
I became worried again and acutely aware of my problem.
The old dread returned, the pendulum began to swing.
I was changing, of course, before I went to the Meeting House.
The Meeting House merely hastened that change.
I had been far too ‘high’ to last and a drop to reality was essential.
The trouble was that when the pendulum did swing, it swung too far, right to the opposite side.
Perhaps it was sitting in front of an audience that I hardly knew but believed to be very worthy that brought back that old feeling of being a bit of a fraud, particularly when one lady, catching the shreds of my zeal said I had taken away her fear of cancer!
Perhaps it was while watching the faces, that I began to get a mirror of my own doubts.
Perhaps it was the weakness from the severe vegan diet.
Whatever it was, I began to be aware of all the doubts, of all the rational thoughts that I had put away in my pursuit of ‘complementary’ medicine.
Was I not perhaps the greatest fool in Christendom?
What of the loony fringe that I had so conveniently forgotten?
Dick had been right all along, how could swaying to ethnic music  with my eyes shut or touching another's face with the tips of my fingers possibly help my cancer?
How could healing from a priest when I had no faith be of any assistance, and wasn't the whole of that phoney world perfectly epitomized by the belief that the wanderings of an old man in the Oxfordshire lanes in the 1930s, seeking the energies of various plants, could possibly be relevant to a most dreaded disease?
I am referring to Dr. Bach Flower Remedies, a mixed distillation of which I had been prescribed and acquired at Bristol.
I remembered my astonishment when the first doctor I saw at the Centre read my notes and wrote down a mixture of Centaury, Gorse, Star of Bethlehem and Beech.
I was so surprised that at the time I uttered no word.
It was only later that I dared to approach the nurse who did the dispensing and whisper in her ear that I knew nothing of Bach Remedies and would she please enlighten me.
With the little bottle containing the mixture, she gave me a pamphlet.
I sat on my bed and studied it.
I discovered that the remedies were all prepared from wild flowers, plants and trees, that none were harmful and that they were not used directly for physical complaints, but for the sufferer's negative feelings such as worry, apprehension, hopelessness, irritability etc.
In other words the states of mind that do nothing for the healing process.
My next concern in this strange new land was how did Dr. Bach, when wandering the lanes near his cottage know the vibes that each flower, plant or tree emitted.
At this point you have to suspend disbelief and take your faith in your hands.
Apparently the worthy doctor would ‘will’ in his own self the feelings of a particular distress and then wander the lanes and fields until he was ‘led’to a plant, flower etc.
If that plant removed the distress and brought serenity to mind, then that was the plant to be used.
In this way Dr. Bach built up a complete medicine chest of thirty-eight flowers to cover all known negative states of mind.
I now looked up what I had been prescribed:
Centaury : Weakness of will; those who let themselves be exploited or imposed upon — become subservient; difficulty in saying ‘no’.
Human doormat.
Gorse : Extreme hopeless — pessimist —‘Oh, what's the use?’
Star of Bethlehem : For all the effect of serious news, or fright following an accident etc.
Beech : Critical and intolerant of others.
Arrogant.
Now I knew what the doctor at the Centre thought of me, and he wasn't far wrong.
The only problem was, was Dr. Bach right?
Was he really ‘guided’ in his wanderings or were they no more than the meanderings of an old man?
Might I not go out and wander and be ‘guided’ to quite a different set of plants.
What if Dr. Bach had lived in the desert and not in Oxfordshire with its lush fields and hedgerows.
Would I now be taking the juices of cactus, date and fig?
Nevertheless, such was my faith while at the Centre that along with my vitamins and supplements, I religiously took my drops of Dr. Bach every day, at the same time muttering the necessary affirmations.
Now, however, with the tide of disbelief, all that was swept away.
I did not discard everything, for Vitamin A, B, C and little tablets of zinc and selenium made scientific sense, but poor, old Dr. Bach really did seem nonsense.
So I put away my little brown bottle of herbal remedies, turned my back upon much I had learned at the Centre, and before leaving for Hungary and all that forbidden goulash, took three quite definite steps.
The diet was too severe and I broke it by having eggs and fish.
Against the advice given me at the Centre, quite deliberately I decided to have neither a counsellor nor a healer.
There were three Hitchcocks amongst the rebels of Sedgemoor, Humphrey was hanged, John transported to Barbados and a second John, not being at home when the sheriff called, seems to have cheated rope and ship.
Now, having been the rebel from the NHS, I had turned maverick and become the rebel of Bristol.
Budapest was a struggle.
It was hot, the pavements were hard, the food, both heavy and greasy, everything being cooked in lard.
I had gone believing that I would find plenty of eggs and fish from Lake Balaton — apparently a delicacy.
During my time at the Centre, the strict vegan, detoxifying diet was recommended for three months as a minimum; only after that should one go to the ‘stay well diet’ which  does allow a little fish and eggs.
At the time of going to Budapest I was still only in my second month of strict diet and had another five weeks left.
I saw the men playing chess in the hot Szechenyi baths and managed the journey back, but when I got home, people shook their heads.
One look and the family decided I was once again on the way out.
I can't remember feeling particularly ill, but my energy was now back to zero and my zest for life at a nadir.
Two dates faced me in the late summer, early autumn of that year.
I was due to pay my second visit to my surgeon after my operation, and I had committed myself to returning to the Centre for a day visit at the end of October.
I had no worry about visiting my surgeon, but I did worry about returning to the Centre with such grave doubts and negative attitude towards their therapies.
Indeed, how could I ever go back to Bristol without having done my prep ?
It was a reunion at Bath that made me decide.
Outside the village of Paulton in Somerset there is a memorial to a glider that crashed on the way to Arnhem, killing everyone on board.
Every year for the past four years, some of the veterans I was with in Normandy have taken part in the annual Paulton memorial service.
The site is across two meadows.
I had always managed the walk with ease, but this time it was different.
I made it and I made it back, but the friend who saw me onto the train was so concerned at my appearance, she phoned my daughter.
I may have rebelled, but I was too weak to be a rebel.
I was ill, some thought very ill, and I still needed help.
APOCALYPSE NOW
‘May I speak to Mr. Lampitt please?’
‘Mr. Lampitt is operating.
Can I help?
I'm Mr. Lampitt's secretary.’
‘I've got a card here from Out Patients with an appointment to see Mr. Lampitt on Monday next.
There must be some mistake, I saw him only ten days ago.
That was on a Monday.
I dare say it's simply a case of getting one Monday mixed with another.
It can happen to anyone.’
‘Can I have your name please?’
I gave my name.
A little light patter while she looks for the file.
‘We all make mistakes.
I certainly came the other day and had an X-ray of my chest.’
There is a long pause and at last the voice says.
‘I have to check your papers, may I ring you back?’
‘Of course, but I'm pretty sure it's a mistake.
As I said, I saw Mr. Lampitt on the Monday before last and everything was fine, absolutely fine.’
‘I'll ring you back.’
I sat and waited.
I no longer drank black coffee nor smoked, so I could only chew my almonds and sip my herb tea.
The whole thing was preposterous, most certainly a mistake.
NHS hospitals were notorious for getting papers mixed up and cutting off the wrong leg or arm.
And with all those people stacked up in X-ray, cheek by jowl, rubbing their short, white dressing gowns together, the plates were bound to have got into the wrong envelopes.
Anyway, they'd got my papers wrong well before that.
They'd X-rayed my chest when any fool knew that it was the kidney that had had to come out.
If they were looking for more cancer then surely the place to look was at the next vulnerable point?
If you wanted to kill someone, and you'd struck at one kidney, you'd certainly  strike at the other.
Even the simplest tactician knew that.
Yet here they were looking at my chest.
I could make neither head nor tail of it and decided I was dealing with a bunch of idiots.
No wonder people talked of the breakdown of the health service and turned in their thousands to complementary medicine.
‘Mr. Hitchcock?
Mr. Lampitt's secretary here.
Mr. Lampitt would like to see you.’
It made no sense and I just swallowed.
‘He would like to talk to you about your X-rays.’
The conversation was no longer real.
The woman was mad.
By mistake I had been put through not to the hospital but to a  psychiatric ward.
Whatever goes today for Bedlam.
I sat upright.
‘Talk about my X-rays?
How can you talk about X-rays ?
X-rays aren't something you can talk about, they're visual things .
Like paintings, they need to be seen not talked about.’
‘Mr. Lampitt would like to talk about them…’
It wasn't just the secretary that was mad but the surgeon as well.
I was the only sane one, so although I hated to ask, I took the plunge.
‘You mean…there's something on the X-rays ?!’
‘Mr. Lampitt wants to talk about them.’
It was like a very bad gramophone record.
‘You mean he's found something on them?’
‘He would like to talk to you about them.’
‘But it was my chest…my lungs ,’
‘So the appointment is quite correct…’
I let the phone drop.
Bile came up in my mouth.
I started talking, at first to myself, striding about the room.
There must still be some mistake.
My surgeon was one of those nuts who, when they aren't too busy, like to have old patients in and chat about their X-rays.
Like some people get a kick out of crossing the Atlantic in an old bath, so my particular surgeon, for all his great skill, is not quite right in the head.
For him, looking at X-rays is like going to the theatre or watching a good film.
And besides, I must be all right; didn't he want to talk about my chest?
There couldn't be anything wrong with my chest unless I'd swallowed something as a child, an old thrupenny bit.
Or  maybe he'd spotted an old piece of long-forgotten shrapnel.
One thing was absolutely certain; as it was my chest we were to chat about, it couldn't have anything to  do with cancer.
With that thought I breathed a deep sigh of relief.
Nevertheless, the wait for Monday was long and hard.
There now occurred something, that in retrospect, I believe to have been of the greatest significance to this journey.
Although I had decided to have neither a healer nor a counsellor, I had, in earlier weeks when feeling positive, made gentle, tentative enquiries.
I got to hear of several healers, but there was one in particular towards whom I was subtly steered.
Beth Stubbs was a Quaker, a member of that old Mafia that I had been so wary of.
She was a Christian but not a Church one.
Early in October, after receiving the summons to return to Out Patients, feeling none too well, I capitulated once again.
I contacted Beth, and on the 10th of October, just four days before going to my surgeon, she came to my house.
I had met Beth twice before.
All I knew about her was that she was a Quaker elder, had a bad back and a year ago had wanted either my studio or garden to give relaxation classes in.
I, of course, had said ‘no’.
Now I opened the door to a white-haired lady carrying a portable tape recorder, a small box of tapes and a book.
Believing me to be an intellectual, Beth had spent the previous night searching for suitable words to read before the laying-on of hands.
We had soft music — a little Mozart and surprise of surprises, James Last — and words — now long forgotten — and a sort of fantasy journey.
She laid hands upon me in the name of God and I didn't mind .
And that was the extraordinary thing.
Nothing inside me revolted, cried out nor felt embarrassed.
Beth had invoked the help of God or Jesus Christ and I had taken it like a lamb.
And the Anglican Church still can't bring itself to ordain women!
I have now had seven different healers, three at the Centre and four at home.
Healers all perform differently, each with their own way.
Some are specifically Christian and evoke God or Jesus, others do not.
When I first met Christopher Pilkington at the Centre I had no idea he was a priest and remember asking if he was the healer as one might question a plumber's identity.
His reply, ‘one of them,’ was as good as anything.
Most healers lay their hands on the head, but some also consider the site of the actual hurt, perhaps passing a hand over one's side.
Before I ever had healing I was told that I might feel tingling or warmth, but alas, I cannot truthfully say that I ever felt either, although of course, with hands laid on you, or just above you, there must be the sensation of touch.
What then did I feel?
I felt more than just the centre of attention, although that feeling is always present.
Almost always I felt peace, as if a cloud had been lifted, lightness of body and spirit and sometimes hopeful.
I recall no occasion of feeling ‘physically better’, and that could hardly have been expected, rather a sense of a lantern lighting a gloom, or an astounding view unfolding.
Of my seven healers, three, two at the Centre and one at home stand out as memorable.
This doesn't mean that the others had no ‘powers’, that they seemed to do little for me may have been my own lack of receptivity.
If they were the transmitter, or more likely the conductor, then as the receiver I was probably not tuned to their wavelength.
One healer at the Centre always made me feel recharged.
I must have been spot on his wavelength for I never left the quiet room after one of his healings without a sense, almost of VROOOOM!
Get up and go!
But then he also talked of the power of the mind and maybe that was part of the reassurance.
With Beth it was different, there was music and a reading but not really much VROOOOM!
But then she wasn't a vroooom! person.
The word spiritual is over used, but for Beth it's the right adjective.
I can't say I felt any stronger when Beth left that day, but I was exceedingly glad that she had come and I was left with an inkling of hope.
Whatever was to be, I should be more able to cope with it.
I sat and tried to stay calm turning the pages of a Country Life so old it was still selling off prefabs.
A dozen of us were waiting in Out Patients, all with something wrong down there, in an area designated ‘the water works’.
However, if there had been no mistake, then my ‘wrong’ was no longer down ‘there’, but up ‘here’.
It was a thought to ponder while reading about the short-nosed shrew and the harmlessness of the false chanterelle.
The nurse called my name; I walked into the consulting room, flashing a worn, mechanical smile, but feeling as if I was walking onto the stage at the National without my trousers.
I felt stupid and powerless, with my whole future in other hands.
My surgeon indicated a chair.
The nurse stood silently, arms behind her, the assistant sat and may have smiled, I hardly noticed.
‘How are you?’
I asked, it seemed a good enough start.
‘I'm very well, the question is,how are you ?’
I wasn't really well and no doubt it showed; on the other hand I felt better than I had.
‘Oh, not bad…’
My surgeon looked grave.
Nevertheless, even at his gravest he has a benign twinkle.
I don't remember his words now and it would be ethically wrong for me to make them up, but he began to tell me that there was something in my lung.
He selected an X-ray, took it to the wall display, pinned it up and pointed.
I looked at and through myself in two-tone, X-ray grey.
Sure enough to the left of the backbone, somewhere about my nipple there was a large round blob.
It was certainly no thrupenny bit nor even a half a crown.
It was more like a saucer or a small beer mat.
My eyes glued to the beer mat I tried to take in what was being said.
In view of what I bad already had, i. e. a kidney removed with cancer, the offensive blob we were all staring at could well be malignant .
‘It wasn't there on the previous X-ray.’
I nodded helplessly, as if it was my fault.
The previous X-ray of my lungs had been just before my operation in March.
It was now September.
So the tumour, if tumour it was, had grown in the last six months.
‘You mean, I could now have cancer of the lung ?!’
There was the faint, almost imperceptible nod.
‘In view of what we have already done…’
Even with the warning shots of ‘wanting to talk about my X-rays’, I was stunned.
Whoever expected the little grey devils I had been assaulting with white arrows and rolling with white healing balls to reappear in my lung?
It was unfair.
Dastardly unfair.
It was a filthy trick, totally unsporting and certainly not cricket.
Had they obeyed the accepted rules of warfare they would have stayed somewhere ‘further down’.
Cancer cells, like meter readers without identity cards were evidently not to be trusted.
I was sitting down again when the words floated through.
‘I must tell you, this might mean surgery or some form of drugs…’
I remembered the wigs and the beautiful woman without hair.
‘You mean chemotherapy?
You mean I might lose my hair…my teeth?!’
My surgeon gave an encouraging smile.
‘That sort of tumour sometimes responds well to female hormones…’
Oh, my God, I'm going to grow breasts!
‘The side effects are quite small.’
Small breasts, some crumb of comfort there.
‘I'm in your hands,’ I mumbled and didn't quite know why I said it.
‘First we'll get some more X-rays…’
I nodded again.
It seemed a good idea.
‘And then we'll go on from there.’
We shook hands and I walked from the consulting room,
The car park was so full that upon my visits to the hospital I now parked across the road in a garden centre.
To ease my conscience, for every parking I bought an indoor pot plant, so that by now we have a veritable jungle growing along all the window sills, crawling up the walls and wrapping their tendrils around the television set.
That day I had bought a fern, a modest enough plant but with bright, shiny leaves and an indestructible appearance.
When I got back to the car, the fern was sitting in the boot in its pot looking exceedingly perky, if a fern can look perky.
‘You're well enough!’
I cried angrily, ‘I'm glad something's alright.’
And with that I slammed the boot lid down.
This time my reaction to the knowledge that in all probability cancer was back with me and that I had a dreaded secondary was quite different from my reaction on first being told of the disease six months earlier.
Then I had felt a someone: the centre of all attention and an exceedingly important person.
But then I had been very ignorant of the disease; now I was wiser.
Far from feeling elated or having adrenaline surging about, I was frightened, shattered, but also bewildered.
One of the questions I asked myself was what could possibly have gone wrong ?
Until recently, hadn't I done everything, well almost everything that the Centre suggested?
And yet here I was, deep in trouble for a second time.
Having taken on so much responsibility for myself, I now began to feel guilty.
Quite evidently when I had performed the various therapies I hadn't performed them properly.
If I had done, then the secondary would not have occurred.
The proof of the pudding was in the eating, and in my case I'd got the ingredients wrong.
I was quite evidently not a person to be trusted with even the simplest task.
I still didn't think I would die, but I had no idea how I was going to live.
Drugs or even more surgery on yet another organ seemed intolerable, and yet I had said to my surgeon, ‘I am in your hands.’
The rest of that day was a shocked daze.
From home, the news was distributed over the telephone.
It was bad, the old man had got a secondary in his lung.
‘What's a secondary?’
‘It means it's come back…’
‘You mean, he's got more cancer?’
‘Yeah, and this time it's in his lung.’
‘My God, that's a bad place!
I take it he's flaking out?’
‘Sort of…’
‘That's why he looked like a bit of old parchment when he came back from Hungary.’
‘Guess so…’
In a moment of optimism my wife told me not to worry and pronounced that I could live perfectly well on one lung.
Lots of people do it every day.
‘Name one!
Name any one person you know who's walking around with one lung.’
She couldn't.
It was then that I made my mind up.
‘I've got one leg!’
I cried — a bit of an exaggeration, but it was no moment for exactitudes, ‘And now I've got only one kidney.
I'm damned if I'm going to have one lung !’
THE WAY OF STRENGTH
A long, piercing whistle echoed beneath my open study window.
The resident water-keeper had a message.
‘Something that would interest you, my lord.
Charlie's found a skeleton in his garden.
It must be pretty old, it's right down in the chalk and yellower than my old Roman ring.’
The hamlet I live in consists of thirty houses and perhaps a hundred souls and sits immediately astride the River Itchen.
It has no present claim to fame and its longest guidebook entry are the words in Domesday.
In spite of television aerials, overhead telephone lines, wheely-bins, garages and infill, the hamlet struggles to maintain its sense and beauty and on the whole succeeds.
It is a ‘pretty little place’ with half-timbered cottages, a converted Georgian water mill and a sprinkling of later vernacular architecture, all so apparently pleasing to the passers by.
But that is the surface world.
What of that other world, the world of the distant past that now lies beneath our feet?
Who in their daily whirl stops to consider it?
Does the milkman see the ghosts of warrior, yeoman, serf and villein — and all the womenfolk that kept the hamlet — as he drives his float down the 1,000 year old lane?
Do we, privileged to live here, see them — men and women in skins, furs or rough-woven garments, all so young yet looking so old?
The discovery in Charlie's garden on that May morning fourteen years ago was just another reminder of the layers — the heritage — we all dwell upon yet seem able to ignore with such ease.
The water-keeper escorted me back up the lane.
It is said to be an overcoat warmer in the valley, but shelter from the north is no compensation for the deep-freeze effect as the frosts drain down to the river.
Spring, our particular spring, is always late and something to be talked about.
Fred — as the skeleton was later named — was found in May, with the willows by the bank at their greenest and  the wild fowl at their most excited.
So that morning there was life in abundance, except in Charlie's garden.
Charlie — that's not his real name — was a policeman, a very senior detective.
He was also a Stakhanovite.
In the twilight of the Great Drought he had come down to the river and filled his wheelbarrow with water until only a Samson could have moved it.
In the summer dawn he ran in the hollow ways where his great grandfather had humped the sacks of corn.
Now, living in the cottage where his father and mother had once lived, he was the only indigenous, true specimen left of the village.
Inserting a garage into his ancestors' ancient garden, the bulldozer's blade had sliced through the ochre remains lost in the chalk.
At first sight ‘Fred’ was disappointing.
A portion of that most evocative of all pieces of the human skeleton, the skull had been removed by the excavator, as had the whole right arm.
Then he was so small.
True he was crouched, but he was still small.
Almost too small to be a man.
Yet that was what went into the archaeologist's notebook: ‘…appears to be a man…one vertebrae directly east of the head…’
I saw that notebook again many winters later, and suddenly realised why that first sighting of ‘Fred’ had been such a disappointment.
His magic, the magic of uncovering a man who had trod the land that I now trod, who died and was laid in the chalk 3,000 years ago, had been little more than pages in a notebook: another find in the ceaseless archaeological round.
But what was, for the archaeologist the end of a job, was for me the beginning.
‘Alas, poor Bronze Age Fred, I knew him; a fellow of infinite jest, of most excellent fancy…’
‘Fred’ was the beginning of my layers, the bottom strata of the well wherein lay my strength.
I was so affected by his discovery that I pursued his future career with the Museum Service and later visited him in his cardboard box.
He was a young man, probably no more than twenty; his teeth were worn down to the stumps by rough ground corn, the tops so sliced through they might have been cut with a circular saw and the resulting surface polished with emery paper.
For ‘Fred’ it was exactly like being a rabbit.
Bronze Age man didn't have stoppings, he just wore his teeth away.
He had no grave goods and that marked him pretty low both on the social scale and with the archaeologists.
When his bones  were brought out of their air-conditioned home for me to glimpse, I was astonished at their lightness and frailty.
The earliest known inhabitant of my village, who had tilled its fields, fished its river, delighted at the sunshine and huddled around his smoking fire in the winter damp, who shared all our human emotions, love, hate, joy, sorrow and pain was now no more than a box of prehistoric Crunchie bars dried almost to dust.
In my hands, ‘Fred's’ frail remains made my flesh tingle.
When I reluctantly put him back in his shoe box, I had a desperate need to be close to ‘Fred’ the person.
My parting thought as the lid went on was what object might we both have known.
The only place I could think of was Stonehenge which must have been spanking new then and as up to date as a Hilton or an out-of-town Sainsburys.
If ‘Fred’ was the lowest strata of my well of strength, others come in rapid succession.
The Celtic fields; Iron Age and Roman farms, all still detectable from the air; the Dark Age village along the river bank with its ghostly, ghastly cemetery on the hill where a woman was buried alive and her skeletal fingers dug into the rough chalk sides of her grave; nearby Winchester, the old Saxon capital; the warpath at the top of my lane; the mill I live in, founded in the days of Alfred's great grandson, and reinforcements for the Conqueror's victorious army trotting past the site of our bus shelter.
These then are the ‘things’ beneath my feet, the layers that fill the well of strength from which I draw energy and comfort in times of crisis.
I may now consider myself significant, even of importance, I may now feel strong and reassured by those who have helped and loved me, but for inner strength, the strength when I am alone or awake in the night, or when old feelings rear their hoary heads, I turn to what is beneath my feet.
The earth is an electrode, my legs the conductors.
From those thousands who have trodden the same paths in earlier times, the energy is inexhaustible.
I hear voices saying, ‘Ah, he's lucky, it's alright for him, he lives in an historic place.’
Every place, in every country is historic.
As historic as the planet we live on.
I discovered soon after my illness the same energies walking beneath the cliffs of Lyme Regis, in the shadow of Mary Annan and the ichthyosauruses as I do in this hamlet.
Try it for yourself: go out into a meadow, a village street, stand by the bank of a stream or on the sea shore and imagine the people who knew it 1,000 years ago.
Let their energy   rise into you through your feet.
It may take a little practice, there may be a telephone box or a house or two to remove but it's not as difficult as it sounds.
Once mastered, once you can see that Saxon reeve plodding along with his staff or the Celt ploughing his ancient lynchet, you'll begin to understand your own mortality.
When you understand that, fear will vanish and strength return.
Between seeing my surgeon and being X-rayed there were only a few days.
It all happened very quickly in the same week.
Nevertheless, in that brief space of time I turned up the flame.
The X-rays that had proved so offensive and shown up that considerable blob had been taken more than three weeks previously.
Since then I had had a healing, been taking massive doses of vitamin C, regular doses of vitamin A and B and supplements of zinc and selenium, eating my ‘stay-well’ diet and doing my visualization.
I did, in fact, feel better, certainly better than when the X-rays had been taken, and much better than the period immediately before that.
That there was a time lag heartened me.
My surgeon was looking at the past, not the present .
He could only see how I had been, not how I was.
Then a most exciting thought struck me.
Supposing the tumour in my lungs was not entirely new but had started five months ago, before I went onto my diet, took my vitamins or began my visualizations?
That was not impossible, for there had been six months between the X-rays, in which case The tumour could have already been on the way down when it was spotted .
Far from ‘letting me down’, the methods I had adopted from the Centre may well have been helping me.
It was a cheerful prognosis and I leapt at it.
It was nice and positive and suited me fine.
Now was the time for this good man to go with all speed and energy to the aid of his immune system.
The only thing I could step up while waiting for that next visit to the X-ray department was my visualization.
This I immediately did.
In every relaxation and visualization session, the one common factor amongst patients had been the desire to image a pastoral background.
When asked to put their minds and bodies at rest, no one ever visualized themselves in the middle of Piccadilly waiting  supermarket, or crushed in an underground train.
In every case they pictured a pastoral place where streams trickled through lush meadows, waterfalls fell into cool, sparkling pools or the sea gently bathed a sandy beach.
It may have been a very naive discovery on my part, but that said something very definite to me about the way we live.
Man's mind yearns for a rural existence — where 99.999% of his evolution occurred — but for many of us, mind and body have to take the daily buffets of urban, industrial civilization.
I had developed a visualization to go with this mood.
Before assaulting my cancer with arrows or rolling the healing ball across my stomach, I made my own little pastoral journey.
I started — and still do — in a field that I call my Chagall field because Chagall once painted one exactly like it.
It is a small field, full of wild flowers and with high hedges that double as trees.
There could be a horse grazing in the field, but not the purple Chagall donkey.
In the right hand corner is a small gate.
I walk across the field to the gate and out into a narrow lane.
A little way along the lane is a humpback bridge that crosses a stream.
At the approach to the bridge I take off my burdens and lay them down.
In my case the burdens are weighted saddlebags that hang from my shoulder.
As I take them off I give them names, the names of people and the names of things.
The people can be, and often are, both near and very dear to me.
Things are easier to lay down for they are physical pressures common to all of us: bills that must be paid, letters that must be written, accounts that must be done, people that must be phoned, problems that must be faced.
With my burdens lying against the brickwork of the bridge, I walk on along the same narrow path that now begins to climb the side of a rather bald looking hill.
On the top of the hill stands a small ruined church.
The stones of the church are dark with age and the roof has long since gone.
Either side of the church the ground slopes away sharply, and at one time, in my earlier visualization, a stream defied the laws of gravity to flow towards the church and then away again.
The double doors of the church are always open and I walk straight in.
The inside of the church I now know well.
Again the stone walls are dark and streaked with rain and age, and along them are ranged carved figures, many badly worn and now almost unrecognizable.
There is a small stone ‘seat’ running the length   of both walls, but the most important piece of masonry within the building is a stone slab in the centre of the nave that might be an old tomb or perhaps even the site of an old altar.
It is on this that I lie and visualize the various ‘assaults’ upon my cancer cells that I have already described.
In those few days between seeing my surgeon and going back to the X-ray department I went up to that chapel two or three times a day, I did my visualizations with all the intensity that I could summons.
I felt I was doing good and my confidence began to grow.
I thought hard about my actual immune system and the white cells of which it is largely composed.
I knew that the only time I had actually seen them was when I had wiped or picked away my own pus.
My friends who had died in my cause.
At this time I remember too the widely reported story I had once thought apocryphal but now know to be in Dr. Ronald Glasser's The Body is the Hero .
A kidney, thought to be perfectly healthy was transplanted into a patient on chronic dialysis.
For the transplant to succeed, the patient's immune system had to be suppressed, otherwise the ‘foreign’ body would be rejected.
Within days, the transplanted kidney began to enlarge.
X-rays showed tumours in the patient's lungs.
It was evident that the masses in the lungs were metastatic cancer.
That is to say, malignant cells that had broken away from the original cancer and begun to reproduce in other parts of the body.
The cancerous masses developed at a rate that would normally have taken months and years.
The drugs that depressed the immune system were stopped, and as quickly as they had grown, the masses in the lungs began to disappear.
The transplanted kidney too shrank back to its previous size.
But, of course, as the patient's immune system recovered and rejected the cancer so it rejected the transplanted organ leaving the patient with no option but to return to dialysis.
Sad though that may have been for that particular patient, there was a positive side, the cancer never reappeared.
Such then was the power of the immune system that it could suppress an inadvertently transplanted cancer.
But if this was a positive factor to hold on to, the story told me more.
The cancer from a kidney had metastasized to the lungs.
The medical profession weren't the fools I had taken them for.
I had conceived my fictional, pastoral church within which I now spent so much of my time during an imaging session at the Centre, but I had yet to see it in reality.
I knew of the Knowlton Circles in Dorset but I had never seen them, although I had seen an air photograph.
At some point in the summer I was drawn to make my first journey there.
In the middle of an ancient henge — now no more than a bank — which itself sits within many other circles, lies an old, roofless church.
The moment I saw the church, although there were considerable differences — the main and obvious one being it was not on a hill — I accepted it as my church.
True there was no weathered statue in the nave, nor a tomb or altar upon which I lay, but the stones were worn and the building was isolated just as my building was isolated.
But there was another deeper factor that endeared me to that little derelict church at Knowlton and slotted it into my spiritual pattern even tighter than my fictional one.
It sat upon an ancient heathen site, a site far darker than anything I could ever have conceived and it instantly became part of my well of strength.
The church had, of course, been put there deliberately both to use and to nullify the site of the previous religion.
I made two more visits to Knowlton, and it has now become a focus for my own particular pilgrimage.
The story of the real church doesn't quite end there.
On a day of deep winter cold, while driving through Somerset, I spied a church sitting on a knoll high above the River Parrett.
I hadn't time to climb the knoll and so have yet to explore the inside, but the sight of that dramatic, bald hill crowned by its little building fits well with my own visualization.
Perhaps in the end, the best of both sites will be my own materialization.
WAITING FOR THE ORACLE
In an earlier incarnation I would have paid my dues to the temple priests and consulted the oracle: ‘Please tell me whether the tumour in my chest has grown or diminished?’
After a couple of days the answer would come, abstrusely worried in non-rhyming hexameters: ‘Fortunate is the man who honours his mother and keeps off animal fats.’
Now all I did was park my car in the garden centre, buy a small cactus and walk across the road to X-ray.
‘Just lean your shoulders a little further forward, and when I tell you, hold your breath.’
‘Are we taking just the one?’
‘That depends.
Now hold your breath.’
I fixed my chin firmly on the metal in front of me and obeyed the instructions.
My chest duly received its dose of  milirems .
There was a pause and then, ‘We'll just take one more.’
I had gone for that X-ray in a state of anxious calm.
That is to say, I may have appeared calm, but inside anxiety raged.
Each of us has our moment of truth.
Sitting there in the regulation dressing gown waiting for the results of these critical proceedings, this was certainly my moment of truth.
I analysed the situation as extraordinarily simple.
There were only three possibilities.
Either the tumour in my lung had grown in the last three and a half weeks, in which case it must be even more in evidence, or it had stood still, in which case today's X-rays must be much the same as the previous ones, or it had diminished.
If it had diminished then, disbelieving the evidence and wishing to make sure, the radiologists might have another go.
But surely a couple of photos must tell the story one way or the other?
They could hardly want a whole album.
But that was exactly what they did want, a whole album.
‘We're going to take a few more,’ and I was ushered up onto the big machine.
but for the flood of  milirems pouring down, lying on the big machine is exceedingly restful.
not having to stand, you can relax, go through he breathing exercises and watch everyone else doing the work.
In this position, with white-coated radiographers scuttling about snapping X-ray plates into some dark slot beneath me, I allowed myself to consider progress so fat.
If the tumour had grown bigger why take more pictures? but that was dangerous ground, I wasn't a medic.
‘How's it gong?’
‘alright.’
‘You mean you're finding something?’
Just hold your breath…’
By now my chest was being X-rayed in tiny vertical slices.
The lens of the machine was weaving above me and the clatter of new and used plates was endless.
Quite soon I had received more  milirems than a fireman at Chernobyl.
For a while I was released and sat next to the big machine now as silent as a pensioned Dalek.
I thought of all the multitudes who had lain upon its hard, steel bed staring upwards, their fears and hopes filling the room, waiting only for its pronouncements when can easily turn into a foe.
The X-ray machine has indeed become the Twentieth Century oracle.
I was glad that I had learned to breath properly and relax.
A radiologist I remembered from a previous visit with my now long-gone kidney came in, looked at me and smiled.
‘I think we're getting somewhere.’
‘You mean, you're finding something?!’
But he had gone.
a little more wait and I was back on the bed of the big machine for a few parting shots.
Better try putting it another way round.
‘You're finding something, are you?’
‘We're getting there.’
The paradox made me laugh.
I wanted them to find nothing and they wanted to find something.
We were wonderful, ‘Alice in Wonderland’ odds.
but the truth was beginning to dawn upon me.
No one could be spending this much time, money and energy, and saying, ‘We're getting there,’ like the crew of a fishing boat struggling to reach harbour,if that tumour had grown .
That afternoon's performance could only mean one  thing.
The tumour might well be still there, but it was exceedingly difficult to find .
I gave thanks to the priestess of that oracle and left the X-ray Department in a state of exhausted exultation.
THE FERN THAT DIED AND THE TREE THAT LIVES
‘Well, my old mate, how are you?’
My old mate, who although he stands sixty fret high, is in fact only eighteen years old, said absolutely nothing but just went on waving his limbs as he does for most of the day.
‘You look well.
You seem to have grown even since yesterday.
If you go on like this, you'll soon be too big for the place.
We'll need to get you a larger garden.’
My old mate remained mute.
I looked up into his branches, listened to the patter of his leaves, gloried in the snow-white underside and admired his ability to soar heavenwards with such grace, dignity and in his case, dash.
He belongs to the family Salicaceae and is formally known as Populus alba .
To me, as well as being my old mate, he's a fine, outstanding example of a White Poplar.
His full trunk, before any branch is reached is now massive, and such is his configuration that when I put my arms around him — which I do regularly — only one particular bough is hugged with ease.
I now put my arms around that bough and pressed the wood to my chest.
‘What about a little energy, eh?
Come on, you've got lots, masses, you can spare me a bit.
You can't have grown that high in eighteen years, stood up to all those gales, frosts, rain and hail, and not be bounding with energy.’
I gaze through his boughs, through the scintillating leaves, and across the river to the field beyond.
‘It's time you stopped waving for a minute and listened to me.
All I want is a little of your energy.
The energy you're pulling up out of the earth, out of the river, out of the air.’
I hug a bit tighter and gaze a bit harder.
There is something so immovable, so enduring — yet I am perfectly aware that one day he will fall down — so mysterious about my old mate that although I can't say that I actually feel a surge of energy, I do feel some sort of ‘reward’.
Perhaps it can best be described as a feeling of being ‘earthed’.
No longer are my positive and negative leads just hanging free about to blow a fuse or allow my personal electricity to seep away.
I am, in some strange way reminded of the enigma of mortality and immortality, of birth, life, growth and ultimately death.
But there is nothing morbid about the death.
With my tree, all is natural.
Indeed, every time I hug him, my old mate, the White Poplar gives me a new lead, a hotline to earth.
‘That's better…much better.’
I talked to that tree like that because I was instrumental in his development.
When he was no more than knee high and as slender as a pencil, I dug him out of the wild river bank and planted him in a virginal garden, half an acre of island that consisted of nothing more luxurious or exotic than brick rubble, tilled chalk and grass seed.
Along with him I planted other wild trees, mostly native willows and the nurserymen came and added their more refined products.
But my White Poplar has outstripped them all.
I tell this story for two reasons.
The first is that my tree really has become an old mate and I really do go out into the garden and hug it.
Not every day, nor as often as I would wish, but I took my middle daughter to see it yesterday and we hugged it together, and two days before that I hugged it with a friend.
And when I hug it, I always talk to it.
It's a form of monologue, of course, and I could never stand before a learned judge and be cross-questioned by counsel and state upon oath all that that tree says to me.
But in its way it does talk back.
It doesn't actually have to tell me that I am ‘earthed’ but it does remind me that I am.
My second reason for telling the story of the tree and I is to illustrate the concept of being ‘earthed’.
I claim no copyright for the expression, but since first hearing it regularly find myself considering people in terms of whether they are ‘earthed’ or not.
Subjectivity is a daily pitfall but I seem to observe that being ‘earthed’ has little to do with intellect, class, fortune or even belief.
I know of the most intellectual of men and women who are not ‘earthed’ and some of the humblest who are.
I know Quakers  who are ‘earthed’ and quakers who are not ‘earthed’and never will be.
Perhaps it all has to do with being unworldly and prepared to believe in the little people at the end of the garden.
Certainly I now never close my mind about anyone being a member.
I have recently discovered that even the profession of accountant isn't a bar.
So when I hug my tree I feel ‘earthed’, and being ‘earthed’ I am able to dip my bucket even deeper into the well of strength.
By now I have no doubt created a quite erroneous impression of myself.
The reader is seeing a benign gardener, a cartoon Adam with his trousers tied up with string, who gets his lettuces in on time and knows a Delphinium from a Campanula.
I am no such thing.
I have never liked gardening and nowadays do virtually none.
For years I cut the grass — and living on water, grass grows at a prodigious and unnatural rate — and while doing so spent hundreds of man hours considering how I might stop it growing.
What I do love is landscaping, planting trees, turning a bare patch into a park.
In another existence I might have emulated Capability Brown.
Having set the record straight there is a paradox.
Recently I did take up a form of gardening, indoor gardening.
The collection or pot plants wasn't simply brought about by my parking my car at the garden centre every time I went to the hospital; there was more to it than that.
With my outside erection, the trees all grown, I needed some new green children and the cry to soften the interior of the house appealed to me.
So I bought indoor-plants and was given indoor plants, and one of the indoor plants I expended my energy on was the fern with the bright, shiny leaves and the indestructible appearance bought that day when I had suffered the apocalypse.
The day I had seen the large round blob in my lung.
Along with all the other indoor plants that fern received lavish treatment.
I apologised for slamming the car boot down upon it and commenting churlishly upon its perkiness and assumed that since ferns grew in the wild and my great aunt had had a whole conservatory of them, they were not difficult to rear.
But in that no-man's-land twilight after the long X-ray session and before receiving another summons to my surgeon, I noticed a grave deterioration in that fern.
It seemed to have started the moment I got it home.
Even placed amongst its own kind in the very best environment, the tips of the leaves soon browned and both the shininess and perkiness that had enticed me to buy the plant were wilting with each day.
I immediately put the fern into our hospital, that is on the kitchen windowsill, a position in the public eye where it could be attended to by my of the family.
Even with this treatment, there appeared no sign of recovery.
The browning increased and with it a brittleness, and a general botanical lackadaisicalness that boded ill.
I did all I could for that plant, but while my White Poplar in the garden went from strength to strength, sprouting new branches and hundreds of suckers that came up like a forest over all the lawn, the fern bought on that memorable day when the second deluge had fallen just faded away before my eyes.
Those next four weeks were like lying out in no-man's-land.
The anticlimax after the session in the X-ray Department was difficult to bear.
I had felt certain that the session had gone well, yet nevertheless waited anxiously to hear officially, but nothing happened.
At least, nothing appeared to be happening, that is on paper.
In fact a lot was happening in my world, but at that time I wasn't at all aware of it.
Beth gave me more healing, and a new ally now entered my life.
Jo Saunders, a Re-evaluation Co-counsellor came to suss me out and see whether I was worthy of her efforts.
I told her about myself in as honest terms as I could.
I had had and might still have cancer and was waiting to find out exactly what was happening in my lung.
My personal life had been a disaster: I had had a lousy relationship with my mother; been frightened of my father; from time to time my marriage had been close to the rocks and I had been an uncaring father.
All of which, of course, had been my fault.
I was fighting back against the cancer by diet, relaxation, visualization and hugging a Populus alba , but I needed even more.
I needed myself put right.
I think in the end it was the Populus alba that did it.
Jo decided that she could work with anyone who hugged a tree.
We fixed our first session for the following week, and with a little planning there could be a further session before I went back to Bristol for my first day return since being a resident.
LORD OF THE WOMB
With Jo I got right back to basics, and that meant starting with my own birth.
I have never believed that the period of my own gestation was a particularly auspicious or joyful occasion.
No one ran about crying, ‘Hey, Ruby's pregnant, don't you think it's just wonderful?!’
Or opened a bottle of NAAFI champagne to celebrate.
In all probability it was quite the opposite.
For the first six months of my mother's pregnancy, I was assumed to be indigestion.
At least that was the diagnosis that the MO gave in the listless heat of the monsoon.
I doubt if my mother really wanted to have a child in the heat of India and was surely delighted that she was merely the victim of indigestion.
Indigestion could be quelled with a simple magnesia tablet, thousands of which she chewed in her lifetime.
Heartened by the thought that all the rumblings within her were no more than spasms of ill-digested curry, she walked out from the Khyber fort that was her home, and with my father beside her, tapped her chilblains to the pipes of the Black Watch and admired the wild Pathans cleaning their rifles high on the hillside.
This period, before any mortal knew of my existence, Jo and I considered my squirearchy.
It was the time of my own personal greatness, before any human hurt had got in the way.
It was when I was lord of the womb, king of the fallopian tubes.
That was the time when I stood in all that fluid with my boots on, a priceless carpet under my feet, hounds never seen on the earth before lying still and obedient before me, staring out of that maternal portico with its flanking columns, down the long avenue of limes that lead to birth, life and Arcadia.
And then, of course, the discovery was made.
I was no longer ill-digested curry, but a human being, whose imminent launch into a difficult, hostile world, would make my poor mother, labouring in  the steamy heat of Calcutta, scream with agony.
In short, I was a total nuisance.
But, of course, it wasn't my fault that my mother was pregnant and yet for years I felt that it was.
From the day I first got an inkling of ‘where babies come from’ and taxed my mother with the proposition that I was therefore no relation to my father, I believed that it was me and me alone who had been responsible for all that pain and trouble called my birth .
Even upon discovering the full facts of life, my father's role in my conception, I failed to shift some of my guilt onto him.
It sounds weak, I know, but I was the dustbin of guilt.
You will now appreciate the load I have carried for the greater part of my life.
When you believe that you are guilty of all the pain caused by your own pregnancy, birth and subsequent existence, then the burden really does bend your back, and it takes the labours of Hercules to try and straighten it.
How can a man who believes that from foetus to Senior Citizen Railcard his existence has been nothing but a nuisance, that in his wake he has left nothing but pain and trouble, possibly love himself?
That was the problem Jo had to work on.
Even before I got to understand guilt, I used to walk about the house muttering, ‘You're a subject for guilt, boy, a subject for guilt.’
That is, of course , when I wasn't actually casting an eye at the rope and pulley high over the hall or taking a glance at the shotgun.
I wrapped guilt around me like a thick overcoat, wallowed in it and even took shelter in it.
In almost anything that happened I could find guilt and apply it to myself.
A ticking off at school, or a beating left me encrusted with guilt.
My exam results and my father's comments upon them left me shrivelled.
I still remember that day in the war when, as a very junior subaltern, my CO left me a little hand-written note admonishing me for appearing at breakfast unshaven.
Were I to tell that story to my own son and tell him too of the subsequent shame and guilt that haunted me for months and is still so deeply etched in my memory, he would laugh and wonder what it was all about.
Like a ‘Tel’ in the Palestinian desert, built on layers of civilization, my life has been built on  strata of guilt.
They have  piled up beneath me like a geological section.
Childhood with my parents, school, the army, Cambridge, and in later life my various careers, marriage and the relationship with my own children each added their layer.
At none of them did I seem to do well.
Each contained its ‘duty demand’, its call for responsibility, its particular way I ‘should’ behave, but never did.
Even my wife, enlightened, but energetically gregarious, upon my expressing my desire not to go to a certain gathering would say, ‘Normal people like parties, they want to go.’
So I was abnormal — a sort of mini Dracula or Frankenstein's monster, and that made me even more guilty.
The army might have been different for here was one ‘duty’ I thought I would enjoy, or at least understand.
Born and reared within its environments, joining up straight from school as an eighteen-year-old seemed at the time no great trauma.
Indeed, even going into a war was a welcome escape from my poorish Higher Certificate results.
Yet once behind the sentry box, guilt and failure lay stacked on the barrack square.
Like many of my generation I enjoyed playing soldiers.
I enjoyed painting my little armoured scout car and sticking my head out of the lid.
But that was the acceptable side of the army, the childlike side.
There was the other side, the reality, the disciplines, the demands, the side I never seemed good enough at.
My father was a professional soldier and I was conscious of his excellence and knew I would never achieve that excellence.
When volunteers were called for to drop on a remote Yugoslavian mountain, their packs laden with gelignite to blow up bridges, I carefully avoided the challenging eye and the demanding notice board.
I did just what I had to do, and never realised that it was my best.
For years I carried a secret guilt that when I had been wounded — and seven of my men killed — I had not done enough for them or those that remained.
My memories of that event are hazy but I felt that I should have somehow or other done something, crawled about the burning ground with my leg hanging off singing ‘There'll always be an England’ and waving a tattered Union Jack over the hedge in defiance.
It was nearly forty years later that I met the man who had carried me into the only half track we had left and who reassured me.
So I had stood for a little while on the bridge and saluted as the ship went down after all.
What a relief.
By middle age I had discovered that everything I wanted to do, every attitude I announced, every desire I expressed, anything that might give me joy appeared to contradict the wishes of someone else.
So to survive I put my head right down and dug deep.
And when I got there I stayed there, it was the safest place to be.
Who should I have always been guilty of believing that I had never done enough?
Some of my father's gems will help explain: ‘I never failed an exam in my life’…
‘With all the money I'm paying for your education, you should learn more than that’…
‘Remember, your career must always come first.’
…‘You don't want to go fishing, you'll only get dirty and your mother will have to wash your clothes’…
‘Don't give your mother extra work, she's got enough to do already.’
…‘You've let me down, I never thought a son of mine would do that.’
…‘You were frightened weren't you?’
Visiting me in hospital, hot foot from the Middle East, with his Brigadier's tabs and row of medals, he stroked his moustache and said in crisp tones, ‘Pity you hadn't got a bit more promotion, boy.
Pity you weren't a captain, then you'd have got a bigger disability pension.’
Another failure.
Yet he was proud of me in his way.
Even if I hadn't won a medal nor got enough promotion, I had been at the sharp end.
My mother too had her oft-repeated favourites.
There were religious ones, cleansing ones and family ones.
‘You've upset your father; how could you do such a thing after all he's done for you?’
And the blockbuster, her answer to any sticky problem or difficult question, ‘Honour thy father and thy mother.’
Now, slowly I began to come to terms with guilt.
I discovered that we are not born with guilt, we acquire it.
It is not one of our inherent feelings like love, hate, anger, or fear.
It is a completely artificial emotion for which society, and in particular our parents are responsible.
Guilt is the secret weapon for the control of children.
In my case, my parents used it with devastating overkill.
It was their means of controlling my behaviour and getting me to do exactly what they wanted.
No brickbats for that, for neither of them did it out of a sense of malice, but merely because they thought it was the right thing to do, and no doubt also because they believed, quite wrongly, that to instil a sense of guilt into me would ultimately be for my good, If I did what they thought was wrong then I was made  to feel that someone, usually them, had suffered.
In short that I had caused pain.
Of course, my upbringing wasn't exceptional; all parents play the guilt game.
It was simply that with me it really worked.
Everything said, stuck.
‘Oh, my ma and pa said exactly the same things to me when I was a kid, but I took no notice of it.’
How I envied them.
How fortunate they were.
If only I had a duck's back instead of wafer thin skin.
With me it was all too simple and evident, my behaviour — and I was a most law-abiding child — caused my parents pain, and as I could do nothing about it, certainly nothing to improve it, except to cease to exist, I grew more and more guilty.
The first thing I had to learn was that my parents' use of guilt was not for my benefit but for theirs .
By controlling me they believed that they were avoiding my criticism of them as parents.
In other words that they were shifting the blame.
In fact, of course, I did criticise them, although out of fear of my father I took the easier route and voiced that criticism upon my mother.
Her answer was always the blockbuster, ‘Honour thy father and thy mother.’
At first this left me speechless, but after a while I began to ask ‘Why?’
To that she would reply simply that it was what ‘I ought to do.’
It was what ‘good’ children do.
‘Good children honour their father and mother.’
I was clearly a bad child and that made me even more guilty.
It is when guilt lingers into adulthood that the damage is done.
To feel guilty as an adult is to stultify our own freedom.
We cannot do what we want because guilt convinces us that those around us will be hurt, so we temper our lives and our actions to avoid that mythical hurt.
Asked to do something we don't want to do, we say ‘Yes’, in the mistaken belief that to say ‘No’ will hurt someone.
So, in order to avoid what we believe is hurting others, we end up hurting ourselves, with the final result that because we cannot do what we want, we grow bitter and resentful.
To get out of this trap we must first disobey our parents, no uncommon thing today, but in my day, it really was a very big step and I was too fainthearted to take it.
I was still obeying my father when the war came, so it was Hitler who really promoted my release.
Even then the release wasn't total.
From my earliest days my father had planned my future along rigid lines.
Without any  consideration for my talents — such as they were — or my own wishes — never expressed — he had decided my path.
I followed his chosen route through army and university but my heart wasn't in it.
I wanted to draw, paint and write.
If I had wanted to study anything academic, it would have been archaeology, history or possibly architecture.
I could never have expressed that wish so long as my father was alive, for I had been trained to think that such sentiments would hurt him .
So deeper and deeper I went into the world of science, wanting all the time to express myself in a totally different field.
Not until he was dead did I dare to go in the direction I wanted.
Even then the move wasn't taken lightly.
My wife supported me, but my in-law's saw me as an engineer.
The ‘arts’ were not part of their orbit.
I believe that my own children have rebelled properly and decently, and found their own paths.
I hope they will never feel as frustrated with their parents as I felt with mine.
With Jo I talked about hurt.
I discovered that we do not actually hurt people, they allow themselves to be hurt.
At first this might sound a little too simple — or a clever exit from responsibility — but if thought about can be seen to be true.
The hurts in adults were created long ago when they were children.
It is then, that in order to survive, they started creating their own rigid patterns.
Our actions or words may reactivate one of those hurts, but that is no more than putting that old 78 back on the gramophone.
When we are hurt by someone's behaviour, all that is happening is that we are disappointed because they do not behave in the way we expect and the reality conflicts with our ideals.
We have to learn that unless we take people as they are, we will inevitably get hurt.
Nor is there any way of avoiding hurt.
No one can please all the people around them, partly because they will never know what is expected of them.
The obverse of hurt is love, and the start of all love is loving ourselves.
I have said before how much that seemed to fly in the face of my own upbringing, but I am now slowly getting there.
To know that I, as a person, am thoroughly good, intelligent and desirable, and that being so it is only logical that I should love myself passionately and unconditionally is quite a leap.
And yet after all, it is perfectly logical.
I am the centre of my life, why shouldn't I be my own most cherished lover?
Avoid the mirror syndrome, the acquisition of friends to make you feel good with yourself.
To hear good things about yourself.
Only you can prove the certainty of what a fine person you are.
It was Jo who first got me to see that I had done my best.
Always I was comparing myself to others, watching other husbands, fathers and sons and invariably finding myself wanting.
But now, at last, I am beginning to see that for all the ‘believed failures’ of the past, I have done my best.
What I took to be failures were not my failures but simply where I failed to fit in with what others expected of me.
To have reached other people's expectations, would have required a completely different person, not the me I am.
I am what I am, and that is fine.
Indeed, it is something to rejoice about, and I'm now beginning to do that.
This was my period in no-man's-land.
I was having a counsellor and a healer, sticking to my diet, doing my visualization and being as positive as I could be, but nothing was happening officially.
Those X-rays, that had taken so long to photograph, that lengthy session when I had got so friendly with the big machine, had so far resulted in nothing.
Or if it had, I had not been told.
I saw my GP who seemed to think that there ‘was something there’, but still no card came from Out Patients.
The longer that summons was delayed, the more anxious I got.
I never realised that with X-rays, no news can be good news.
On the last day of October, I returned to Bristol for my day visit, this time with no fraudulent feeling.
I had or believed I had a secondary, and had every right to be there.
I was pleased to be able to announce that I had followed many of their therapies, but fearfully expressed my alarm and disappointment that having religiously performed my visualizations, cancer may have returned by the back door.
‘And what exactly were you visualizing?’
‘Oh, you know, the old burning white healing ball.
And on and off a shower or two of white arrows, when I thought I needed them.’
‘And whereabouts did you visualize all this happening?’
‘In my stomach.
All around my intestines, my kidney, liver and around the prostate.
You can't be too careful.’
‘And you never thought about the rest of your body.’
‘I do now.’
‘But you didn't then?’
That was the first time I was conscious that before the apocalypse I had never thought of visualising anywhere but in my stomach.
‘You must visualize the healing of all your body, every part of it.
When you run your healing ball within yourself, you must roll it everywhere.
Down each firm and leg, around your chest, stomach and in every nook and cranny.’
On that same day visit, a counsellor put it to me that my Agincourt style visualization with its obliterating flights of white arrows might perhaps be a little too aggressive.
t needed to exert my authority over my cancer cells, but did I need to be quite so warlike?
I listened with astonishment to the view that I might consider loving my cancer, for it did remind me that all was not well with myself, and not just physically.
This was a novel and breathtaking concept.
Far from cutting down my flights of arrows since learning of the tumours in my lung, I had sharpened the tips and ranged even more bowmen on the heights and so deadly were the mental arrow storms nothing could possibly have stayed alive.
Maybe that was the counsellor's point and a valid one, but as a friend commented succinctly.
‘I wouldn't have thought it was the moment for semantics.’
The idea stuck.
How could I make my visualization more ‘humane’?
To exert my dominance over the cancer cells and yet not be too aggressive seemed, in that moment of crisis, to be altogether too difficult and contradictory a task.
In desperation I went back to my military roots and consulted the Geneva Convention: ‘Rules and Regulations governing the treatment of defeated cancer cells.’
I could, of course, provide the ‘dead’ cancer cells with stretcher bearers after I had slaughtered them.
Or instead of washing them away down my mythical hillside, I could give them a decent burial in a sod of cancer graveyard, perhaps with a little cross over it.
But all that was only bring kind after the event.
In the end I came to a good old British compromise.
I retained my archers but took away their bows and arrows and gave them powerful, waterproof torches instead.
So after that visit to Bristol, when I went to my little chapel on that bald knoll, I first called up the white healing ball and rolled  it around every part of my anatomy , then I called up my archers and let them shine the beams of their torches down onto the spot in my lung.
In recent days that particular visualization has become a bit more sophisticated.
I now see the white corpuscles of my immune system streaming down the torch beams, abseiling to the rescue like demented camouflaged commandos in the Arctic.
The excitement of that particular visualizing can at times be intense and I now no longer miss the arrow storms.
In that way, at least, I have graduated.
STRANGE THINGS HAPPEN
At last I got the summons.
I gave up trying to resuscitate that fern that had once had such shiny green leaves and perky look, declared it dead, threw it out of the house and went to see my surgeon.
I went calmly enough, but there must have been a suspicion of the trepidation that inevitably invests us at the sight of a hospital and the thought of entering it.
I went, reinforced by my experience at the long X-ray session and the fact that nearly a month had transpired since the photos were taken.
As friends were now pointing out, that could only be good news.
Had the news been bad I would certainly have been called earlier.
I went reinforced too by all I had been doing for myself and with the knowledge that I felt better than I had felt for some time and that that growth towards well being appeared to be increasing with each day.
But there were problems.
This was to be our first meeting since the threat of further surgery or at the least, drugs.
I knew that I wanted neither, but wasn't sure that I had the strength or conviction to refuse them should they be prescribed.
From that sprung another dilemma.
Not only did I not want surgery or drugs, but I hoped that in refusing them I would not be offending my surgeon !
So when I was ushered into his consulting room, it was his welfare that concerned me as much as my own.
A patient entering a consulting room is always conscious that before entering, and upon leaving, there is a knowing tête à tête between consultant and assistant.
The overweight, slob, do-nothing, placebo dialogue.
My pre-entry briefing must have gone something like this.
‘This next chap is quite an old codger.
He had a large kidneyectomy for a slow-growing tumour in March last year and has since developed a secondary in his right lung.
A case of perfectly normal metastasis.
A month ago I didn't give him a  dog's chance, but a funny thing seems to have happened on the way to X-ray.’
‘A funny thing?’
‘Without any treatment the tumour seems to have got no worse.
Indeed, it's actually got better.’
‘My God, you mean a spontaneous regression!’
‘Let's get the old chap in and see what he looks like.’
We exchanged the usual pleasantries.
My notes and X-rays were open on the desk.
The opening gambit was cautious and non controversial.
‘How do you feel?’
‘Well.’
I couldn't say that I felt very well for that wasn't quite true, but I certainly no longer felt ill.
A grave face and then.
‘You have got something there…’
‘Ah, but it can't be very evident or I wouldn't have had to spend an hour and half in the X-ray Department and they wouldn't have had to take a Complete album of me.’
That was a fairly challenging one and I waited.
I was gaining confidence by the moment.
So far as I could judge, events, were now moving in my favour.
No X-ray had been flashed up on the screen with a football-sized tumour for me to stare at, and my surgeon was playing his cards so close to his chest there was some doubt somewhere.
So I relaxed as far as I could, and short of thumping my chest like Tarzan, hoped I was emanating nothing but lovely rude health.
‘You've had enough X-rays for a while, so I'm going to do nothing for the moment.
All we do is watch it.
Come back in three months and we'll have another look.’
He gave me the thumbs up sign, half a wink and I marched head high to the door.
I could hardly believe my luck.
Not only had I had three months reprieve, but there had been no confrontation over any further treatment.
I had been left to get on with things my way.
Between that visit to my surgeon and the next, towards the end of January, there was Christmas and the depth of the winter.
It was a period that I would once have dreaded: short days and biting cold, when the river, so exciting for much of the year reflects the drab January sky and the dead vegetation.
It's a time for few windows and we have many, and maybe it's even a time for living in town or city with lights and movement and not just the dead nettles of the water meadow to gaze at.
Yet, in spite of all that, and the old mid-winter recordings within me, that winter — last winter — I never once resorted to glancing up at the pulley with its rope, the exhaust pipe of my car nor even the barrel of my shotgun.
Instead, I invested in my future by buying a word processor and kept on those visits from counsellor and healer and maintained as far as possible — even over Christmas itself — my ‘stay well’ diet.
And all the time I kept up the visualization.
Of course, there were up days and down days, but the down days were never as black as before.
I dare not let them be.
The moment I felt myself slipping back into that sad, old routine, I jerked myself back to the reality of the moment.
‘Don't listen to me, dear white cells, don't listen to me!
It was all just a moment's mental aberration!
I don't want to die, I've far too much to do.
All those drawings for that Doctor!
Doctor ! book, the Budapest novel, and then what about a TV play?
So get back to work, stream down those torch beams, work overtime, burn the candle at both ends, slog on when I'm asleep, and remember, I'm supporting you.
I'M RIGHT BEHIND YOU!
I ALWAYS SUPPORT MY IMMUNE SYSTEM!
In January I had a book published.
This created the limited excitement that publication day can sometimes bring: broadcasts and reviews to search out.
Over a period of ten days I spent a lot of energy and seemed to come through with colours flying.
So when I went back to my surgeon in late January I was reasonably confident.
I was weathering the winter and believed that if there was anything in my lung, then at the very worst I was holding it at bay.
X-rays were taken there and then and resisting the temptation to open the package, I took them back to the consulting room.
‘Well?’
‘It's a little more defined.’
That surprised me and I put it down to Christmas and a slight slackening of my efforts.
‘How do you feel?’
‘Not bad at all.
Pretty well.’
‘Then we'll just go on watching it.
I'll see you at the end of April.’
Another thumbs up, another half wink, another reprieve and a lot of joy.
But I was definitely worried that the shadow was ‘slightly more defined’.
I thought the matter over and remembered an old worry.
The offending blob had been on the left side of the X-ray as I had looked at it, and I had assumed that it was my left lung that was affected.
But supposing X-rays were normally displayed back to front or the way one looked at the person?
I am told this is the norm.
In which case the tumour would be in my right lung, not the left one.
Fortunately in my confusion I had sometimes visualized one lung and sometimes the other.
Now, to cover all eventualities, I at once began to work on both lungs.
From then on, my archers with their powerful torches swept their beams over both cavities, and all those snow-white commandos — the white cells of my immune system — flooded down to right and left.
April came and by the end of it I felt exceedingly well.
Just as before, I had spent the intervening three months ‘supporting’ myself and this time I was so confident I was able to march into the hospital and into the consulting room certain that whatever I had or had had I was now on top of it.
It was a wonderful feeling.
The best I had had for more than two years.
‘You do look well.’
The assistant and the nurse smiled in agreement.
‘I feel great.
Terrific.
Haven't felt so well for years.’
I had read that cancer of the lung was normally so virulent that if unchecked it spread with great rapidity.
I now put that information as a leading question.
‘It's six months since you first showed me that X-ray.
As I understand it, lung cancer spreads like the plague.
If I really had it, I'd be dead by now.’
My surgeon looked grave.
‘Not necessarily.
The tumour in your kidney was a very slow growing one.’
A blunt question and a blunt answer.
He was saying, ‘Give it time.’
I had a slow-growing tumour in the lung and it would take time to reach obnoxious proportions, but as sure as the moon will rise and set and the tides with it, so my tumour would go on grinding away until…
I must redouble my efforts.
Then I remembered my  quandary over the way one looked at X-rays.
Left or right lung?
My surgeon seemed taken unawares.
He glanced down at my notes and touched his own chest, first on the left then on the right as if beginning the sign of the cross: ‘Both.’
‘Both lungs !?’
He nodded.
Both lungs, that really was unfair.
How could I possibly have shadows on both lungs?!
‘It doesn't make sense when I feel so well.
And we know that the tumour I first saw has got less.
It must have.
Remember how it looked on that first X-ray?’
There was a long silence, that is long for a consulting room with a queue waiting outside, then my surgeon gave the hint of a smile and said, very quietly, ‘Strange things happen.’
It was a concession and all that I needed.
To me then, the proof of the pudding was in the eating.
‘For the moment we'll just watch it.
Next time we'll take an X-ray.’
I departed to that friendly, hopeful thumbs up and half wink.
I made no notes of these visits to Out Patients, for at the time I had no idea that I might one day feel my experience with cancer sufficiently interesting to write about.
Relying on memory, the dates in my diary and what my wife recalls of all I said on coming away from the Presence, I have done my best to get things right.
As those visits covered a period of six months, I may have got some of the dialogue a little out of the exact chronological order, but by and large that was the sequence of events.
I am writing this in the mid-summer of 1986, feeling strong and well and scheduled to make a return visit to my surgeon in just ten days time.
Once again I shall see how the pudding eats, but as long as I live, I shall never now forget that ‘strange things happen.’