

GOVERNMENT POLICY
The following are a selection of the many Acts, Circulars and other government publications relating to land use in the context of conflicting demands from development and conservation interests.
They are arranged chronologically with each year's section beginning with relevant Department of the Environment Circulars.
Further detail, including the many Statutory Instruments relating to particular pieces of legislation, can be found in standard reference works such as the Encyclopaedia of Planning Law and the annual list of publications published by the Department of the Environment Library.
In the first of the Planning Policy Guidance documents published in January 1988 the government stated that the planning system ‘should be efficient, effective and simple in conception and operation to facilitate much needed development and to strike the right balance between that development and the interests of conservation.
It should not be regarded simply as a means of preventing change’.
Nor should it be used to protect one private interest against another.
However, the second PPG also reaffirms that ‘the government attaches great importance to Green Belts’ and will continue to support a general presumption against inappropriate development within them.
Much of the controversy which has arisen over land use during the past ten years has centred on the changing balance of power between planners and developers.
Successive measures have weakened the role of local government and freed the private sector from what the government sees as burdensome planning restrictions.
The aim is to stimulate economic activity and make the planning system responsive to newly emerging forms of economic activity in both the town and countryside.
However, there is a widespread feeling that the balance of power has shifted too far toward developers and that the Department of the Environment is aiding and abetting this process through the appeal system.
The numbers of applications and appeals have risen markedly in recent years, particularly in the retail development sector where developers have found it a useful means of overcoming local authority resistance to particular schemes.
This trend threatens to overwhelm local government development control sections and may jeopardise the government's drive to reduce delay in the planning system.
The government has introduced new rules on the awarding of costs in an attempt to reduce the number of frivolous appeals, and recent Department of the Environment decisions on some large retail planning applications suggest a more restrictive stance.
It has emphasised its continued support for Green Belts, although much of the most controversial development is taking place in areas outside them, and appears to be responding to the fears of its backbenchers about the electoral disadvantages of apparently condoning the wholesale ‘concreting over’ of southern England.
The emergence of Mrs Thatcher and Mr Ridley as champions of the environment in late 1988 may also signal a change in emphasis on planning issues.
The increasingly high profile of problems such as the greenhouse effect, the hole in the ozone layer, agricultural pollution and the state of Britain's waterways has pushed the environment to the top of the political agenda, and the government is keen to be seen responding.
Mrs Thatcher argues that the government's success in revitalising the economy has now provided the resources for tackling these problems and she claims that many will be solved within the next five years.
However, the government emphasises that a clean environment cannot be had on the cheap, and electricity and water consumers are being prepared for increased charges to meet the costs.
Despite the government's insistence that water privatisation, for example, will be accompanied by strict regulatory controls to protect the environment, many believe that the presumption in favour of market-led development will continue to dominate its thinking.
To the critics the preservation, or restoration, of a green and pleasant land  requires firm planning control and enforcement across the board, and not just in legally protected areas such as the Green Belt.
A government committed to the abolition of the structure planning system, the progressive reduction of planning controls over businesses, and the privatisation of major public services seems an unlikely champion of the environment in their view.
1980
LAND FOR PRIVATE HOUSEBUILDING
Department of the Environment Circular 9/80
Introduced the requirement for joint land availability studies between local authorities and private housebuilders, and modified the basis on which availability should be assessed to increase the supply of marketable land for builders.
Superseded by Circular 15/84.
DEVELOPMENT CONTROL: POLICY AND PRACTICE
Department of the Environment Circular 22/80
Aims to speed up the process of development control and make the planning system ‘as positive and as helpful as it can be to investment in industry and commerce, and to the development industry’.
Annex A (reprinted with minor amendments as Annex A to Circular 15/84) looks in some detail at housing land availability in the countryside and elsewhere.
However, ‘expansion of a town into the surrounding countryside is objectionable on planning grounds…’
LOCAL GOVERNMENT PLANNING AND LAND ACT 1980
This stripped the county councils of much of their participation in the detailed operation of Green Belt development control.
They no longer have the power to direct planning authorities to refuse an application for development on the grounds that it would substantially and adversely affect their interests.
Districts are, however, required to consult with counties over ‘matters of concern’.
The Act also introduced statutory registers of public sector land with the aim of forcing the disposal of ‘surplus’ assets to the private sector.
1981
DEVELOPMENT PLANS
Department of the Environment Circular 23/81
Emphasises the view that plans and reviews should only be prepared where there is a ‘clear need’, and stresses the importance of speed and conciseness in the planning system.
THE CHANNEL LINK: SECOND REPORT FROM THE TRANSPORT COMMITTEE, SESSION 1980–81
House of Commons Transport Committee HMSO, 1981. 3 vols
The first examination of the possibility of a Channel fixed link under the Conservative government.
Although no firm progress was made at this stage much of the evidence is of interest as it deals with the environmental and development pressures resulting from such a link.
TOWN AND COUNTRY PLANNING (MINERALS) ACT 1981
Implements some of the recommendations of the 1976 Stevens and Verney Committee reports (Planning Control Over Mineral Workings, and Report on Aggregates: the Way Ahead).
Distinguishes minerals development from other types of development under planning control, defines mineral planning authorities, and confers new powers of control on them.
See Department of the Environment Circulars 1/82 and 11/86 (both entitled Town and Country Planning (Minerals) Act 1981) for further details on implementation.
WILDLIFE AND COUNTRYSIDE ACT 1981
Confers new planning controls in respect of Sites of Special Scientific Interest, and extends the concept of management agreements between authorities and land owners and agents.
The Act is designed to conserve and enhance the land and prevent undesirable uses or developments.
See Department of the Environment Circular 32/81 (Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981), and 4/83 (Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981: financial guidelines for management agreements) for further comment on the detailed implementation of the Act.
1982
GUIDELINES FOR AGGREGATES PROVISION IN ENGLAND AND WALES
Department of the Environment Circular 21/82
Based on the Verney Report which reviewed the problems caused by pressures on local authorities to release more land for mineral working.
The aim is to help maintain a steady and adequate supply of material to the construction industry at the ‘best balance’ of social, economic and environmental cost.
1983
PLANNING GAIN
Department of the Environment Circular 22/83
The government's response to the 1981 report of the Property Advisory Group.
Gives guidance on the terms under which conditions and obligations can reasonably be imposed on developers, an issue which may be particularly relevant in the argument over the development of ‘brown’ areas of the Green Belt.
UNDERUSED AND SURPLUS PROPERTY IN THE NATIONAL HEALTH SERVICE: REPORT OF ENQUIRY
Department of Health and Social Security HMSO, 1983, 44pp (Chairman: Ceri Davies)
Of the NHS' national assets of 20,000ha of land and 2,000 hospitals and clinics, some in Green Belt areas are surplus to requirements.
Redevelopment for industry and commerce may be acceptable as an alternative to leaving such sites unused, and health authorities which are refused planning permission are advised to appeal to the Minister.
See Department of Health Circular 83(22) (Estate management: underused and surplus property in the NHS) for further comment on the property condition and use surveys to be completed by health authorities by June 1984.
1984
GREEN BELTS
Department of the Environment Circular 14/84
Issued following the withdrawal of a controversial draft Circular in December 1983.
Reaffirms the objectives of Green Belt policies and related development control policies as laid down in previous Circulars.
States that ‘the essential characteristics of Green Belts is (sic) their permanence and their protection must be maintained as far as can be seen ahead’.
Thus approved Green Belt must only be altered in exceptional circumstances.
However, where boundaries have not yet been defined it is important that decisions should ensure the exclusion of land which might be needed for development at some future date.
Otherwise there is a risk that encroachment may have to be permitted, thus devaluing the Green Belt concept.
LAND FOR HOUSING
Department of the Environment Circular 15/84
Also issued following a controversial draft Circular.
Emphasises the role of the planning system in ensuring an adequate and continuing supply of land for new housing to meet the increasing demand for home ownership on which no limit has been set.
However, ‘well established conservation policies should be maintained’ and the general presumption against inappropriate development in the Green Belt remains.
Housing land must be ‘free, or easily freed, from planning, physical and ownership constraints’…‘capable of being developed economically, be in areas where potential housebuyers want to live, and be suitable for the wide range of housing types which the housing market now requires’.
Cancels Circular 9/80.
INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT
Department of the Environment Circular 16/84
Aims to encourage industrial development, especially in the warehousing and high tech fields.
An expansion of the advice given in Circular 22/80 which includes the statement that ‘there will be a general presumption against inappropriate development where losses of countryside, Green Belt and agricultural land are at issue’.
MEMORANDUM ON STRUCTURE AND LOCAL PLANS: THE TOWN AND COUNTRY PLANNING ACT 1971: PART II (AS AMENDED BY THE TOWN AND COUNTRY PLANNING (AMENDMENT) ACT 1972, THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACT 1972, AND THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT PLANNING AND LAND ACT 1980)
Department of the Environment Circular 22/84
Detailed guidance, including advice on content.
On housing ‘it is not in general desirable to seek to control the disposal of private houses through planning restrictions’; on industry and commerce ‘policies and proposals…should promote and not hinder the regeneration of industry and reflect an up to date and realistic view of the scale, pattern and diversity of industry’; on retail development ‘policies and proposals should neither seek to regulate competition between retailers nor to stifle the evolution of new forms of retail provision’; and on agriculture and forestry ‘authorities should take account of the need to ensure that no more than an essential minimum of agricultural land is diverted to development’.
This Circular cancels Circular 4/79 (Memorandum on structure and local plans), and Circular 13/82 (Town and country planning (structure and local plans) regulations 1982).
GREEN BELT AND LAND FOR HOUSING: 1ST REPORT, SESSION 1983–84
House of Commons Environment Committee HMSO, May 1984, 3 vols (House of Commons Papers 275-I/III)
Includes recommendations for improvements and amendments to the controversial 1983 draft Circulars on Green Belts and housing land as well as evidence from a wide range of local authorities, pressure groups, professional bodies, housing developers and individual academics.
GREEN BELT AND LAND FOR HOUSING: THE DEPARTMENT'S FURTHER RESPONSE TO COMMITTEE'S FIRST REPORT 1983–84 (HC 275): 5th SPECIAL REPORT, SESSION 1983–84
House of Commons Environmental Committee HMSO, Oct 1984. 11pp (House of Commons Paper 635)
TOWN AND COUNTRY PLANNING ACT 1984
Alters the relationship between Crown land and the planning system, in particular by allowing the Crown to apply for planning before the disposal of assets.
Disposals should, ‘as far as possible’, be in line with local planning and environmental policies but, where existing use conflicts with these, disposing authorities should remember that the asset represents a considerable public investment.
As such, redevelopment may be in the public interest even if it conflicts with local policy.
This has important implications for the redevelopment of Green Belt mental hospitals and other large NHS sites.
See Department of the Environment Circular 14/84 (Crown land and Crown development), and Statutory Instrument 1984/1015 for further details.
1985
THE USE OF CONDITIONS IN PLANNING PERMISSION
Department of the Environment Circular 1/85
Gives general guidance on conditions stressing that they should only be imposed where necessary, reasonable and enforceable.
Includes comment on occupancy conditions which is relevant to the re-use of redundant agricultural and other buildings in the countryside.
DEVELOPMENT AND EMPLOYMENT
Department of the Environment Circular 14/85
The government remains committed to Green Belt protection, conservation of agricultural land etc. but states that ‘there is, therefore always a presumption in favour of allowing applications for development having regard to all material considerations, unless that development would cause demonstrable harm to interests of acknowledged importance’.
Issued as an annex to the White Paper Lifting the Burden (Cmnd 9571) which was designed to liberalise planning controls over industry and commerce.
GUIDELINES FOR THE PROVISION OF SILICA SAND IN ENGLAND AND WALES
Department of the Environment Circular 25/85
The growing demand for this material is leading to development pressures, and the Circular gives advice on how to reconcile the conflict between the pressure for extraction and agricultural, amenity and other countryside interests.
CHANNEL FIXED LINK: ENVIRONMENTAL APPRAISAL OF ALTERNATIVE PROPOSALS
Land Use Consultants, and Department of Transport HMSO, 1985, 97pp + appendices
Looks at the possible social, environmental and economic effects of four bridge or tunnel options including comment on the impact on the Kent landscape.
CHANNEL LINK: 1ST REPORT, SESSION 1985–86
House of Commons Transport Committee HMSO, Dec 1985, 2 vols
The Select Committee's examination of the four options which looks at a wide range of technical, economic, social and environmental factors and recommends the government to choose the Channel Tunnel Group proposal.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACT 1985
Abolished the Greater London Council and metropolitan counties and thus removed a tier of strategic planning in many of the Green Belt areas.
Green Belt functions were transferred to the lower tier authorities who are now required to prepare unitary development plans for their areas.
LIFTING THE BURDEN
Department of the Environment HMSO, 1987.
(Cmnd 9571)
Recommends liberalisation of parts of the planning system to encourage industrial and commercial development.
1986
DEVELOPMENT BY SMALL BUSINESSES
Department of the Environment Circular 2/86
Extends some of the ideas of Circulars 22/80, 16/84, 22/84 and 1/85 in respect of the planning environment of small businesses in both rural and urban areas.
Small firms have traditionally found it difficult to set up in rural areas, despite the need for job creation and economic diversification, and this Circular is designed to help them by, for example, relaxing the conditions over the re-use of redundant agricultural buildings.
CHANGES TO THE GENERAL DEVELOPMENT ORDER
Department of the Environment Circular 3/86
Covers the changes introduced by the Town and Country Planning General Development (Amendment)(No 2) Order 1985 and the Town and Country Planning (National Parks…etc) Special Development (Amendment) Order 1986.
Relevant sections cover development near highways, agricultural engineering operations, mineral exploration and industrial and warehouse extensions.
POLICY ON MAJOR RETAIL DEVELOPMENTS: TOWN AND COUNTRY PLANNING (SHOPPING DEVELOPMENT)(ENGLAND AND WALES) DIRECTION 1986
Department of the Environment Circular 21/86
Local authorities are required to consult the Department of the Environment or Welsh Office before taking decisions on shopping schemes over 250,000 sq ft.
The Direction was issued in response to growing concern at the spread of large, out-of-town retail developments, some on greenfield sites.
BUILDING BUSINESSES…
NOT BARRIERS
Department of the Environment HMSO, 1986. 80pp (Cmnd 9794)
The second White Paper designed to liberalise controls over industrial and commercial development.
THE CHANNEL FIXED LINK
Department of Transport HMSO, Feb 1986, 24pp (Cmnd 9723)
Outlines reasons for the choice of the Channel Tunnel Group/Grande Manche option and examines the impact on roads, the railway system, economic development, employment and the environment.
PLANNING: APPEALS, CALL-IN AND MAJOR PUBLIC INQUIRIES: 5TH REPORT FROM ENVIRONMENT COMMITTEE, SESSION 1985–86
House of Commons Environment Committee HMSO, 1986, 2 vols (House of Commons Papers HC 181-I/II)
A report prompted by the growing concern at the number of planning appeals and the role of the Department of the Environment in overturning the decisions of local government on large and controversial developments.
SPECIAL REPORT FROM THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE CHANNEL TUNNEL BILL: SESSION 1986–87: TOGETHER WITH APPENDICES AND THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE COMMITTEE
House of Commons Select Committee on the Channel Tunnel Bill HMSO, Nov 1986. 181pp (House of Commons Paper 34)
Discusses matters of particular concern to environmental interests and to local authorities in Kent and Sussex.
1987
1 AWARDS OF COSTS INCURRED IN PLANNING AND COMPULSORY PURCHASE ORDERS
Department of the Environment Circular 2/87
Issued in part as a response to the growing number of appeals over controversial retail, industrial and other developments in sensitive areas.
HISTORIC BUILDINGS AND CONSERVATION AREAS: POLICY AN PROCEDURES
Department of the Environment Circular 8/87
Includes comment on the issue of new uses for old buildings in town and countryside stating that ‘local authorities should, therefore, be flexible in dealing with planning applications for changes of use of buildings of architectural or historic interest’.
Pressure for the conversion or redevelopment of historic houses and estates in financial difficulties has grown in recent years and is causing concern to those wishing to preserve the traditional countryside.
This Circular supersedes Circular 12/81 (Historic buildings and conservation areas).
REDUNDANT HOSPITAL SITES IN GREEN BELTS: PLANNING GUIDELINES
Department of the Environment Circular 12/87
The ‘aim should be to use them for purposes compatible with the Green Belt as set out in Circular 14/84 which can include institutional uses’.
However, if the buildings cannot be used for such purposes ‘other uses are preferable to allowing the buildings to remain empty or grossly under-occupied’.
CHANGES OF USE OF BUILDINGS AND OTHER LAND
Department of the Environment Circular 13/87
Describes and explains the Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 which supersedes the 1972 Use Classes Order and is designed to cater for major changes in the nature and geographical distribution of economic activity.
See The Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order published by Debenham Tewson and Chinnock (June 1987, 16pp) for a commentary on the new Order.
DEVELOPMENT INVOLVING AGRICULTURAL LAND
Department of the Environment Circular 16/87
High quality agricultural land is described as  a ‘a national resource for the longer term and should be in general protected from irreversible development’.
Other land may, therefore, be available although the Department is at pains to point out that the Circular does not give the green light to a development free-for-all in the countryside.
NATURE CONSERVATION
Department of the Environment Circular 27/87
Summarises changes in the law and advice on this issue since Circular 108/77 on Nature Conservation and Planning.
FARMING AND RURAL ENTERPRISE
Ministry of Agriculture Fisheries and Food HMSO, 1987. 8 pamphlets
The pamphlets cover the changing economic environment of agriculture and the government's policies to encourage diversification in rural enterprise.
MINUTES OF EVIDENCE TAKEN BEFORE THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE CHANNEL TUNNEL BILL
House of Lords Select Committee on the Channel Tunnel Bill HMSO, 1987.
Various pagings (House of Lords Papers 81/i–xxx)
Environmental and development pressures were the major subjects of evidence taken on 4 March (81–iii);
1988
CODES OF PRACTICE: PREPARING FOR MAJOR PLANNING INQUIRIES: HEARINGS INTO PLANNING APPEALS
Department of the Environment Circular 10/88
Guidance on ways of speeding up the planning inquiry system which supersedes the previous rules contained in Statutory Instrument 1974/420.
TOWN AND COUNTRY PLANNING (ASSESSMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS) REGULATIONS 1988
Department of the Environment Circular 15/88
Brought in to give effect to EEC Directive 85/837.
States that ‘the process of environmental assessment should not be imposed where it is not required by the Directive’ and gives guidance on the circumstances in which it should be used.
These include proposed developments in, or adjacent to, ‘sensitive’ areas such as National Parks and Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty.
An appendix gives guidance on the types of projects which may require assessment including larger intensive poultry, pig and fish breeding units, new deep mines, larger open cast mines, motorways and industrial estates over 20 to 30ha.
See also Environmental Assessment: Implementation of EC Directive (Department of the Environment, 26 Jan 1988. 52pp)
ESTATE MANAGEMENT IN THE NATIONAL HEALTH SERVICE
National Audit Office HMSO, Apr 1988.
(House of Commons Paper 405)
Finds that the hospital estate is a ‘vast resource’ consisting of some 2,000 buildings and over 50,000 acres of land.
Recommends the establishment of a reliable database and the vesting of responsibility for estate management in officers of a ‘sufficiently senior level’.
Sales of surplus property, including some in the Green Belt, are estimated to have raised £240m in 1987–88 and there is still ‘significant scope’ for property rationalisation.
FARMLAND AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT ACT 1988
Provides for the payment of grants to help farmers diversify their businesses, including converting part of their land to woodland.
HOUSING IN RURAL AREAS: VILLAGE HOUSING AND NEW VILLAGES: A DISCUSSION PAPER
Department of the Environment, Jul 1988. 20pp
Favours new villages of between 200 and 1,000 houses as an alternative to sporadic housing development in the countryside.
MINERAL PLANNING GUIDANCE
Department of the Environment HMSO, 1988 +
A new series of guidance notes including, so far:
MPG 1: General considerations and the development plan system (Jan)
MPG 4: The review of mineral working sites (Sep)
MPG 5: Minerals planning and the General Development Order (Dec)
PLANNING POLICY GUIDANCE
Department of the Environment HMSO, 1988 +
A new series of guidance notes including, so far:
PPG1: General policy and principles (Jan)
PPG2: Green Belts (Jan)
PPG3: Land for housing (Jan)
PPG4: Industrial and commercial development and small firms (Jan)
PPG5: Major retail developments (Jan)
PPG7: Rural enterprise and development (Jan)
PPG9: Regional guidance for the South East (Jan)
PPG10: Strategic guidance for the West Midlands (Sep)
PPG11: Strategic guidance for Merseyside (Oct)
PPG12: Local plans (Nov)
PROTECTING YOUR ENVIRONMENT: A GUIDE
Department of the Environment, 1988. 40pp
Issued in association with conservation and farming interests.
RELEASING ENTERPRISES
Department of the Environment HMSO, 1988. 44pp (Cm 512)
Planning conditions should be imposed only where relevant, enforceable, precise and reasonable.
Also includes further measures to liberalise controls over the development process.
THE GREEN BELTS new edition
Department of the Environment HMSO, Dec 1988. 38pp
First issued on the 50th anniversary of the Metropolitan Green Belt.
Claims that the Conservative government has successfully protected the countryside by, among other things, more than doubling the amount of approved Green Belt since 1979.
1989
THE FUTURE OF DEVELOPMENT PLANS
Department of the Environment HMSO, 1989. 16pp (Cm 569)
A White Paper recommending the replacement of the two tier structure/local plan system with a unitary system consisting of district development plans and county policy advice.
As such it complements the introduction of unitary development plans for the metropolitan districts.
Critics fear the new scheme will remove the last vestiges of strategic planning power: although the new county planning statements will have to cover housebuilding, large industrial and commercial development, and Green Belt issues, they will have no statutory force and cannot include detailed land allocations.
POLICY COMMENT AND GENERAL STUDIES
This section includes general comment on the functions and status of the Green Belt, and pressures on it, in the light of Conservative government attitudes towards development and conservation.
In crude terms the debate divides between those who see the Green Belt as an essential bastion against untrammelled growth in areas of development pressure, and those who see it as the source of many of the problems facing such areas.
In the former camp, organisations such as the Council for the Protection of Rural England vigorously protest at any threat to the Green Belt and argue that derelict, or ‘brown’ sites within it should be restored rather than handed over to developers.
The London Planning Advisory Committee in its recent Strategic Planning Advice for London follows this line and recommends the upgrading of all metropolitan open space to Green Belt status.
Certain elements in the Conservative Party are also strongly in favour of restraint including Jerry Wiggin and Nicholas Baker whose ‘wet’ planning manifesto in 1987 recommended permanent Strategic Development Boundaries around conurbations, permanent Green Belts beyond these, and Local Development Boundaries around rural towns and villages.
A section of opinion believes that the emphasis on the Green Belt has obscured the major threat to the traditional British countryside which lies in the inappropriate development of small country towns.
Ranged against these pro-Green Belt interests are those who feel that existing restraint policies have outlived their usefulness at a time of rapid socioeconomic change, and are positively detrimental to the communities they are meant to protect.
These include private sector interests such as the House Builders Federation and companies like ARC which recently argued that the metropolitan Green Belt has imposed a net cost of £14.6bn on the British economy.
However, many professional planners are also convinced that Green Belt restrictions are partly responsible for many of the problems facing the south east such as housing land shortages, rocketing house prices, loss of employment opportunities in rural areas, and  labour immobility.
They argue that a continuation of Green Belt restrictions in their present form will turn the countryside into a ghetto for rich commuters while local people pay for this rural idyll in homelessness and unemployment.
Although strong controls should be maintained over important wildlife habitats and prime agricultural land, sensitive development should be permitted elsewhere in order to allow the diversification of the rural economy and provide homes and jobs for everyone.
A third approach to the problems of a congested south east is seen in some of the recent reports on the north/south divide which recommend the decentralisation of administrative commercial activity from London.
Although concerned principally with reviving the fortunes of the north, such policies would obviously reduce development pressures in the south could they be implemented effectively.
However, the present government's stance on market forces makes a return to interventionist regional planning unlikely.
Recent evidence from two Nuffield College researchers, John Muellbauer and Anthony Murphy, suggests that development pressures may already be having an effect with an estimated 100,000 people emigrating from the south east in 1988 because of high house prices.
This ‘brain and skills drain’ may not be to the government's liking because the evidence suggests that about 30,000 people will emigrate abroad, taking considerable assets with them.
The results of this unplanned decongestion of the region could be significant for the industrial, retail and housing development sectors.
THE THREAT TO THE ENVIRONMENT
Development pressures in the south east are perceived by many ordinary people, as well as pressure groups, as a threat to the physical and social nature of the traditional English countryside.
Although the government remains committed, at least on paper, to the preservation of high quality agricultural land and open countryside, the demands for more housing, roads and industrial development in other areas are frequently unpopular.
The industrialisation of agriculture and the spread of commercial forestry also arouse opposition because of their impact on rural landscapes, wildlife, the welfare of farm animals and, most recently, the safety and quality of food.
Critics of opponents to development frequently accuse them of being blinded by nostalgia and motivated by personal vested interest.
It is widely assumed that ‘real’ country people are in favour of development as a source of new jobs and housing while the rich commuter is only concerned to protect his equity and a style of living which has never been available to the locals.
No doubt this is an over-simplification but there does seem to be some relationship between level of income and concern for ‘the environment’.
Opposition to development from lower income groups is more likely to be motivated by anger at the focus on up-market housing than by a desire to preserve a golden past which they are well aware has never existed.
Concern about the condition of the fringes of major urban areas is also growing in view of widespread dereliction and the ‘browning’ of large areas of the Green Belt where development pressures may be particularly severe.
The Countryside Commission has taken a particular interest in these areas with the aim of promoting environmental improvement through Groundwork and other types of project.
However, the replacement of the Community Programme by Employment Training threatens many of these initiatives and the Commission has recently called for a special environmental task force under the auspices of the new Training and Enterprise Councils.
PLANNING RESTRAINT IN PRESSURED AREAS
Local authorities in many areas of the south and south east face the difficult task of reconciling the demand for new local housing and employment opportunities with the need to preserve the environment and fulfil their obligations in respect of Green Belts, Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty and other protected areas.
This section includes material on general planning issues while more specific items on, for example, housing or industrial development are covered in section 4 of the guide.
Oxford Polytechnic Department of Town Planning, and the University of Bristol School for Advanced Urban Studies, have contributed a great deal to the study of planning restraint in pressured areas and many of the following items concern their work.
LAND USES
AGRICULTURE
Farmers are seen as both victims and perpetrators of the increasing pressure on the countryside.
Although the government remains committed to the preservation of top quality farmland as a national resource, there is some confusion over what exactly constitutes top quality, and some farmers face considerable pressure from developers.
This can be a serious problem in the urban fringe where farmers also suffer from vandalism and trespass as the result of proximity to built up areas.
They are also faced with an increasing need to diversify because of changes in the Common Agricultural Policy to counter the problem of over-production, and a consequent decline in farming income.
The increasing productivity of agriculture through the use of modern industrial methods has also led to a decline in traditional job opportunities in the countryside, and the government is keen to encourage more general diversification in the rural economy.
Some of its measures, such as those involving the sue of farmland for forestry or housing development, have been controversial, but measures to stimulate the growth of small rural businesses have been more generally welcomed in the countryside.
A Farmland and Rural Development Act was passed in 1988 and farmers now have access to grant aid to help in diversification projects.
However, despite their economic problems, farmers have come under fire from conservation interests because of the allegedly adverse effects of modern farming practices on the environment.
They are accused of polluting the waterways and the soil, uprooting wildlife habitats and destroying the countryside environment by introducing intensive livestock units, fish farms, farm shops and other non-traditional activities.
There is increasing public concern about the health hazards of modern stock rearing methods, and about the threat to native flora and fauna of hedgerow loss and the widespread use of chemical pesticides.
MINERAL WORKING
Minerals are an important natural resource which often occur in areas of beautiful countryside including National Parks and Green Belts.
By their very nature they must be worked where they occur and extraction often involves environmental nuisance and danger.
The Town and Country Planning (Minerals) Act of 1981 recognised the unique nature of mineral working as an industrial activity and created mineral planning authorities to oversee the process and ensure the restoration of the land after its mineral resources are exhausted.
The government's overall aim is to ensure that planning control ensures the provision of much needed industrial materials at the least possible environmental cost.
The application of the EEC Environmental Impact Assessment Directive to new mineral extraction sites should give added weight to this policy.
A related problem involves the environmental impact of onshore oil and gas extraction, an issue which may achieve added prominence with the discovery of significant reserves in some of the most beautiful parts of southern England.
The expansion of the Wytch Farm site in Dorset has aroused considerable anxiety from local people and conservation interests, and the Dorset County Council has imposed many hundreds of planning conditions on the developers as a result.
This section deals mainly with the impact of mineral working, and the restoration of exhausted sites, in south and south east England although it is recognised that some of the most serious environmental problems occur in the National Parks and in areas where  deep and opencast mining are carried out.
The ACOMPLINE database does, however, carry some material on mineral working in these areas for those who are interested.
For government policy on mineral working see entries 1(6) (8)(20)(40)(48).
COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY
The economic boom in the south east has led to increasing demands for new types of industrial site, and the growth in high tech and service industries has placed a premium on high quality sites in pleasant surroundings and with good communications.
The M25, M4, M40 and other road developments have proved a powerful stimulus to the dispersal of economic activity away from traditional urban centres and the emergence of severe  development pressures in parts of Kent, Berkshire, Hertfordshire, Oxfordshire and other counties.
Additional pressure for growth is expected as a result of the Channel Tunnel.
The revival of the West Midlands economy has also been accompanied by increasing demands for high quality industrial sites in attractive locations.
The government's liberalisation of planning controls, and changes to the Use Classes Order, have stimulated and sustained these trends and although the presumption against development in the Green Belt and open countryside remains, these areas are extremely attractive to developers.
Pressure on local authorities is thus likely to continue, especially where the ‘browner’ areas of the Green Belt are concerned.
The use of planning agreements and conditions could ensure the upgrading of these areas through sensitive development although the loss of any Green Belt land is guaranteed to raise a storm of protest.
As well as supporting high tech and other ‘desirable’ industrial development, the government is also concerned to promote diversification in the rural economy.
To this end it has relaxed the controls over the re-use of redundant agricultural and other buildings in the countryside in order to stimulate the growth of small businesses.
Farmers are also being given access to grant aid to help in setting up extra activities to supplement their farming income.
SHOPPING
The growth of out-of-town retailing has been a particularly contentious issue in the past ten years, not only for its potentially adverse effects on urban shopping centres but also because of the resulting development pressures on fringe and green field sites.
Although the government's Planning Policy Guidance on retail planning states that large retail developments in the Green Belt or open countryside are inappropriate, critics remain sceptical about its commitment to effective restraint.
There is a general presumption in favour of development and the government quite clearly ‘has no intention of identifying specific locations suitable for major development or for different types of retailing’.
Although the Green Belt remains largely exempt from such developments, there is increasing pressure on urban fringe and other less protected sites, especially those located near major motorway junctions.
In the past few years the appeal system has been successfully used to overcome the resistance of reluctant local authorities, and development has tended to proceed on an ad hoc basis with new centres sited where developers can acquire land easily rather than on the basis of any strategic plan.
The situation is further confused by the abolition of the metropolitan authorities and the probable demise of the structure plan system.
A few commentators have seen signs of hope in the recent refusal at appeal of applications for large centres alongside the M1 near Leicester and at Cribbs Causeway outside Bristol.
Their optimism is likely to be heightened by the news that the Department of the Environment has also rejected plans for a retail development on Green Belt land near Orpington and has awarded costs of £250,000 against the developers Prudential Assurance.
Sections of the retail trade itself are also likely to welcome a slow down in what some see as a development free-for-all which could damage the balance of retail provision and lead to an over-supply of retail space in the near future.
This section lists a selection of relevant material but excludes the various sources of data on shopping developments and associated planning inquiries.
Details of these, and other documents, can be found in Shopping in the 80s: a Guide to Sources and Information, by D A Kirby (British Library Science Reference and Information Service: London, Feb 1988. 58pp).
For government policy on major retail development see 1(13–14) (27)(43)(49); 1.1(39).
For comment on the impact of road development on the retail sector see 4.3. c(28) (30).
HIGH TECH DEVELOPMENTS
High technology industry has been increasingly drawn to the south and south east by the ready availability of trained manpower, proximity to universities and government defence establishments, good communications and attractive locations.
Certain areas, notably Oxford and Cambridge and the so-called Golden Triangle, have experienced major high-tech-based growth in the past few years and the government is keen to encourage this type of development as reflected in Department of the Environment Circular 16/84, changes to the Use Classes Order and measures to liberalise planning controls over business in general.
However, there are some misgivings about development which tends to boost land and house prices without providing significant job opportunities for ‘ordinary’ people or, apparently, acting as much of a catalyst to growth in the rest of the local economy.
The concentration of development west of London along the M4 corridor may also have the effect of destabilising development within the region while, at a national level, it reinforces the dominance of the south east in the ‘information economy’.
This magnet effect not only puts pressure on the south east but makes it difficult for other regions to attract the type of investment necessary for their own economic revival.
There is some evidence to suggest that the high costs of operating in the south and south east, and the growing skill shortage problem, are beginning to influence location decisions but the  region seems set to retain its leading position for some time to come.
A recent analysis from Jones Lang Wootton shows that demand for business space is still growing faster in the south east than in other regions with about half of the firms surveyed looking for premises outside London.
IMPACT OF ROAD DEVELOPMENTS
Motorway and road construction has proved a major incentive to industrial and commercial growth and the dispersal of economic activity away from major urban centres into the surrounding countryside.
As the sections on industrial and housing development show, this dispersal has resulted in considerable problems as well as opportunities for the counties surrounding London.
There is now widespread evidence that the transport infrastructure cannot keep pace with growth, and the Confederation of British Industry argues that traffic congestion is now costing the country some £15bn a year.
The government's four London Road Assessment studies and the Central London Rail  Study are designed to improve matters in and around the capital but have attracted considerable hostility from conservation groups and some local authorities who believe the environmental consequences of major new road building will be catastrophic.
Their fears have been enhanced by the recent announcement from the Department of Transport that it is considering new plans to relieve congestion on the M25.
Among these are a new route across Sussex to join the Channel Tunnel with Southampton and a series of bypasses to link the A40 near Thame in Oxfordshire with the A1(M) at Stevenage.
Although the plans have been welcomed by the CBI and the British Road Federation they are likely to raise a storm of protest from residents and local authorities directly affected and from conservation groups already concerned at the likely impact of the Channel Tunnel and its rail links with London.
Other items on motorway-induced development can also be found in the sections on retail, high tech and housing development.
See entries 4.3(1); 4.3. a(19) (21)(49);
IMPACT OF THE CHANNEL TUNNEL
The construction of a cross-Channel link was discussed exhaustively in the early 1980s before the proposal for a joint British/French rail tunnel was finally approved in 1986.
The government clearly sees it as contributing to economic growth but there are significant misgivings among conservation groups and local residents about the environmental impact on Kent and Sussex.
These have been viewed with some irritation by Northern regions who feel that their needs have been ignored in the planning of the Tunnel, and that pampered southerners should be prepared to pay the price of their economic success.
However, there are fears that transport congestion, environmental damage and other symptoms of over-development in the south east may prove a positive disincentive to growth once the Tunnel is opened, and that the main beneficiary will be the Nord Pas de Calais region, especially as French companies seem to be ahead of their British counterparts in planning for the future.
Some, including Kent County Council, believe that large scale induced development will not occur without positive government intervention and that some towns such as Dover could be badly affected by the loss of their traditional ferry business.
The Channel Tunnel Research Unit at the University of Kent is also cautious in its assessment and expects the direct impact of the Tunnel to be marginal.
However, the Council for the Protection of Rural England predicts massive pressures for development throughout the south east and is naturally campaigning to resist them.
In many cases they have the public on their side as the recent furore over the rail links with London has demonstrated.
The residents of Kent are generally fairly prosperous and many are prepared to forgo higher growth in order to preserve the Garden of England from the depredations of developers.
In Ashford, for example, the local authority is one of the strongest supporters of the Tunnel and the town has already attracted considerable commercial interest.
However, an opinion poll carried out in 1987 found the majority of residents to be against the projects with opponents outnumbering supporters by more than two to one.
HOUSING
Some of the fiercest controversy about the pressure on land has focused on the issues of housing and housing land shortages in the south which have accompanied the economic boom in the region and social changes leading to an increasing number of households.
The building industry, encouraged by the government's support for owner occupation, has campaigned vigorously against planning restraints in areas of increasing demand for housing.
It argues that new housing is essential to boost labour mobility and maintain economic growth in areas where spiralling house prices are beginning to act as a disincentive to development.
Some of this new housing has been sited in inner city and other urban areas where land has been released by the process of industrial decline.
However, the difficulties of assembling land, and the unattractive locations of many inner city sites, have encouraged developers to turn their attentions elsewhere.
In 1987 about 25% of all new private housing in the south east was built on small ‘back garden’ sites, and the loss of suburban open space is emerging as a major environmental problem.
As these sites are used up housebuilders have looked further afield to the small towns and villages of southern England which are now within commuting reach of London and the motorway-induced development radiating from it.
Counties such as Berkshire, Hampshire, Hertfordshire and Cambridgeshire have been faced with increasing government demands to provide more new housing and this has produced vociferous opposition from local residents who see their traditional communities under threat.
Both high income commuters and lower income residents may resent development of this kind: the one because it interferes with their fantasy of the rural life, and the other because it pushes up house prices without providing any new job opportunities.
Although some developers provide low cost or rented housing within their schemes, the majority of housing is aimed at the upper end of the market thus setting in motion a house price spiral which effectively freezes the locals out of home ownership.
Academics and practising planners have also criticised the building industry.
They argue that the techniques used to estimate the current and future supply of housing land are flawed and that the industry's main motive is speculative profit.
The government's pursuit of mass home ownership, and its liberalisation of controls over private sector development, have encouraged a building boom which represents a serious threat to the countryside.
HOUSING LAND IN SPECIFIC AREAS
Many of the items included in this section are joint land availability studies produced by local authorities and the housebuilding industry under the terms of Department of the Environment Circular 9/80.
NEW SETTLEMENTS
The housebuilding industry has caused considerable controversy over its campaign for new, private country towns and villages as a solution to the housing problems of the south east.
To date applications for development in the Green Belt and open countryside have been resisted, but the government has expressed agreement with the new village concept as an alternative to sporadic countryside development.
It is likely, therefore, that the pressure on the often reluctant local authorities in counties like Hampshire and Cambridgeshire will continue.
In recent months some in the planning profession have revived the notion of planned new communities in areas of particular stress as an alternative to unconstrained private sector development.
This may meet the criticisms of those who believe that many private sector applications are of low quality and concerned simply with making high profits.
However, organisations like the Council for the Protection of Rural England are likely to remain opposed to further rural housing development which it sees as both socially and environmentally damaging.
See entry 1(47) for the latest government view on new villages, and 6(6–7) (9) for articles on the Shenley Park new village on the site of a redundant mental hospital in Hertfordshire.
RECREATION
In theory Green Belt and urban fringe land should form an important recreational resource for inner city residents but in practice this is often far from the case.
A significant proportion of fringe land around London, for example, is derelict and many of the more attractive sites are inaccessible for one reason or another.
Research suggests that fringe and Green Belt sites are generally used by local populations for informal recreation, and that facilities are not of a sufficient standard to attract people from far afield.
One possible solution might be the creation of country parks like those in Nottinghamshire which have proved a popular and well used resource for urban fringe recreation.
The increasing demand for outdoor land and water-based sports suggests that disused reservoirs and gravel workings could be successfully redeveloped for recreation, and urban fringe farmers may well look to recreational activities to supplement their main income.
This section includes research on the recreational use of the Green Belt and urban fringe, and material on the planning difficulties reconciling demands for recreation facilities with environmental protection.
See entries 2(3) (7)(17) for items dealing with public access, or lack of it, to the countryside; 2.1(3) on the Colne Valley Regional Park; and 4.2(14) (34)(40) on the recreational use of mineral working sites.
INSTITUTIONAL USES OF LAND
This last short section concerns the fate of large institutional sites in the countryside, principally redundant hospital sites which are becoming available for redevelopment as the result of community care and other policies.
The government has made it clear that redevelopment should, as far as possible, be in line with local planning policies but that where this is impossible new uses are preferable to leaving a large site derelict.
The redevelopment of the Shenley Hospital for new housing suggests that such redevelopment can be carried out in a sensitive and locally acceptable manner.
A related issue concerns the development of private hospitals and clinics on Green Belt  land but this may be declining in importance as the private health care sector becomes saturated in the south and south east.
The need for redevelopment and reuse can also arise in the case of large country houses and estates where there may be pressure for the introduction of heritage centres or other types of leisure development.
These may generate considerable opposition as the current controversy at Avebury suggests.
A further, but as yet untested, area of controversy concerns the future use of water authority land resources in the event of privatisation.
The estate is substantial and much of it is located in areas which are highly desirable to the private sector.
Companies may find the prospect of land gain a considerable attraction to offset against the problems involved in providing water and sewerage services.
The government has introduced new restrictions on the use of national park land in the event of privatisation but Opposition, and some Conservative, MPs believe that tougher planning controls are needed to enable the national park authorities to block damaging development.