

Homoeopathy: The Theory and Practice
The theory and philosophy of Homoeopathy
What is Homoeopathy?
Homoeopathy is a complete system of medicine which aims to promote general health, by reinforcing the body's own natural healing capacity.
Homoeopathy does not have treatments for diseases.
It has remedies for people with diseases.
It works in a totally different way from conventional medicine, which is known to Homoeopathic practitioners as Allopathy.
Allopathy means ‘different from the suffering’; the drugs that are given work against the disease and its symptoms.
Therefore drugs that are ‘anti’ are found, such as antibiotics, anti-depressants, anti-inflammatory and anti-pain drugs etc.
Homoeopathy means ‘similar to the suffering’.
The remedies used to treat sick people are actually capable of producing similar symptoms and diseases to those present in the patient needing that remedy.
The significance of this should become more clear to you as you read this chapter and you become familiar with the ‘Homoeopathic’ view of the world and its ills.
So how does Homoeopathy work?
Before attempting to answer that question it is necessary to understand a little about the function of disease in our lives.
Does disease have a function?
It is often useful, when explaining a very large concept, to start at the beginning.
In this case let us consider the healthy child and the illnesses that commonly occur in childhood.
Healthy children have lots of energy as a rule, so much so that they can wear out their poor unhealthy parents!
When they get ill, what sort of illnesses do they get?
Do they not tend to get sick rapidly with a very high fever, a vigorous illness which puts them in bed?
Then in a matter of days, or even one day, are they not up and about again eating us out of house and home?
At least, is this not the tendency in the beginning with most very young children and certainly with lively, healthy ones?
So what is going on in illness?
Sometimes an observant parent will notice something that will give us a clue; after a child recovers from one of those high fevers that ‘lay it very low’ for a short time it is sometimes seen that the child is more ‘well’than before it became ‘ill’, provided the illness has not been inappropriately treated or interfered with in some way.
Often this is very subtle.
There may be an improvement in the child's already abundant energy or that nebulous sense of well being that we all know about but find so hard to put into words.
This may show itself by an improvement in the child's behaviour or in the resolution of some lingering problem, such as the slight cough or persistently runny nose.
Frequently this improvement is missed or does not occur because of some form of interference.
If you have healthy young children, observe them closely and see what you can find out for yourself.
What happens as we grow up?
There is a tendency for illnesses to become  more prolonged, less intense and for the recovery to be slower.
Eventually the recovery becomes incomplete and we can see the gradual emergence of chronic disease.
From this progression it becomes possible to consider chronic diseases either as acute illnesses from which we have not been able to recover fully or as arising from the individual having insufficient ‘energy’, for whatever reason, to develop an acute illness and be done with it!
Of course this can start in the very young, though it is much more rare.
Is chronic disease inevitable?
Why does this happen?
What has gone wrong?
Is it natural for man to slowly degenerate in this way?
Just because it is so common that it is regarded as ‘normal’ to expect chronic ill health with advancing years does that mean that it is the way things have to be or, indeed, should be?
Occasionally we hear of people of very advanced years who appear and act as if they were in their prime, both mentally and physically.
Plainly not everyone has to be subject to chronic disease.
Is it not possible that these few exceptional individuals are, in fact, the normal ones and the rest of us have somewhere deviated from this path of health?
For me, it makes much more sense to look at the world from the point of view that things should be perfect.
If they are not, something has interfered with the natural state and thrown things out of balance.
This is of direct importance to the view of health and the function of disease in Homoeopathy.
Already we have looked at the healthy state of the majority of children when they enter this world and how their health tends to deteriorate slowly with time.
This need not be considered ‘normal’ or inevitable.
When does disease begin?
This is the first point to consider.
Let us look at an example of acute illness that would naturally resolve in time.
We commonly think of an illness as starting when the symptoms commence, like the lethargy and runny nose at the beginning of a cold.
To understand Homoeopathy we must consider a little more deeply and look at the situation afresh.
Consider a crowded bus in the rush hour.
Right in the centre is one person with a streaming cold who is sneezing his head off!
What happens next?
During the following few days a number of people in the bus will go down with a cold and will likely blame the poor soul who was suffering on his journey home.
But look a little more deeply and you will see that something else has happened too; if a number of people have gone down with the cold, does not it mean that a number of people have not gone down with the cold?
So why, if the bugs that the sneezing man spread about the bus were the cause of the illness, did not everyone get a cold?
What have we overlooked in blaming the man or his bugs for the cold?
It is, of course, quite obvious once we stop to think about it that the important difference between those that produced the cold and those that did not is that one group was susceptible to it whilst the other one was not.
Plainly  the dose of bugs is a factor too.
Nevertheless, some of those who were very close to the man would not get ill despite receiving a very large dose of bugs and some, who were in the most distant part of the bus, would catch it despite receiving a small dose.
What is susceptibility?
In order to become ill one has to be susceptible to that illness.
If a person is not susceptible to an illness then he (or she) simply will not develop it.
So when did all those people on the bus who went down with a cold become ill?
When did the illness actually begin?
We commonly think of the illness as the symptoms but I would ask you to expand your view of disease to take into consideration the individual's susceptibility because, as we have just seen, it is essential to the process of producing an illness that he be susceptible to it.
With that in mind, how can we reasonably leave it out of our picture of disease?
When we consider the essential role of susceptibility it becomes plain that the people who caught a cold in the bus were ‘ill’ before they ever stepped onto it, for if they had been healthy they would never have picked up the bugs in the first place.
How long they had been ‘carrying’ their susceptibility to that cold around with them just waiting to meet up with the right bugs will depend upon the individual circumstances of each of them.
At this point there is a need to distinguish between two uses of the word disease (or illness).
Commonly we consider a disease to be the symptoms that we experience when ill but if we are to take the susceptibility into account then we need a word to include it in this larger view of disease.
Unfortunately, we have no such word in the English language.
When the word disease is used in the field of Homoeopathy it often should be understood to include the susceptibility and it should be apparent from the context when this is so.
You may consider the susceptibility as the soil in which the seeds of disease are sown.
If the soil is not right then the seeds will not grow.
The seeds are all the external influences that tend to throw us out of balance and they may affect us on any level of our being; on the physical level it may be something simple like being exposed to a cold wind, getting soaked in the rain or even some form of trauma.
They will all tend to put a stress on the system and depending on our health or susceptibility we will be affected to a greater or a lesser degree.
On the emotional level, stresses come in many different forms; such as problems in relationships, with family or the grief from the death of a loved one.
On the mental level we may experience stresses from business problems and financial worries, the pressure of examinations and so on.
Frequently the stresses involve a combination of these different levels.
Natural healing powers
Our natural healing or life powers will cope with many of these stresses without ever producing any symptoms.
It is as if our vitality is sufficient to stop those apparently unhelpful influences from having any effect.
A point may be reached when the external stresses on any level become so great that in order to defend, repair and maintain order in the system the healing powers produce symptoms and signs of what we call an illness or disease.
If our vitality is low then our susceptibility is high.
The body has an organising intelligence that orders it and runs all the processes and functions of the parts and integrates them into the whole.
It operates through the agencies of the different control systems such as the autonomic nervous system, hormonal system, immune system etc.
Without this intelligence the body would rapidly cease to exist.
This same intelligence is concerned with the natural healing power of the body.
Is it sensible to consider that this natural intelligence or healing power would produce a situation that was without a purpose, for which no reason existed and which was harmful to the person when considered as a whole?
It may cause damage to a part of the person but we should not lose sight of the whole person if we wish to understand what is going on.
What is the purpose of symptoms?
What, then, is the purpose of disease symptoms?
Is it not likely that the healing powers are continually trying to maintain order in the system but once the external stresses reach a certain level this can no longer be done ‘passively’ but the very attempt to keep a balance produces outward signs which we generally find uncomfortable and so call disease; which is literally a lack of ease or disease.
Viewed in this way the symptoms and signs of disease appear entirely different.
They are no longer the inconvenient, unwanted, useless and ‘why did I have to get it now’ things that they are commonly thought to be but they are actually the manifestation of each person's attempt to get well, to maintain order and balance in the system.
They are the external effect of the internal fight to get well, recover and heal.
They are not a part of becoming ill, which went on, generally unnoticed, beforehand, but are a part of the healing process.
Now it becomes a little clearer why, in a young healthy child where ‘disease’ serves its function in its most simple and natural form, it has been observed that the child is more well after an acute ailment has resolved than he was before it started.
It also becomes quite understandable why people tend to become ‘ill’ when there are a lot of stresses going on in their lives and especially at times of life crises such as griefs, changes in work and divorce.
Quite simply, these are times when there is more healing to be done, more effort is required by the natural healing powers to maintain order or to put it slightly differently, it is no longer possible for a balance and harmony to be sustained without the production of symptoms of disease.
A further question may have arisen; why is the fertile soil or the susceptibility present in the first place?
What gave rise to it?
This is connected to questions about why some people are born with poor health and touches on some very deep aspects of philosophy which I will not attempt to discuss in this book.
Suffice it to say that some people are better built at the beginning.
They are constructed with few weaknesses and have a sound, strong constitution.
These are the people who are often quoted as enjoying good health to a  ripe old age despite smoking, drinking and never taking any exercise.
These days there are not many of them around.
The key to understanding Homoeopathy
How does Homoeopathy fit into this picture of disease?
Once it is understood that the symptoms of disease are actually a good thing in that they are the highly characteristic outward indication of the healing and balancing process that is going on inside each individual person, then to give a medicine that is capable of mimicking and bringing about that same process suddenly seems to be a good idea; both totally reasonable and logical.
The key to Homoeopathy is that no two people suffer from the same disease.
We each have our own highly individual ways of reacting to the stresses of life and of maintaining our inner harmony.
Certainly there are broad similarities and a degree of categorisation is possible but with detailed analysis there are always differences.
After all, no two people are exactly the same, at least none that I have heard of or met!
Take as an example a simple sore throat.
Let us assume that we have selected twenty cases who all have the same bugs growing in their throats.
The usual view is that they are all suffering from the same disease and yet it is plain that there are marked differences between the reaction of one patient to that of another.
For instance one may find marked relief from taking warm drinks which would make another feel much worse; one may have a high fever and sweats whilst another has no fever at all; one may be hot and want to be uncovered and in the fresh air whilst another is hot yet wants to be covered up to his chin; one may wish to continue his work whilst another might only wish to lie down and die and so on .
These differences are an indication of the unique way in which each individual is responding to the circumstances in which he finds himself and of the state of that person as a whole, that is they show how his healing powers are operating at that time.
Now, if a medicine is given to a healthy person and it causes them to produce a particular reaction, a set of symptoms, then these symptoms are the healing response that this particular medicine is capable of bringing about.
To put it another way, bearing in mind that symptoms are part of the healing process and not the disease process, then particular medicines will bring about particular healing responses, that is symptoms.
Like cures like
It now makes perfect sense to give a remedy that is capable of bringing about the same or very similar healing responses, that is symptoms, to the healing response which is occurring in the patient as shown by his individual symptoms.
Hence we have the Law of Similars which is very ancient and predates the formulation of Homoeopathy in the eighteenth century.
It was known to Paracelsus in the fifteenth century, it can be found in the fourth  century BC in Hippocratic writings and is one of the principles of treatment in Ayurvedic Medicine which was written down over 5000 years ago.
It states —‘that which can cause a disease can also cure it’ or ‘like cures like’.
It is interesting that examples of this law in operation are found in many different areas.
In the field of cancer therapy it is well known that irradiation can cause tumours and yet they can also be treated by radiation and many of the drugs used in chemotherapy for tumours can also cause tumours.
Digitoxin can cause heart irregularities, or arrhythmias, but it is also very useful in the treatment of certain arrhythmias.
There are many others.
Many of these seemingly contradictory properties of the agents are related to dose.
The healthier a person is, the higher the dose necessary to throw that person out of balance, as shown by the appearance of symptoms and signs.
In disease, even a small stimulus, if it is aligned with the healing process of the individual, will have an effect.
Nevertheless, a higher dose or one not sufficiently matched to the individual will still tend to overstimulate and may then cause what are usually called side-effects.
The closer the stimulus or medicine is aligned to the healing in the patient the lower the dose of drug needed; they are more susceptible to it.
The unwanted effects, which are an indication of the  mis-match between the powers of the drug and those of the patient either in quality (the type of medicine used) or in quantity (the dose administered), are fewer.
This explains a phenomenon frequently observed in Homoeopathy; often after the administration of the indicated remedy there is a brief and mild worsening of the symptoms followed by their gradual resolution.
This is due to the stimulus of the remedy causing the healing powers to respond.
In principle if the dose were to exactly meet the requirements of the patient there would be no observable reaction before the resolution took place.
In practice this rarely happens and a mild reaction is commonly produced.
It can be seen that the correct dose of the correct medicine will aid a person's healing.
Give too much and it may bring about the very conditions it is capable of curing; ‘Through the like, disease is produced and through the application of the like it is cured’, said Hippocrates over 2000 years ago.
Homoeopathy is why a remedy is given, not what is given
It is well known that Homoeopathic remedies are very dilute in their preparation though their effects cannot be explained so simply.
For those that understand such terminology it might be said that the remedies work at the level of energy and not of matter.
Here we again begin to approach the deeper aspects of philosophy and I do not intend to say any more about it here.
The method of preparation of the remedies and how they act is not essential to an understanding of Homoeopathy.
Homoeopathy is about why a remedy is given, not what is given.
There is a great deal of nonsense spoken about Homoeopathy that stems from this basic misconception.
So often we hear about a Homoeopathic remedy for colds or flu or arthritis etc.
Only a little thought will show what a nonsense  this is, for, as we have just seen, no two individuals manifest their illnesses in exactly the same way even if they are given the same disease label.
So how can there be one ‘Homoeopathic’ remedy to suit everyone with that ‘disease’?
Plainly it has nothing to do with Homoeopathy which is concerned with individualisation.
It is only when a substance is matched with a patient according to the Law of Similars that it becomes Homoeopathic.
When it is sitting in the medicine chest or pharmacy it is not Homoeopathic at all; it is just a potentised remedy (potentisation is the name given to the process of preparation of the remedies used).
Potentised remedies are used in many different forms of therapy, not just Homoeopathy.
They can even be used allopathically (as in orthodox medicine) and this is just what is happening in the situation above when one or two remedies are advocated for the treatment of everyone with one disease label.
It is worthy of note at this point that the decision as to what is the correct or most similar remedy for a patient is not necessarily simple or straightforward.
In acute diseases it is generally adequate to look only at the symptoms of the acute disease itself.
How the person is being affected as a whole is usually quite clear and obvious.
In constitutional treatment, a much greater insight into what is happening and the significance of the symptoms is required, that is as to what constitutes the totality of the disease for which a most similar remedy is required.
This is why, as has been said earlier, conditions which more closely reflect the constitutional state of the person should only be treated by experienced therapists and not the well intentioned novice.
The remedy pictures
How is the capability of each remedy known?
How is the picture which determines its use ascertained?
Very simply by giving the remedy to a group of healthy people in a carefully controlled and closely monitored fashion.
All the changes and symptoms that arise are noted and studied to detect patterns and trends that are characteristic and commonly occur.
These are likely to be of great importance when prescribing the remedy for a patient.
This process is called a Proving of the remedy and strict criteria are laid down in order to ensure that the true action of the remedy is brought out and not any interferences from other sources.
A properly conducted Proving may last for many months.
Once the Proving picture is obtained then enough is known about the remedy to start using it in practice.
Subsequently, when the remedy is given to treat sick people, other symptoms that had not been brought out in the Proving are noted to be cured by the remedy and if this happens repeatedly then those symptoms are added to the picture of that remedy.
So gradually a fuller understanding of the actions of the remedies is obtained enabling them to be used with greater accuracy.
This process has continued from one generation of Homoeopaths to the next so that instead of the new discoveries sweeping away all the previous ideas, as commonly occurs in many ‘scientific’ studies, the knowledge of remedies, known as Materia Medica, is continually being added to, developed and refined.
The holistic approach
How is the progress of a patient assessed?
In Homoeopathy and many other types of alternative medicine the patient's illness is placed in a much larger context.
The susceptibility has already been spoken of but the assessment of a patient involves looking at their health on all levels, including physical, mental and emotional.
Since there is an intelligent system at work in each person it follows that if discomfort or dysfunction is necessary in order to maintain harmony within the system as a whole then the disease will manifest in the least important parts possible thus preserving the higher functions of the person for as long as possible.
Therefore, it becomes apparent that there is a hierarchy of symptoms and disease.
Among the most important functions are the mental faculties without which a person could no longer lead a useful life.
It takes little thought to see that someone who is physically crippled and confined to a wheelchair may still lead a very full life if his mental and higher faculties are in good order whereas a physically fit but totally demented person has little left to give and little capacity to receive except for physical care and a little love.
Their life could certainly not be described as full.
Within each realm there is a hierarchy, so in very general terms in the physical sphere a skin rash or a cold is of minor significance whereas a heart, lung or brain disease is much more serious.
Diseases of joints, muscles and gut lie somewhere in the middle.
In the emotional field, minor anger and irritability are less deep than fears and phobias and mentally, a little forgetfulness is less significant than delusions or confusional states.
This is a very brief view of the type of assessment that is made during constitutional treatment.
The focus of a patient's illness, in relation to the hierarchy, is assessed and monitored.
To be sure that a patient is truly regaining their health, it is of no value just to know that the symptoms of his complaint have been relieved, rather the focus of his disease has to be seen to be shifting into less important areas, that is, moving down the hierarchy.
If someone ‘recovers’ from their arthritic condition but later develops a heart condition then, in reality, they never recovered at all but the focus of their disease shifted from a more superficial to a deeper level.
Such connections are occasionally recognised in orthodox medicine where there is not a long time delay between one complaint developing and the next, though the significance of the link between diseases is frequently missed.
For example it is well known that asthma and eczema are linked but what is frequently overlooked is the way that a person's asthma can be bad at a time when their eczema is quiet and their eczema can be its worst when the asthma is quiet.
This natural sequence of events is frequently obscured when the condition is treated without taking the constitution into account.
The Law of Cure
With a view to aiding the assessment of a patient's progress there are a few simple guidelines that can be followed; for cure to be taking place the disease  should go from within to without, from organs of greater importance to lesser importance, from above to below and to disappear in the reverse order to their original appearance.
The last is probably the most important since it has been observed time and again that, during constitutional treatment, old symptoms reminiscent of previous states of health tend to recur, until a state of health can sometimes eventually be achieved where the only illnesses experienced are those common to childhood, such as coughs, colds, sore throats and skin rashes.
For many reasons this cannot be attained by all patients though most can be helped some of the way back, to former states of better health.
Finally
This is a very brief overview of some of the aspects of Homoeopathy and a view of the world which may help to shed a little light on what is happening with a person's health.
This book does not aim to be a comprehensive text covering the philosophy and principles of Homoeopathy; it is a practical book designed to be used by anyone wishing to treat the common acute illnesses, particularly those occurring during childhood.
A complete understanding of the theory and philosophy is not necessary in order to use Homoeopathy effectively and safely in these types of condition.
However a little knowledge of the philosophy is useful and may stimulate an interest.
Whether or not what has been suggested here reflects your view of the world is immaterial.
If this book helps in the selection of remedies to assist the natural healing process then it will have achieved its purpose.
This selection is not difficult and requires no academic training.
The ability to observe is of far greater importance and is readily enhanced by practice.
When it comes to the treatment of chronic and recurrent illnesses such as those listed in the section Conditions Requiring Constitutional Therapy on page 137, the situation is quite different.
If the condition is a recurrent one such as migraine or period pains, it is perfectly possible to use a book like this to find remedies that will give relief each time the pain occurs but it will not prevent the pain recurring next time.
Curative treatment for such conditions is quite beyond the scope of this book.
They reflect processes taking place much more deeply within the individual and are dependent upon many factors such as constitutional make-up, heredity, diet, life events, lifestyle, environment and so on.
Anyone requiring therapy for such conditions would be well advised to seek out an experienced practitioner in whichever constitutional therapy best suits their individual needs.
Individualisation is common to all the reputable therapies of which I am aware and that includes the choice of therapy itself.
There is much more to discover and there are many methods of discovery.
Homoeopathy is not the only practice that uses the concepts presented here and no one of repute, of whom I am aware, would claim that Homoeopathy has all the answers or that it will suit everyone.
It certainly has something of value to offer and there is only one way to find out whom it will suit; try it!
How to use Homoeopathy in practice
The aim
The essence of Homoeopathy is to match a remedy picture to the disease picture in an individual.
A picture in this sense consists of the collection of symptoms which characterise the remedy or the patient with his illness.
Symptoms are changes from the normal state of a person occurring at any level of his being and would range from changes of mood or behaviour to physical things like pains, temperature reactions, colour changes, sweats etc.
That which a remedy is capable of causing (that is, the picture of the remedy) is also able to be cured by that remedy.
This is the Law of Similars —‘like cures like’.
An explanation of why this should be is given in Chapter 1.
However, Homoeopathy can be used for simple acute illnesses such as those described in this book, without a full understanding of its philosophy and theory.
Remember the aim — to find the remedy with the most similar picture to the picture of disease in the patient.
Here arises the first problem: how completely must the picture of the disease and the remedy match in order to be assured of a beneficial result?
Clearly, the more complete the fit between the remedy and the illness the more certain and the greater will be the success of the prescription.
Only an expert after much study and practical experience will achieve consistently good responses.
So how can the beginner maximise the chance of success?
It was with this in mind that the book was written.
Some of the most important features of the remedies are highlighted and the information is presented in an easy-to-use tabular form.
It gives additional information which can be used as experience grows and by those who already possess some knowledge of Homoeopathy.
It is designed to enable anyone to make a start in finding, with a reasonable degree of accuracy, remedies to treat common illnesses and, as time goes on, to develop a knowledge and understanding of the remedies and their uses.
The book is designed to bridge the gap between the very simple and inadequate descriptions of use given with many Homoeopathic remedies and the much larger texts, the depth and complexity of which would put Homoeopathy quite beyond all but the most dedicated of beginners.
The method
Firstly, the picture of the disease in the patient is needed.
The process of obtaining this information is called ‘taking the case’.
Taking the case
There are only two requirements when taking a case and they are interdependent:Observation with all the senses and objectivity or freedom from interpretation of what is observed.
Observation
Observation involves seeing, hearing, smelling, touching and, rarely, tasting!
The vital clue to an individual's sickness may come through any of the senses, so use them all.
Having observed something, just record it and do not reason it out as to why it is so.
Best of all, record the patient's own words, especially for the important symptoms.
The less thinking and interpreting that goes on the better.
By all means make enquiries in order to aid observation.
Indeed, the largest part of the case will be heard as the patient tells of his symptoms except, of course, in the case of an infant.
Keep a record
You may like to keep a family or personal health record to note all relevant health matters — patterns of health, details of specific illnesses, their treatment and outcome, accidents, vaccinations and their effect etc.
It would be interesting to note also the stresses that occur from time to time, be they physical, mental or emotional and to observe their effect on health.
This can sometimes be quite enlightening!
One of the secrets of staying healthy is to discover what it is that tends to throw you out of balance and causes illnesses to appear.
This will be very individual and may be important for your long term health.
It is good to regain a healthy state.
It is far better to never get unhealthy in the first place!
When taking a case, even your own, write it down in whatever layout and form you find suits you.
You may divide it into sections, such as in the tables, record it just as it is spoken, or however else you wish, but do record it for later reference and to help you learn.
What to observe
Allow the patient to speak of what they notice to be wrong with themselves and try not to put words into the patient's mouth.
Use questions such as‘what else?, what more?, can you tell me more about that?’ in order to extract more information.
What the patient tells you without prompting will usually be of greater importance.
Of course you have to take into account the basic personality of the patient; some will tell all without needing to be questioned, others need tact, diplomacy and perseverance to get any symptoms from them.
Sometimes it can be as hard a task as pulling teeth from a hungry crocodile but do not despair!
This fact in itself may be a symptom of the illness, particularly if it is not usual for them to behave in that way.
This would be an example of a mental symptom.
The more marked the change in behaviour or mental state, the more important it will be to find a remedy with that same mental picture.
Underline anything that is very prominent and strong.
You may wish to underline some things two or three times.
Make a special note of anything that is unexpected such as a sore throat that is better for swallowing solid food — normally one would expect this to make it worse.
Another example would be a  fever with a dry mouth but no thirst.
Symptoms like this are called strange, rare and peculiar , and are often of prime importance in finding the remedy or group of remedies from which to make one's selection.
Other things to be observed would be the patient's appearance, presence or absence of heat and sweat in different areas of the body, his behaviour and mood, what he wants in his surroundings and environment, does he want to be still or moving, if he moves why does he move, does he want fresh air or to be covered, or both, or neither, and so on!
Refer to the tables for ideas
A brief look at the tables will give you an idea of the type of symptoms and detail that is required.
After the patient has run out of things to tell you on his own initiative make enquiries into each of the sections covering the particular complaint of the patient.
Ask for details of sensations, where they are situated, where they move to, how they start and change, find out what the pattern is but take care to use open ended questions whenever possible; questions that cannot be answered by a simple ‘yes’ or ‘no’, such as‘How does your head feel?’instead of ‘Do you have a headache?’
Be sure to ask about the modalities of the symptoms — these are the factors which make it better (>) or worse (<).
For brevity it is worth using these little symbols which are easy to learn.
As can be seen from the tables, just about anything may affect a symptom.
The stronger, more definite and consistent it is, the more important it will be as a symptom of the case.
Under Cause and Onset look at what has been happening in the preceding hours or days to the onset of the illness and consider the speed with which the illness came on and the order of events.
Causes might range from becoming wet or chilled, a change in the weather, overexertion, dietary indiscretions etc. to emotional factors such as grief or anger.
Do not ignore these emotional factors as triggers of illness.
That headaches can follow arguments and diarrhoea may appear in anticipation of some unusual event is well known but the role that the emotions play in many if not most illnesses is rarely appreciated.
In general if an illness has appeared rapidly and vigorously over a matter of hours then one should look for a cause in the preceding few hours or day at the most.
If it appears slowly with a few days warning of something being not quite right and the patient gradually sinks into the illness, then the cause is likely to lie several days or even a week earlier.
It may reflect some prolonged period of stress at any level of being; physical, mental or emotional.
Whilst first aid remedies may be of use for each episode of acute illness, proper constitutional treatment and advice is likely to be more appropriate to help with the long term tendency to become unwell repeatedly.
Under the section of Abdominal Conditions it will be noticed that there are three lots of modalities.
These relate to each of the preceding sections, that is the modalities of the sensation, the modalities of the diarrhoea, and the modalities of the nausea and vomiting.
Concomitant symptoms are symptoms not directly related to but arising at the  same time as, the main complaint such as a headache with diarrhoea or cold sores with a fever — things which are repeatedly associated, so that the patient might say ‘Whenever I get this problem I always get a stomach upset’ or whatever it may be.
The final section of the tables is headed Mentals and Generals .
Mental symptoms relate to the mood, behaviour, speech pattern etc. of the patient.
Characteristics of the patient when well that are still present when ill are not actually a part of the picture of the acute illness and are therefore not important when selecting a remedy for the acute disease.
This actually applies to any symptom, not just to mental conditions.
Whereas if someone who is normally very placid and kind became ill, say with an earache and at the same time became irritable and bad tempered, then this would be a highly significant symptom.
That patient would need a remedy capable of causing just such an irritability.
Mental symptoms arising in this way are generally of the greatest importance when selecting the most similar remedy.
General symptoms are symptoms that relate to the whole person in general and not just to the particular site of the problem.
So if a person had a sore throat and it burned, this burning would be a particular symptom because it was limited to a single focus of his illness.
If on the other hand he also had some burning when he passed a motion, his feet burned at night and his eyes were dry and burning, then it is clear that the sensation of ‘burning’ runs throughout many areas of the person's body and so becomes characteristic of him as a whole, that is, it becomes General.
General symptoms can be preceded by the words ‘I am’, as in ‘I am thirsty, hot, tired, lacking energy or burning all over’.
The opposite of a general symptom is a particular symptom.
This relates only to an isolated part of the person and is usually preceded by the word ‘my’, such as‘my head hurts, my throat is dry’, etc.
Things which affect the person as a whole are of much greater importance than those affecting only a part.
So mental and general symptoms carry greater weight when evaluating a case.
More information on Mentals and Generals is given in the Materia Medica section towards the end of the book, which covers the most commonly required remedies.
This guide will help you to take the case.
Bear in mind that in order to find the most similar remedy we need to have symptoms that mark out how one individual's illness differs from another's.
We need the symptoms that characterise the individuality of the disease process in each case.
So symptoms that are common and occur in most or all cases of that type of complaint are useless when selecting a remedy, for example, nausea worse for eating, pains worse for touching the sore part, dry mouth with thirst.
Likewise symptoms that are indefinite, mild and nebulous.
Unless, of course, all the symptoms are like that in which case it becomes a general symptom and might point towards a remedy like Ferrum phos .
or maybe Pulsatilla .
So look out for the strong, the peculiar, the characteristic symptoms, any general symptoms that run through the case in different areas of the body and any chances in the mental state of the patient.
Make sure that you have all the  details of each symptom: any cause, the speed of onset, the site, the sensations, the modalities etc.
Have you ascertained the strength and consistency of each symptom?
This will help you to appreciate the unique state of the patient and just how the illness is affecting him.
There is no one way to take a case.
It is a creative and individual process reflecting the relationship between yourself and the patient.
This is why you should be as free from emotional upset and involvement as possible when taking it.
There is only one way to become proficient at anything — practice!
In that practice you will discover different ways of obtaining the information to suit the different types of cases.
They will, of course, also suit your own character and style of doing things.
Case analysis and use of the tables
Now that you have ‘taken the case’ it needs to be analysed.
When selecting the most important features of the case they should be clear, strong and characteristic of the patient's illness right now.
Be quite sure the symptoms are new changes and do not relate to the patient's normal state of health.
Changes of intensity may be included though proportionally less significance can be given to them.
Much has already been said to help you evaluate the importance of each symptom.
The evaluation mainly arises from a combination of three factors.
Firstly the depth of the symptom — that is at what level of the person's being it is taking place, secondly the strength of the symptom and thirdly how uniquely characteristic is the symptom of the patient's state.
A useful guide to the first two is to see what effect a symptom has on the patient's ability to function as a whole, creative, happy, loving human being, taking into account their normal state of course!
It is clear that anything which affects the mind will be of prime importance in this (see Chapter 1) as also will be anything that affects the person as a whole.
Mental and General symptoms are therefore ranked high.
Particular symptoms which relate to the separate parts are usually of less significance.
Nevertheless if the patient is mentally and emotionally unaffected but has, for example, a pain somewhere, then the details of the pain will make up the whole case, or ‘totality’ as it is called, for which a similar remedy must be found.
This can also happen if a pain is very severe and strong such that it makes all the other symptoms pale into insignificance.
Peculiar symptoms, also called ‘Strange, Rare and Peculiar symptoms’, fall outside this method of evaluation because they may be very debilitating or make little difference to the patient's ability to function.
Their high ranking stems from the individuality of the symptom to that patient.
If the Peculiar is also strong and consistent then this will increase its importance even occasionally to the point where it will override Mental and General symptoms when evaluating the case.
Peculiars are by definition uncommon but they are worth searching for and if present in a case would strongly favour any remedies showing that same symptom.
Examples of Peculiar symptoms would be ‘dry  mouth without thirst’, ‘burning pain better for (>) heat’, ‘symptoms affecting one half of the body only’.
Clearly the strength of each symptom needs to be taken into account.
The way in which the patient speaks of his symptoms, his tone of voice, choice of language, gestures and expressions will all tell of the intensity.
At first you may like to employ a points system to help in your evaluation of symptoms, though with practice and familiarity this will not be necessary:
Mentals are worth 3 points.
Physical symptoms that are Generals (symptoms that can be expressed ‘I am…) are worth 2 points.
Particular symptoms that relate to the separate parts of the body are worth 1 point.
Peculiars might come anywhere depending on their degree of peculiarity.
The more that you know about what is normal and expected in diseases the easier it will be to evaluate the Peculiars.
Most of it is just common sense.
The ranking of the modalities and concomitants relates to the individual symptoms concerned and should fall into one of the above categories.
Finally, having ranked the symptoms as above, additional points need to be allocated according to the strength of each symptom on a scale of 1 to 3. dTake into account the intensity and consistency in deciding how many points to give for this.
The sum of these two numbers together will allow you to choose the most important and characteristic symptoms of the case which should be used for the next step.
Selecting the remedy
The main area or areas of complaint will indicate the first tables to consider.
Note the selection headings for these areas and write down the most important features of the case that occur in each of these sections in a layout that will make the next step easy for you.
Look along the sections of the tables and match the main features of the case with the features of the remedies.
The remedy picture may include a lot of other symptoms that are not in the case itself.
Do not worry about this so long as all or most of the important symptoms of the case are in the remedy.
Construct a list of matching remedies.
The first two pages for each set of tables contains the remedies most frequently indicated.
The remedies have been grouped for easier comparison and so do not appear alphabetically.
If you find that none are a good match then you are probably including too much detail and are not just selecting the most important features.
Go back to the case and review critically the main characteristic symptoms eliminating those that are not strong, are vague, have perhaps only occurred once or twice and are not really important features of the illness.
Consider using the points system to help you.
If you find six or more remedies are matching then you have probably included too many common symptoms.
These you will recall are the ones that  are characteristic of the disease in general in everyone and not the disease in the individual.
You should also review the case looking for the more individual features in it.
It may be necessary to return to the patient and ask for more details of symptoms and search for any important features that have been overlooked.
Ideally you should end up with less than six and probably more than one or two remedies to consider in greater detail in the tables.
The second stage in the selection process is to refine the match.
Is there a remedy picture which most closely resembles the important features of the case?
Do many or most of the important symptoms of the remedy which appear in bold type match the strongest symptoms of the case?
Are the more minor symptoms of the case to be found in the remedy?
This is of less importance but may confirm what was already clear or it may help to differentiate between two or more remedies which are equally close.
Read the whole case again, read all the symptoms of the remedy and refer to the Materia Medica of the most common remedies at the back of the book for the final comparison which does not rely on the numerical evaluation.
You may find that reference to more than one set of tables will help you.
For instance someone with a sore throat may well also have a fever and you will get a fuller picture by looking at the remedies in both sections.
When comparing the symptoms of the case and the remedy you should also note that the most important symptoms do not clash or contradict.
For example Belladonna has a rapid, vigorous and violent fever coming on quickly.
If the patient's fever took several days to appear then it is much less likely to be Belladonna no matter how much the rest of the picture looks like it.
You will also find that some remedies have opposite symptoms, for example Belladonna may be thirstless or thirsty in its fever.
Both pictures may occur.
If one is very much more common and prominent than the other then it will be written in bold type and the other in ordinary type.
A warning should be issued here.
You almost never find all the symptoms of the case in a remedy picture and you will never find all the symptoms of a remedy in the disease picture of the case, so do not look for it or try to fit it all in.
It will only exasperate you!
It is much more important to look out for those strong, peculiar, characteristic symptoms and any mental or general symptoms.
Let those be your guide when selecting the remedy.
For the absolute beginner and those who lack the time or enthusiasm, the selection of a remedy can take place by considering primarily the very important symptoms of the remedies which have been printed in bold type, ignoring all the information in ordinary type.
Different ways of selecting the remedy
Selecting a remedy is part science, part art.
Commonly it starts off being a scientific process, evaluating and carefully comparing all the different features of the case with the most likely remedies.
This tends to be the way that the gentlemen work it out.
They are generally more logical, step by step, and scientific in their approach to a problem.
The artistic approach involves a more intuitive, creative way of thinking that is not always entirely logical, is found more often in the ladies’ approach and comes with experience.
This is also a valid way and can produce better results than the scientific way of working.
It does require a certain knowledge of the remedies, though.
Commonly the prescriber will be fairly familiar with the remedies and will ‘just know’ the remedy as the case is taken or may only need to look up one or two symptoms to confirm the remedy.
The process of evaluating and matching symptom pictures as a whole, which takes place in this more intuitive process, might be compared to the difference between a mathematician and a child when presented with a simple sum such as 4 + 3.
The child will work it out on his fingers and get the right answer.
The mathematician will look at it and simply know the answer.
Both are right but one is quicker.
However, once upon a time the mathematician was a child too.
This process must not be confused with guessing or wishful thinking.
It is very different, and as you can see has to be based on some knowledge or understanding.
As this knowledge of the remedies grows in you, do not be surprised if you sometimes ‘just know’ which is the right remedy and know it without any doubts.
Sometimes there is something about the ‘image’ of a remedy which just seems to fit the patient.
Have a good look at that remedy and see if your intuitive feelings can be justified.
However you work in selecting a remedy find the way that suits you and gives you results as shown by a good response to its administration.
The accuracy of your selection can only be proved by giving the remedy and the patient getting better.
In this sense every Homoeopathic prescription is an experiment, even those of the most experienced professional!
Plenty of spaces have been left throughout the book on which you can add your own notes about the remedies.
Only add those things of which you are quite sure.
If there is a doubt put it in pencil and wait for confirmation from your own experience or from the reports of others.
Which potency?
The more a remedy is potentised, the quicker and deeper its action.
It also becomes more specific and for the higher potencies the remedy selection has to be more accurate for the remedy to work.
Low potencies are usually regarded as being those up to and including the 30c or 30x.
The letters ‘c’ and ‘x’refer to the dilution factor used in the preparation of the remedy and it need not concern us here, as to all practical intents and purposes for home prescribing the difference is negligible.
Commonly one can readily obtain the following potencies; 6x, 6c, 12x, 12c, 30x and 30c.
The higher the number the greater the potency of the remedy.
For the conditions described in this book it is the selection of the remedy that is of far greater importance than the specific potency used.
As a general rule if the sick person requires a remedy and you only have it available in one potency then that is the correct potency no matter what it is!
If you are going to stock your medicine cupboard with only one potency of each remedy, my personal choice would be 12x or 12c.
This will go a little further than a 6 but is not quite so specific as a 30.
If you have built up some experience using the remedies then you will find the 30 an excellent potency for acute illness.
If you are new to Homoeopathy and do not intend to follow case taking and evaluation guidelines, such as have been given in this chapter, then a set of 6x remedies will serve you best.
In the vast majority of cases the 6th potency will work just as well as the 30th and does not require such accuracy.
One point that may help you is that the lower the potency the more frequently it is likely to need repeating.
Safety and Storage
Having selected a remedy it must now be given, but first I would like to put in a little reassurance.
What if it is the wrong one?
In treating acute illnesses there are only two outcomes to giving the wrong low potency remedy.
Firstly, there may be a partial response which does not last long, and secondly, there may be no response at all.
In order to bring about a deterioration in the patient's condition with low potency remedies one would have to keep on repeating the wrong remedy many times and even then it is unlikely that much would happen unless the patient were particularly frail and weak, in which case they should be having constitutional treatment to boost their overall state and not ‘first aid’ treatment for the little bits that go wrong.
Someone who has much chronic ill health should not be treated except by an experienced practitioner.
Nevertheless it is very difficult to do any harm with ‘first aid’ Homoeopathy using low potency remedies.
They are very safe.
Even if a child took a whole bottle full of remedies it would not be harmed!
This is because the important factor is the frequency of repetition of the remedy and not the quantity given.
No more than one pill at a time is needed and the effect is not stronger by giving a full bottle.
It is rather like having a door handle to be opened.
In the opening of a door it matters not if the strong hand of a weight lifter turns the knob or the delicate hand of a lady, the effect is the same.
The door is opened.
So it is with Homoeopathy, the quantity does not matter, it is the quality that is important.
During pregnancy low potency remedies can be taken for acute illnesses without risk to mother or child.
The pills themselves, if stored tightly capped, out of the sun and away from strong smells, can be kept for years without loss of potency.
Keep them in their original containers and if you need to transfer them make sure they go into a new, labelled bottle or clean paper envelope.
Never reuse old remedy bottles or envelopes for a different remedy or potency.
Only open one remedy bottle at a time.
Although they are much safer than allopathic or conventional drugs it is obviously advisable to store them in a safe place, out of reach of little fingers.
How do you give the remedy?
The remedy may come as a liquid potency when the dose is one drop, as  granules when the dose is 10 or 20 grains (like sugar grains or the ‘hundreds and thousands’ used to decorate cakes) or, most commonly as tablets when the dose is one tablet.
Rules
1.
Do not touch the pills.
The patient himself may pick one up with clean hands, but no one else.
You may also use a clean spoon or piece of paper.
2.
Do not return pills to the stock bottle if accidentally tipped out.
Discard them.
3.
Suck the pill under the tongue.
They are made from sugar and should easily dissolve.
If it is slow, crush it with the teeth and then suck the pieces under the tongue.
4.
Ideally the mouth should be clean with no flavours, food or drink for 10 or 15 minutes before or after taking the pill.
5.
Whilst treating anyone with remedies they should avoid anything with a strong smell, scent, aroma or perfume.
No aromatic oils, vapour rubs, smelly nasal decongestants like menthol or eucalyptus etc.
Some Homoeopaths will also advise avoiding coffee and toothpaste; others will not.
You may suit yourself on that one!
What I do is to stop these last two if apparently indicated remedies are not working as well as I would have expected.
It is a good thing to stop coffee anyway from a general health point of view but the benefits of this would only be apparent from a long term change, not just for a few days.
Children can either take remedies as a powder by crushing the pill between two clean teaspoons, or dissolved in a little clean, fresh water in a glass.
Plussing
In a very acute illness the remedy may need to be repeated every hour or two at first until sustained improvement sets in.
In this situation it is often worth dissolving two or three tablets, or their equivalent, in a clean glass of fresh water and taking a teaspoonful when needed.
Between doses the water is best agitated by lifting a spoonful up in the air and allowing it to splash back in the glass ten or twenty times.
This is called plussing and it slightly alters the potency of the remedy in the glass which helps to maintain its effectiveness.
After the first prescription
The rule here is not to repeat or change the remedy until the action of the previous dose has ceased.
This may mean a lot of waiting!
One of four things commonly happens:
1.
The patient gets better.
Do not repeat the remedy whilst improvement is still occurring.
Nothing more to be done!
2.
The symptoms get slightly worse straight after the remedy is given.
This is a common reaction to the effect of the remedy and you should wait and  expect to see an improvement over the next few minutes or an hour or so depending on how severe the illness is.
The more vigorous and acute the illness is the quicker things change.
So in a lingering slow fever you might wait several hours for a response to a remedy, whereas in a delirious, high, raging fever one would expect to see changes within ten or fifteen minutes.
3.
The patient improves for a time, say an hour or more, then either stops getting better and the picture becomes more or less static, or begins to slip back again with the same symptoms.
Your prescription has worked and now is the time to repeat the same remedy.
4.
No effect.
Often the first change is that the patient begins to feel better in himself but still has all the symptoms.
This is a very important sign of a good response and must not be overlooked.
You should wait and look for other improvements to follow.
If there has really been no response, wait for a time depending on the vigour and severity of the illness (see para. 2).
If no changes occur then repeat the same remedy and wait again.
Do this once or twice more before giving up on that remedy.
If there is no response after three or four pills then either the prescription is wrong or the remedy is no good and has lost its potency for some reason.
If you are a beginner it is a fair bet that the prescription is not right and you should review the case and select another remedy.
If you have some experience and would have expected the remedy to work then put a pencil dot or mark on the bottle.
If you find next time you need that remedy that it again does not work, put another mark on the bottle and give it one more chance before discarding the whole bottle.
Very occasionally a bottle will become contaminated and lose its potency.
Do remember to rub out your dots if a remedy works at a later date and only mark your bottle when the remedy has no effect if you are very certain that it should have worked.
Often changes are marked and obvious, there being no doubt as what to do.
Sometimes when the changes are slower it can be more difficult because allowance has to be made for the natural variations that occur hour by hour in an illness even without any treatment.
Here it is important to remember the point made in paragraph 2 above; vigorous, severe illnesses respond to remedies in a vigorous way.
They also tend to ‘use up’ remedies quickly which may need repeating several times an hour at first but always according to the changes in the symptom picture.
Cases of this severity are likely to be the ones which would lead you to seek expert medical advice from your local health care practitioner.
Whilst you are waiting for the expert help to arrive, there is no reason why you should not take the person's case and find a remedy for him.
Even whilst a person is waiting to go to hospital there may be something you can do to help.
Very often the more severe and acute the illness, the clearer the disease picture so that the similar remedy may actually be easier to select.
If the picture is clear, give the remedy.
If you follow the guidelines given in this book it can only help and certainly will not harm.
Slow lingering illnesses may require only one remedy a day or less.
The  patient will tell you by his symptoms what needs to be done, when to wait and when to treat.
As a rough guide the ‘average’ illness that will put a person in bed is likely to need a remedy between 3 and 8 times a day, needing more at the beginning of the illness than later on.
A less severe cough, cold, throat or stomach upset etc. may need a dose 2 or 3 times a day.
I cannot emphasise enough that you should let the patient tell you, through his symptoms, what needs to be done.
The less rigid and routine your prescribing the better the outcome will be.
Another rough guide is not to try more than approximately 4 or 6 different remedies without success before seeking more expert Homoeopathic advice.
Obviously this will vary with the circumstances of each case and the experience of the prescriber.
This is not a guide as to when to call on expert medical advice which should always be determined by the condition of the patient and carried out at whatever stage you would normally call upon such help whether or not you are treating them with Homoeopathic remedies.
Homoeopathic treatment, as described here, should always be an addition to whatever advice you would normally seek.
It is never a substitute for calling your medical practitioner .
When treating illness in children there are two very good signs that you have hit on the correct remedy: firstly, if the child vomits shortly after having the remedy, assuming he was not already vomiting all the time!
You should not worry if part of the pill comes out as well, just wait and watch the child's condition.
The second is if the child goes off to sleep.
Do not disturb this sleep unless there are other indications that the child is not sleeping a peaceful, healing sleep.
This sleep can be quite prolonged; my own son, when he was three, awoke screaming in the early hours one night with a very high fever and typical picture of Belladonna .
He took the remedy and within ten minutes was fast asleep again.
At 4 pm the following afternoon he awoke and came downstairs asking for breakfast!
It should now be clear that you need to monitor the patient in order to know what to do.
After subsequent doses of the selected remedy
Again several possibilities exist:
1.
The patient improves after each dose and gradually needs the remedy less and less frequently until he is better.
Nothing more can be added to this!
2.
The patient gets better after each dose but requires it more and more frequently in order to sustain the benefit.
This may well indicate the need for the next higher potency of that same remedy.
If you don't have one then try plussing (see page 21).
If this fails to hold the situation then review the case and see if there have been any changes or new information come to light that would enable you to select a more similar remedy which could carry on the work of the first remedy.
3.
The patient improved at first but is now slipping back and a different set of symptoms has appeared.
Your first prescription was right but a new remedy  is now needed.
Base your selection on the new symptoms that have appeared.
They will be a reliable guide to the second prescription.
4.
There was initial improvement but now there is no response to the remedy and the same symptoms are still present.
This probably means that the remedy was close but not quite close enough to give any sustained relief.
You should reassess the case and choose another remedy, though it may first be worth trying a dose of the same remedy in a higher potency if you have it.
One further thing that will help you to be a successful prescriber; the more you enjoy it the easier it will be.
Homoeopathy can be very satisfying if you do not get worried or weighed down by the ‘burden’ of finding a remedy.
Keep it light and sometimes when things are not as clear as you would like them to be just trust and give the remedy you judge to be nearest.
You can only do as well as your knowledge and experience allow which is just the same as the rest of us.
Do not set your goals too high or else you will always be failing and there is nothing more demoralising.
Homoeopathy is very safe and forgiving especially to honest beginners.
Even a prescription of the wrong remedy can sometimes affect the picture of symptoms so as to make the right remedy more obvious and easily discerned.
May I wish you every success and satisfaction in your prescribing.
Remedy Pictures and Tables
The suggestions for when to seek advice in the following sections are only intended to be guidelines to help you decide when you need to call on the expert help of your health care practitioner.
Clearly your own knowledge, experience and circumstances will all play a part in your decision.
The following guides do not aim to be totally comprehensive.
Complete books have been written on this subject which will give much more information about when a condition is likely to be serious or not.
For this reason the guidelines here tend to err on the cautious side.
Fevers
Fevers: When to seek advice
Urgently, Right now!
If the fever is very high — approximately 106°F (41.1°C) or above, in any patient.
For any fever in the young infant — less than 4 months.
The very young can stop feeding and rapidly become very ill.
The more lethargic, weak and ill the infant, the greater is the urgency and need for expert advice.
If necessary you should be prepared to take your child to your health practitioner's surgery or even to hospital.
Do whatever is necessary to get a very sick young infant seen.
If the conscious level of the patient is affected — drowsiness, confusion, lethargy and unresponsiveness.
If there are fits or convulsions.
If the neck becomes stiff.
If the breathing is very rapid or laboured.
Look at the whole patient and ask yourself the question ‘How sick?’
If the answer is ‘Very’ then seek advice, even if none of the above categories apply.
With a young child the mother will often just know something is seriously wrong and she should trust this knowledge and act accordingly.
Within 24 hours
If the fever is persistently above about 104°F (40°C) and will not respond to the following measures:
1.
Homoeopathic treatment.
2.
Open a window and keep the room cool but not cold.
3.
Cover with only one blanket.
4.
Tepid sponge the whole body.
Do not use cold water.
For fevers in children of 4–6 months and persistent fevers in older children.
As a rough guide, if a fever persists more than a day or two in a child under 2 years then consider seeking advice.
The older the child the longer you can wait so long as there are no other signs of serious illness.
Remember to give plenty of clear fluids — water and fruit juices.
Breastfeeding infants will require more frequent feeds and may take water and fruit juice in addition.
Solid food is not necessary for anyone with an acute fever and will usually be rejected anyway.
(See the section on diarrhoea and vomiting.)
Refer to other chapters as necessary.
Headaches
Headaches: When to seek advice
Urgently, Right now!
If the level of consciousness is affected — drowsiness, confusion, etc.
For any severe unexpected headache.
If there is stiffness of the neck and/or high fever (above approximately 104°F, 40°C) and/or photophobia.
If the headache follows a head injury, especially if there is drowsiness or vomiting.
(See the first aid section.)
Within 24 hours
For headaches with any symptoms involving other parts of the nervous system, such as disturbances of sensation, especially vision and dizziness or any disturbed capacity to initiate movement, such as speech difficulty or weakness.
If the headache is continuous with no signs of improvement over several days even if the headache is mild.
Eye complaints
Eyes: When to seek advice
Urgently, Right now!
If there is any deterioration or loss of vision.
If any eye pain is severe.
If the eye is damaged by a foreign body or chemical.
Wash out liquid irritants immediately, usually copious clean water is required, and seek advice without delay.
Within 24 hours
If there is a thick yellow or green discharge flowing from the eye.
If significant eye pain persists.
If bright lights cause significant pain, especially if the eye is red mainly around the iris or the pupil is irregular and does not react normally to changes of light.
If there is a rash, such as shingles, or an infection on the face close to or involving the eye in any way.
Refer to other chapters as necessary
Ear complaints
Ears: When to seek advice
Urgently, Right now!
If there is also drowsiness, severe headache, stiffness of the neck or severe lethargy.
Within 24 hours
If a baby persistently pulls or rubs an ear.
Frequently this indicates an ear infection.
Most mild ear infections will settle in time without any treatment, but their progress should be monitored and homoeopathic treatment will help them to settle quicker.
If the earache is severe or if any earache accompanies measles.
Any ear discharge.
If the bony lump behind the ear (mastoid bone) becomes tender or red.
If the hearing is significantly and persistently impaired.
Refer to other chapters as necessary.
Nose & sinuses
Throat complaints
Throats: When to seek advice
Urgently, Right now!
If the throat is so severely swollen as to cause difficulty breathing.
If the pain is very severe with inability to swallow and much drooling.
If there is bleeding from the mouth with measles.
Within 24 hours
If unusual and very marked swelling occurs around the tonsils on one or both sides.
Severe sore throats persisting more than a day or two in a young child without signs of improvement.
If there has been a history of rheumatic fever in the past.
Refer to other chapters as necessary.
Abdominal complaints
Abdomen: When to seek advice
Urgently, Right now!
If there are significant signs of dehydration (loss of body fluids), usually from diarrhoea or vomiting, especially in an infant, as shown by:
1.
Eyes appear sunken.
2.
In babies the fontanelle (soft spot on the top of the head) is sunken.
3.
Dryness of the mouth or eyes.
4.
Loss of skin tone or turgor — gently pinch up the skin which will normally snap straight back into place.
If it does not then marked dehydration is present.
5.
Decreased quantity of urine being passed.
It may be very strong.
Constant repeated vomiting.
If the vomit is bloodstained or looks like coffee grounds.
If the stool is bloody, black or tar-like.
Bleeding from the rectum with measles.
If marked abdominal symptoms follow a head or abdominal injury, especially if vomiting follows a head injury (see First Aid Section).
Severe pain anywhere in the abdomen.
In children with vomiting, inconsolable screaming or lethargy.
If there is evidence or suspicion of drugs or poisonous substances having been taken.
If possible keep a sample of the substance and of the vomited material for later analysis.
Within 24 hours
Unexpected swelling, pain or tenderness in the groin or insides of the tops of the thighs.
For constipation with pain and or vomiting of a day or more duration.
Abdominal symptoms in someone with diabetes may become urgent — advice should always be sought sooner for a person with diabetes.
Likewise with abdominal symptoms in a pregnant lady — if in doubt, seek advice.
Signs of jaundice — yellow eyes or skin, dark urine and there may be light coloured stools.
Any urinary symptoms — pains, discharge, bleeding or deposit in the urine, frequent urging, especially if the urinary symptoms are accompanied by a backache or loin pains which may suggest that the kidneys are affected in some way.
Refer to other chapters as necessary.
Coughs
The Coughs section has been arranged in the form of a table with the different characteristics of the cough in the  lefthand column.
The following symbols indicate their intensity or effect on the cough in each of the remedies:
± + and + + indicate mild, moderate and marked intensity 
> and >> indicate conditions under which the cough is improved and markedly improved 
< and << indicate conditions which worsen and markedly worsen the cough 
An ‘A’ under the ‘Thirst’section means that the thirst is usually absent.
The word ‘from’ indicates a cause of the cough.
When using this table you may find it easier to take a sheet of A4 paper, place it alongside the column of Characteristics and mark the symptoms of your patient on the edge of the sheet using the above symbols.
You can then move the paper across the table and compare symptoms of the case to each remedy in turn and make a note of those that match the best.
Choose your remedy from this list with reference to the Materia Medica and other tables as appropriate.
Coughs: When to seek advice
Urgently, Right now!
If there is severe difficulty in breathing — shortness of breath, wheezing, laboured, rapid or shallow breathing.
If the conscious level of the patient is affected — confusion, drowsiness.
If there is marked chest pain.
If something solid has been inhaled.
There is likely to be much coughing, though not always and the coughing may cease.
Help should be urgently sought.
If the patient's lips, tongue or face take on a purply-bluish tint.
Within 24 hours
If the cough persists without improvement for a week or more and there is much weakness, tiredness and lack of energy.
If the breathing is laboured or rapid.
If unexpected wheezing or chest pain occurs.
Clearly the young the patient and the more severe the breathing difficulty the more urgent becomes the need for help.
Significant cough for 4 or more days with no signs of improvement during measles.
Refer to other chapters as necessary.
Cystitis
Whilst each episode of cystitis may be helped by remedies selected from these tables, the tendency for the condition to recur is unlikely to be affected.
One of the constitutional forms of therapy would be of value in this situation.
See Conditions Requiring Constitutional Therapy on page 137.
Cystitis is relatively common in women.
In men it is rare and should always be checked out with your health care practitioner because it may be an indication that there is something else wrong in the urinary system.
In general cystitis will be helped by drinking plenty of clear fluids.
Pure water (such as bottled or filtered) is the best drink.
Fresh vegetables, salads and sweet fruit are good.
It is best to avoid or limit the intake of acid or acid producing foods and drinks such as those containing refined sugars, tea, coffee, alcohol, citrus fruits and juices etc,(although home-made lemon barley water is a useful traditional remedy.)
Acute cystitis is usually accompanied by excessive acidity in the body.
Natrum Phosphoricum 6x three or four times a day given as well as the indicated remedy will often help the body to rectify this acid imbalance and hence helps the indicated remedy to work more effectively and quickly.
Cystitis: When to seek advice
Urgently, Right now!
If there is a fever and inflammation of the kidneys.
This causes pain in the kidney area (the loins).
They lie on either side of the spine above the waist.
I you place your hands on your hips with your fingers pointing backwards and then move them an inch or two higher over the bottom of the rib cage they will cover the loins.
If there are rigors — bouts of cold and violent shivering and shaking.
Within 24 hours
If any of the symptoms are severe.
If there is a significant fever, above 101°F (38.4°C).
If there is a significant amount of blood in the urine.
It may be pink, red or a muddy-brown like tea (with milk in).
If there is vomiting or a significant headache.
If swelling of the hands, face or ankles develops.
All males with cystitis should seek the advice of their health care practitioner, particularly if it is recurrent.
It may be an indication of other problems in the urinary tract some of which could potentially be serious in the long term.
Period Pains
Whilst period pain may be helped each month by remedies selected from this table, the recurrent nature of these problems is unlikely to be affected until a more constitutional approach is adopted.
See Conditions Requiring Constitutional Therapy on page 137.
In general, regular exercise helps to lessen period pains as may vigorous exercise during the painful time especially if it mobilises the pelvic area.
If you  practise Yoga, remember to avoid inverted postures during menstruation.
Masturbation may help some people with particularly acute pains.
Period Pains: When to seek advice
Urgently, Right now!
If the pain is unusually severe.
If a period has been missed and there is a possibility of pregnancy when severe or unusual pains develop with or without any blood flow.
Within 24 hours
Significant bleeding between periods even without pains.
Recurrent minor, unexplained bleeding between periods.
Any uncharacteristic vaginal discharge, especially if accompanied by lower abdominal pain or fever.
If sores develop on, in or near the genitals.
If you have had sex with someone who is known to have a sexually transmissible disease like gonorrhoea, syphilis or chlamydia.
Vaginal Thrush
This condition often arises when the system is out of balance.
It may be connected with the use of drugs, especially antibiotics.
The thrush organism,Candida albicans , is a yeast which is normally found on the skin.
It only becomes a problem if the environment encourages it to grow excessively.
There are several general measures that can be taken to reduce or eliminate the problem altogether.
Firstly try not to create the environment in which it grows well.
It likes damp, moist, airless places with a slightly more alkaline pH than is normally found in the vagina (normally slightly acid).
Therefore wear clothing that is loose and airy.
Jeans, trousers and tights are much loved by Candida .
Preferably wear a skirt or culottes with loose underwear made from natural fibres or better still no underwear at all.
Rinse underwear thoroughly after washing.
Some people find a change of soap powder can help, especially a move away from a biological powder.
Also avoid the use of vaginal deodorants, tampons and bleached sanitary towels.
Soaps, bubble bath and the like are all alkaline and best avoided completely, especially the use of soap anywhere near the vagina.
In fact, as a general comment on skin care, the less soap and detergent used the better.
I frequently recommend that soap be used only if there is stubborn dirt that will not rub off without it.
The problem is that soap washes out the natural skin oils which keep our skin supple and protect it from the ravages of the outside world.
It is a myth, put about by parents and soap manufacturers, that we need soap in order to wash.
Generally a good daily rub in the bath or shower is all that is required.
You can actually feel that there is a grimy, slimy layer that disappears after a little rubbing leaving a soft slightly oily feel to the skin.
Your skin needs those oils.
If you wash them away it will either become dry and troublesome or the body will try to replace them and become too greasy.
Apart from really dirty hands my family has not used soap for many years and our friends still come to visit us, even the blunt ones who are not slow to call a spade a spade!
Another factor which may initiate a bout of thrush is mechanical injury.
If you make love when there is inadequate lubrication and you become dry, and/ or sore, this can often encourage thrush.
If this is a problem, be sure to use a good lubricant like KY Jelly (available at every chemist as far as I am aware).
Thrush also arises as a means of unloading waste material from the body.
It is a discharge of ‘stuff’ that the body cannot properly process.
This may arise when there are excesses in the diet or when the digestive system is upset and weakened so that it cannot fully break down the food for the body to use.
The latter is the case when antibiotics are taken which affect the natural balance of healthy organisms in the gut and thereby reduce its digestive capability for a while.
Taking a little live yoghurt or a lactobacillus supplement (available as acidophilus capsules: the best are enteric coated, which prevent the capsule  dissolving in the stomach where the acidophilus would be killed by the stomach juices thus allowing a safe passage to the lower gut where they are needed) will often help to restore this balance more quickly.
Live yoghurt applied vaginally can often bring considerable relief from the itching, so long as you can contain the mess!
Even more effective, I am told, is crushed garlic mixed with live yoghurt.
It can also help on its own either locally or in the diet.
Excessive quantities of dairy products, refined sugars and raw foods would be best avoided, with the emphasis on excessive.
Part of the diet can be raw but not totally because raw foods require more digestive power than do cooked.
If the digestion is already weakened then it will not cope with a totally raw food diet.
As you may be able to see from the above, there are many factors that play a part in the condition called thrush.
A constitutional assessment would be highly recommended particularly as thrush tends to be a recurrent or chronic problem — see Conditions Requiring Constitutional Therapy on page 137.
However it is still worth trying one of the following remedies for an acute attack.
Kali mur .
6x .
Probably the remedy to try first, two or three times a day especially if there is a thick, milky-white, bland discharge that does not irritate or only very little.
The discharge may be quite profuse.
Sulphur 30 .
The itching is very troublesome and may be around the vagina with burning soreness and redness.
It may be worse for any contact with water and when warm.
Take a single dose of Sulphur 30 but expect the thrush to get worse in three or four days' time before it will get better.
Pulsatilla 6x or 12 .
A burning, thick discharge like cream, especially if it occurs at the time of the monthly period.
One, twice or three times daily.
(See the Materia Medica for other Pulsatilla symptoms.)
Sepia 6x or 12 .
A milky discharge, if it is lumpy , in big lumps, then Sepia would be well worth trying.
Even more so if there was dryness of the vagina and an aversion to sex.
One, twice or three times a day.
(See Period Pains.)
Candida 30 .
If all else fails try a single dose of Candida 30 .
(This remedy is unlikely to be available at your local stockists — see Remedies and Pharmacies on page 140).
Birthing
It is of the greatest benefit if this process is approached with love and trust.
Birthing is not something which you do with your mind.
You do it with your body just like it has been successfully done millions of times before throughout history.
Your body will perform regardless.
It helps if your mind and emotions are in harmony with it and you have the loving support of those around you.
Ideally, avoid the company of those who are afraid, even if they are trying not to show it.
Spend as much time as possible with those who support you in every way.
One of the best ways to achieve this harmony is through breathing.
Practise breathing with the diaphragm, so that the tummy moves out and the bottom of the rib cage expands as you breath in, and vice versa as you breath out.
The top of the chest should move very little.
In early pregnancy you can practise this lying on your back with a bag of sugar or two on the upper part of your tummy.
This helps to train the diaphragm to move.
It will not be so easy later on!
Practise breathing out fear and breathing in love and trust.
All this will help your body to perform this creative function to the best of its ability.
Pregnancy is a wonderful time to have constitutional homoeopathic treatment because changes can happen much more quickly and simply than at other times resulting in a healthier more energetic body that will perform its functions with greater ease (see Chapter 1).
Preparations for pregnancy can begin six months or more before conception with a healthy diet — plenty of fresh fruit and vegetables, preferably organically grown and as few chemicals in the form of food additives as is possible.
Also use as pure a source of water as possible for drinking and cooking.
Stopping smoking and avoiding alcohol are also important.
All these measures apply to the man as well .
The quality of the sperm is important.
Anyone interested in this aspect of preconceptual care would do well to contact Foresight who have local counsellors able to give specific individual advice.
(See Sources of Information.)
The following remedies are intended to assist the body with some of the hold-ups that may occur in this natural process whether or not you are having constitutional treatment.
Do not take them unless you need to and do not hesitate to use them if they are indicated.
If the event does not live up to your expectations take whatever help and comfort you need from those willing to give it.
Letting go of guilt and self-recrimination is not always easy.
It may be comforting if you can acknowledge that in any moment you make the best choices you are able to in the situations in which you find yourself.
With hindsight, it may not seem so.
Better choices can usually be seen but can never be made retrospectively.
A completely normal delivery is a rare event these days.
It involves about twenty minutes of mild discomfort.
I have only ever  seen this once.
Normality is rare in the ‘civilised’ Western world with regard to all aspects of health.
However it can be achieved and is well worth pursuing.
The remedies in the 200M and 10M potencies will not be available over the counter except in specialist pharmacies.
Suitable sources will be found in the section Remedies and Pharmacies .
Early labour
If the contractions cannot make up their mind about starting or not, that is they come and go and labour is not properly established, take one dose of Pulsatilla 200 every 2 hours until the contractions do make up their mind.
They will either stop or labour will start properly.
In either case take no more.
Established labour
Once the process is definitely under way and there is no chance of it stopping again take one dose only of Caulophyllum 10M .
Exhaustion
The process is becoming laborious and a lot of energy is being expended with little result to show for it, progress is very slow.
The nervous system is becoming exhausted.
Take one dose of Kali phos. 12x every 15 minutes until the results justify the effort being made.
Lack of trust, fear
If the mother or anyone else connected with the birthing process shows any signs of lack of trust, anxiety, fear, pain, etc. take one dose as often as needed, perhaps as often as every 10 minutes, of Rescue Remedy (one of the Bach Flower remedies).
It is available as pills or as a liquid and can if wanted be put in a glass of water to be sipped.
The baby at birth
Ideally, the cord should be allowed to stop pulsating before it is clipped or cut.
Be prepared to express your preference to your attendants.
If the new person shows any signs of shock or fright, or if he or she stays purple for too long then give one dose of Aconite M .
If the baby is still attached by the cord to the mother then she may take it.
It would be best to buy this remedy as liquid potency for ease of administration.
If this is not possible you can crush a pill between two spoons to make a powder which can be sprinkled onto the lips and tongue of the baby if needed.
Prepare this remedy before labour starts.
Bleeding
If there is any sign of overbleeding after the arrival of the new person give  one dose of Ipecacuanha 200 .
Take one dose only.
Any bleeding should stop in seconds or a minute or two.
The brisker the bleeding the quicker it should stop.
Immediately after the birth
Give the new mother one dose of Arnica 200 every 3 hours for three doses only .
Start as soon as the delivery is complete.
It will help the body to quickly recover from any stretching, bruising or damage that it may have sustained.
The next day
Take one dose of Bellis perennis M .
each day for three days starting the day after the birth.
It will help the mother's organs to regain their natural places.
Breast Feeding
You need to be comfortable and the baby needs to be well supported.
Pillows may be useful.
Breast feeding lying down is restful, especially at night and for an afternoon nap.
Make sure that the baby's body is facing the breast and that he or she is taking the whole nipple to fill its mouth.
The best description I have heard for this position is ‘well plugged on’— a plug will not go into a socket if it is crooked, that is the baby should not be twisting his or her neck.
Try looking over your shoulder and drinking a glass of milk.
Many babies also find this position uncomfortable and will, not surprisingly, prefer the bottle.
If you are having problems you could get in touch with an experienced breast feeding counsellor from one of the self-help organisations.
Here are a few remedies to help with some of the more commonly encountered problems during breast feeding.
Cracked and sore nipples
Keep the nipples dry and exposed to the air; pads can make things worse.
Castor equi 3x .
Sore nipples, cracked and ragged, exceedingly sensitive, cannot bear touch.
The number one remedy.
Phytolacca 6x or 12 .
Sore and fissured.
Retracted nipples.
Pain starts in the nipple and radiates all over the body.
Intense pains.
May have heavy breasts with hard lumps.
Hydrastis 6x or 12 .
Abrasions (grazes) of the nipple.
Retracted nipples.
Mastitis
This is inflammation and infection of the breast which sometimes follows cracked nipples and shows itself by pain, redness of a part or the whole breast, swelling, and fever.
If you are feeling ‘fluey’ this may be the first sign of mastitis.
You should consult your health care practitioner if you suspect that mastitis is on the way but start with the following measures immediately.
It is important to keep on breast feeding and to empty, as far as possible, the affected breast.
This will help the breast to clear the infection and may in itself prevent a mild bout from getting worse.
It will not harm your baby.
You will be producing antibodies in your milk which will protect him or her.
In order to empty the breast completely it is best to feed with the baby in one of three different positions:
1.
Cradling the baby in front of you in the traditional way, see above.
2.
with the baby under your arm, like a rugby or an American football player carrying a ball whilst running.
3.
Whilst lying down with the baby beside you in line with your body.
These positions will help the breast to drain from all its segments.
Cold or hot compresses and/or a gentle massage may bring some relief.
In the early stages of inflammation one of the first three remedies will probably be indicated.
The first two are the most commonly required.
Remedies will not hurt the baby.
Bryonia .
Inflammation due to consolidation of milk.
Worse (<)Movement — must support the breast.
Pains may be stitching, tearing.
Belladonna .
Bright red and very hot .
A segment of the breast affected, streaks of red.
Rapid onset.
Frightfully tender.
Burning,throbbing pains.
Worse (<) jar, least touch.
Mercurius .
When Bryonia and Belladonna fail!
Worse (<) Heat, cold, everything.
Not even relieved by sweating.
Ulcerating pains.
Phytolacca .
When the breast becomes hard, like stone with great pain.
Painful, very hard lumps, especially if associated with an injury, either recent or in the past.
When suppuration becomes inevitable (an abscess is forming).
Hepar sulphuris .
After suppuration has begun when there is intense heat and throbbing.
See also the Fever sections and the Materia Medica for more information.
Milk supply
Pulsatilla .
Given immediately upon stopping the nursing this will often help to dry up the milk supply.
Calcarea carbonica or Lac defloratum .
May help to increase an inadequate milk supply.
Ideally an assessment by an experienced practitioner should be sought for this but these two remedies are worth trying.
After pains during breast feeding
Arnica .
May help especially if it has not already been given directly after the birth.
Violent pains.
Conium .
Pains which go from left to right.
Post-natal depression
Post-natal depression or prolonged ‘blues’ really needs assessment by an experienced practitioner.
See ‘Conditions Requiring Constitutional Therapy ’ on page 137.
Baby Colic
Here are four of the most commonly indicated remedies with their key symptoms.
A more detailed description plus a comparison with other colic remedies will be found in the Abdominal Complaints tables.
Mag. phos .
Better (>)heat , doubling up, firm pressure.
Passing wind or belching may not help.
Persistent hiccup with retching may occur.
The number one remedy for colics.
Colocynthis .
Better (>)pressure , heat, doubling up.
More restless, irritable and angry than Mag.phos .
The tongue may also be coated.
Pressure relieves more in Colocynthis and heat in Mag. phos .
Otherwise they are very similar.
Chamomilla .
Doubles up and screams with a hot, flushed face and sweat.
Frantically irritable .
The inconsolable temper will often indicate this remedy.
Better (>) heat, being carried.
Worse (<) at night.
There may also be green diarrhoea and a smell of rotten eggs.
Dioscorea .
Worse (<) doubling up.
Better (>) stretching out, heat and firm pressure.
The colic may be very sudden.
Better (>) stretching out is the key to this remedy.
Teething and toothache
Chamomilla .
Irritable, piteous wailing, even a snarling cry.
Nothing suits; capricious desires, wants this, no, that!
Whenever a thing demanded is offered it is rejected.
Does not know what he wants.
One gets exasperated with the
Chamomilla child, unlike the Pulsatilla child who most often evokes one's sympathy.
The only relief is from being constantly carried and even then the relief may not last or they will want to be carried first by one parent and then the other.
A hot head.
Aching, tearing, stitching, burning pains.
Worse (<) night; warm food or drinks; warm room or bed.
Better (>) cold drinks held in the mouth, cold air.
Pulsatilla .
Very weepy, whiny and clingy.
They desire company and to be held and touched.
There may be tearing and stitching pains.
Worse (<) warm drinks; lying with the head low.
Better (>) cold water held in the mouth; cold air; walking in the open air; pressure.
Bryonia .
Tearing stitching pains.
Worse (<) warmth; motion; smoking.
Better (>) cold drinks held in the mouth; cold air; firm pressure.
Mercurius .
Salivation.
Offensive odour of mouth is marked.
Sweetish or metallic taste.
There may be perspiration with it.
Drawing pain.
Worse (<) cold air; cold drinks; smoking.
Characteristically things tend to aggravate (<) and nothing ameliorates (>).
Coffea .
In a nervous person, grinds teeth.
Hasty eating and drinking.
Worse (<) hot food and warm drinks.
Temporarily better (>) by holding cold water in the mouth; biting teeth together; eating.
Calc. phos .
Slow dentition or early decay.
Foul taste, bitter.
Coated, swollen tongue.
Sensitive to touch, pressure, chewing.
Worse (<) cold; cold air on teeth.
Ignatia .
Teeth feel numb.
Toothache on waking.
Bites inside of cheek when chewing.
Worse (<) after drinking tea, coffee, wine; smoking.
Better (>) pressure; biting teeth together.
Kreosotum .
Rapid decay, crumbling teeth with spongy bleeding gums.
Putrid odour and bitter taste.
Pains radiate to the ear or temples.
The pain of a tooth abscess or following extraction may be relieved by a solution of Hypericum and Calendula (or Calendula alone) as a mouthwash, using two teaspoons full of the tincture in half a glass of water.
Measles
Aconite .
Sudden onset of fever; restlessness; restless sleep; nasal discharge is clear; red eyes; photophobia; dry croupy cough with stitches in the chest.
Only of use early in the illness when there is suddenness and violence.
Thirst; itching burning skin; restless; tossing; anxious and fearful.
Belladonna .
Sudden onset again, with a burning red skin ; high fever; dryness and usually thirst; throbbing headache; drowsy and may be delirious; cannot sleep; twitches and jerks; starts and jumps; sore throat; swollen face; hot head and cold extremities.
Worse (<) light — cannot bear it, noise, pressure or jar.
Better (>) heat.
Ferrum phos .
In the early stages if no other remedy is clearly indicated or if Aconite seems to be indicated but does not help at all.
Apis .
High fever;oedema and highly inflamed eyes and lips; thirstless; may be tearful irritable and delirious.
Especially when the rash does not come out or is suppressed and a stuporose state comes on; stinging pains; high pitched cry; scanty urine; swellings and effusions.
Worse (<) heat and better (>) cool — in any form .
Bryonia .
Sore limbs and body; child wants to lie still and not be moved ; any movement and the child may scream with pain; dry mouth and mucus membranes; intense thirst for cold water ; a bitter taste in the mouth, food or drink.
When the rash appears late or the chest is particularly affected; dry, hard, painful cough with chest stitches or tearing pains; twitches of muscles; pale face; eyes red; constipation and frequently frontal headaches ; mild delirium and the child ‘wants to go home’.
Worse (<) motion.
Better( >); cold and still .
Euphrasia .
Measles rash and fever with fluent bland coryza and acrid watery or purulent eye discharge ; inflammation round the eye; eyes appear red and bright; streaming, hot, burning tears with the rash; photophobia; intense, throbbing, headache which is better (>) once the rash appears; dry cough.
Nose and eyes better (>) open air.
Pulsatilla .
If there is very high fever then Pulsatilla is not likely to be indicated.
It is frequently required in measles.
Very weepy and clingy ; erratic temperature and changeable symptoms; thirstless ; often accompanied by some sort of digestive upset — nausea or diarrhoea after the fever has passed; chilly but dislikes the heat; thick, yellow , bland discharges; earache; lingering eye complaints; dry cough at night and loose by day;desires cool open air .
(Consider Kali bich .
too.)
Gelsemium .
Slow onset ; gradual fever and chilliness which may run up and down the back; feels very heavy and tired , so he is motionless, apathetic, drowsy, dislikes disturbances; thirstless; watery coryza which burns the upper lip;occipital dull heavy headache ; sometimes a harsh croupy cough; chills and heats chase each other; sneezing; sore throat; face dark red, swollen with a besotted look; ptosis;so tired, weak and feels stupid .
Rhus tox .
Great soreness and restlessness ; stupor and mild delirium — child constantly tossing about; very itchy rashes not relieved by scratching; rash is also dry, hot and burning; desire cold drinks.
Worse (<) at rest ; at night.
Kali bich .
This remedy may come in later if earache occurs; enlarged lymph glands; sensation of pressure at the root of the nose or throbbing and burning; rattling cough; thick, yellow, stringy nasal discharge.
Camphor .
When the rash fails to appear; child is very cold yet wants to kick off the covers; desires fresh air ; rather pinched face; may have profuse diarrhoea.
Sulphur .
The rash stings and burns, is worse (<) washing and water, worse (<) heat of the bed ; thirsty; hot feet, may stick them out of the bed; hot flushes of the skin which may look dusky and red; burning stinging catarrhs from the eyes or nose; dusky purplish skin and the rash does not come out;slow convalescence and the patient is weak, tired and prostrate .
Mercurius .
Catarrhal measles with abundant rash and earache; thick, swollen, heavily coated tongue; offensive breath; swollen, ulcerated eyelids; often loose motions.
Carbo veg .
Congestive headache; dusky face; enlarged lymph glands, even induration; alternating heat and chill; warm head and cold extremities; wants to be fanned vigorously.
Arsenicum .
Severe measles;great restlessness; prostration; anxiety; offensive and exhausting discharges, diarrhoea; delirium.
See also Fevers and any other sections as appropriate.
Mumps
Belladonna .
Rapid onset and violent .
Dazed and delirious with twitchings and startings;high fever; great redness , red face, swelling, inflammation, heat of parotids worse (<) touch.
Dryness; burning in the throat; shooting pains in glands;throbbing headache; spasms in the throat with difficulty swallowing; often a copious thirst but may be thirstless;dilated pupils; hot head and cold extremities; wants heat; fine smooth rash.
Child may wet the bed and have constipation.
Especially affects the right side.
Phytolacca .
Swollen, inflamed parotids; sub-mandibular glands too — they may be stony hard with a sensation of tension or pressure around them; pains often shoot into the ears on swallowing ; dry rough throat with difficulty swallowing especially hot things; pale face and skin.
Generally worse (<) cold and wet weather, at night, the heat of the bed.
May be needed when the swelling subsides as the result of a chill and worse ensues, such as the breast, ovaries or testicles becoming affected.
Jaborandi .
Dry mouth with copious salivation, saliva like the white of an egg; intense thirst; enlarged submaxillary glands; dry at the back of the throat; furred tongue and difficulty talking; swelling of the tonsils and stiffness of the jaws; profuse sweat.
When swelling subsides as the result of a chill and worse ensues, like Phytolacca , when it affects the breasts, ovaries or testes.
Mercurius .
Profuse sweat and salivation with a foul odour; sweating worse at night;offensive ; foul metallic, sweet taste; enlarged sub-mandibular glands; swollen tongue showing indents from the teeth; glands may be hard and tender; right side especially.
Use in the later stages after the fever.
Pulsatilla .
In the later stages if it lingers, with a weepy clingy child desiring open air and is worse in a warm room; thirstless ; heavily coated tongue yellow or white; dry mouth; bad taste; enlarged glands everywhere.
Worse (<) night, lying down;inflammation extends to the breasts or testes .
Apis .
Red, oedematous swelling; burning and stinging pains; face puffed and pitted;swollen eyelids; cannot bear to be left alone; very sensitive to touch or pressure; sweat comes and goes.
Worse (<) heat .
Like Pulsatilla , wants the covers off and cool things.
Aconite .
If there is very sudden onset of fever, great restlessness and thirst;worse (<) warm room; better (>) open air.
Rhus tox .
Swelling more on left than right; aching sore limbs, worse at night with restlessness; extreme chilliness and sensitivity to the cold ; dry burning thirst; cold sores on the lips; highly inflamed and enlarged parotid and submaxillary glands,worse (<) cold, cold winds, cold wet .
Bryonia .
Very irritable and wants to be left alone ; slightest motion causes pain,even turning the head; dry lips and copious thirst for cold water .
Arsenicum .
Severe weakness,chilliness , clammy sweats,anxiety and thirst for sips ; also has extension of the illness to the breasts, ovaries and testes; worse after midnight.
Carbo veg .
Face pale and cold; there may be a cold sweat on the forehead; breasts and testes may be involved.
Lachesis .
Enormously swollen parotid especially on the left side ; sensitive to the least touch or pressure which causes severe pain, he shrinks away when approached; can scarcely swallow, throat sore internally; face red and swollen; eyes glassy and wild.
There is not the offensive mouth and dirty tongue of Mercurius but there is more throbbing with the Lachesis tension, like a pot on the boil, a sense of pent up energy.
Lycopodium .
From right to left side ; desires warm drinks which ameliorate (>); no offensive mouth and salivation of Mercurius .
See also Fevers and any other sections as appropriate.
Chicken pox
Rhus tox .
Intense itching worse (<) scratching, night and rest.
May have large and pus filled eruptions; very restless and great difficulty going to sleep.
Pulsatilla .
Weepy clingy children; worse (<)heat ; little thirst despite the fever and dryness; better (>)open air ; worse (<) night.
Enlarged lymph nodes; light sweat and low fever ; can be itchy when warm.
Ant.
tart .
Skin rash coming out very slowly and possibly a very large rash; may have a rattling cough and bronchitis.
Pustular or blue rash with a cold skin sometimes.
Child does not like to be touched or even looked at;very ill humoured ; moans, whines and complains; often a white tongue, thickly coated; white sputum; nausea and gagging.
Arsenicum .
Large eruptions with much pus — they may even become open sores like in Mercurius ;burning pains better (>)heat or hot applications is very characteristic of this remedy; extreme chilliness ; pain and itching worse (<) after midnight and worse (<) cold.
Belladonna .
With severe headache,red flushed face, very hot skin , drowsy and unable to sleep, twitchings and startings etc.
Mercurius .
With offensive sweat , profuse sweat.
Large eruptions with much pus that may become open sores like Arsenicum .
Swollen glands in the neck; never comfortable because they are worse (<) both by heat and cold, at night too.
The discharges irritate and make the skin sore; salivation may be profuse; the breath offensive.
Vesicles that suppurate.
This remedy picture emerges more commonly after the fever.
See also Fevers and any other sections as appropriate.
PART 3 First Aid Remedies
The suggestions for when to seek advice in the following sections are only intended to be guidelines to help you decide when you need to call on the expert help of your health care practitioner.
Clearly your own knowledge, experience and circumstances will all play a part in your decision.
The following guides do not aim to be totally comprehensive.
Complete books have been written on this subject which will give much more information about when a condition is likely to be serious or not.
For this reason the guidelines here tend to err on the cautious side.
Index to first aid remedies
Bites and stings
Apis .
Marked redness, swelling, heat and pain.
Pains worse (<) heat.
Often needed in urticaria (nettlerash) which develops after a bite or sting (see Urtica urens also).
Ledum .
Number one remedy for bee stings.
Swelling, redness, stinging and pricking pains.
Part feels cold, yet is ameliorated (>) by cold applications.
Natrum mur .
Very good remedy for bee and wasp stings.
The remedy can even be made into a paste and applied directly to the sting.
Staphisagria .
Especially in children who get mosquito bites which become large and irritating.
Urtica urens .
For people with hives (nettle rash or urticaria) after a sting.
A L.C tincture can be applied to all sorts of stings and bites.
It is a combination of Apis, Ledum and Calendula .
Bruises
Arnica .
Anywhere.
The number one remedy.
Sore, bruised, aching.
Bellis per .
For deep injuries to muscles and joints when Arnica does not seem to be working well enough.
Hypericum .
Severe.
Crushed parts, especially sentient parts (see Cuts and Scrapes), with the same excruciating, shooting pains and great sensitivity to touch.
Pain like this after a fall on the coccyx.
Spinal concussion.
Lachesis .
Black eyes.
Aids blood  reabsorption .
Worse (<) heat, better (>) cold, as above.
Ledum .
Black eyes or severe bruises.
Bruises that feel cold and numb.
Cold to touch and better (>)cold , cold applications.
Ruta .
Bruises of the periosteum of bones (it lies on the surface of bones and is easily injured where the bones lie just beneath the skin, for example, elbow, shin or kneecap).
Sore, bruised, lame feelings.
Symphytum .
In trauma to a cartilage or periosteum (the lining of a bone) especially near to the skin where pain is excessive and Ruta has not relieved within 24 hours.
Blunt injury to the eyeball.
Burns
Calendula .
For redness without blistering, that is, first degree burns, it is the number one remedy.
It is also used to dress second degree burns (blisters without skin loss) once the blisters have broken leaving an open sore (see Cuts and Scrapes).
Cantharis .
For blistering bums, that is, second degree, it is the number one remedy.
After the blisters have broken dress locally with Calendula tincture.
Causticum .
The number one remedy in third degree bums, that is, the full thickness of the skin has been lost.
These are serious bums requiring medical attention and often skin grafting.
Also of use in old bums that do not resolve and if there are any ill effects of burns — other conditions that have developed from the burn itself or coincided with the burn though not apparently directly connected with it.
Phosphorus .
Electrical burns or shocks.
Urtica urens .
Minor burns without blistering (first degree).
Other preparations recommended for minor burns include Nelson's Burn Ointment and Pakua , a wonderful preparation which aids healing in all sorts of injuries where the skin is damaged.
(See Sources of Information.)
Cuts & Scrapes
Calendula .
Use the tincture topically in a dilution of 1:25 with sterile or boiled water instead of an antiseptic to clean and dress shallow wounds.
Excessive pain.
In clean cuts with stinging pains.
Torn lacerations.
As a mouthwash after dental extraction.
Treats and prevents suppuration.
(Obtain and use Calendula cerate or ointment in episiotomies where it is very soothing.)
Do not use if deep sepsis is present because it promotes rapid healing which will seal the sepsis (infection) in.
Hypericum .
Use in deep cuts with much pain and hypersensitivity to any touch.
Lacerated fingers.
Use in injury to sentient parts — fingers, toes, anus, spine, coccyx, palms, soles, teeth.
Pains characteristically shoot from the site of injury and often there is great stiffness.
Excruciating pain, intolerable, shooting.
Staphisagria .
In clean cuts .
Injuries from sharp instruments with stinging and smarting.
Lacerations, use after operations.
Worse (<)motion , better (>) heat and better (>) pressure.
Dislocated joints
Arnica .
The number one remedy.
May need Rhus tox .
or another remedy to follow after the joint has been reduced (put back in place).
Ruta .
For repeated easy dislocation of joints after they have been relocated.
Eye trauma
Euphrasia .
For the ill effects of bruises and other mechanical trauma, after Arnica .
Conjunctivitis after injury; the eyes are hot, burning and watering.
Soreness.
Generally feels better in the open air, except the eyes which stream.
It can also be most soothing when used in an eyebath.
Sterile eye drops can be purchased for this purpose.
Lachesis .
Black eyes.
Aids blood  reabsorption .
Worse (<) heat, better (>) cold, as above.
Symphytum .
Blunt injury to the eyeball such as when a tennis or squash ball hits the eye.
Fractures
Arnica .
Helps with the shock, bruising and swelling.
Often the first remedy needed because of the shock, which is the main indication.
Local area very tender.
Bryonia .
Sometimes in fractured ribs with marked worse (<) movement, must keep absolutely still and may even lie on the affected side in order to keep it from moving.
Calc. phos .
Aids the nutrition of bones.
May be of use if someone is malnourished or the bones are not healing (non-union).
Eupator. perf .
Main symptom is pain without so much bruising as would make one give Arnica .
Silica .
May be of use if a small chip has come off a bone.
Symphytum .
The number one remedy.
Use only after the bones have been set .
Also may be of use in cases of non-union of a fracture.
Calc. phos .
may be needed after it.
Irritating, pricking, stitching sharp pain in the point of the fracture.
Head injuries
Please take special note of the section at the end of this chapter on when to seek advice.
Arnica .
For the shock and/or the bruising — the number one remedy.
Kali phos .
When there is weakness and exhaustion after a head injury.
Natrum sul .
With a headache, especially a crushing, gnawing pain in the occiput.
Drowsiness, photophobia, buzzing or pain in the top of the head (vertex).
(Note .
Medical advice should be sought for such injuries with drowsiness or photophobia.)
Better (>) cold air.
This remedy may come in if there are any ill effects after a head injury, even as far as a change in personality but expert assistance should be sought in such cases.
Sun/heat stroke
Belladonna .
Fever.
Throbbing headache, bright-red face, stupor.
Burning of the skin greater than with Glonoin .
Headache better (>) bending the head backwards, better (>) sitting silently, better (>) head uncovered.
Cuprum .
Heat exhaustion.
Cramping marks out this remedy.
Stupor with jerking of muscles and even convulsions may occur.
Profuse, clammy sweat; great weakness even to collapse.
Faintness, pallor, coldness of the body, nausea, a rapid pulse.
Glonoin .
Sunstroke fever, throbbing headache, red face, stupor.
Less burning of the skin than in Belladonna and worse (<) bending head backwards, worse (<) cold applications, better (>) uncovering and in the open air, better (>) pressure.
Puncture wounds
Apis .
They feel warm or hot with stinging pains and better (>) cold applications.
Much swelling at the site.
Hypericum .
With the same excruciating, intolerable shooting pains in sentient parts (see Cuts and Scrapes).
Ledum .
Number one remedy.
Redness, swelling and throbbing pains.
When the wound feels cold to touch but is better (>) by cold applications.
Sepsis
Lachesis .
Suppuration (pus formation) after injury, sloughing, haemorrhage.
This remedy has an affinity for the blood and circulation.
Bad effects of poisoned wounds.
An incredible sepsis remedy.
Skin cold and clammy.
Worse (<) heated room, better (>) touch.
Better (>) cold air or being slowly fanned, better (>) once discharge has started.
Shock
Arnica .
The number one remedy.
Usually is the first remedy needed in any accident or injury.
Sprains and strains
Arnica .
Muscles, ligaments or joints.
After overexertion of muscles; pulled muscles with pain and stiffness; number one remedy for muscles.
After overexertion or straining of ligaments and joints when there is considerable swelling, bruising and inflammation around the joint.
Often Rhus tox .
or another remedy is needed to follow before complete resolution occurs.
Bellis per .
With deep injuries to muscles and joints when Arnica does not seem to be working well enough.
Bryonia .
Ligament and joints.
When the pain is worse (<) for the slightest movement and continued motion only makes it worse still.
Some swelling.
Calc. phos .
Where nutrition is a problem causing healing to be slow and prolonged.
It may be used to supplement the action of the indicated remedy in such anaemic or malnourished people.
Ledum .
Affecting fibrous tissues and joints, especially of ankles when parts feel cold or numb and are better (>) cold applications.
Rhus tox .
Ligaments and muscles.
Of muscles due to overexertion, after the most acute symptoms have gone or when there is worse (<) initial motion and better (>) from continued motion with better (>) heat.
Of ligaments and joints where it is the number one remedy.
Pains and stiffness are worse (<) initial motion, better (>) continued motion and better (>) heat.
For complaints coming on after overexertion or over lifting.
It often follows the initial use of Arnica in strains.
Ruta .
Of ligaments and tendons.
Usually of use after the most marked initial swelling and tenderness has begun to decline.
In cases that do not have a clear Rhus tox .
picture.
Sore lame and bruised.
Paralytic rigidness as if broken.
A few general notes about some of the remedies
Arnica.
Use in bruises and shock.
The sore, bruised, aching feeling makes him restless; always having to change position.
Worse (<) touch; does not want anyone to come near him.
He may say he is all right when he is not.
In severe injury or in head injury he may lapse in and out of unconsciousness.
It should be plain that cases such as this require urgent, expert medical attention for which Arnica is no substitute even though it may well help.
Calendula.
Has an affinity with soft tissue conditions.
Excessive pain is most characteristic.
It helps clot formation and keeps a wound clean.
Ledum.
Generally chilly and cold but they desire the cold .
This remedy has an affinity for fibrous tissues, joints and tendons.
Rhus tox.
The grand characteristics of this remedy are the worse (<) from first movement and better (>) for continued movement with better (>) heat and worse (<) cold .
It has a strong affinity for fibrous tissues hence its use in conditions affecting joints, ligaments and the stage of healing when fibrous scar tissue is laid down after the initial inflammation has begun to settle.
When to seek advice
Urgently, Right now!
In bites and stings if the creature is known to be poisonous or the person is known to react badly to such bites or stings.
If after a bite or sting the conscious level is impaired or if swelling is severe and rapid especially if it affects the mouth and throat or if breathing becomes difficult.
In burns — any third degree burn (see below), any second degree burn (blistering and loss of the top surface of the skin — very sore and painful) occurring on sensitive skin (face, hands, genitals) or second degree burn larger than a hand size occurring anywhere else.
In electrical burns remember to isolate the power before touching the person, otherwise pull them off using some insulating material such as rubber, plastic or dry wood.
Third degree burns involve the full thickness of the skin and are likely to be less tender than first or second degree burns so do not be fooled into underestimating the severity of a serious burn by the lack of pain.
Do not dress or interfere with severe burns until expert help is available but do treat the shock.
Other remedies may be needed later.
If there is loss or impairment of consciousness or confusion after any form of trauma.
Head injuries followed by:—
1.
Any impairment of consciousness from being drowsy and lethargic to total unconsciousness.
2.
Unexpected irritability.
3.
Any sign of neurological (nervous system) disturbance, such as slurred speech, visual abnormality (double, blurred, etc.), weakness or difficulty when moving the limbs, pupils of different size, numbness, fits or convulsions.
4.
Vomiting.
5.
Loss of a clear or a bloodstained, watery fluid from the nose or ear.
If a fracture or serious neck or back injury is suspected.
Do not move the person until expert help is available.
Any joint injury with loss of the full range of movement of the joint, albeit painful!
If the injured part is distorted, deformed or unstable in any way.
Intense pain or spasm of the surrounding muscles which may suggest a fracture.
If there is marked swelling or bleeding under the skin.
Coldness, blueness, or numbness of the injury, or the part beyond the injury, suggesting damage to the blood or nervous supply of that area.
In heat exhaustion (when the person has the symptoms of mild shock — cold, clammy, pale, tired, nausea, raised heart rate, they may also have muscle  cramps) if the level of consciousness is affected (drowsy and dull) or they do not show signs of increasing strength and vitality after an hour of cool rest.
In sunstroke.
This is a medical emergency because the body's temperature regulating mechanism has been overloaded and has failed.
The skin is hot, red and often dry.
There are signs of impaired consciousness or confusion and even convulsions.
Take whatever steps are possible to cool the body below 102°F (38.9°C) as quickly as possible whilst awaiting expert help.
Haemorrhage (bleeding).
Obviously the severity of the wound and the bleeding will dictate the degree of urgency and need for help.
Deep puncture wounds or animal bites anywhere.
Lacerations and puncture wounds to the following areas should be treated with great caution as there are vital organs, blood vessels and nerves close to the surface — the face, neck, chest, abdomen, and back.
If a wound appears to involve a joint, most commonly the knee.
For signs of shock — pale, sweaty, faint or weak with cold limbs and a rapid, weak pulse.
Within 24 hours
If a wound becomes infected as shown by increasing pain, swelling and redness, particularly if the inflammation runs from the wound in red streaks towards the body (lymphangitis).
There may be suppuration.
All animal bites should be examined by your health practitioner.
His advice should also be sought for all puncture wounds and lacerations regarding any measures needed to avoid tetanus.
Any unexpected impairment of use of the injured part, such as being unable to weight-bear on an injured leg or limited and painful use of a wrist after a fall, especially in a child.
Refer to other chapters as necessary.
PART 4 Materia Medica
Aconite
Suddenness and intensity
Exposure to cold, especially very cold dry weather and then ill the same day
Great excitement of the circulation
Fear
Awful anxiety, anguish, great restlessness
Oversensitive and burning pains
Great thirst for cold water
Bright red in its inflammations
Suddenness and intensity mark out Aconite .
A great storm that suddenly appears and is soon over; if the condition lingers or does not have much intensity, it is not Aconite .
Aconite is not feeble!
Often found to be needed in vigorous, robust, healthy, rugged people and in children: they come down suddenly with a violent illness, a raging fever etc.
It has often been precipitated by a period of considerable exposure to cold, especially very cold dry weather and then ill the same day, that is soon after the exposure.
It can also come in for gastric complaints following intensely hot weather.
Illnesses may follow a fright or shock especially in children.
There is great excitement of the circulation; a full, fast pulse; great nervousness and excitement without much delirium.
In the extreme this can lead to intense fear, even to predicting (their) time of death.
Awful anxiety, anguish, great restlessness with the suddenness and violence of the illness.
Marked congestion of the head and flushes of heat.
Often needed in the first stage of high grade inflammations, fevers and congestions with great anxiety, heat and restlessness; tosses about, throws off the covers.
The senses are oversensitive and burning pains are characteristic but there may also be stinging, stabbing, tearing, cutting pains with numbness, tingling and crawling.
Intense pains, neuralgic pains, cannot bear to be touched, in agony; worse (<) night and especially in the evening.
There is great dryness and with it great thirst for cold water.
Characteristically the skin is dry and hot with no sweat.
Worse (<) in a warm room and warm covers, better (>) uncovering; kicks off the covers.
Violent headaches which may be from exposure to a dry cold wind that has stopped a nasal catarrh from flowing.
Photophobia in fever with small contracted pupils.
Aconite is bright red in its inflammations, congested face, etc. though may turn pale on rising up.
It is not dusky or mottled and it has no results of inflammation such as no suppuration, no thick green or yellow purulent discharges and no continued fever;
Aconite is over quickly, in a night.
Everything may taste bitter, except water; They may crave bitter things in a fever.
Burning, smarting and dryness of the throat with great redness and sometimes swelling.
Violent, sudden nausea and vomiting.
May go to sleep.
— The larynx becomes dry and they wake with spasms in the throat thinking they will choke.
Croupy, choking, violent, dry cough with hoarse barking coming on in the night after being chilled in the day; intense febrile excitement.
Suffocating cough.
Croup arising after exposure to cold, dry air.
Dry mucus membranes.
A short dry cough, may be a little watery mucus, possibly blood streaked.
Other remedies will be needed if Aconite does not suffice and the condition lingers or continues on for more than a day or so.
Sulphur, Arnica, Belladonna, Bryonia, Ipecacuanha follow it well.
Allium cepa
Complaints often from cold, damp, penetrating winds  
Principally of use in colds and coughs
Copious watering of the eyes which is bland
Watery nasal discharge which is acrid and excoriates the skin
Worse (<) warmth, evenings
Complaints often from cold, damp, penetrating winds and it is principally of use in colds and coughs.
Copious watering of the eyes which is bland, watery nasal discharge which is acrid and excoriates the skin of the nose and upper lip are the strong characteristics of this remedy.
All phases of the cold are worse (<) warmth except the tickling in the larynx which can be worse (<) drawing in cold air.
(<) Evenings too.
Coryza worse (<) indoors, better (>) open air.
Rawness of the mucous membranes.
Tearing, painful larynx with each cough.
Nose drips and burns with a sore upper lip and wings of the nose, red and raw.
Sneezing comes early and with increasing frequency.
Watery nasal discharge and obstruction goes from left to right nostril.
Much congestion; full, congestive headache often; fullness in the nose, may be throbbing and burning and sometimes nosebleeds.
Dull frontal headache, occipital headache; pain in the jaws go to the head.
Severe headache sometimes and the eyes cannot stand the light.
Tearing bursting and throbbing headaches.
Headaches worse (<) in a warm room, better (>) in the open air like coryza.
Cough with tearing pains in the larynx, worse (<) drawing in cold air but also can be worse (<) in warm air or a warm room: worse (<) in the evening.
Spasmodic cough resembling croups or whooping cough; hoarse, harsh, ringing, spasmodic cough excited by constant tickling in the larynx.
Cough that produces a raw, splitting sensation in the larynx that is so acute and severe that they make every effort not to cough.
Cold may also go down onto the chest with lots of secretions, coughing and rattling of mucus.
Antimonium tartaricum
Chest complaints and gastric bowel disorders
Face pale and sickly
Feeble state, weakness, great drowsiness often
Accumulation of mucus in the air passages
Rattling breathing with the inability to raise phlegm
Stomach troubles from sour food or drink
Intense nausea
Worse (<) lying down, warmth
This remedy is most often needed in chest complaints and gastric or bowel disorders.
The face may be pale and sickly with dark rings round the eyes and may be covered in cold sweat.
A state of relaxation and weakness with little fever, a lack of reactive power, a feeble state, weakness, great drowsiness often.
Every spell of cold, wet weather brings on coarse rattlings in the chest, a great accumulation of mucus in the air passages, or constant colds one after another.
It lacks the vitality to throw these conditions off; it does not have the expulsive power of Ipecacuanha and the chest steadily fills up with mucus; rattling breathing with the inability to raise phlegm.
May be sinking rapidly into this unreactive state; suffocating on white mucus; lacks the power to clear it but would be better (>) if they could.
They must sit up in bed, breathing is worse (<) lying down.
They must be fanned sometimes but only slowly.
They are worse (<) warmth or too much clothing, it makes them feel they are suffocating.
Mucous membranes covered in a thick white mucous exudate.
This weak, depleted state does not come on early in an illness.
It comes with prostration, after several days and is most often found in patients of poor vitality, rather broken down weak constitutions who are subject to catarrhal illnesses; most often needed in the elderly and in young infants.
This person does not want to be meddled or interfered with in this state; everything is a burden and they do not want to be disturbed.
The sick child does not want to be touched or sometimes even looked at.
They want to be let alone.
Pitiful, whining and moaning in the infant.
Very irritable when disturbed.
Occasionally may cling and want  to be carried and may show their irritation in some other ways.
They may loathe food; even water is vomited.
Thirstless and usually is irritated if it is offered; the child only grunts.
Sometimes there is a desire for cold things, acids or acid fruits which cause vomiting.
Stomach troubles from sour food or drink is another situation which may call for this remedy.
Aversion to milk which is vomited.
Vomiting, intense nausea, prostration with coldness, cold sweat and drowsiness, sleepiness.
Vomiting ameliorates (>) the nausea unlike Ipecacuanha .
Apis Mellifica
Complaints come on quite rapidly
Worse (<) heat or warn room
Better (>) cold
Pains sting and burn
Marked rapid swelling
Thirstlessness
Face flushed, red
Tightness throughout the abdomen, fear that something will burst
Scanty urine
Rashes feel rough
Skin sensitive to touch
This remedy may be needed after a fright, rage, vexation, jealousy or hearing bad news.
It may follow the disappearance or non-appearance of a rash, for instance if the rash of measles fails to develop fully or begins and then disappears.
Complaints come on quite rapidly in Apis like in Belladonna .
Worse (<) heat or warm room is very marked, this affects both the local conditions, like pains and inflammations, and also the patient himself; better (>) cold in any form, air, applications etc.
Complaints may start on the right and go to the left.
Pains characteristically sting and burn and are better (>) cold; many other types of pain can occur though.
Swelling is also marked; rapid swelling, may come and go rapidly.
Mucous membranes swollen as if filled with water even.
Oedematous eyes, eyelids, face or limbs.
Thirstlessness is also usual.
In delirium they may go into a stupor and even unconsciousness with twitchings sometimes, of one side; head rolling; pupils maybe contracted or dilated; eyes red; face flushed, red.
Lying as if benumbed.
May become deathly pale if the room is overheated; kick off the bed covers if they are able to.
Skin may be alternately hot and dry or perspiring.
A high pitched shriek or cry in a tossing or stuporose child.
Many eye complaints with burning tears, swelling and redness.
Discharges sting and burn worse (<) heat and better (>) cold.
Suffocates from the radiated heat of a fire in a chill or fever.
Nausea of vomiting or retching with great anxiety.
Tightness throughout the abdomen making it impossible to cough or strain for fear that something will burst or will tear loose.
They are likely to bend forward and flex the limbs in order to gain relief from the tightness.
Very sore to touch.
Often there is scanty urine.
There may be much urging to urinate, smarting, stinging, burning along the urinary tract.
Often needed in conditions where the skin is affected.
Rashes feel thick, often rough; skin that is sensitive to touch, tender.
Urticaria.
Arnica
Great bodily soreness as if bruised
Greatly prostrated, weak and weary
Averse to being talked to or even approached
Hot and red head and face, cold extremities
The great bodily soreness as if bruised marks out Arnica (like Baptisia ,Phytolacca ,Rhus tox .
and Ruta .
The patient lies still, just turning a little from time to time.
Why?
Because of this soreness which make the bed feel too hard; it is no wonder that Arnica is the prime remedy for bruises and the results of trauma.
In fevers they may be greatly prostrated, weak and weary, stuporous, unconscious but can be aroused and will correctly answer your questions but will lapse back into this prostrate state.
They may say they are not sick when clearly they are; this is because of the mental state.
They want to be left alone; fear being touched because of the bodily soreness.
Averse to being talked to or even approached; morose; irritable; sad; fearful; stupid; horror of instant death; nightmares, night horrors.
Hot and red head and face, cold extremities and body.
Great thirst during the chill.
They have easy bleeding and bruising too; catarrhal complaints may be with inflamed mucous membranes which bleed easily.
In scarlet fever this state may come up when dusky, mottled and covered in red spots but the eruption does not come out (like Antimonium tartaricum ).
Joints may be swollen and sore.
Offensiveness of eructations, taste, flatus and stool — smells like rotten eggs (Baptisia is even worse).
Sore as if bruised with a sore throat, consider Phytolacca which also has a hot red face and cold limbs and body.
Stupor with involuntary discharge of faeces and urine.
Many small boils, one after another, painful and sore.
Arsenicum album
Anxiety
Restlessness
Weakness out of proportion to the illness
Thirst for ice cold water, little and often, just sips
Burning pains better (>) for heat
Chilly
Worse (<) for cold
Worse (<) before and just after midnight
Vomits everything
Burns up and down
Diarrhoea with exhaustion and restlessness
Anxiety, restlessness, weakness out of proportion to the illness, burning pains better (>) heat, foul odours, chilly, worse (<) before and just after midnight — these are characteristic of this remedy.
Worse (<) cold air or applications; usually chilly and better (>) warm wraps except for head complaints which are congestive and better (>) cool, fresh air.
Often the skin is pale, cold and clammy.
Worse (<) movement, prostrated.
Anxiety is commonly intermingled with fear and takes the form of restlessness; it is a mental anxiety and uneasiness that makes the patient toss and turn, get up and walk about, move from place to place, one position to another but they become so weak that eventually, in very serious diseases, he is prostrate even to having a deathly aspect.
Commonly, he is too weak to move about as he would like to but if strong enough, he cannot keep still.
Thirst for ice cold water, little and often, just sips is another characteristic.
They must drink because they are so dry yet cold water disagrees with their stomach so they only take it in sips.
In stomach complaints he prefers warm things.
In fevers there may be thirst for hot drinks during the chill, for sips during the heat and a copious thirst during the sweat.
The sweat usually ameliorates (>) the condition (like Natrum mur ).
Characteristically one finds chills with a sensation of ice water running in the blood vessels, this leads to an intensely hot fever with a sensation of boiling in the blood  vessels, then comes the sweat and prostration with marked chilliness.
Chilliness may alternate with flashes of heat too (like Mercurius).
Burning pains better (>) for heat is very characteristic of this remedy as is the weakness out of proportion to the illness.
Congestive, pulsating, burning in the head which is better (>) cold.
All other burning pains elsewhere are better (>) heat, for example in the throat, stomach, lungs, bladder, eyes etc.
Discharges are acrid and cause burning better (>) heat.
A dry hacking cough and later a large quantity of thin watery or frothy mucus is expectorated.
Burning in the chest.
Difficulty with breathing, wheezy; must sit up to breath and is much worse (<) for any exertion.
Vomits everything with the prostration and anxiety, dry mouth, burning pains better (>) heat, better (>) warm water or milk burns up and down.
Gastritis.
A very sensitive stomach better (>) heat.
Diarrhoea and vomiting simultaneously, worse (<) after eating or drinking.
Diarrhoea with exhaustion and restlessness, better (>) heat; foul smell.
Rectum and anus burn and become raw and excoriated.
Mentally may be oversensitive, fussy and fastidious.
Sensitive to smell and touch.
Chilly, always taking colds which cause catarrh and sneezing; from every change in the weather.
Catarrhs travel down to the larynx and hoarseness, to the trachea with burning worse (<) for coughing and to the chest with constriction and a cough.
Belladonna
Complaints come on suddenly and with great violence
Violent heat
Redness — bright, shiny red skin
Intense burning in the inflamed parts
Swelling
Very sensitive to pains which come and go suddenly
Congestion with throbbing all over
Hot head and cold extremities
Great dryness of mucus membranes 
Dry skin but often sweats on covered parts
Twitching and jerking, starts and jumps in fevers
Worse (<) motion
Worse (<) at 3pm and at night
Like Aconite it is suited to plethoric, vigorous, healthy constitutions, robust children and babies when the complaints come on suddenly and with great violence, then subsides just as suddenly; a short, sharp course — Not to be used in prolonged, continuous or recurrent states or in complaints which come on gradually.
Great liability to take cold; sensitive to a draught especially on the head like Hepar sulph .
and Silica .
Violent heat, so intense that it lingers on the hand after touching the patient's skin.
All sorts of inflammations and fevers.
Redness — bright, shiny red skin especially of face, mucous membranes etc.
Later it may become a little dusky and mottled.
Burning — intense burning in the inflamed parts.
The throat burns like coals of fire; the skin burns in scarlet fever and inflammations; gastritis burns.
Swelling — inflamed parts swell rapidly, are very sensitive to touch with the sensation as if they would burst, with pressing, stinging, burning pains.
Very sensitive to pains, which come and go suddenly.
Much suffering; worse (<) motion, jar, cold, touch, pressure, light.
They want to be warmly wrapped unlike Apis.
Congestion with throbbing all over and burning; blood vessels throb and pulsate as do local inflammations; hammering pains in the head if they move.
The more congestion there is the more excitability.
In fever they become delirious, see horrible faces, animals, etc.; a wild state even, which is sometimes better (>) eating some light food.
Vertigo is common.
Congestive headache worse (<) stooping, lying down; wants to wrap up the head.
Marked congestion predominates in head symptoms; a sense of fullness.
Hot head and cold extremities; rush of blood to the head.
Eyes red and bloodshot.
Burning dryness and sense of constriction in the throat.
Great dryness of mucous membranes with copious thirst or may be thirstless; often craves lemons or lemonade in fevers.
Dry skin but often sweats on covered parts.
Tongue may have red edges and white central coating.
Offensive, putrid taste.
Twitching and jerking, starts and jumps more common in fevers, even to convulsions.
Restless sleep, full of dreams of violence, nightmares, moaning and groaning.
Dryness produces tickling, leading to a dry, barking cough; violent cough and may produce a little blood stained mucus.
Once mucus is raised there is relief for a while and then it repeats.
Chest very sore and tight, children may cry before they cough.
Tickling and burning in the larynx with violent paroxysms of coughing.
Headache as if head would burst with the cough.
Tendency to right sided complaints and cannot lie on the painful side unlike Bryonia .
Most complaints are better (>) keeping still; frequently worse (<) at 3 pm and at night.
Bryonia
Complaints come on slowly, are continuous or remittent
Much worse (<) motion
Worse (<) heat and stuffy rooms
Better (>) pressure
Extreme irritability
A sluggish state of mind
Headache accompanies almost all other illnesses
Stitching pains and lies on the painful side
Chest painful and they hold it when coughing
Dryness of mucous membranes
Great thirst for large quantities of cold water
Complaints begin a day or more after taking cold, especially if overheated or if the sweat is suppressed by cold air or water, or from exposure to dry cold winds.
They may also follow some mortification or hurt feelings.
Complaints often commence in the morning and may follow several days of preparation — feeling languid, tired, stupid in the head and may increase gradually into violence.
Complaints come on slowly, are continuous or remittent.
Often suited to plethoric, slow people subject to catarrhal congestions.
Much worse (<) motion is always present.
They desire to keep perfectly still; the more and the longer they move the more they suffer.
Better (>) Pressure, it holds the parts still.
Extreme irritability; does not want to talk or be disturbed and may later be stupefied, a state of stupor bordering on unconsciousness even.
A sluggish state of mind, not excitable; when roused from stupor they may be confused, want to go home etc., a low type of delirium, not the flashing wild excitement of Belladonna .
Delirium may start at 9 pm and last all night like the fever.
Chill at 9 pm too.
9 pm is a common time of aggravation for Bryonia complaints.
They may be indecisive and not know what they want.
Sometimes their anxiety and an uneasy feeling compel them to move like Arsenicum and, even though it makes the pains worse (<), they cannot keep still; or the pains can be so violent that they also have to move but it still makes the pains worse (<).
Worse (<) heat, better (>) cold.
In themselves and their congestive complaints they are worse (<) heat and better (>) cold (like Apis, Pulsatilla etc.)
Some rheumatic complaints are better (>) heat though.
Headache may be on its own or the forerunner of other complaints; it accompanies almost all other illnesses.
There may be mental dullness and confusion with a bursting headache; usually better (>) tight pressure.
Headache with nausea, with faintness.
Splitting, violent, congestive headache, a pressure pain; headache as if the skull would split.
Worse (<) motion, even the winking of an eye; exertion is impossible, they keep perfectly quiet and still, in the dark too because worse (<) by light.
Worse (<) heat and stuffy rooms, stooping, sitting up after lying down, coughing.
Often looks rather besotted with a congested mottled and purple face; a bloated face but not oedema.
Stitching pains (like Kali carb.)and lies on the painful side (unlike Belladonna or Kali carb .);
lies still and is better (>) pressure.
They hold their heads tight when coughing because of the splitting headache.
Many complaints start in the nose with sneezing, coryza with red eyes and headache.
It may progress to the throat, larynx and down onto the chest.
Burning and tickling of the larynx, hoarseness and congestion of the chest.
They feel sore, lame and bruised all over (Arnica more so).
The chest may be painful and they hold it when coughing and lie on the painful side to keep it still and put pressure on it.
A chill with much pain in the chest, a short, hard, racking, dry cough with scanty or rusty coloured sputum.
They take short rapid breaths because of the pain on deeper inspiration; pleurisy.
Affinity for the right side with pain and pneumonia.
A violent cough racks the body sometimes with a headache and copious mucus.
Cough worse (<) after eating, movement, going from cold to warm air.
Dryness of mucous membranes, from lips to anus.
Lips very dry, children tend to pick them; mouth dry.
Great thirst for large quantities of cold water at long intervals.
Toothache better (>) cold and pressure.
There may be loss of or altered taste with a dry brown tongue and even, rarely, thirstlessness.
Dry sore throat with the thirst but cold drinks may bring on the cough and pains.
In stomach complaints warm drinks ameliorate (>).
Thickly coated white tongue.
Sore throats with aphthous ulceration.
They may crave what their stomach is averse to; indecisive.
Sitting up may cause nausea and faintness.
Disordered digestion with the sensation of a stone or weight in the stomach (like Nux vomica, Pulsatilla etc).
Bitter taste in the mouth (like Pulsatilla, Nux vomica is sour).
Nausea and vomiting worse (<) motion.
Complaints follow errors in the diet especially at the beginning of a warm spell after cold weather.
Constipation with dry, hard stools is most characteristic but also may get diarrhoea worse (<) morning, movement and from overeating.
All complaints are usually better (>) sweat.
Generally worse (<) after eating, at 9 pm.
Pains, except in the abdomen are better (>) pressure.
Calcarea carbonica
Complaints may follow exposure to cold water
Full of congestions
A chilly patient; sensitive to cold air
Coldness with sweats.
Sweats in spots  
Relaxed tissues and blood vessels
Weakness
Glands, especially lymph nodes, hard, inflamed and sore
Sourness
Sweats about the head on the least exertion
Hot head during congestions
Complaints may follow exposure to cold water.
Full of congestions.
Cold feet and hot head.
A chilly patient; sensitive to cold air, raw winds, a draught, a storm.
Takes cold so easily.
Coldness of parts especially lower legs and feet.
Worse (<) cold air, ascending or exertion.
Coldness with sweats.
Sweats in spots, in various places; head, forehead, back of neck, front of chest, feet.
If they get into a sweat and stop still too long the sweat will stop suddenly and they get a chill or a headache.
Relaxed tissues and blood vessels — varicose veins, piles etc. with burning in varicose veins.
Weakness, worse (<) exertion, out of breath.
Fever or headache from exertion.
Glands, especially lymph nodes, become hard, inflamed and sore.
Abscesses in deep tissues.
Sourness; sour vomiting, diarrhoea, smell of the body, breath etc.
Tendency to looseness of the bowels worse (<) afternoon.
Tired and exhausted mentally and physically; break down in a sweat and become excited and irritable.
Complaints lasting for days or weeks from excitement of the emotions, worry or vexation.
Inability to apply themselves.
Sweats about the head on the least exertion, covered with cold sweat.
Sweats on forehead and every draught of air chills and brings on a headache.
Feet sweat, cold and damp.
Neck sweats at night.
Hot head during congestions.
Headaches are stupefying, benumbing and bring on confusion of mind.
Headache from suppressed coryza.
Pulsating headache if severe.
The more marked the congestion of the internal parts the colder the surface becomes.
Cold, icy, sweaty hands with chest, stomach and bowel complaints.
Fever with cold sweat on the scalp.
Burning in vertex of head with coldness in the forehead.
Sweaty head at night which wets the pillow.
Thick yellow discharge from ears or nose after cold weather.
Sore throats in those that take cold frequently, one straight after another; chronic sore throats with constant dry, choking feeling with pain on swallowing.
Painless hoarseness, worse (<) morning.
Colds all settle on the chest, so tired; expectoration of thick, yellow mucus, may be sour, offensive.
Cough is better (>) cold, wet, wind.
Weak, sensitive back; slides down in the bed.
Rheumatic joints, stiffness on rising from a seat.
Sleep disturbed by ideas, horrible visions on closing the eyes; grinds teeth, chews and swallows.
Cold feet in bed and when they warm up they burn and need cooling.
Causticum
The Causticum cough
Dry, raw, hoarse even to complete loss of voice
Tracheal irritation
This gives the picture of the Causticum cough:
Rawness and tickling in the throat with a dry cough.
Burning in the throat not better (>) swallowing.
Dry, raw, hoarse even to complete loss of voice; hoarseness worse (<) mornings.
Hard, dry cough racks the whole chest.
Tracheal irritation — a raw streak down the centre of the upper chest.
Chest seems to be full of mucus, if only they could cough a little deeper they feel they would be able to shift it and get it up.
Struggle and cough until exhausted or until they find that a little cold drink will relieve.
Cough worse (<) expiration.
Leak of urine may occur with each cough.
Soreness in the chest with the cough.
Inability to expectorate and is obliged to swallow any sputum that is raised; it may taste greasy.
Dry cough with pain in the hip, involuntary urination.
Chamomilla
Great sensitivity especially to pain
Great irritability and oversensitiveness
Angry, snarling crying; piteous moaning
Teething
Great sensitivity especially to pain, also to impressions, surroundings and persons.
Great irritability and oversensitiveness.
Cross, ugly, spiteful and snappish.
This state may arise from anger, a temper, being contradicted, feeling mortified o from physical pain itself.
Angry, snarling crying; piteous moaning.
These states are often found in the child and it is this emotional picture that will usually indicate the remedy.
They may be driven to a frenzy by the pains, with a total loss of consideration for others; they may be quarrelsome, disputative and uncivil.
Children are often snappish and cannot be touched; they want to do as they please yet do not know what pleases them!
A spunky, peevish state that can occur with inflammation anywhere.
They may whine and cry; sputter about everything; not know what they want and are never satisfied, capriciously rejecting the things they have just asked for and such a temper.
Sometimes better (>) for passive motion; they want to be carried the whole time but even then they may not be quietened for long and will demand to be carried by someone else.
With earache children may screech out, cannot keep still with the pain and may be violently excited by it.
Earache may be very r sensitive to the cold.
Very sensitive to pain which makes them mad, cannot bear the pain, sweats with the pains.
Sometimes there is numbness with the pains.
Thirsty for cold water usually.
High fever with sweating especially on the head, one f cheek red and one pale.
Very useful in teething which is this oversensitive, capricious state where nothing pleases and the teething is worse (<) heat and night, better (>) cold applications.
Teething with green, foul diarrhoea smelling of rotten eggs and there may be colicky pain and bloating.
Most complaints come on in the evening or night and subside by midnight usually.
May be worse (<) 9 am.
Often worse (<) heat but not better (>) cold in general,(unlike Pulsatilla and Apis).
In fact cold may bring on most troubles.
Drosera
A remedy for coughs that are spasmodic
A dry cough with tickling
Worse (<) lying down and after midnight
A remedy for coughs that are spasmodic, that is with spasm and constrictions; painful and often exhausting.
A dry cough with tickling.
Worse (>) lying down and after midnight, drinking and eating.
The pains in the chest are better (>) pressure.
A tickling cough coming every few hours with increasing intensity.
It may lead to vomiting or haemorrhage.
Tickling or crawling in the larynx provokes cough and wakes them.
Constriction felt in the throat, larynx or chest with the spasmodic cough, can hardly get any breath; suffocation with the spasms in the chest and larynx and the constant violent paroxysms of coughing, worse (<) lying down.
Constriction preventing swallowing.
Clutching, cramping, burning felt in the larynx.
Deep sounding hoarse cough; tenacious mucus or dry.
Coughing spasms every 2–3 hours worse (<) lying down at night until 3 am.
Stitching pains in the chest worse (<) coughing and better (>) pressure, they hold the chest like Bryonia .
Pain in top of abdomen better (>) holding it while coughing.
Chill and fever worse (<) after midnight; cold copious sweat; hot head and cold extremities; no thirst.
They may have shivering at rest better (>) motion.
They feel generally better (>) open air.
Dulcamara
Strong affinity for catarrhal states of mucous membrane
Every change of the weather, especially from warm to cold
From perspiration that is checked
From taking cold
 Worse (<) cold wet weather
This remedy has a strong affinity for catarrhal states of mucous membranes.
It is often caused by every change of the weather, especially from warm to cold; from perspiration that is checked especially if hot; from taking cold; from cold wet weather.
They are worse (<) cold, damp weather, worse (<) in the Autumn, in the evening and night, at rest.
They are better (>) for dry even weather, for motion, for rising from a seat, for warmth.
In diarrhoea which comes on when there are hot days and cold nights and the nature of the stools keeps changing (like Pulsatilla)Infant diarrhoea may be like this.
There are yellow or yellowy green, slimy and undigested stools.
Frequently there is a mass of slimy substance.
Diarrhoeas that come on after taking cold.
Back and neck pains and stiffness from cold and damp.
Fevers may come on from going into cold air whilst hot; with trembling, aching bones and muscles; a dazed state, they cannot remember things.
Sore catarrhal eyes from taking cold.
There is a tendency for mucous membranes to ulcerate and the ulcers to spread.
Sore throat every time they breathe cold air when overheated, especially if it is cold damp air.
Urge to urinate may come if the patient becomes chilled.
There may be dry, teasing winter coughs; dry, rough and hoarse or a loose cough with copious mucus worse (<) lying, in a warm room, better (>) in the open air.
Cold sores may appear on the lips or genitalia.
Eupatorium perfoliatum
Aching in bones as if they would break  
Winter colds with much sneezing, coryza and headache as if it would burst
Chill at 7–9 am intense aching in bones before the chill
Worse (<) motion
Aching in bones as if they would break is the main feature of this remedy that accompanies all of its complaints.
It is otherwise very similar to Bryonia .
Winter colds with much sneezing, coryza and headache as if it would burst which is worse (<) motion, in a person who is chilly and wants to be warmly wrapped and has much aching in the bones.
There can be fever, thirst and generally worse (<) for motion.
After a few days it may go onto their chest or settle in the liver causing a bilious fever and even jaundice.
An attack may begin with the sensation as if their back were breaking, great shivering all over, a congestive headache and flushed face.
A high fever; bilious vomiting and those aching bones.
There may be stomach pains after eating.
The patient wants to keep still but the pains can be so severe that they must move so sometimes they can appear to be restless.
In the chest they may have a dry racking, teasing, hacking cough and so sore and worse (<) motion; it is similar to Bryonia and Phosphorus .
Hoarseness in the morning with a sore aching chest.
They are very sensitive to cold air, as much as in Nux vomica which also has the aching bones and wants to be covered and in a hot room.
Nux vomica has dreadful irritability of temper whereas Eupatorium tends towards overwhelming sadness.
Chill at 7–9 am.
Intense aching in bones before the chill.
There is often a thirst but during the chill cold water often makes this worse (<).
Vomiting often comes at the close of a chill; vomiting of bile between the chill and the heat.
They burn all over with the heat and feel hotter than their temperature would justify.
There is usually little sweat.
A violent headache may be present during the chill and it can be worse (<) sweat.
Fever every third day too.
Euphrasia
Marked affinity for the eyes
In fevers the chills predominate
A catarrhal remedy; catarrhal headaches
Profuse, watery, excoriating discharge from the eyes with a bland, fluent discharge from the nose
Worse (<) daytime
Better (>) lying down
No cough at night
Marked affinity for the eyes.
A chilly person who cannot get warm.
In fevers the chills predominate with the fever mostly in the day, red faced with cold hands.
Often the perspiration is confined to the upper part of the body.
A catarrhal remedy; catarrhal headaches; often has a headache with eye complaints or coryza; a bursting, bruised headache with dazzling from bright lights; headache in the evening.
Catarrh may be with or without fever.
A tendency to accumulate sticky mucus on the cornea removed by blinking.
Profuse, watery, excoriating discharge from the eyes with a bland, fluent discharge from the nose is a very strong symptom for this remedy.
Dry, burning, biting, pressure in the eyes, as if by dust with itching.
Swollen mucous membranes, red and enlarged blood vessels; inflammation of all the tissues of the eye.
Contracted pupils.
There may be a purulent discharge too.
Many tears in cold air and windy weather.
The lids may be very sensitive and swollen; the margins itch and burn.
Blepharitis.
A fine rash about the eyes.
Pain in the eyes is worse (<) open air and light.
Lots of tears.
Sneezing and fluent, bland coryza; the mucous membranes of the nose may be swollen and after a day or two the coryza may extend to the larynx with a hard cough.
Coryza is worse (<) lying down at night and worse (<) in the open air and windy weather.
Cough is worse (<) daytime and is better (>) lying down.
It sometimes comes on in the open air.
There may be hoarseness in the morning; irritation in the larynx compelling them to cough, followed by pressure  beneath the sternum.
Abundant secretions in (<) in the larynx causing a loose cough with rattling in the chest; copious expectoration with or after the coryza.
Difficulty breathing may be better (>) lying down at night and worse (<) in the morning when there may be copious and usually easy expectoration.
No cough at night, like in Bryonia .
Usually loose but sometimes can be a dry cough.
Ferrum phosphoricum
Complaints come on often from overexertion.
The early stages of many illnesses
Great weakness and the desire to lie down
Haemorrhagic complaints
Nosebleeds
Worse (<) open air
Better (>) gentle motion
The onset is not quite as rapid or violent as Belladonna or Aconite but it is not quite as torpid and slow as Gelsemium .
Complaints come on often from overexertion.
Great weakness and the desire to lie down is a strong feature as are haemorrhagic complaints; problems involving some sort of bleeding.
There may be fainting spells but the patient is more alert than in Belladonna .
There are congestions and a vascular fullness, pulsations and surgings of blood.
Flushes of the face and a flushed face — a false kind of plethora that is often confined to well described circular patches on the cheeks.
Their appearance may not be one of illness because of these pink cheeks.
There may be nervousness at night, trembling limbs, though not as anxious as Aconite .
Sometimes they are loquacious and mirthful when ill.
Often the mind is confused when trying to think, difficulty concentrating and they can become forgetful, dull and indifferent as they tire, better (>) for cold washing of the face.
They are sensitive to the open air and worse (<) from it; always taking cold.
Soreness throughout the body is worse (<) jar and walking.
Many complaints are worse (<) from lying in bed and from rest and are better (>) slowly moving about but the great lassitude compels them to lie down.
Restless at night with the fever, for ever tossing about.
There may be numbness of affected parts, stitching, tearing pains and may be oversensitive to pain.
Ear infections with a purulent discharge, itching and noises in the ears; eustachian catarrh.
Coryza may be acrid and purulent or a bloody discharge.
Nosebleeds may come with the coryza, with fear or a headache when the head is congested, hot and full.
Dry lips with a flushed face.
Dry cough which is worse (<) for cold, eating and deep breathing, with a mucous coryza or dryness.
Sore chest or stitching pain with the cough or deep breathing.
Mucus of all sorts.
Backache, a stiff neck, wry neck.
Chills in the afternoon and at night, a shaking chill.
Fever has a dry heat with thirst, flushes of heat and perspiration.
Cold extremities or heat all over.
They may desire sour things but are worse (<) for them.
Worse (<) open air; physical exertion, after eating; cold drinks; sour food; standing.
They are better (>) for gentle motion like Pulsatilla .
Gelsemium
Complaints may follow fear, shock, embarrassment or fright
Insidious onset
Slow, congestive complaints and headache
Congestion of the head is most marked
A feeling of great weight and tiredness
Dazed and talk as if delirious, incoherent, stupid, forgetful
Face flushed, dusky
Mottled skin
Cold extremities with hot head and back
Chills run up and down back
Little thirst
Disturbed sensations
The complaints of Gelsemium may follow fear, shock, embarrassment or fright.
There is an insidious onset of complaints, several days after exposure or shock etc.
Colds and fevers are of a low grade, not violent.
Slow, congestive complaints and headaches.
Congestion of the head is most marked.
It is suited to the warmer climates and milder winters.
A feeling of great weight and tiredness runs all through the remedy; so weary and heavy that they must lie down and lie still.
Trembling if they attempt to move.
Children may have a fear of falling, in fevers, and hold on tight.
They are in a state of nervous excitement when awake though they lie thinking of nothing in particular because their minds will not work in an orderly way.
They may be dazed and talk as if delirious, incoherent, stupid, forgetful; worse (<) for mental exertions and is averse to speaking or even having company present; too tired to communicate and not wanting to make the effort.
Congestive headaches with most violent pain in the occiput, sometimes hammering, pulsating pain.
So violent sometimes that they cannot stand up but lie perfectly exhausted.
Often better (>) by lying still, bolstered up by pillows.
Better (>) pressure and alcohol, it stimulates them; worse (<) mental exertion, smoking, lying with the head low, heat of the sun.
Face flushed, dusky, mind dazed, eyes glassy, pupils often dilated, cold extremities, mottled skin, scanty urine, cramps in fingers, toes and back.
Dizziness with blurred or double vision.
Cold extremities with hot head and back; face purple during congestion, high fever.
Great coldness and chills run up and down the back; pains can go up the back too.
Chattering teeth and shaking even without a sense of coldness.
High fever in the afternoons may progress to a continued fever with little thirst and marked head complaints, a dazed mind etc.
They are as still as in Bryonia but it is because they are so tired and weary, not from the pain and their head is more congested than in Bryonia .
Profuse, exhaustive sweats, too weak to move.
Coryza with sneezing and a watery discharge, cold extremities.
It goes down to the throat with redness and swelling, enlarged tonsils, hot head, congested face, heavy limbs, a gradual onset.
There may be tearing pains in nerves, sciatica, numbness, disturbed sensations.
Disturbance of vision before attacks; double, dim, misty vision or nystagmus.
Palpitations with fever.
A sense of weakness or goneness in the heart region that extends to the stomach creating a sensation of hunger.
The heart's pulse is feeble, soft and irregular,(unlike Aconite, Belladonna etc.)
Paralytic states of sphincters — involuntary stool and urination.
Weakness of extremities or just awkward and clumsy.
Ptosis.
Diarrhoea from sudden excitement or emotion, bad news, fright, anticipation of some ordeal.
In summary — great heaviness and weakness of the limbs, congested head, face flushed, mottled, dusky red or purple, cold extremities, dazed and delirious, stuporose, with disturbances of sensations and paralysed sphincters coming on slowly.
Hepar sulphuris
Chilly, irritable and hypersensitive.
From exposure to dry cold winds
The least uncovering of a hand or foot causes chilliness
Oversensitive to impressions, touch, surroundings, cold and pain
Quarrelsome, nothing pleases, ever–thing disturbs
Catarrhal states
Sweating all night without relief
Worse (<) cold
Better (>) heat and wet weather
Chilly, irritable and hypersensitive.
From exposure to dry cold winds or after the premature disappearance of a rash.
All the complaints are worse (<) cold.
They want the room warm and to be well covered.
The least uncovering of a hand or foot causes chilliness or cough.
Oversensitive to impressions, touch, surroundings, cold and pain.
Intense suffering even without apparently sufficient cause.
Pains are severe, sharp and sticking; very sensitive inflammations and ulcerations.
Splinter pains in the throat worse (<) from swallowing.
They may even faint with the pains.
Delicate oversensitive people who become extremely irritable.
Angry, abusive and impulsive.
Quarrelsome, nothing pleases, everything disturbs.
Desires a constant change of people, surroundings or things.
Tendency to suppuration with this irritability — glands, ulcers, boils, injuries.
Catarrhal states; coryza with much sneezing and obstruction every time they go into a cold wind.
Initially watery, later thick, yellow and offensive smelling often like decomposed cheese.
All discharges can smell of decomposed cheese, or may smell sour.
Copious catarrhs of the throat and pharynx; splinter pains; extremely sensitive to touch; pain on swallowing.
Loss of voice and dry hoarse bark, especially in the mornings and the evenings, worse (<) cold and dry winds, worse (<) uncovering.
A great remedy in croup for sensitive children who have been exposed to cold air or dry cold winds and have come down with croup the following morning (see also Aconite and Spongia particularly); worse (<) morning and evening.
It may follow Aconite if an attack returns the next morning.
The more rattling there is in the chest the more it is like Hepar .
There may be a loose cough in the day and a dry paroxysmal cough in the evening and night.
The catarrhal state may be lower down in the trachea which becomes extremely sore from much coughing for days and weeks, again is worse (<) morning and evening, a rattling, wheezing, barking cough in an oversensitive, chilly patient.
They may cough and sweat; much sweating throughout the night which does not relieve.
Sweating all night without relief is found in many complaints.
Sweats easily.
Hepar may be needed after Mercurius .
Ear infections with a bloody, purulent, cheesy smelling discharge and sticking pains.
Offensive thick eye discharges too.
They may hate fat and love vinegar, pickles and other sour things, spices, strong tasting foods.
Sourness like in Calcarea carbonica .
Heat and wet weather, damp.
Worse (<) lying on the painful side, touch, pressure, motion, exertion, tight clothing.
Ipecacuanha
Rapid onset over a few hours
Nausea and vomiting runs right through this remedy
Rapid onset over a few hours.
Nausea and vomiting runs right through this remedy especially if the vomiting does not relieve the nausea.
Often an acute complaint begins with nausea and vomiting with a clean tongue.
The stomach and bowels feel relaxed as if hanging down.
Prostration comes in spells, unlike Arsenicum where it is continuous.
Vomiting does not relieve the nausea
Prostration comes in spells
Bronchitis of children with coarse rattling, coughing, gagging and a sense of suffocation
Desire fresh air very much
Complaints may come on from suppressed emotions or vexations.
Nausea from eating rich foods, like in Pulsatilla, and after dietary indulgences.
Violent chills, face flushed bright red or bluish red.
Colds settle in the nose which may stuff up at night with much sneezing and blows out mucus and often blood; nosebleeds with every cold.
Colds descend and produce hoarseness then rawness of the trachea, then to the chest with suffocation and a great accumulation of mucus but there is an expulsive power to the cough (unlike in Antimonium tartaricum ).
Dry, teasing, hacking cough with a sense of suffocation.
They choke and gag and get red in the face.
Bloody sputum.
Whooping cough may be like this or even asthma.
Bronchitis of children with coarse rattling, coughing, gagging and a sense of suffocation, weight and anxiety in the chest, after a rapid onset and they look dreadfully sick, drawn and pale; the condition has come on rapidly.
Mucus in the chest and it will not come up, rattling and wheezing.
Wheeziness which is like this and is worse (<) damp weather, better (>) sitting up and for fresh air.
Often they desire fresh air very much.
Cough with inclination to vomit without nausea; usually intense nausea though.
Generally thirstless except in the fever which is prolonged and with nausea.
Headache as if bruised all through the bones of the head and down into the root of the tongue with nausea.
Nausea may precede the headache.
Dysentery like diarrhoea with awful tenesmus; they may pass a little blood or green slime.
Constant nausea; vomit bile; vomit everything taken in, with great prostration and great pallor.
Copious diarrhoea often of green slime or mucus.
Much crying and straining at stool in the infant.
Colic with nausea and green stools; fermented, foamy stools.
Worse (<) damp, overeating.
Better (>) open air, rest.
Kali bichromicum
Copious, ropy, mucus discharges from mucous membranes anywhere
Wandering pains and very severe pains in small spots
Always suffering with or nasal Catarrh
Better (>) warmth
This is a catarrhal remedy.
There may be copious, ropy, mucus discharges from mucous membranes anywhere; great long string of mucus; jelly-like mucus.
The catarrhal symptoms may alternate with joint symptoms and rheumatic pains in the winter.
In the summer, diarrhoea alternates with rheumatic complaints.
Wandering pains (like Pulsatilla)and very severe pains in small spots, such as can be covered by a thumb tip, are characteristic.
Worse (<) morning
Sharp, stitching pains too.
Pains often appear and disappear rapidly (like Belladonna ).
A chilly person, everywhere, especially in the back of the neck.
Pains and cough are better (>) warmth.
Always suffering with a nasal catarrh; pressing pain in the root of the nose with a chronic catarrh and if exposed to the cold the discharge dries up and a headache begins,(like in Kali Carbonicum ), often starting with dim vision.
The pains may be pulsating, shooting, burning, better (>) for warmth and pressure.
One sided pains or even just in spots.
Often retching and vomiting occur with the headache and sometimes vertigo; worse (<) morning, night, motion, stooping.
Very red inflamed throat with swollen tonsils, swollen neck and even suppuration; with this the pain extends to the ears.
There may be a dry burning sensation; a dry mouth, ropy mucus, mouth ulcers.
The uvula can be oedematous.
Intense pain in the root of the tongue on protrusion may be present or the sensation of a hair on the tongue.
Yellow coating at the base of the tongue or a dry, smooth, glazed, cracked tongue.
Copious, thick, ropy mucus from the larynx; hoarseness, rough voice, dry cough.
Cough worse (<) breathing, worse (<) damp cold weather and may be better (>) in a warm bed at night.
Stitching pain with the cough.
Much wheezing and tightness in the centre of the chest.
There is a characteristic pain from the sternum to the back with the catarrh and the cough.
A tickling, dry, hard cough; great soreness in the chest on coughing or deep breathing.
Hard coughing on waking, better (>) lying down, warm bed, worse (<) cold air, undressing, deep breathing.
Ropy, yellow or green mucus with rattling in the chest.
Digestion is suspended and their food lies like a load in the stomach; fullness and distress come on immediately after eating.
Much foetid eructations.
Averse to meat and they may desire beer which produces vomiting and diarrhoea.
Worse (<) 2–3 am, in the morning, for motion.
Ulcers of mucous membranes can be deep as if punched out.
Kali carbonicum
Sensitive to every draught or air movement
Pains that fly around
Worse (<) 3–5 am
Dry, hacking, barking cough in cold air
Swelling between eyelids and eyebrows
Stitching pains
These people are worse (<) wet weather and worse (<) cold weather.
They tend to be sensitive to every change in the atmosphere; they cannot get the temperature exactly right.
Sensitive to every draught or air movement.
Sensitive to cold, always shivering.
Their nerves may be painful when cold and if the affected part is kept warm the pain goes to some other place that is uncovered.
Stitching pains, burning, tearing pains.
Pains that fly around, wander from place to place.
Worse (<) 3–5 am.
Catarrhal, congestive headaches from cold air which clears the nose and brings on a headache (like Kali bich).
In a warm room the nose discharges and fills up which ameliorates the headache; a thick, fluent, yellow discharge.
There is a tendency for colds to locate in the chest.
Dry cough day and night with vomiting of food and some phlegm, worse (<) after eating and drinking, worse (<) evenings.
Chronic bronchitis.
Dryness, a dry, hacking, barking cough in cold air, which is when they feel most uncomfortable; copious expectoration of mucus in the warm which produces a general amelioration.
Expectoration may be very offensive, tenacious, lumpy, blood streaked or like thick, yellow or yellow/green pus, often with a pungent, cheesy taste.
Mostly they have a dry hacking cough with morning expectoration, increasing to a most violent, gagging cough with vomiting and a sensation as if their head would burst or fly to pieces.
The face begins to swell and the eyes to protrude with the cough and then comes oedema between the  eyelids and the eyebrows, even to the extent of a little water bag forming.
Wheeziness worse (<) 3–5 am, better (>) leaning forward or by rocking, like Arsenicum ; with rattling in the chest, rattling cough and stitches in the chest with respiration, like Bryonia , or between breaths.
Sputum of small round lumps.
Pain in the lower right chest through to the back (like Mercurius)worse (<) lying on the painful side,(Opposite to Bryonia)
Great flatulence, everything eaten turns to gas.
Lachesis
Worse (<) on waking
Sleep into an aggravation
Worse (<) spring time or on going from cold to warm, becoming warm
Better (>) onset of a discharge
Surging waves of pain
Face is congested, mottled, purplish and engorged
Complaints on the left side or go from left to right
Neck is very sensitive to touch
The modalities are likely to lead to this remedy:
Complaints are worse (<) on waking, they sleep into an aggravation (<).
Worse (<) light touch or pressure.
Worse (<) spring time or on going from cold to warm, becoming warm, they cannot breath in the heat.
Better (>) onset of a discharge eg. menses or a nasal catarrh.
Surging waves of pain and the face is congested, mottled, purplish and engorged.
Puffed eyelids and face.
Inflamed parts take on a bluish, purplish tint.
They hate constrictions about the neck or abdomen.
Complaints are characteristically on the left side or go from left to right.
Headache on waking, sleeps into it.
Face very pale with the headache.
Waves of pain worse (<) after moving.
Bursting, pulsating headache, pressure and burning on the vertex and the senses are overwrought; worse (<) noise, cannot stand the touch of the clothes, especially about the neck.
Dim vision and flickerings with the headache and a very pale face, maybe vertigo.
Relief often comes with a discharge such as the menses or a nasal discharge etc.
Dyspnoea; they wake from sleep with a sense of suffocation, a sense of choking which can come on in the first sleep, a sense of strangulation when lying and especially when anything is around the neck; neck is very sensitive to touch.
They wake with this sense of suffocation and must sit up and bend forward or else must rush to the open window; they feel they must take a deep breath.
The cough is dry, suffocating like Spongia and tickling.
Little secretion and much sensitiveness, worse (<) pressure on larynx; larynx is painful to touch.
Cough worse (<) after sleep like Spongia ; coughs early in sleep at about 11 pm.
Throat problems are worse (<) empty swallowing or swallowing liquids, solids usually go down much easier.
Throat pains go to the ears and are worse (<) for hot drinks,(unlike Lycopodium ).
Painful hawking of mucus.
Starts on left and goes to right.
Purplish hue to the inflammation.
Throat and neck sensitive to the slightest touch.
Lycopodium
Complaints are right sided, go from right to left or above downwards
A chilly patient with pains better (>) warmth except the head complaints which are better (>) cold and worse (<) in a warm room
Sore throats better for warm drinks
Great flatulence and belching
Often worse (<) 4–8 pm
Full and distended after very few mouthfuls
Complaints are right sided, go from right to left or above downwards.
A chilly patient with pains better (>) warmth except the head complaints which are better (>) cold and worse (<) in a warm room.
Often worse (<) 4–8 pm.
There may be marked nervous excitement and prostration.
Headache better (>) cool air and motion until they become warmed up which then makes it worse (<); worse (<) lying down, warm wraps and noise.
Throbbing, pressing bursting headache.
Periodical headaches and headaches with stomach complaints.
Often it is better (>) for eating and comes on if they miss a meal; headache with hunger.
Headache from suppressed nasal discharge, when a chronic, thick, yellow discharge is replaced by an acute, watery coryza with sneezing, then comes a headache which subsides when the thick, yellow discharge returns.
Thick, yellow, offensive ear discharges with loss of hearing and dry cough.
Ear infections with eczema around and behind the ears.
Colds may settle in the nose and usually go to the chest with much whistling, wheezing and dyspnoea, worse (<) exertion.
A dry teasing cough.
Throbbing, burning and tickling in the chest.
Sore throats better for warm drinks, especially if they go from the right to the left side.
Cold extremities and a hot head; they want the head uncovered because of the congestion.
Great flatulence and belching is another marked symptom of this remedy.
Everything eaten turns to wind and they may feel full and distended after only a very few mouthfuls with momentary relief (>) from belching.
Gnawing pains and burning with gastritis and ulcers.
Pains worse (<) cold drinks and better (>) warm drinks.
Noisy rumbling.
Diarrhoea of all kinds.
They may desire sweets very much.
The urine may contain red sand or gravel.
A headache may come on after the gravel stops coming out in the urine.
They may be irritable on waking too.
Mercurius
Sensitive to both heat and cold
Offensive odours, of breath, sweat, discharges, stools, etc.
Glands affected; inflamed and swollen
Ulcerations of mucous membranes
A tendency to suppuration 
Catarrhs of mucous membranes
Copious salivation; often with a metallic taste
Tongue may be swollen, flabby, spongy, taking the imprint of the teeth
Tenesmus with diarrhoea
Sensitive to both heat and cold or open air, thus they have great difficulty in getting comfortable.
Offensive odours, of breath, sweat, discharges, stools etc.
Worse (<) night; pains in joints or inflammations which indurate.
Worse (<) in the warmth of the bed.
Gland affected; inflamed and swollen.
Ulcerations; of mucous membranes.
Tendency to suppuration; it comes on rapidly with burning and stinging (like in
Apis).
Catarrhs of mucous membranes; discharges start thin and excoriating and later become more thick and bland.
Rheumatic complaints.
Complaints with sweating which is offensive, may be profuse but does not give relief (>) and may even make them worse (<),(unlike Arsenicum and Natrum mur.).
Copious salivation; often with a metallic taste or sweet or salty and a sense of dryness with intense thirst sometimes.
Trembling.
Delirium in an acute illness.
Many complaints are worse (<) lying on the right side.
Repeated swellings and abscess formation without any heat, they sweat all over and slowly emaciate, it keeps on discharging with no tendency to heal.
In a child after scarlet fever or a suppressed ear discharge with sweating of the head, dilated pupils, rolling of the head, worse (<) at night, in such lingering febrile conditions Mercurius may be needed.
In fevers they are chilly before the chill, a creeping chilliness in the evening which may increase into the night; very sensitive to a draught; cold hands and feet; profuse and offensive sweat which often makes things worse (<).
Fevers are not as high as in Belladonna .
Chilliness may alternate with flashes of heat like in Arsenicum .
In chronic catarrh with a thick discharge suppressed, possibly by a cold, and on comes a severe headache, in the forehead, face, ears.
Much heat in the head with all the headaches; bursting, constricting pains.
Eye catarrh worse (<) sitting by the fire; every cold settles in the eyes in rheumatic patients.
Colds may also go to the chest and linger.
Ears and nose produce a horrible, stinking, green discharge; ear infection with rupture and suppuration.
The tongue may be swollen, flabby, spongy, taking the imprint of the teeth, coated, foul with copious saliva and nothing tastes right.
Gums may be swollen, spongy and bleeding.
Sore throat may have a swollen, spongy appearance, with flat spreading ulcers; sensation of great dryness.
Difficulty swallowing from the pain and paralytic weakness.
Quinsy.
Sour stomach with wind, regurgitation, reflux, nausea, food sitting like a load, the characteristic taste and salivation.
Milk disagrees and comes up sour.
Tenesmus with diarrhoea.
Affects the right lower chest with stitches through to the back (like in Kali carb.).
Almost everything will make them worse (<) and virtually nothing will bring relief (>)
Natrum muriaticum
Complaints following a loss, a grief, a rejection, unrequited love or a reprimand
Often worse (<) 10–11 am
Discharge from mucous membranes is watery or thick like white of egg
Awful bursting headaches 
Often worse (<) 10–11 am
Thirst for cold drinks throughout
Mucous membranes are dry
Complaints following a loss, a grief, a rejection, unrequited love or a reprimand.
They hold their feelings in, their grief, anger, frustration and would rarely weep in front of others.
They may be sensitive to a change of weather.
There may be weakness, nervous prostration, nervous irritability and they desire solitude when they are ill; consolation makes worse (<).
Greatly disturbed by excitement and they can be extremely emotional.
The whole nervous economy may be in a state of fret and irritation; worse (<) sudden noises, may feel weak and ill afterwards, worse (<) music.
Oversensitive and easily offended.
Worse (<) 10–11 am.
Worse (<) lying down.
Pains are stitching, electric shock like, shooting with twitchings, jerkings and trembling.
They take cold easily when sweating or in a draught but are in general better (>) in the open air, though worse (<) on getting heated.
They may usually be quite warm blooded people.
Discharge from mucous membranes is watery or thick like white of egg; from ears and eyes too.
Awful headaches; bursting compressing as if in a vice, as if would be crushed; hammering and throbbing pains; pains in the morning on waking.
Great nervousness.
They fall asleep late and wake with a headache.
Headache at 10 or 11 am.
Periodical headaches.
A bursting headache during the chill and fever with copious thirst and relief (>) during the sweat; other headaches are not relieved (>) by the sweat.
Headache from the inability to focus the eyes rapidly enough, from eye strain.
Headache with sore eyes.
Chill at 10 or 11 am; starting in the extremities, with a throbbing head and flushed face.
Thirst for cold drinks throughout.
During the coldness they are not better (>) by heat or covering up and they still want cold drinks despite chattering teeth and aching bones; tossing and turning.
In the fever there may be intense heat and they go into a congestive stupor or sleep.
They may be delirious with constant talking and mania.
The sweat ameliorates (>) sometimes everything except the headache.
Mucous membranes are dry; lips dry and cracked, split in the centre of the lips, cold sore on the lips, throat dry, red, patulous with a splinter sensation.
Chronic dryness without ulceration.
Much catarrhal discharge with dryness at other times; there may be a sense of dryness without actual dryness like in Mercurius .
A bitter taste at times.
Slow digestion, sensation of a lump in the stomach after eating which disagrees (<).
Bowels distended with gas.
Stool hard and difficult.
Stitching, tearing pains in the liver with fullness.
Cough from tickling low down, with bursting pain in the forehead.
Stitches all over the chest.
Nux vomica
Complaints coming from overindulgence in food, drink, spicy foods, stimulants of all sorts or from mental overwork
Problems following exposure to cold dry winds
Digestive upset
Marked oversensitivity
Severe chills in a fever 
When vomiting there is much retching, gagging and straining
Much straining but only scanty stool
Worse (<) eating
Worse (<) cold
Complaints coming from overindulgence in food, drink, spicy foods, stimulants of all sorts or from mental overwork.
Problems following exposure to cold dry winds.
The complaints are often accompanied by some sort of digestive upset (like in Pulsatilla).
Marked oversensitivity; irritable and touchy, never contented, never satisfied.
They may be prone to arguments and quarrel over any imagined offence.
They can feel hurried and driven, critical and quick to reproach.
They may prefer to be left alone and hate having to depend on others who are less capable than themselves.
They cannot stand contradiction and indeed they are often right.
Even to being impulsive, an uncontrolled state of irritability; it is a weakness and is accompanied by physical weakness.
They may be sleepless from an overactive mind and sensitivity to slight noises which disturb them.
Feel as if they could fly to pieces.
Weakness, twitching, trembling.
This mental state may indicate the remedy on its own, like the emotional state of Chamomilla often does but there may be none of it apparent and yet the physical symptoms would still indicate its use.
A chilly person, sensitive to draughts.
Sweats easily.
Always taking cold which settles in the nose, throat or ears and goes to the chest.
A warm room makes the coryza worse (<) before the fever comes on; after the fever they must have heat.
Severe chills in a fever, they cannot get warm and cannot bear to uncover, which sends waves of chills through them.
The heat is short and dry followed by intense heat and hot sweat worse (<) in the morning.
A very red face in the fever.
Neuralgic headaches; stick and tear, burn and sting; drawing pains especially; a sensation of tension in the muscles.
Headache worse (<) mental exertion, anger, open air, on waking, after eating, coffee, spirits, sun, light, noise, stooping, movement, stormy weather.
Headache with constipation and a sour stomach.
They may have a weak digestion and be intolerant of many foods yet crave pungent, bitter, spicy things, tonics or milk.
Meat can cause nausea.
When vomiting there is much retching, gagging and straining before they can finally vomit.
Likewise there may be much straining but only scanty stool .
The spasmodic, colicky abdominal pains are worse (<) motion and better (>) heat.
Nux is worse (<) eating and suffers from dyspepsia, heartburn, nausea, fullness, constipation, bloating and gas.
A feeling of pressure 1 or 2 hours after eating, like a stone even (Bryonia, Pulsatilla etc.).
Nux is definitely better (>) with an empty stomach .
Backache worse (<) lying down, must get up and walk.
Dry teasing cough with great soreness of the chest.
Spasmodic cough with retching; worse (<) cold dry windy weather.
Tickling and pain in the larynx with the cough.
Cough causes a bursting headache.
Worse (<) cold, uncovering, cold dry weather, eating and especially overeating stimulants, mornings, anger, mental exertion.
Better (>) evenings, resting, wet weather, after stool.
Phosphorus
Sensitive to external stimuli; odours, touch, noise, cold etc
Flushes of heat
Haemorrhages
Headaches are congestive and throbbing
Hunger
Violent thirst for ice cold and refreshing drinks
Vomiting of warm drinks
Hoarseness worse (<) in evening 
Oppression and constriction in the chest
Flushes of blood and heat going upwards in the chest
Complaints may come on from electric changes in the atmosphere.
Flushes of heat.
Often in people subject to violent pulsations, palpitations and congestions.
Haemorrhages; anaemia and relaxed conditions of muscles.
Burning pains, tearing and drawing pains.
Sensation of intense heat running up the back.
May be very sensitive to all external stimuli; odours, touch noise, cold etc. which can lead to exhaustion.
Always tired and want to rest.
Great prostration of mind or body after mental or physical effort.
Weakness to paralysis even.
Trembling from slight causes; great excitability, can be restless and fidgety.
May want to be rubbed, massaged.
Full of anxieties and fears but usually easily reassured.
Vertigo and dizziness is common.
Headaches are congestive and throbbing; blood mounts to the head; better (>) cold and rest, worse (<) heat, motion and lying down; often they have to sit up and apply pressure to the head and a cold application.
Face flushed and hot.
Hunger can precede or accompany the headaches.
Coryza; painful dryness in the nose; sneezing and running of the nose may be with blood.
Yellow, green discharges too.
Swollen glands in weak, sickly, pale, exhausted people.
Violent thirst for ice cold, and refreshing drinks; dry mouth and throat.
Sore, excoriated, bleeding mouth.
Swollen tonsils; dysphagia and constriction.
Hunger may be violent; must eat during the chill, at night, with the headache.
Must eat or they will faint; hungry empty feeling in the whole abdomen.
Vomiting of warm drinks in stomach upset.
They may desire cold food, sour, spicy things, wine.
Laryngitis with hoarseness worse (<) in the evening; larynx so painful they cannot talk; very sensitive to touch and cold air.
Violent tickling in the larynx and behind the sternum.
Colds may go to the larynx from every change of weather.
A hard, dry, rasping cough, exhausting; so painful that they suppress the cough.
Anxiety, weakness, oppression and constriction in the chest; sensation as if a great weight were on the chest.
Tightness.
Flushes of blood and heat going upwards in the chest.
Painful chest especially in the right lower zone, better (>) for pressure.
Blood stained sputum, salty, sour or yellow.
Suffocation and constriction better (>) pressure.
Bursting headache with the cough.
Cough worse (<) open air, going from a warm to a cold room or vice versa, twilight, lying on left side, talking, eating; better (>) lying on right side.
Violent palpitations worse (<) lying on left side, motion.
May sleep on right side for preference.
Stiffness on beginning to move in the morning.
Worse (<) cold weather.
Better (>) heat except stomach and head, rest.
Pulsatilla
A gentle, mild, yielding person desiring attention
Changeable in mood
Clingy, whiny child who evokes your sympathy
Desires company and comforting which ameliorates
Worse (<) heat, they desire cool, open air
Flushes to the face
Better (>) slow gentle motion
Thirstlessness 
Changeability is marked
 Catarrhs thick, yellow/ green and bland
Digestive complaints often accompany every illness
Worse (<) rich and fatty foods
Digestive complaints worse (<) morning, mental complaints worse (<) evening
One sided complaints
Many eye, ear and nose catarrhal complaints
This remedy is often selected on its emotional picture:
A gentle, mild, yielding person desiring attention.
Nervous, fidgety, changeable in mood, easily led.
A clingy, whiny child who evokes your sympathy.
May be fussy and irritable but not like the tantrums of Chamomilla or the touchiness of Hepar .
Desires company and comforting which ameliorates (>).
Moods may change easily from laughter to sadness; they cry easily even at the thought of pain.
They tend to be sweet and loving when well but self-pitying when ill.
Indecisive.
They may not look ill.
Complaints may follow getting the feet wet; dietary indulgence especially of rich foods which upset them.
Worse (<) heat is marked, they desire cool open air.
The skin feels hot even without a fever.
Flushes to the face.
Better (>) slow gentle motion; this soothes them both generally and their specific complaints — pains, headaches etc.
Thirstlessness is usual even with a fever or the dry mouth which is also commonly present.
Changeability is marked even on the physical level; diarrhoea with no two stools alike; their pains may wander and symptoms change.
Pains can come on suddenly and be slow to disappear.
Catarrhs of any mucous membrane which is inflamed and can look purplish, are common.
The discharges are thick, yellow/green and bland.
With nasal catarrh of some duration there may be loss of smell or taste.
Digestive complaints often accompany every illness; bloated and sensitive especially worse (<) after eating.
Prefers cold things and is worse (<) rich and fatty foods, ice cream, pork, fruit, cold things; they may crave the foods which make them worse (<).
Tongue coated, bad taste in the mouth especially early in the morning.
Digestive complaints are worse (<) in the morning and mental complaints are worse (<) worse in the evening.
Also worse (<) at rest; becomes frantic.
Better (>) lying on the painful side.
May not be able to sleep on the left side because of the palpitations and suffocation.
One sided complaints; fever, headache, sweat, chill etc.
Headache throbbing, congestive and is better (>) cold, pressure, tying the head up tightly, slow motion and worse (<) evening and stooping.
Pains in the temples and sides often.
Headaches before menses which are often scanty.
Many eye, ear and nose catarrhal complaints.
Itching eyelids; styes are better (>) cold, worse (<) heat with the typical discharge.
The nose stuffs up in the evening and in a warm room.
It is stuffed up on rising but they can clear it out.
Nosebleeds are common.
Chills begin in the hands and feet with pains in the limbs; one sided; numbness; fever.
Thirst before the chill.
Profuse sweat all over or on one side.
Heat with distended blood vessels.
Vomiting of mucus in the chill at times.
Pains accompanied by constant chilliness and the more the pains the worse the chilliness.
Dry cough at night worse (<) lying down and a loose cough in the morning.
Thick yellow green mucus.
Cough from tickling in the larynx; dry and teasing, wants fresh air.
Coughs from inspiration; worse (<) evening and warm room.
Rhus toxicodendron
Affects the joints, ligaments, tendons and skin
Complaints come on from cold and damp weather or exposure, getting the feet wet or exposure whilst perspiring, overexertion, strained muscles
Worse (<) cold
Better (>) heat and motion 
First motion makes them worse (<) but continued motion ameliorates (>)
Restless, anxious
Aching, sore and bruised pains, tearing pains
Stupefying headaches
Red, triangular tip to tongue
Eruptions are red, itchy and often with blisters
This remedy particularly affects the joints, ligaments, tendons and skin.
Complaints come on from cold and damp weather or exposure, getting the feet wet or exposure whilst perspiring, overexertion, strained muscles.
Complaints often start at night.
Worse (<) cold in all complaints, worse (<) uncovering, evening and night, overexertion, getting wet.
Better (>) heat and motion (like Pulsatilla)but Rhus wants it warm, better (>) pressure, rubbing, perspiration.
First motion makes them worse (<) but continued motion ameliorates (>) but then on comes exhaustion and they have to stop and rest which makes them worse (<) again.
Therefore they are never perfectly at ease and may toss and turn in bed.
Restless, anxious, aching sore and bruised pains, tearing pains.
Pains often with numbness and weakness of the limbs.
Prominent projections of the bones can become sore to touch, especially the cheek bones.
Fever type headaches; the brain feels loose, stupefying with buzzing in the ears.
Sensation as if parts of the skull were screwed together.
Sore muscles and sore skull.
Occipital pain better (>) holding the head back; great restlessness with this and aching better (>) for motion.
The side of the scalp on which they lie may be sensitive and headaches may be worse (<) for wetting the hair.
Low forms of fever, incoherent talking, answers hastily with anxiety and mild delirium all worse (<) at night.
Mild, persistent delirium, not as violent as in Belladonna restless with laborious dreams, muttering delirium.
Colds settle throughout the body and limbs.
Full of dizziness.
Violent coryza; nose stopped up from every coryza.
Great soreness of the nostrils.
The discharge can be yellow, green, thick, offensive.
Cold may go to the larynx producing hoarseness better (>) for using the voice, rawness and roughness.
Sore throat with swollen glands and a stiff neck.
Thirst is usually marked but there can be dysphagia for solids from the constriction.
Dry mucous membranes; dry or coated tongue with a red triangular tip.
Cold drinks can bring on chilliness or cough.
Dry, teasing, tickling cough before or during the chill; racking cough.
Cough during sleep; cough from the least uncovering.
Pneumonia or pleurisy with sharp, stitching pains in the chest, much fever, aching bones, restlessness and generally better (>) motion but prostration comes on, marked thirst and fever.
Fevers with cold sores on the lips.
Hungry sensation without appetite sometimes.
Stiff lame back, better (>) lying on a hard floor; sore joints and tearing pains down the limbs.
Eruptions are red, itchy and often with blisters.
Urticaria during heat.
Rumex
The respiratory symptoms are its main indication for use
A hoarse, barking cough in attacks every night at 11 pm, at 2 and 5am
Cough from the slightest breathing of cold air
Cough worse (<) lying down
Very sensitive to cold air
Sit without motion
It does not have the febrile symptoms of Bryonia, Rhus tox .
and Aconite , nor does it have the general disturbance; the aching limbs, the general soreness, the fever and thirst.
The respiratory symptoms are its main indication for use.
A hoarse, barking cough in attacks every night at 11 pm, at 2 and 5 am.
Cough with pain behind the mid-sternum.
Cough worse (<) lying down which causes the most violent cough to appear a few moments later.
Cough from the slightest breathing of cold air, like Phosphorus and Spongia , from going from warm to cold.
Very sensitive to cold air, must cover their mouths to protect from the cold air.
Copious, thin, frothy, white mucus is coughed up by the mouthful.
There may also be a hard, dry, spasmodic cough at first.
Watery expectoration that later becomes thick, yellow, stringy and tenacious.
This often accompanies a brown, morning diarrhoea.
Cough with the loss of a little urine,(like Causticum).
Extreme rawness in the larynx and trachea, burning and smarting.
They cannot endure any pressure on the pit of the throat.
Tickling in the pit of the throat or down the centre of the chest to the stomach, causes  coughing and may be with a congested head and wrenching pains in the right of the chest.
Sit without motion, they cannot breathe deeply or rapidly because the burning is increased so much by any change in the pattern of respiration.
Cough from changes of temperature.
Lachesis children cough in their early sleep at about 11 pm but if kept awake they will not cough.
However in Rumex they will cough in either case.
Sensitive to open air and sometimes a sensation of breathlessness as if they were passing rapidly through the air.
Intense itching of the skin when undressing to go to bed may be present.
Silica
Complaints after getting the feet wet from suppressed discharges or sweat
Catarrhs; with a thick, yellow discharge
Lymph nodes enlarge and become hard
Worse (<) warm rooms and heat
Sweat about the upper part of the body or head
Headache from back of head going over forehead
Symptoms often come on in cold damp weather and may be improved by cold dry weather.
Complaints after getting the feet wet,(like Pulsatilla), from suppressed discharges or sweat.
It is easily affected by extremes of temperature, easily overheats and sweats then takes cold.
Catarrhs; with a thick, yellow discharge.
Lymph nodes enlarge and become hard especially in the neck; inflamed glands.
Acute illnesses are worse (<) warm rooms and heat, whereas normally they are chilly and worse (<) draughts.
Sweat about the upper part of the body or head; offensive.
Headache from the back of the head going over the forehead worse (<) night, noise, cold air, better (>) heat and pressure.
Headache with profuse head sweat.
Suppuration of lid margins with stinging, burning and redness.
Photophobia is marked.
Eyes inflamed from trauma or after foreign bodies have been removed.
Chronic ear discharges; offensive, thick, yellow; roaring and hissing in the ears; eustachian catarrh; the hearing returns with a snap, better (>) gaping or swallowing.
Hard crusts accumulate in the nose with loss of taste and smell.
Nosebleeds.
Rough lips; they crack and peel, crusty at the margins of the mucous membranes or on the ears.
Nausea, vomiting and hiccup with aversion to warm food and desire for cold food.
Hot drinks cause sweating and hot flushes in the face and head.
Milk aggravates (<) and causes diarrhoea and vomiting; sour vomiting; sour curds in the stool.
Colic and sore to pressure, worse (<) after eating and better (>) heat.
Spigelia
Intense pains that are shooting, burning, stabbing, tearing, neuralgic
Pains that increase as the sun rises to midday and decrease as it falls and sets
Worse (<) motion
Headaches are often one sided beginning in the occiput and extending forward and settling over the left eye
This remedy is known by its pains.
Pains from taking cold in run down persons.
There are shooting, burning, stabbing, tearing, neuralgic pains.
Intense pains.
Pains that increase as the sun rises to midday and decrease as it falls and sets (like in Natrum mur and Tabacum .
Worse (<) motion; even mental exertion makes the pains worse (<).
Worse (<) eating, in the morning, noise, cold damp rainy weather.
Better (>) for quiet and dry air.
Pains in the neck and shoulders better (>) heat; cannot move because of pain
Pains about the eyes better (>) for cold.
Head pains are worse (<) heat and are temporarily better (>) from cold applications.
Trigeminal neuralgia, especially of the left side.
Painful parts can become red, inflamed and sensitive.
Pulsating and stitching pains in the head may be better (>) lying with the head held high, worse (<) motion, stooping, noise.
Pains in the extremities like hot wires usually better (>) keeping still; so sore that any jar is unbearable.
Vertigo from looking downward, therefore they sit and look straight ahead.
Headaches are often one sided beginning in the occiput and extending forward and settling over the left eye (right is Sanguinaria,Silica etc.).
The eye of the affected side may water with tears.
Spongia
Similar to Aconite but lacks its febrile excitement and is slower in pace
Worse (<) warm room and heat but better (>) for warm drinks
Remedy for croup,
Exposure to dry cold winds
Roughness and dryness of the mucous membranes
Dry/cough with no rattling
This remedy is similar to Aconite but lacks its febrile excitement and is slower in pace, its onset taking several days and often beginning in the evening.
It is another remedy with an affinity for the respiratory tract.
Mentally there may be marked anxiety even to fear of death and suffocation.
Palpitations and uneasiness in the heart region; pain and a sense of fullness or stuffiness in the heart region or chest.
They may wake from sleep with great fear, agitation and anxiety and a sense of suffocation like in Lachesis .
Worse (<) warm room and heat but is better (>) for warm drinks.
A main remedy for croup, especially if it follows taking cold or exposure to dry cold winds I or 2 days previously.
First there appears a roughness and dryness of the mucous membranes, sneezing and croup comes on before midnight with a dry, hoarse, barking cough, like a saw being driven through a plank of wood, and dry air passages.
The more rattling there is the more likely Hepar Sulph .
is to be indicated, especially if inclined to get worse after midnight or in the morning hours, and the less it is likely Spongia will be the remedy.
Dry with no rattling is Spongia and it may follow Aconite if the croup continues after midnight and into the next day.
Wake from sleep with suffocation, alarm, anxiety and a loud cough.
Later tough mucus may form which is difficult to expectorate.
Dyspnoea is worse (<) lying down, with the head low, better (>) for warm food.
Cough better (>) for warm food and drink, worse (<) talking, singing, swallowing, awakening from sleep.
Hoarseness with loss of voice, great dryness of the larynx from a cold; coryza, sneezing, the whole chest rings, is very dry; voice is hissy, croupy and dry.
After taking a cold, rawness of the larynx and trachea come on, then spasmodic constriction of the larynx at night.
The larynx is sensitive to touch (like Phosphorus).
If the symptoms tend to relapse or get more croupy every evening, then Phosphorus may be indicated and should be studied.
Violent basilar headaches, worse (<) lying down, they must sit up and keep still.
In the laryngitis and bronchitis of adults it is as useful as in the croups of children (especially Aconite and Hepar).
Great hoarseness, some soreness and burning and the cough is worse (<) talking, reading, singing, swallowing.
Cough worse (<) cold air, evening and morning, better (>) drinking and eating warm things.
This remedy may come up after a Belladonna sore throat has gone down on the chest.
Sulphur
Healthy people who are emotionally thick skinned
Burning — pains, eruptions, sensations and discharges
Offensive odours sweat, discharges
Aversion to washing
Very thirsty
Heat on top of the head; feet burn at night in bed, hot flushes rising up.
Congestions
Worse (<) heat, standing, at night, 12 am or 12 pm
Hunger at 11 am; feels faint and weak
Catarrhs, especially lingering catarrhs
Often needed for robust, healthy people who are emotionally thick skinned.
Burning-pains, eruptions, sensations and discharges.
The feet, eyes, ears, nose, throat, vertex of head, stomach, chest all burn.
Offensive odours — sweat, discharges; the patient himself may be unaware of the smell.
Aversion to washing and it can make the skin worse (<); worse (<) for water and bathing.
Very thirsty usually.
Heat on top of the head; feet burn at night in bed, hot flushes rising up.
Congestions; they feel so oppressed that they want the window open, especially at night.
Worse (<) heat.
Eruptions itch and burn.
Warmth of the bed produces uneasiness.
Worse (<) 12 am or 12 pm.
Worse (<) at night, with sinking and exhaustion.
Catarrhs of all mucous membranes; suppurations with burning discharges; ulcerations; acrid discharges.
Burning, stinging, itching eruptions worse (<) heat.
Inflammation from pressure and it can indurate.
Skin affected easily by the atmosphere, becomes red from the wind and the cold; flushes begin in the chest and rise up; dusky red at the least provocation.
Skin itching worse (<) for heat, scratching ameliorates (>) but it turns to burning.
Ruddy, purple appearance which may alternate with paleness plus the flushes of heat.
Purplish throat, rash, a venous appearance.
Sleepless yet they are worse (<) if they oversleep; lethargic.
Diarrhoea which drives them from bed in the morning, worse (<) at 5 am.
Dyspnoea, especially on exertion, copious sweat and so exhausted.
Rattling in the chest; every cold goes to the chest or nose and the catarrh hangs on a long time.
The Worse (<) standing, bathing.
Better (>) patient does not convalesce, complains that sitting, lying.
Hunger at 11 am; feels faint and weak.
they are slow to pick up, cannot muster the energy to get better.
Lingering cough after a  chest infection.
Problems that improve temporarily and then relapse again and the previously effective remedy no longer works; a dose or two of Sulphur in this situation will often either clear up the problem or will allow the indicated remedy to work again.
Red lips, eyelids and around the orifices of the body.
A violent racking cough in bronchitis.
Suffocating and wants doors and windows open at night.
Night cough.
Cough with congested head.
Burning in the chest etc.
A remedy commonly needed in measles, especially if the rash has not come out fully or has disappeared again and they become more ill.
They may be impatient, hurried and quick tempered in an acute illness.