

Money and banks
Introduction
This chapter deals firstly with the origin and development of money.
It seeks to explain the important role played by money in the domestic (and international) economy.
Many of the concepts explained may appear to be self-evident but their thorough understanding will assist the reader in later chapters which concentrate on international banks, markets and financial flows.
An explanation of the role of banks as deposit-taking institutions and intermediaries then follows.
Terms such as balance sheet, assets, liabilities, claims, liquidity and capital adequacy will inevitably arise later in the book as it seeks to identify the inter-relationship between financial flows and world economic development.
The chapter concludes with an examination of a nation's balance sheet and the flow of funds between various economic sectors in a country.
This should provide the reader with a sound grasp of important economic and accounting concepts essential to the understanding of national and international financial flows.
The development of money
The origin of money
Most early societies at the dawn of civilisation operated on a barter basis whereby goods were exchanged, i.e. traded, for goods.
However, a barter system suffers from two major drawbacks:
(i)
it is difficult to estimate the value (or swap rate) of one good in terms of another, e.g. wheat in terms of meat;
(ii)
it depends upon a double coincidence of wants between the trading parties, e.g. that the wheat farmer desires meat for consumption and the cattle herder needs wheat to make bread.
For these reasons, a barter-based economy could not develop into a sophisticated modern economy in which the buying and selling of goods and services takes place on a continuous basis.
The use of barter is now  restricted mainly to the under-developed regions of some countries, e.g. the indigenous inhabitants of the Brazilian tropical rain forests.
To overcome the restrictive nature of barter, most societies (economies) sought one special commodity as a means of measuring the value of all other goods and services.
Such a commodity, once acceptable, performed the role of a medium of exchange and could be regarded as money.
The commodity might have been hides, jade, tobacco, salt or precious metals, so long as it was accepted as a means of discharging obligations.
Money has to be something that is widely accepted in settlement of debts.
The key requirement is acceptability of whatever commodity is chosen as money in a society.
Money is also a claim in that it gives the holder command over goods and services in the market place.
The possession of a requisite sum of money entitles the individual to purchase goods and services.
Finally, the use of money enabled societies and nations to benefit from a greater exchange of goods/services and a more specialised labour force, and both of these factors resulted in higher living standards.
Commodity money
Although most types of commodity money have an intrinsic value, i.e. alternative use(s) to acting as money, all apart from precious metals have disadvantages.
Consider the use of tobacco as money in a society.
The following points will highlight its deficiencies:
(i)
the constant handling of tobacco results in a deterioration in its quality, i.e. worth as money;
(ii)
some tobacco might be lost in the exchange process;
(iii)
not all tobacco leaves are of the same quality (or size);
(iv)
a large quantity of tobacco is not particularly portable from one market place to another;
(v)
tobacco supply varies with the seasons of the year, and whether there is a good or bad harvest;
(vi)
the smoking of tobacco will reduce the money supply in a society which uses it as a medium of exchange.
Despite these deficiencies, tobacco was used as the main type of money in Virginia State, USA, during the late 1700s.
It is still used as a form of money among prison inmates in most countries.
The reader should now consider the use of salt, water or dates as a medium of exchange, and list advantages as well as disadvantages.
Silver and gold coins
In view of the above problems involved in the use of commodities as money, successive societies since Roman times have used silver and gold coins.
Such coins, depending on their denominations, could be easily identified and represented a definite weight and quality of a precious metal.
Consider the main advantages (qualities and characteristics) of gold coins as a monetary medium:
(i)
gold has always been given special status by most civilisations and is therefore widely accepted;
(ii)
gold's value has been maintained over the centuries due to the limited quantity of new supplies (maximum output, at the present time, 1,000 tonnes per annum), only about 100,000 tonnes having been mined since 4,000 BC;
(iii)
gold is virtually indestructible and at the same time is recognisable to most people;
(iv)
the high value of small quantities of gold has facilitated the transfer of the precious metal in the market place.
These characteristics of gold (and to some extent of silver) coins established their use in most parts of Western Europe by the 1100s.
This facilitated the development of the market economy — goods, services and taxes could be paid in silver and gold coins in various societies and nations.
Paper money
The development of paper money can be traced to economic and social developments in Western Europe during the 1600s.
In England, London merchants who engaged in overseas trade began to accumulate wealth in the form of gold (and silver) bullion and coin.
Much of this wealth was deposited with London goldsmiths who refined gold and made gold ornaments and jewellery.
These goldsmiths had secure safes and employed guards to protect their gold stocks.
The goldsmiths issued notes, i.e. receipts, for wealth deposited with them.
These paper notes, redeemable in gold or silver were transferable and thus gave rise to the use of paper money in England.
As long as the note holders had confidence that the issuing goldsmiths could redeem their gold pledges on demand, few notes were ever presented for redemption.
Instead of issuing paper notes for each gold (silver) deposit, goldsmiths eventually provided depositors with passbooks and cheque books to facilitate debt settlement/payment by their customers to other parties.
Ultimately, loans were granted to customers by means of issuing notes or crediting their accounts with deposits (loans) in excess of the gold stock held by the goldsmith.
Through time, many goldsmiths decided to concentrate purely on the deposit, note issue and loan-granting aspects of their business, and, as a result, a large number of private banks were established, mainly in the City of London.
Some of these private banks issued too many notes and caused banking panics as large numbers of their own customers (and holders) presented notes all at the same time for redemption in gold.
This invariably caused the bank's failure.
Over the next two hundred years the issue of notes, i.e. paper money, was gradually taken over by the Bank of England which maintained an adequate gold stock to back the note issue.
Gold redemption on demand for paper money was guaranteed.
Several important European trading centres established banks to enable traders to deposit a variety of gold and silver coins then in circulation, in exchange for paper claims, e.g. Bank of Amsterdam, Holland.
The origin and development of paper money in your own country should be ascertained.
Did it arise through the actions of private bankers or a central issuing body established by the government (or a former colonial power)?
Consider whether your nation's paper money (bank notes) meets the requirements of a good monetary medium.
Is it acceptable, recognisable, portable and scarce?
Most bank notes are printed on special paper that makes forgery more or less impossible, although with the passage of time, new notes have to be issued to replace worn-out and frayed paper notes.
Paper money and copper-nickel coins are used for making payments in most countries but readers will appreciate that most money in advanced economies takes the form of bank deposits which are transferred between parties by means of cheque, giro and other payment mechanisms or techniques.
The functions of money
In any society or economy, money (bank deposits, paper notes and coins) has five main functions which must be fully appreciated and memorised to aid the reader's understanding of banking, finance and economics.
Medium of exchange
The existence of money gives the consumer greater freedom of choice than could ever exist under a barter system.
Providing money is generally acceptable, a person will take it in exchange for goods and services he sells since no difficulty will be encountered in using the money so acquired to purchase other goods and services desired.
Money thus facilitates trade and specialisation, two key conditions for the economic advancement of any society or nation.
Unit of account
Money is used as a common denominator in which the value of things can be expressed in the market.
It enables a price system to operate and facilitates the production and exchange of goods.
Without money, some other means to measure the value of goods against each other would have to be used.
Store of value
In a non-monetary economy, wealth is measured in terms of a person's tangible possessions — cattle, camels, grain, jewellery, etc.
Such wealth is acceptable to others in return for goods and services.
However, jewellery may be stolen, cattle may die and grain deteriorates in quality with the passage of time, thus wealth in these forms is inherently risky and to a certain extent illiquid, i.e. not usually suitable for instant transfer or use.
In a modern economy, liquid wealth is held in the form of money —bank notes, and, more importantly, bank deposits.
This provides a temporary abode of purchasing power for the holder which is both convenient and certain.
It facilitates saving which is absolutely essential for the economic progress of any nation.
Before money is accepted as a store of value two conditions must be satisfied:
(i)
money must retain its value, otherwise people will get rid of it in exchange for real (intrinsic) commodities;
(ii)
goods and services must be available in the future — wars and national crises result in a flight from money into non-perishable foodstuffs, cigarettes, fuel, etc.
Credit standards
The existence of money is essential to the modern system of production which depends upon the granting of credit to those who undertake the manufacture of goods in anticipation of sales.
It facilitates the development of a sophisticated financial system and thus avoids the need for a pure cash economy, i.e. payment in notes and coin only.
It enables capital investment (acquisition of plant and machinery) to take place.
A manufacturer can thus borrow funds to purchase raw materials and machinery and to hire labour to produce goods to be sold later in the market, with the resultant receipts (money) being used to repay loans.
Where a person borrows or enters a contract (agreement) involving some future form of payment, this will invariably be expressed in money terms.
Thus the effective and efficient use of money as a credit standard  requires it not to lose its value due to inflation .
When money is falling in value (prices rising), borrowers gain at the expense of lenders because today's money is worth more than tomorrow's money.
Consequently, borrowing is encouraged whilst savers in the economy demand a higher interest rate for the use of their funds, otherwise savers will spend/invest in commodities less likely to lose their value than money.
Such action tends to make inflation worse.
Once again the reader should note the importance of confidence (a belief in future values) in the acceptability of money as a store of value and as a credit standard.
Influence on economic activity
Money has a dynamic function in that a government, by controlling its supply, may influence the level of economic activity — employment, output and prices.
This dynamic function of money stems from the fact that it represents purchasing power, which, when exercised, stimulates production of goods and services.
The regulation of money supply may be used by governments to achieve specific economic objectives, e.g. full employment or price stability.
It is important to appreciate that money, markets and the price mechanism determine the allocation and utilisation of resources in many countries, e.g. USA and Japan.
Money also facilitates the payment of taxes; it is thus an indispensable tool for a modern state or nation.
Types of money
Convertible and inconvertible paper money
When a bank note can be exchanged for gold on demand at a bank it is said to be convertible or redeemable.
The note issues of most industrial nations, e.g. USA, Britain and Germany, were convertible before 1914.
Two world wars resulted in most notes issues becoming inconvertible; in other words notes could no longer be converted into gold at banks.
The prime factor was (and still is) the vast expansion of paper note issues (and bank deposits) that has taken place in relation to world gold stocks.
Readers should ascertain the situation regarding the convertibility of paper money in their own countries.
Inconvertibility is generally regarded as the final stage in the development of the bank note or paper money.
As long as it can be used to purchase goods and services, the medium of exchange (notes) does not need to have an intrinsic value, providing confidence is maintained in the currency by the avoidance of excessive inflation.
Most nations' note issues are now entirely fiduciary , i.e. based on faith placed in the issuing authority.
Within each country, paper notes and coins are made legal tender by the government and must therefore be accepted in payment for goods and services.
The reader might wonder why paper money has almost superseded the use of metal coins when even one coin has a greater value in metal than the largest banknote has as a piece of paper.
Despite this obvious fact, people prefer paper money as they are interested mainly in its purchasing power and the convenience of handling it — in the latter respect paper money is much preferred to heavier and bulkier coins.
Bank deposits
(i)Customer deposits :
Instead of carrying large sums of paper money, a person can deposit the money in a bank and receive a cheque book.
When a payment is required to be made to a third party (trader, government, etc.) the bank depositor draws, i.e. writes, a cheque on his bank payable to the third party.
The value (faith) placed on a cheque depends on the depositor's creditworthiness and on the standing of the bank on which the cheque has been drawn.
In most countries bank deposits transferred by means of cheques are freely accepted in the discharge of debts and as such constitute as much a part of a country's money supply as its bank notes.
(ii)Customer loans :
Banks can create money because their deposits are accepted as a means of payment, as noted above.
When a customer is granted a loan by his bank, the sum of money lent is added to his account.
The customer can now draw in cash or by cheque, not only that part of his account balance constituting money actually paid in by him but also that part of his account balance which has been advanced (or loaned) by the bank.
The granting of the loan has increased the customer's spending power — money has been created in the banking system and economy.
Hopefully, the reader should now understand the banking principle that every loan creates a deposit in the banking system .
Limitations on money creation by banks
The creation of money by customer loans in the banking system is subject to a number of restrictions.
Firstly, loan demand must come from creditworthy customers who can guarantee loan repayment at a future date.
Customer loan demand is influenced by interest rates, inflation expectations and the level of business confidence in the economy.
The banks themselves must weigh up lending costs and risks, and in many cases will seek to protect themselves by requesting some form of security, e.g. property deeds, bonds, stocks, etc., from the borrower.
Secondly, banks must maintain an adequate degree of liquidity, i.e. cash, to meet customers' cash withdrawals.
An expansion of loans and therefore deposits unless matched by the acquisition of additional cash deposits, must cause a deterioration in the liquidity position of a bank.
Adequate liquidity is essential for the retention of confidence in a bank.
Thirdly, a government through its central bank (or monetary authority) not only controls the supply of notes and coin but can also instruct banks to curtail their lending and thus their deposit or money creation capacity.
Deposits with financial institutions
Bank deposits, because they are freely accepted in payment/settlement of debts, form part of a country's money supply.
Most banks and monetary authorities distinguish between two types of bank deposits:
(i)Sight or demand account deposits :
These deposits can be drawn upon at any time by a customer, principally by means of a cheque.
No time restriction or withdrawal notice is required.
Interest is not usually paid on such deposit balances and in many cases a service charge is made on each withdrawal.
The service charge recompenses the bank for the costs involved in exchanging cheques with other banks.
(ii)Time or savings account deposits :
Such balances are not normally transferable by cheque and may be subject to a time restriction on withdrawals.
Interest is payable on such deposits by most banks.
Transfer of funds to a cheque account can be easily implemented after adequate notice.
The funds are then available to be drawn on by cheque as above.
Deposits can also be held at non-bank financial institutions such as building societies, mortgage corporations, savings and loans associations and finance houses; however, such institutions generally have to hold cheque account balances at banks themselves and thus public deposits with  them are not regarded as part of the nation's money supply in many countries.
Money is sometimes classified into three categories:
(i)Primary money 
— coin; notes issued by a nation's central bank; bank balances maintained by banks with the central bank.
(ii)Secondary money 
— sight and time deposits with banks which represent a claim on primary money, i.e. convertible into primary money.
(iii)Near money 
— building society, etc., deposits which can be transferred only by the use of secondary money, i.e. deposit balances at banks.
Readers should ascertain how their own central bank defines money supply.
In many lesser developed (Third World) countries, the proportion of notes and coin in the nation's total money stock is much larger than that to be found in the advanced industrial nations due to the lack of sophisticated banking/financial systems in most poor countries; also many of the residents still do not fully participate in the money economy due to barter and self-sufficiency.
As explained earlier, the use of bank deposits to supplement notes and coin is the final stage in money's development.
In advanced economies the cheque and associated electronic transfer techniques have become the chief means of payment in the business world.
Remember, it is the bank deposit and not the cheque (or electronic transfer) that is considered to be money.
Subsequent chapters will examine in depth the creation, transfer and use of bank deposits when considering financial institutions in both the domestic and international economies.
It is now essential to make some additional points regarding banks, their financial structure and deposit creation.
The business of banks
The balance sheet
One of the best methods of understanding the functions of a bank is to analyse its balance sheet.
This identifies the sources of funds made available to a bank and their utilisation in order to make profits.
It illustrates clearly the divergent needs of liquidity and profitability that confront most banks.
In addition, it highlights those assets which are subject to central bank control thus enabling the latter to regulate the money supply in the economy.
To assist the reader, a simplified version of a British commercial bank's balance sheet is shown below.
Analysis of liabilities
(i)
Sterling sight and time deposits : The above bank obtains approximately 60 per cent of its total funds from customers' sterling deposits.
Bank deposits are credit balances owed by a bank to its customers.
These deposits are owed because the bank took something from its depositors — cash, another bank deposit, shares (or stocks) or a claim, i.e. loan, upon the customers.
Sight deposits are, in the main, cheque account funds while time deposits incorporate an element of withdrawal restriction, i.e. notice.
A  high proportion of sight deposits necessitates an adequate cash reserve plus liquid assets to meet possible repayment of these demand claims on the bank.
(ii)
Other currency deposits : These non-sterling deposits in Albion Bank are held by UK residents and non-residents.
The main providers of such funds are overseas banks, multinational corporations and institutional investors.
Most are time deposits and constitute part of the euro-currency deposit market which is the subject of close study in later chapters.
(iii)
Capital and reserves : Shareholder funds in Albion Bank amount to £11 bil.
Capital contributed by the shareholders is used to purchase premises and equipment.
Dividends are paid to the shareholders each year if adequate profits are made.
Reserves are accumulated out of profits, not distributed as dividends to the shareholders.
Large reserves are used to strengthen the bank's overall financial position and to offset exceptional loan losses.
The reserves of a bank technically belong to the shareholders.
Finally, in the event of a bank ceasing to conduct business, as a result of insolvency and its liquidation, the shareholders are paid back their capital contribution only after all the depositors' claims are met in full.
Analysis of assets
The objective of a bank is to make a profit for its shareholders.
However, it must maintain adequate liquid assets in order to retain the public's confidence that deposits, i.e. claims, on the bank will be honoured.
All banks face this problem.
Albion Bank's assets are listed in order of decreasing realisability or nearness to cash.
As liquidity decreases — from notes to premises — profitability increases for the bank.
Notes earn no income whereas advances provide most banks with the bulk of their gross incomes.
(i)
Notes : Cash held by a bank must be sufficient to meet customer needs.
It is the most liquid asset but it earns no interest, instead handling and storage costs are incurred.
A relatively low balance of cash can be held as the day-to-day operations of a bank's customers — cash deposits and withdrawals — create an offsetting phenomenon.
(ii)
Bank of England : Albion Bank maintains an operational account(s) with Britain's central bank in order to meet its cash requirements, settle interbank debts arising from customer cheque transactions and any debts due to the government.
In Britain no interest is paid on this liquid asset held at the central bank.
(iii)
Bills of exchange : These are short-term debt instruments, i.e.  claims, issued mainly by corporations and the government, purchased by the bank at less than their face value.
They provide a cheap method of short-term borrowing for bank customers.
On maturity, generally after 91 days, the bills must be repaid in full to the bank.
Bills, while being a relatively liquid asset, generate some income for a bank.
If a bank requires cash it can dispose of bills, prior to their maturity, to other banks.
(iv)
Market loans : This represents secured and unsecured short-term loans made by a bank to other financial institutions operating in London's money markets.
Much of this money is lent on an overnight basis.
As is to be expected such loans are liquid and generate income.
Market loans reduce the volume of idle cash held by banks.
Note, that over 70 per cent of Albion Bank's other currency assets take this form and constitute part of the euro-currency market.
(v)
Advances (loans ): Advances are among the least liquid of a bank's assets, yet they are the most profitable.
Loan interest paid by borrowers provides for interest on time deposits, staff salaries, other administrative expenses and shareholder dividends.
Most advances are supposed to be short-term but in practice many are outstanding for long periods.
Loans are used to meet the financial needs of the business and personal sectors when cash expenditure exceeds cash income.
Banks provide a loan to deal with the resultant cash deficiency.
Banks also make other currency advances to traders, multinational corporations and sovereign governments.
This aspect of international banking will be dealt with in later chapters.
(vi)
Investments : For Albion Bank this primarily represents funds invested in British Government stocks (loans to the government), most of which will have less than five years to maturity, i.e. repayment.
It is an illiquid asset which generates a fixed income depending on the stock's interest rate.
As they are government securities they are almost risk-free.
(vii)
Premises and other assets : Premises are probably the least liquid asset yet most essential to the continuity of the bank's operations.
It is the most permanent asset on a bank's balance sheet.
Other assets, are constituted mainly by equipment, e.g. computers, in which considerable investment has taken place in recent years.
Summary : In using its funds, i.e. customer deposits and capital, a bank must balance liquidity against profitability.
Customer confidence must be retained if a bank is to operate successfully in the modern world.
The reader should endeavour to obtain a copy of a local bank's balance sheet to see how closely its composition corresponds with the above specimen  balance sheet.
(Many of the terms used in the analysis of the balance sheet will be explained more thoroughly in later chapters.)
Liquidity
Most banks are requested by their central bank to keep a certain proportion of their assets in a liquid form.
This enables banks to meet normal cash calls.
It also assists the government in controlling total money supply in an economy.
In most countries the supply of liquid assets is directly controlled by the central bank (or Treasury).
Consider the following simple illustration of a one bank economy where a 10 per cent liquid assets ratio must be maintained.
This bank was thus able to expand its loans by £2,200, i.e. £2,700 (Stage 3)minus £500 (Stage 1).
As a consequence total deposits and money supply increased by a similar amount, £2,200, i.e. £3,000 (Stage 3)minus £800 (Stage 1).
The 10 per cent liquid assets ratio requirement prevents further deposit creation; the bank must acquire additional liquid assets to create more deposits.
The above example illustrates the impact of the credit creation multiplier .
If a bank receives a new cash deposit of £ 100, it will retain £ 10 and lend out the remaining £90.
This will be re-deposited in the bank once the borrower has spent it.
The bank will retain £9 (10 per cent of £90) and lend £81, and so on.
Ultimately total deposits will increase by £1,000, the size of the multiplier being the reciprocal of the liquid asset ratio, i.e.  th.().
In the above example fresh cash (£100) might come into the banking system because the central bank issued more bank notes to enable the government to meet its expenditure.
In reality the multiplier's size might be smaller due to the public desiring to hold additional cash (not all the £ 100 is deposited in the bank).
If only £75 is deposited can you, the reader, ascertain the total deposit creation that will take place?
The government can also offset the £ 100 cash injection by future taxation or borrowing and thus prevent deposit creation.
Other bank services
Banks have a dominant role in most countries' financial markets.
A common characteristic of banks worldwide is their increasing involvement in a wide range of financial activities.
The general trend is towards one-step or universal banking whereby each bank can meet nearly all its customers' financial needs.
After due allowance for cultural, social and economic differences of individual financial systems, most countries' banks are identifiable more by their basic similarities than differences.
Most have experienced a growth in medium-term lending (loans granted for more than three years), a  greater reliance on interest-bearing deposits and increased international banking business.
The undernoted sections mention some additional services provided by banks apart from the acceptance of deposits, granting of loans and funds transmission.
Each reader should find out the services provided by the main banks in his own country.
(i)
Cash distribution : In most countries the main banks hold and provide notes and coin for use by the general public.
Cash is deposited and withdrawn by bank customers.
Cash holdings earn a bank no direct income, yet are essential for the conduct of everyday banking business.
(ii)
Corporate advisory services : Banks are prepared to give advice on mergers, acquisitions or raising new finance.
The last-mentioned might involve share issues or further bank loans.
Such services are a natural development from the increased involvement of banks as providers of medium and long-term finance to corporate customers in most countries.
In the event of a share issue a bank may handle the advertisement, application and allotment of shares.
Banks can also maintain on befall of a corporation its share register in which the names, addresses and holdings of shareholders are recorded.
(iii)
Computer-based services : Most banks now use computers to process their own transactions.
Spare capacity on such equipment can be hired out to bank customers, e.g. payroll service — produces payslips (wages record) for the customer's employees.
(iv)
Investment services : Many banks are willing to buy and sell shares on behalf of customers on local and international stock exchanges.
Some banks manage customers' investment portfolios with the customer and/or bank determining overall investment strategy.
Banks also provide safe custody facilities for their customers whereby share certificates and other valuables can be deposited in a separate compartment in the bank's safe.
(v)
Insurance and tax advisory services : Banks can offer customers insurance services through their own insurance broking departments.
All types of insurances are handled both for personal and corporate customers.
A customer can also use a bank's tax department to look after his tax returns and payments.
In most countries complicated tax laws make the use of outside advice and assistance almost a necessity.
(vi)
Overseas bank services : These will be dealt with in depth in Chapters 3 and 4.
Suffice to state at this stage that banks are essential for the smooth handling of overseas trade and investment transactions.
Banks handle international settlements, letters of credit and economic intelligence reports, etc.
For the personal customer, holiday requirements such as foreign currency notes, travellers' cheques and insurance are also provided.
This brief summary of bank services should provide the reader with some idea of the extensive nature of the work undertaken by the world s major banks.
The above services would be available at the Albion Bank.
Remember to check out the services provided by your own local banks — some regulations might prevent them from offering the above range.
Financial assets, liabilities and intermediaries
It is now necessary to turn briefly from the banking system to the financial system of an economy as a whole.
The national balance sheet
This lists a nation's assets and liabilities.
For the sake of clarity a simplified balance sheet is shown below:
The balance sheet for the hypothetical country of Utopia emphasises the fact that physical assets, e.g. land, buildings, roads and machinery, represent the real wealth of a nation.
These physical (or capital) assets play a major role in the generation of income within an economy.
Note that financial assets and liabilities cancel one another out, thus making net worth equal to the value of physical assets.
The reason for this equality of values arises from the fact that a financial claim is at one and the same time an asset to one economic unit and a liability to another.
It links the two economic units.
For example, bank notes held by an individual are an asset to the holder whereas to the issuing authority, i.e. central bank, the notes represent a liability.
A bank deposit  is an asset to the individual as the holder of the claim but to the bank it appears as a liability in its balance sheet.
The same applies if you hold shares or make a loan to a friend or relative.
The financial system is in effect a superstructure erected upon the real wealth of a nation — its physical assets.
An economy can be divided into various sectors and the net worth of each one — physical plus financial assets minus financial liabilities — can be ascertained.
In most economies the bulk of net worth is attributable to the personal sector , i.e. private individuals.
Funds flow analysis
This measures financial transactions between various economic sectors in a country.
A sector has a financial surplus if total receipts exceed total expenditure for a particular time period, and vice versa for a financial deficit .
The surplus sector must acquire/purchase financial claims (assets), and/or pay off outstanding debts, i.e. claims held against it; obviously, a deficit necessitates the opposite course of action, the issue of financial claims (debt) or a run-down in financial assets held.
The act of borrowing and lending gives rise to financial claims; the holders (savers) of assets and suppliers (borrowers) of claims create a financial market in some form.
One of the main aims of all financial institutions, including banks, is to channel funds from surplus to deficit units in an economy.
This is sometimes referred to as the domestic recycling of funds within an economy.
A simplified funds flow statement is shown below.
The figures indicate that the financial system enables the personal sector to put its financial surplus at the disposal of the other two sectors.
This financial surplus will be in the form of increased holdings of bank notes, bank deposits and shares, etc.
Some of the surplus might be channelled through financial institutions, e.g. banks and insurance companies, rather than holding direct claims, e.g. share certificates, on other sectors.
Note, the figures zero out in each year as financial assets and liabilities are opposite sides in the creation of a financial claim.
In most economies the public sector is invariably a net borrower due to its expenditure being in excess of its tax revenues, so it is thus obliged to issue financial claims, i.e. bank notes and government stock (National Debt).
Financial claims
Most financial claims (excluding bank notes) carry an obligation on the issuer to make periodic income payments and to redeem (repay) the claim at a stated value to the holder.
This might be fixed, e.g. a loan with a fixed interest rate and repayment date, or variable such as dividends on ordinary share capital (common stock), the latter not being subject to repayment by the issuer, as the corporation will be in existence indefinitely, e.g. British Petroleum plc or General Motors.
In most cases, if the holder of shares wishes to recover the money balance surrendered to the issues of the claim such as British Petroleum then the shares must be sold in a secondary market, i.e. a stock exchange, to some other party.
The existence of such a market guarantees the reversibility of such a claim but not the disposal price or value.
Every financial claim has some degree of risk attached to it.
With a bank deposit it is relatively easy for the holder to recover the money balance, risk is low and so also is the rate of return .
The greater the risk, as with ordinary shares, the higher the rate of return expected by the holders of such claims.
For the personal sector, most financial assets thus provide some form of return, are marketable and can be converted into cash at minimal expense and inconvenience.
It is the convertibility aspect that attracts people to hold a certain proportion of their wealth in financial assets.
The alternative is the ownership of physical assets — land, houses, cars, etc. — which might depreciate in value and require to be insured against theft or accidents.
The disposal of physical assets sometimes might involve considerable expense and inconvenience, e.g. legal documentation associated with land and property transactions.
Financial intermediaries
Financial intermediaries such as banks and insurance companies, acquire  direct claims on deficit units and issue to the public their own secondary claims to finance such acquisitions.
The personal sector has an asset in the form of a secondary claim issued by the bank.
Albion Bank has both an asset and liability.
Its asset is a direct claim on British Petroleum.
All other assets and liabilities are ignored in this simplistic illustration on the creation of claims.
Secondary claims must be more attractive to surplus units (the personal sector) than direct claims on deficit units.
Intermediation costs (financial institutions' operating costs) must be paid from the bank's margin between borrowing (deposit) and lending interest rates.
Such costs are reduced by the scale of their operations.
Most financial intermediaries are thus involved in a process known as maturity transformation whereby deposits generally have a shorter term than have their loans.
The liabilities of financial institutions are quite willingly accepted as financial assets by their holders, i.e. bank depositors and insurance policy holders.
Bank liabilities are different from other financial intermediaries' liabilities in that they form part of a nation's money supply whilst these other institutions must maintain accounts with banks.
As previously noted, banks can increase the total volume of spending in the economy by their credit-creating capacity while non-bank financial institutions can merely borrow and lend funds which have been already created within the banking system.
In other words such institutions can never spontaneously add to their liabilities and provide borrowers with additional funds.
A building society must attract deposits before it can grant a mortgage (loan) to a borrower to purchase a house, unlike a bank which can create a deposit by granting a loan.
Competition, particularly between deposit-takers, i.e. banks and non-banks, is based primarily on deposit and loan interest rate differentials, access to funds, the size of the branch network, opening hours and  provision of ancillary services.
However, despite any differences, all financial intermediaries must manage their balance sheets to ensure that no fundamental mis-match arises between deposits and loans as regards maturity and interest cost.
Sufficient liquid assets must be held to meet sudden fund withdrawals.
To conclude: lenders and borrowers use financial intermediaries because these institutions resolve a mis-match of needs and wants.
Also, most lenders desire to reduce risk and maintain maximum liquidity.
Borrowers generally require guaranteed funds for longer periods of time at the lowest possible cost.
Financial intermediaries thus acquire direct financial claims on borrowers and generate the required secondary financial claims to meet the surplus sector's needs.
Summary
Hopefully, the reader has now a sound understanding of money, banks and financial intermediation.
Many of the concepts explained might have appeared self-evident but a thorough grasp of these basic points is essential for understanding later sections of the book which deal with international banking and finance.
However, before dealing with such topics as the foreign exchange market, euro-currency markets and international agencies it is necessary to examine and understand the economic/financial problems faced by lesser developed countries.
Test questions
1.
Explain the main qualities (or characteristics) that money should possess.
2.
Describe the five main functions of money.
3.
How do banks create money?
4.
What are the main sources of funds for a bank?
5.
‘The asset side of a bank's balance sheet is a compromise between liquidity and profitability.’
Discuss.
6.
Stage 3 Balance Sheet (£)
(i)
What would be the impact on advances and deposits if the liquid assets ratio was increased from 10 per cent to 20 per cent?
(ii)
Assume Stage 3 balance sheet totals, and £200 of additional liquid assets are deposited in the bank.
With a 10 per cent liquid assets ratio what will be the new balance sheet figures?
7.
Give a brief account of the main services provided by major banks.
8.
Explain the concept of sector deficits and surpluses in an economy.
9.
What are financial claims?
How do financial and physical assets differ?
8.
Explain the concept of sector deficits and surpluses in an economy.
9.
What are financial claims?
How do financial and physical assets differ?
10.
Why are financial intermediaries required in an economy?
Answers:
6(i)
Deposits and advances both reduced by £ 1,500.
(ii)
Balance Sheet total £5,000.
Lesser developed countries
Introduction
This chapter examines the main economic, financial and social problems of lesser developed countries (LDCs).
A brief review of the impact of oil prices, external debt, financial flows and the Brandt Reports will enable readers to assess in their own minds the true nature, scale and possible solutions to LDCs' problems.
In an interdependent world such problems and solutions will obviously have an impact on most financial markets and institutions; this aspect is dealt with in later chapters.
Definition of a lesser developed country
Various methods are used to define LDCs.
World Bank Development Reports classify countries according to Gross National Product (GNP) per capita, into low-income, middle-income, industrial market economies, high-income oil exporters and centrally planned economies.
Under its classification in low-income countries (including China and India) approximately 2.3 bil people have a GNP per capita of less than $410 per annum, and the average is approximately $260.
The industrial market economies with a population of about 730m enjoy an average GNP per capita of $ 11,060 per annum.
These figures clearly highlight the difference in world living standards.
In the first Brandt Report the world is divided into two areas — the North and the South.
The former includes the USA, Canada, Europe, Russia, Japan, and, south of the Equator, Australia and New Zealand.
The latter area is the rest of the world.
The South therefore includes countries like Saudi Arabia with about 10m people and a GNP per capita of $12,230 per annum; however, most of its income is derived from oil exports and investment income, and in economic and social terms it is still regarded as  an underdeveloped country.
In this chapter the Brandt North-South classification will be used.
The North has approximately one quarter of the world's population and four fifths of its income.
The South which includes China and India, has three quarters of the world's population but only one fifth of its income.
Thus the LDCs, South or Third World, although composed of a collection of dissimilar nations lacking overall homogeneity, e.g. different land areas, population sizes, and climate, have one major similarity — the existence of widespread poverty either among the whole population or a major portion of it.
As a result, people in the South generally have a lower life expectancy than that of their northern neighbours, one fifth suffer from malnutrition and half have no opportunity to become literate.
The prime reason for this inequality is the geographical distribution of economic power.
Economic history/development over the last two hundred years has resulted in 90 per cent of the world's manufacturing capacity being situated in the North, thus enabling it to control world trade, investment and financial resources.
This economic power enables the North, especially the OECD nations to dominate the international economic system and monetary institutions, e.g. the World Bank.
Most countries in the South suffer from a low per capita income, a small industrial base and a lack of diversified exports, although important exceptions do exist.
A few Middle-East countries with small populations export oil and thus enjoy a high per capita income, e.g. Kuwait $ 17,880.
Others such as South Korea, Taiwan and Brazil are developing a diversified manufacturing base and are collectively known as New Industrial Countries (NICs).
However, the bulk of LDCs have neither oil resources to export nor a diversified manufacturing base, and it is these countries that account for a high proportion of the world's poor.
In Africa and Asia most LDCs were former European colonial possessions and as such were considered primarily as a source of raw materials and food.
Overseas colonial investment in plantations and mining resulted in a lack of diversified exports and the non-development of local processing industries.
Since their political independence most LDCs have tried to develop local manufacturing industries and diversify their exports in order to achieve some degree of economic independence from former colonial powers.
Some have been more successful than others.
The key economic objective has been to improve overall living standards by means of a high GNP growth rate.
To use economic terminology, these countries have sought to achieve an economic ‘take-off’ into self-sustained economic growth — some have succeeded, e.g. Singapore and South Korea, others have been less successful, e.g. Bangladesh and Zaire.
Economic growth
A country must experience economic growth if it is to produce a greater output of goods and services.
Providing such output growth is greater than its population growth rate the country's per capita income, i.e. standard of living, should rise.
The reader might wonder what factors cause a country to experience economic growth.
To a large extent it is dependent upon the quantity and quality of a country's factors of production — land (soil, climatic conditions, mineral wealth), labour (workforce size, skills and health), capital (plant and machinery, buildings, railways, etc.) and enterprise (inventive, innovative and organisational abilities).
Variations in the endowment and rate at which some of these factor inputs can be increased influence each country's economic growth rate.
Political stability plus appropriate tax and expenditure policies are also essential for stable economic growth.
Some countries enhance their economic growth rates by acquiring some factor endowments outside their national frontiers, e.g. use of specialised labour or importation of capital equipment.
Why do we need economic growth?
The opening paragraph provides the main reason — a desire for a higher standard of living.
People in most countries want more income to purchase more goods and services.
It also makes possible the attainment of other economic and social goals without, perhaps, the need for additional taxation.
Rising tax revenues should provide more resources for health care, education, etc., which encourages further growth through a healthier and better skilled labour force.
On an international basis, economic growth determines a country's influence and position in the world community or, perhaps, within a specific geographical region, e.g. Middle-East or South-East Asia.
A country's military potential is also determined by the size and growth rate of its national income.
For LDCs, economic growth should reduce their reliance on foreign aid and assistance and thus raise their self-esteem in the world community.
Finally, the costs of economic growth must be considered in full by each country (and the world as a whole).
The use of finite natural resources, e.g. coal, oil, must, perhaps, result in ultimate shortages.
Environmental pollution through smoke, de-afforestation, the development of conurbations (large built-up areas) or the use of nuclear power and the disposal of its waste products must be weighed up by a country's government (and the world community) against potential income growth.
The international economic environment
Most economists are agreed that the period 1948 to 1973 was one of increasing world prosperity.
During this era the advanced industrialised nations, i.e. OECD countries, as a whole, experienced full employment, economic growth, low inflation and relative balance of payments stability.
At the same time, the European colonial empires ceased to exist as many LDCs in Africa and Asia obtained their political independence.
Subsequent economic development in these newly independent nations was assisted by the overall growth of world trade and investment.
Since the early 1970s less favourable conditions have existed due to major changes and shocks experienced within the international economy.
The main ones are dealt with, albeit briefly, below (some will be re-examined in more detail in later sections and chapters).
The Bretton Woods system
A conference in 1944 resulted in the establishment of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) which provided an environment of relatively stable exchange rates.
It encouraged monetary co-operation between nations and provided nations with financial assistance to meet current account deficits, i.e. imports in excess of exports.
Countries received this assistance on implementation of corrective economic policies.
The resultant stability of exchange rates contributed to the development of international trade and investment.
In 1973 the Bretton Woods system of fixed exchange rates collapsed due mainly to problems associated with the dollar's external value.
Instead of maintaining a fixed rate or parity against the dollar, other major currencies were allowed to float in the foreign exchange market.
The widespread adoption of floating exchange rates increased the uncertainty and risk associated with international trade and investment.
It also, perhaps, undermined the influence of the IMF in the international economy.
Energy prices
In the 1950s and 1960s the world economy benefited from declining nominal and real oil prices plus easy access to Middle East oil resources.
Cheap energy provided a major stimulus to economic development in Western Europe and Japan.
It created new industries and employment opportunities.
In the 1970s oil prices increased due to economic and political factors.
The cheap energy era was brought to an abrupt end with a resultant shock to the international economic/monetary system.
Many energy-intensive industries had to reduce their productive capacity, e.g. oil refineries, steel works, while international banks found themselves engaged in a massive petro-dollar recycling operation between surplus and deficit countries.
A high proportion of the recycled funds were channelled through the emerging euro-currency markets.
Inflation
Up to the mid-1960s, inflation rates had been low in the international economy due to two major factors.
Firstly, the USA experienced low inflation in its economy up to the early 1960s due to‘conservative economic policies.
This aided the operation of the fixed exchange rate system and helped to maintain a low inflation rate in the international economy.
Secondly, workers and trade unions in most industrial countries exercised a high degree of wage moderation.
This resulted in high profits and thereby increased investment in industry.
The 1970s witnessed the reversal of both these factors with high inflation in the USA and ‘aggressive’ wage bargaining by trade unions.
Resultant wage levels eroded corporate liquidity and profitability, although the extent of the deterioration varied between nations.
Such trends provide a major explanation for the rise in worldwide unemployment in the 1970s and 1980s.
High and volatile inflation rates also had an impact on financial institutions and markets as evidenced by fluctuating interest and foreign exchange rates.
It also affected the borrowing requirements of corporations, countries and international agencies.
Government Economic policies
The era of rising global prosperity is generally associated with most industrial nations pursuing active economic management policies — manipulating tax rates and public expenditure — to maintain full employment, economic growth and price stability.
In the 1970s high domestic inflation rates encouraged governments to change the emphasis of economic policies towards money supply control, as it was believed excessive money creation had caused inflation.
Such monetarist policies meant that employment and interest rates were left to find their own levels in the market place.
This change in economic strategy (the main objective now being price stability) had a major impact on financial institutions and markets.
Structural unemployment
This type of unemployment is associated with labour lay-offs in declining industries, e.g. steel, textiles, coal, in some of the advanced industrial nations.
The main causes are new products, new technology and foreign competition.
During the 1950s and 1960s high economic growth and government policies alleviated this problem, so that tariff and quota reductions were implemented to the benefit of all nations engaged in international trade.
Apart from stimulating trade the curtailment of protectionism assisted industrialisation in several LDCs, e.g. South Korea.
Since the early 1970s rising unemployment has encouraged the re-adoption of protectionist measures, e.g. tariffs, quotas, subsidies, to protect certain industrial sectors from overseas competition.
Such policies have an impact on new, emergent industrial nations as export markets and revenues are curtailed thus making it difficult for LDCs to service external debts.
Summary
The last two points highlight the fact that economic problems and policies of major countries, e.g., USA, Japan and West Germany, can influence the livelihoods of nations and people many thousands of miles away from policy-making centres.
This will become increasingly apparent throughout the rest of this book.
As the reader will, perhaps, already know, developments in the US economy and financial system (Federal budget deficit, interest rates, etc.) have a major impact on the international economy and financial system.
LDCs' economic resources and problems
Population
The above statistics highlight the world population problem.
At present the world's population is increasing by over 200,000 per day, with most of the growth concentrated in the LDCs.
Some estimates have the world's population peaking/stabilising in 2050, others 2100 at about ten billions; however, these population projections are dependent upon there being sufficient food supplies, and no nuclear war or ecological disaster on the planet.
Population growth will not be evenly distributed between the world's regions.
Growth rates in the North are well below the world average and thus its population will increase by about only 20 per cent between 1980 and 2025.
In contrast, the South's population is expected to double before 2025, thereby increasing its share of the world total from around 75 per cent in 1980 to nearly 85 per cent in 2025.
Africa with a population of about 500m in 1980 will have 850m by 2000 and 1,600m by 2025.
Most of this growth will be in countries with a GNP per capita of less than $700.
The anticipated increase in the South's population is the result of a high birth rate and, at present, a declining death rate; thus despite some economic growth many poor LDCs face the prospect of static or declining per capita incomes.
It might be thought that a larger population would create a larger labour force and market, thereby increasing the level of economic welfare in LDCs; however, it is essential for other resources (land, capital and enterprise) to be available also to generate income and wealth through productive enterprise.
It is the inadequacy of these other resources which acts as a crucial obstacle to economic development in many LDCs.
Another pressing problem in the South is the drift of population into the cities of LDCs.
Mexico City is expected to have a population of 31m by 2000 (11m in 1975).
Over one half of the anticipated increase in the South's population will reside in cities many of which already suffer from urban squalor, high crime rates, vandalism and political unrest.
Several LDCs' governments are endeavouring to halt this population movement.
Population growth has and will have a profound impact upon world food demand.
Although food production has risen in many LDCs over the last thirty years, imports of cereals have increased.
Africa, once a food exporter, has now become a food importer.
Bad management, lack of modern technology, droughts and insufficient agricultural investment have resulted in many African countries becoming net food importers so draining away some of their scarce foreign-currency earnings.
Apart from city states, e.g. Singapore, it is generally recognised that agricultural development must precede (or at least match) industrial development.
Food is the basic necessity of life and without it economic progress is impossible.
The World Bank has estimated that up to $8 bil per annum is required to be invested in the agricultural sector of LDCs.
Labour resources
The South's total labour force will increase by 600m between 1975 and 2000.
This does not necessarily mean an expansion of output or rise in output per head will take place, since a large proportion of the existing available workforce is either unemployed or underemployed in many LDCs.
Underemployment is endemic is the agricultural sector where the additional output of each extra worker may be zero (or even negative); this is a major reason for population drift from rural areas into city slums in many LDCs.
In most low-income LDCs the labour force lacks basic industrial skills because of an inadequate manufacturing base.
In many instances educational systems are a product of former colonial rule and needs; the result is too many administrators and insufficient engineers or accountants.
Some LDCs have also experienced a ‘brain-drain' as professional and skilled workers migrated to the North to seek out better opportunities and higher incomes.
It has to be recognised that LDCs face a difficult choice on how to spend educational funds — whether to erase illiteracy or train a small number of scientific and technical specialists.
The problem is made more difficult by the expense of education and the long pay-off time involved.
Despite these problems, most LDCs are increasing their education expenditures as the lack of skills and knowledge acts as a barrier to economic progress.
It must be recognised that an under-utilised labour force, without adequate welfare provisions, poses a potential threat to a LDC's political stability which might discourage much-needed foreign investment and loans.
Lad and natural resources
Variations in climate and soil fertility influence the level of agricultural output and the availability of cash crops, e.g. coffee, for export.
Many low-income LDCs exist on a slim margin between subsistence and disaster, and already in many cases the fragile natural environment has been damaged by over-grazing and over-cultivation associated with population growth.
Natural disasters such as prolonged droughts have also damaged the ecology of numerous African countries.
The World Bank has emphasised the need for increased agricultural investment in LDCs where over 60 per cent of the labour force is employed on the land, together with land reform (re-distribution of land ownership in favour of peasant farmers).
A country that has a large supply of easily-developed resources (land, water and minerals) will find growth easier than one that has fewer and less accessible resources.
To foster growth such resources must be developed, but this, however, necessitates increased investment.
Capital resources
In most LDCs there is a lack of capital (plant/machinery, etc) per head of the population.
Some countries lack a suitable economic infrastructure — roads, railways, docks, etc — and as a consequence are unable to exploit their natural resources.
In most LDCs infrastructure investment is largely the responsibility of the government.
Investment requires saving to take place in an economy, otherwise external funds have to be utilised.
It is difficult for low-income LDCs to generate a high level of savings due to the subsistence nature of agriculture and the high propensity (desire) to consume — a vicious poverty circle exists.
Low income equals low savings and investment, this results in a low economic growth and, because of rising population, per capita income remains low.
In many LDCs banking facilities and capital markets are either nonexistent or underdeveloped.
Some have suffered from high inflation rates and political coups which have undermined the population's confidence in domestic currencies and thereby encouraged investment in non-productive gold coins or jewellery.
External finance or borrowing therefore becomes a pre-requisite for industrial and infrastructural investment in many LDCs.
Foreign trade
Most LDCs experience at regular intervals external current account (deficit) problems due to a lack of diversified exports and/or deteriorating terms of trade because many obtain more than 50 per cent of their export earnings from one or two products, e.g. Zambia regularly obtains over 90 per cent of its foreign exchange earnings from copper.
A recession in the industrialised economies reduces demand and prices for most primary commodities (tea, coffee, rubber, bauxite, oil, etc.) which can have a disastrous impact on many LDCs.
The price of most commodities is determined by international economic developments and in markets over which most LDCs have no control.
It should be noted that LDCs engaged in economic development programmes will tend to have import deficits.
Providing such deficits are kept within manageable proportions they can usually be financed by means of capital inflows such as foreign investment or incurring debts to overseas banks.
For most LDCs the export of primary commodities no longer guarantees economic growth as it did for the USA, Canada, Sweden, etc., in the 1800s.
Why is this the case nowadays?
Three main reasons can be put forward to substantiate this claim.
Firstly, industrialised countries trade mainly with each other in manufactured goods and services.
The proportion of world exports supplied by non-oil exporting LDCs has declined.
In addition, the advanced economies are becoming more service-sector orientated (growth of personal services) which has reduced their primary and raw material needs.
Secondly, the development of Northern technology has resulted in synthetic substitutes for many natural products, e.g. jute and rubber.
Thirdly, European industrialisation and population growth in the 1800s encouraged cheap food imports and thus stimulated economic development in North America and elsewhere.
Now, industrialised countries are almost self-sufficient in basic foodstuffs due to the use of fertilisers, mechanisation and larger farm units.
However, the key factor has been domestic agricultural policies which protect indigenous agriculture for security or political reasons.
Such policies present a major obstacle to some food exports (e.g. sugar) from LDCs.
Political, social and cultural problems
Many LDCs gained political independence in the 1960s and 1970s, sometimes at the end of a war which proved to be destructive in human and material terms, e.g. Algeria, Angola and Zimbabwe.
In some LDCs, wars, invasions and civil unrest continue.
Others have not yet achieved real political/economic independence as the USA, Russia and France finance their governments, provide key civil service personnel and maintain a military presence for strategic and raw material reasons.
Corruption and inegalitarian (unequal) societies, together with one man or one party systems of government which are prevalent in many LDCs have tended to encourage political/military coups.
The extended family system in some LDCs encourages bribery in public services and, perhaps, preferential central government treatment for certain regions of a country.
Resultant regional tensions are often used by other countries to further their own political/economic aims among the LDCs.
A major problem for most LDCs’ governments is the lack of tax revenue to finance their expenditure, e.g. defence, health, education.
This arises due to an inadequate tax base and/or tax evasion by citizens with relatively high incomes.
Many governments thus resort to financing expenditure through domestic bank borrowing and printing money, both of which are inflationary.
Inflation, if unchecked, can result in economic and social disorder, as conditions akin to hyper-inflation (a thousand-fold rise in prices over a few months) make bank savings worthless.
In the final stages of such inflation, paper money ceases to have any value and people resort to barter, and in the meanwhile the country's financial system disintegrates.
Ultimately, a  new currency has to be issued by the central bank and the financial system is rebuilt, but not before much political and social damage has been inflicted on the country.
Finally, another major problem as perceived by Western governments and agencies is the philosophy held by many LDCs' governments to free/private enterprise, the market mechanism, foreign investment and expropriation of assets.
Also many LDCs have large state sectors, i.e. government ownership of industrial corporations, which do tend to be wasteful and inefficient, thereby resulting in a mis-use of scarce economic resources.
Oil imports and external debts
Fluctuations in the nominal and real (inflation adjusted) price of oil have caused problems for LDCs, especially non-oil producers.
The occurrence of oil-induced current account deficits encouraged some countries to rely on external borrowing from public and private sources.
The latter was provided mainly by international banks operating in the euro-currency markets to middle-income countries, e.g. Brazil, South Korea.
Other sources of external debt arise where non-residents purchase local bonds, or a non-resident corporation extends credit to a domestic corporation or establishes a subsidiary plant.
Sometimes richer countries' governments provide direct loans to LDCs.
Low-income LDCs rely mainly on concessional funds from individual OECD governments and multilateral agencies such as the World Bank.
The full consequences of external borrowing (debt) to pay for oil imports and economic development will be examined in later chapters.
Summary
The above sections have endeavoured to explain the overall economic, social and political problems confronting LDCs.
However, they are a disparate group of nations, so further analysis of some of the main categories of LDCs is necessary as a background for later chapters in the book which deal with bank lending policies, external debt and the activities of international agencies.
The new industrial countries (NICs)
Overview
The NICs are situated in Latin America, i.e. Brazil, Mexico, Argentina, and the West-Pacific Basin, e.g. South Korea, Singapore, Taiwan.
Although complete homogeneity does not exist between NICs there are certain features common to both regional groupings.
Each NIC has attempted to develop a broad industrial base to satisfy domestic demand and diversify exports so as to reduce reliance on a few major primary commodities, e.g. coffee, meat, rubber.
All have experienced rapid urban population growth which has been partly absorbed into the manufacturing and service sectors.
Increased output has enabled most NICs to experience rising per capita income and a gradual reduction in poverty within their societies.
Much of their industrialisation (and infrastructure) has been financed through external borrowing and by the establishment of plants belonging to multinational corporations.
At odd intervals external debt considerations, balance of payments constraints and reduced international capital inflows have forced some NICs to cut back their economic development programmes, with consequential rises in unemployment and related social problems.
Latin American NICs
These countries developed their manufacturing sector to provide employment, income and a diversified industrial base.
Development was initially assisted by protectionist (tariffs and quotas) measures.
Exports were awarded low priority in economic development policy while tremendous reliance was placed on external finance to fund industrial and infrastructure investment.
Naturally, large external debts were incurred to banks, foreign governments and world agencies.
Unfortunately, the promotion of industrialisation by protectionist measures tended to encourage inefficiency, waste and a diversion of resources away from the competitive export market.
In the 1980s many Latin American NICs had to reschedule external debts and implement austerity budgets (cuts in public services) to improve their economic situations.
As a consequence, most experienced a deceleration in (or negative) economic growth.
External debt continues to weigh heavily upon these countries.
The West-Pacific Basin NICs
These countries are situated between South Korea and Indonesia  (excluding China and Vietnam).
A number of factors have contributed to their economic success:
(i)
Japan's stimulus to the regional economy — it had no resources, except human capital — it is now the non-Communist world's second most important industrial power;
(ii)
the development of transport and communications opened up distant US/European markets — reliance on exports by most Asian NICs as their domestic markets were too small;
(iii)
low labour costs plus capitalist economic philosophy aided development of light export-orientated industry, e.g. textiles and transistors;
(iv)
the potential military threat of aggressive Communist regimes (North Korea and Vietnam) encouraged economic development and financial assistance from USA, Japan and Europe — establishment of the Asian Development Bank;
(v)
regional shift of population and industry to USA's west coast — recognition of Pacific Basin's economic potential;
(vi)
most West-Pacific NICs, by structural adjustments in their economies and controlling real wage levels, have been able to cope with external economic shocks more easily than other countries — with more intra-trade and an increasing share of the world's fixed investment, economic prospects are generally regarded as sound by bankers;
(vii)
most West-Pacific NICs have, by greater reliance on export growth plus domestic savings, avoided excessive external debts.
Summary
No single economic model can encompass all the West-Pacific NIC policies from Hong Kong's free market approach to South Korea's planned industrial strategy.
Nor has the possession of oil or any other natural resource been the sole key to development success.
Instead, the main ingredient of success appears to be that they have consistently geared themselves to the needs of international trade.
This action has also witnessed the development of their own banking and financial systems/ centres, e.g. Hong Kong and Singapore.
The reader will appreciate that any book dealing with international banking and finance must make some comment on the economic conditions and prospects of these two regional NICs groups.
The Organisation of petroleum Exporting countries (OPEC)
Overview
Apart from oil exports, OPEC's thirteen member countries have marked differences in land area, population, per capita income and political institutions.
On the one hand Saudi Arabia and the Persian Gulf Emirates have large oil reserves, small populations and very high per capita incomes.
A high proportion of their oil export revenues has been invested in the world's main financial markets.
On the other hand Nigeria and Indonesia are large densely-populated countries with relatively low per capita incomes.
Most of their oil revenues are used to finance imports of consumer and capital goods, the latter being associated with industrial and infrastructure investment.
The need for oil export revenues thus varies among the member states and influences the attitude of individual OPEC members on the cartel's oil output and price policies.
As most readers will know already, OPEC became a major force in the international economy, and in banking and finance during 1973–74 when it raised the price of a barrel of oil from $3.00 to $11.65.
This improvement in its members' economic fortunes was engineered through OPEC's near monopoly power in supplying two thirds of the world's oil at that time.
Subsequent OPEC petro-dollar surpluses, although short-lived, altered the distribution of income and wealth in the world.
Initially, the potential problems posed by this income/wealth transfer perplexed economists, financial experts, bankers and politicians.
As we now know, the market mechanism (demand, supply and the price of oil) solved the apparently insoluble problem.
It is now necessary to examine briefly this problem and how it was coped with, as reference to it is unavoidable in subsequent chapters.
The petro-dollar ‘problem'
Increased imports into the OPEC states were expected to absorb only  about one third of their increased oil export revenues, and the other two thirds had to be invested in international capital and money markets.
Some economists predicted that such capital transfers would bring about the collapse of the international monetary system along with the Western world's bankruptcy and demise.
By the late 1970s it became obvious that the petro-dollar surplus was not going to destroy the international monetary system.
A number of factors enabled the world economy to cope with the oil price explosion.
Firstly, the recession (1975–76) reduced oil demand while its high price encouraged the use of alternative energy sources plus oil exploration outside of the Middle-East.
Secondly, the absorptive capacity of OPEC was under-estimated as most member countries embarked on ambitious development programmes.
A current account surplus of $67 bil in 1974 was transformed into a $1 bil deficit by 1978, and whereas oil's nominal price remained stable its real price fell.
Thirdly, oil exporters’ petro-dollar surpluses were invested mainly in industrial nations' financial markets.
Initially, a high proportion of these funds was invested in euro-currency deposits with banks, and, later, long-term investment in stocks, shares and real estate took place.
The international banks, through the euro-currency market, recycled petro-dollars from surplus to deficit countries.
This important intermediary role and its consequences are examined in later chapters.
In 1979 the Iranian revolution and subsequent oil supply problems enabled OPEC to raise the price of a barrel of oil to over $30.
By 1980 the OPEC current account surplus was $115 bil while the industrialised countries had a deficit of $68 bil and non-oil exporting LDCs $65 bil.
The reader should note the analogy (similarity) to the domestic funds flow concept explained in Chapter 1, now it is being applied to the international economy.
OPEC oil prices peaked at $36 in January 1981 and once again experts predicted a permanent petro-dollar surplus.
However, the world economic recession (1981–82), energy (oil) conservation, non-OPEC oil supplies (Alaska, Mexico, UK and Norway), alternative energy sources (coal and nuclear energy) and OPEC imports quickly transformed the OPEC petro-dollar surplus into a small deficit by 1982 (approximately $13 bil).
The oil glut and OPEC
As noted above, developments in the oil industry have reduced, perhaps only temporary, the dependence of the non-Communist world on OPEC oil supplies.
In 1984 the OPEC member countries had to reduce their crude oil output to about one half of its potential capacity, and at the same time the price of oil per barrel fell below $30.
Obviously, oil revenues have declined — OPEC oil income $280bil in 1980, $160bil in 1983 — and an overall OPEC current account surplus of over $100 bil was transformed into a $25bil deficit in 1983.
Such a turnaround in its external account benefited oil importing/consuming nations, e.g. USA, Europe and Japan, and assisted their economic recovery.
Non-oil LDCs also benefited from lower oil import bills.
Of course oil exporters, e.g. Nigeria and Algeria, have had to revise ambitious economic development programmes whilst some of the Persian Gulf oil exporters have disposed of some of their capital and money market investments.
The reader should endeavour to keep up to date with oil market developments because of their impact upon the international economy and financial system.
The paradox of the oil market
In 1976–78 an economic upturn partly contributed to the second oil price explosion.
This was followed by a deep recession (1981–82) and energy conservation measures, with a consequential fall in world oil demand and prices.
Oil exporters, as noted, had to cut their imports and thus, perhaps, aggravated the world recession.
Lower oil prices also tend to influence the rate of exploration and exploitation of new oil wells along with reduced investment in energy conservation.
These factors, possibly, result in the oil market amplifying the business cycle in the international economy.
The reader might question the wisdom of leaving oil prices to be determined by purely market forces.
Global co-operation between oil exporters and importers has been suggested as a means of averting a re-occurrence of the oil market cycle of the 1970s.
However, such a suggestion is not helped by the controversy and confusion that surround oil demand forecasts, proven reserves and exploration levels.
It might now be the case that the best guarantee of future oil supplies lies in the mutual economic interests that exist between Arab oil exporting economies and the industrial North.
The former have invested considerable sums of money in the latter's capital and money markets (see Table 2.2 page 53).
One final point must be made clear to the reader regarding OPEC and Middle East oil supplies.
The Arabian peninsula contains one half of the non-Communist world's oil reserves, Saudi Arabia's proven oil reserves are fourfold those of USA and UK together.
Unfortunately, the Middle-East  continues to remain politically and militarily unstable, with any renewed conflict between Israel and its Arab neighbours, or a violent revolution in a major oil producer putting the West's oil supplies in jeopardy.
Such events would have serious consequences for the world's economy and banking system.
The Independent Commission on International Development Issues — The Brandt Report(s)
Introduction
The Commission was set up in December 1977 at the World Bank's instigation, under the chairmanship of Willy Brandt, former Chancellor of the Federal Republic of West Germany.
Its members were drawn from the North and South (including oil exporters).
No Soviet bloc representatives sat on the Commission.
After its publication in February 1980 a deterioration in the world's economic and political ‘climate’ made the large resource transfers and major institutional changes suggested only a remote possibility.
The Report's overall philosophy was that the reshaping of North-South relations had to be regarded as vital to mankind's future.
It suggested that all countries had strong mutual interests in providing growing markets for each others' products, in security of supplies and in a more stable monetary system.
It emphasised the need for increased aid (resource transfers) and financial flows from the rich industrialised nations to non-oil LDCs.
The notions of partnership and mutual benefit were continuously emphasised.
It stressed the need for world economic growth and reduced protectionism to enable the South to industrialise and expand its exports.
Military expenditure required to be reduced with resultant savings being utilised to improve the world's environment and health services.
Tasks identified for the South were the encouragement of small-scale local industry particularly in the rural sector and improving education and sound domestic economic management through realistic tax and expenditure policies.
A Programme for Survival
The Brandt Report made six major recommendations:
(i)
Energy : It recommended that the North conserve oil and reduce  per capita energy consumption.
In the event of a future oil shortage the LDCs were to receive priority supplies to meet basic economic needs.
It also suggested more finance be made available for oil and gas exploration in non-oil LDCs.
Its recommendation for a global oil strategy has so far received no recognition, despite oil being the lifeblood of industrial (modern) society.
(ii)
Industrialisation : Most LDCs must industrialise to achieve a higher per capita income.
The South accounts for approximately 10 per cent of world manufacturing capacity at present, and the Report's objective was to raise this to 25 per cent by the year 2000.
Such an ambitious target was dependent upon adequate financial flows, access to the North's markets and secure oil supplies.
The Report emphasised the need for old industrial nations, e.g. UK, West Germany, to re-deploy capital and labour resources into technically advanced industries and activities as traditional manufactures (textiles, ships, steel, etc.) are replaced by LDC imports.
Such structural changes are inevitable with the international division of labour but Northern protectionism will, undoubtedly, slow down this process.
(iii)
World monetary reform : The Report emphasised the need for world monetary reform as a pre-condition for a new international economic order, i.e. a re-distribution of income and wealth between the North and South.
Stable exchange rates were regarded as absolutely essential to reduce LDCs' economic management problems and better adjustment mechanisms were required to share the burden of external imbalances between deficit and surplus countries.
It also recommended the replacement of reserve currencies ($US, Deutsche Mark, etc.) with a new form of international liquidity supplied by the IMF.
Most international monetary institutions were regarded as being outdated with virtually no Communist country representation.
In addition, the South had never achieved sufficient standing in these institutions that their numbers or importance deserved.
Whether any of these proposals are realistic or not will be examined in the later chapters of this book.
(iv)
Development finance : The Report acknowledged the crucial role played by the international banks in providing loans and export credits to non-oil LDCs.
But even in February 1980 it doubted the long-term viability of this mechanism and pointed to potential LDCs' debt servicing problems for banks.
Its suggestion of increased co-operation and assistance of international agencies with banks was subsequently acted upon after Mexico's rescheduling request in August 1982.
It criticised the OECD countries for failing to meet the United Nations' foreign aid target of 0.7 per cent of their GNPs.
The Report estimated the LDCs' development finance needs to be at a minimum of $100bil per annum for the remainder of this century.
Whether such  finance will be made available and how it might be channelled are major themes in subsequent chapters.
(v)
The Emergency Programme 1980–85 : Most of the above Brandt proposals covered a period of twenty years.
To cope with short-term problems it proposed an emergency programme covering aid, energy, food and international relations over five years.
This was not implemented.
(vi)
A Summit conference : The final recommendation was for a global summit to discuss international economic and financial issues raised by the Report.
Criticisms of the Brandt Report
A number of criticisms were made by economists, bankers and politicians from various countries.
Some of the recommendations, it was felt, lacked detailed analysis while the benefits of private enterprise in the South were apparently undervalued.
Commodity price stabilisation schemes appeared to be aimed at interfering with market forces, i.e. demand and supply.
To many the Report failed to take account of the lack of homogeneity among LDCs and overlooked various NICs that had achieved success through capitalism, i.e. private enterprise.
To some, aid destroyed a nation's social fabric, resulted in unproductive enterprises and maintained in many instances the existing oligarchy (ruling class).
Many of these views were held by several OECD governments.
The Cancun summit Conference — October 1981
Austria and Mexico initiated the North-South conference which took place on 22–23 October 1981.
The summit at Cancun in Mexico was attended by twenty-two countries' leaders.
To all intents and purposes it was a failure.
On all the major topics listed under the Programme for Survival no progress towards any international agreement or solution was made.
Instead, renewed global negotiations were to be undertaken at the United Nations despite the failure of previous negotiations to achieve any concrete results.
The US Administration under President Reagan rejected outright the need for a new international economic order or any sweeping changes in international monetary institutions.
It emphasised the need for economic/ political freedom and self-interest in order to provide incentives for work, saving and investment.
Such a political and economic environment had enabled the USA to increase its productive capacity over the previous hundred and fifty years to become the world's greatest economic power.
The most the USA could do (or offered) was to pursue an open trade  policy, provide access to its capital markets and reduce domestic inflation.
To the US Government the Brandt Report wanted an extension of socialist principles into the international arena.
President Reagan summarised the US view, prior to the summit, by stating on 15 October 1981:
‘At Cancun we will promote a revolutionary idea born more than two hundred years ago.
It's called freedom and it works.’
Common crisis North-South: cooperation for world recovery — Brandt Report 2
A fresh appeal for a radical restructuring of the world's economic and monetary system was launched in February 1983 by Willy Brandt.
This second report did not re-emphasise the need for massive resource transfers, instead it concentrated on the adequacy of the international financial system and the debt problem faced by many countries.
It recommended an increase in IMF resources, significant changes in the conditions attached to IMF loans and more emphasis on supply factors (resource utilisation) rather than reducing demand in crisis-hit LDCs.
To help maintain private financial flows to LDCs it favoured the establishment of a multilateral investment insurance scheme.
Perhaps, the Cancun failure encouraged the Commission to be less ambitious in its demands.
Some of the above points will be examined in later chapters.
Summary
Perhaps, the main conclusion to be made from the response these Reports evoked is that in today's world and its existing political structure, the LDCs must rely on themselves to achieve a higher level of economic welfare.
There will be no immediate or automatic resource transfers to the LDCs over and above existing levels of aid provided by the North.
Readers should endeavour to keep abreast of current debates and conferences on LDCs’ problems.
It is now essential to provide a brief insight into how issues mentioned in previous sections of this chapter affect banks and financial markets.
This will indicate to the reader the close interrelationship between international finance and LDCs' economic development, a major theme of later chapters.
Banks and financial flows
Banks
If banks in LDCs do not function properly and fail in their vital role as intermediaries between savers and investors in the economy, then any existing shortage of funds for capital investment will be intensified.
In some LDCs people have no faith in financially weak banks and thus a great expansion of bank deposits is prevented.
Instead people invest their savings in sterile assets, e.g. gold and jewellery, which retards economic development and results in foreign exchange losses through legal and often illegal gold imports.
As already noted, capital formation financed by domestic saving involves a sacrifice of present consumption, a difficult requirement in most low-income LDCs.
Insufficient domestic savings results in greater reliance being placed on external finance from international banks, capital markets and international agencies.
It is essential that these externally borrowed funds are used to stimulate long-term economic growth and exports in order to service the debt, i.e. interest cost, plus principal repayment.
Unfortunately, a number of LDCs' governments squandered their funds on consumer goods imports and uneconomic projects which made no recognisable increase in their countries' productive capacities.
Such LDCs subsequently found it difficult to service external debts and this had grave implications for the world's financial system.
Some LDCs have been reluctant to rely too heavily on foreign finance (and investment) as it might result in undue foreign interference and intervention by richer nations in their countries.
This has even been a criticism of (or objection to) the use of conditional funds from the IMF, unless it becomes an absolute necessity for economic survival.
The World Bank and foreign aid
Many low-income LDCs have no access to market funds (bank loans or bond issues) and must therefore rely on concessionary funds or multilateral and bilateral aid.
The World Bank provides long-term loans although at a market-related interest rate.
The International Development Association (World Bank subsidiary) provides grants to poor countries for up to fifty years with no interest charge.
Both these institutions are dealt with in Chapter 12.
Aid supplied by the OECD countries (and capital-rich oil exporters) although amounting to about $33bil per annum in the early 1980s (approximately 0.36 per cent of OECD's GNP) was well below the United Nations'  target figure of 0.7 per cent of GNP.
Foreign assistance or aid will be examined later; suffice to state that it is totally inadequate in relation to the present-day financial needs of many LDCs.
Oil exporter' cash surpluses
Capital-rich oil exporters, e.g. Saudi Arabia, have invested vast sums of money in the OECD's financial markets.
Initially, most surplus petro-dollars were invested in euro-currency deposits and short-term government securities, but, thereafter, long-term investment in private corporations, land and property took place.
Most of the funds deposited in banks were subsequently lent to private and public borrowers in OECD and non-oil developing countries.
The petro-dollar recycling resulted in banks acting as international intermediaries between the surplus and deficit units.
An examination of this recycling forms a major part of this book's analysis of international finance and LDCs.
Table 2.2 highlights how oil exporters with cash surpluses have invested their funds in the world's main money and capital markets.
Summary
It is to be hoped that the reader has now some idea of the problems confronting LDCs.
Terms such as NICs and OPEC explained in this  chapter will re-surface in subsequent chapters as the interdependence of nations and the world's financial system are unravelled.
The next two chapters return to basic banking principles and the development of global banking.
Test questions
1.
Define a lesser developed country.
2.
Why is economic growth essential for LDCs?
3.
What ‘shocks’ has the international economy experienced in the last few years?
4.
Describe the main economic and social problems confronting non-oil LDCs.
5.
Explain the apparent economic success of various Asian NICs.
6.
How did the OPEC petro-dollar surpluses affect the world's banking system?
7.
Discuss the main themes of the Brandt Report (1980).
8.
What happened prior to and at the Cancun Summit?
9.
Explain the poor response of OECD governments to the Brandt Reports.
10.
Why are banks important to the economic development of LDCs?
Banks, foreign trade and foreign exchange
Introduction
The conduct and finance of foreign trade together with the settlement of export and import debts is a very complicated business.
Banks, through modern communications and worldwide correspondents, provide assistance to customers engaged in international trade.
In fact, without banks, payments between different countries arising from trade would be incredibly slow.
It is thus necessary to examine the methods of payment, types of trade credit and bonds provided by banks in industrial and underdeveloped countries.
Thereafter, a review of the foreign exchange market is required to explain how it operates, including bank involvement and the significance of spot and forward exchange rates.
This market has close ties with the international credit market, i.e. the euro-currency markets, which is examined in Chapter 5.
International trade and finance
First, as a background for the reader, it is necessary to consider the additional risks and problems associated with international trade and finance.
Foreign trade risks
The import and export of goods is more complicated than conducting domestic business within a single country, for a number of largely self-evident reasons.
Firstly, geography alone means foreign traders are less well known to one another because of the distances involved, e.g. a Brazilian exporter despatching goods to Singapore.
To complicate matters further, differences exist as regards legal systems, trade customs and language, all of which increase the probability of trade contract errors and make  settlement of these more difficult.
For these reasons international trade entails a greater risk of non-performance of a contract and non-payment on completion.
Fortunately, the expertise of bankers and the compliance of most traders with agreed international procedures keeps disputes and nonpayment to a minimum.
Secondly, international trade involves receipts and payments in foreign currencies, unlike domestic trade which is conducted in the recognised national currency.
International trade thus involves an element of currency exchange risk.
An importer might be able to make payment in his own domestic currency if this is acceptable to the exporter.
It is more likely that the importer will have to settle his debt in the exporter's currency or the currency of a third country, e.g. Brazil/Singapore trade deal billed and settled in US dollars.
Unfortunately, between the contract date and its settlement, movements in the relative values of currencies involved might transform a profitable transaction into a loss-making one for a trader.
Both importers and exporters are confronted with this foreign exchange risk problem.
Banks play a major role in reducing and eliminating such risks on behalf of their customers.
Thirdly, actual payment and receipt of funds might be delayed, frustrated or made impossible by external and internal events.
Even if no complications do arise, distance alone generally means slower debt settlement and thus exporters must decide how the transaction is to be financed.
Again this involves banks in the provision of trade credit (loans).
Traders must consider domestic and foreign exchange control regulations when entering into contracts and seeking settlement.
Other delays can arise if a country is experiencing a foreign currency shortage (insufficient export revenues) and some form of currency rationing exists which prevents importers from settling their debts on the due dates.
The most serious risk arises when a war, national disaster or excessive external debt results in a country's outright default and repudiation of outstanding debts.
Such country risk can involve an exporter in a total loss on a transaction, sometimes resulting in his bankruptcy or insolvency.
With these points in mind it is hardly surprising that international traders seek the assistance and advice of bankers in the conduct, financing and settlement of transactions.
Methods of payment
Various payment methods are used in international trade, the variations usually depending upon the degree of trust between the exporter and importer (and their respective bargaining strengths).
Readers should note the following is a brief description of a very complex subject.
However, it is sufficient for our purposes in this book.
(i)
Advance payments : This requires an importer to pay before delivery of the exporter's goods.
For an importer this has two disadvantages.
It entails extending credit to the exporter which involves a financial cost through the loss of deposit interest or incurring bank loan charges.
Also non-delivery of the goods will result in a serious financial loss.
For these reasons advance payments are rare, and instead most importers make an advance cash deposit, of say 10 per cent and provide final settlement on the goods' delivery or documents pertaining to them.
(ii)
Open account : Under this payment method the exporter gives up control of the goods to the importer and receives debt settlement at a later date under the contract's terms.
This is similar to the conduct of most domestic trade transactions.
Such an arrangement requires a high degree of trust and confidence between the parties involved, a situation, perhaps, reached after several years of trading.
It offers the exporter least security and involves no specific finance arrangements.
Instead the exporter must use existing business resources or credit (loan) facilities of a bank.
Notwithstanding these drawbacks a large proportion of international trade is conducted on an open account basis with the documents of title being sent direct to the importer.
These documents include invoices, insurance certificates, exchange control documents, but, however, the bill of lading is the most important.
It is a receipt issued on behalf of the shipping corporation that the goods were received and will be delivered to a specified destination.
Bills of lading give the holder title and claim to the goods.
Under an open account, settlement is effected in a number of ways by the purchaser (importer).
He could draw on his own bank a cheque payable in his own currency and despatch it to the exporter.
The cheque funds (amount) have to be collected by the exporter's bank before being credited to the exporter's account.
Collection can involve a considerable time delay especially if exchange control regulations have to be satisfied.
Alternatively, the importer's bank could draw a cheque on its correspondent bank in the exporter's country.
This cheque will be in the exporter's currency.
No time delay is associated with this method.
The exact mechanics of payment will be examined later.
Finally, payment can be made by mail transfer, telegraphic or electronic transfer.
In the former, instructions are sent by airmail to a correspondent bank requesting it to credit the exporter or his bank with an appropriate amount in the exporter's domestic currency.
Telegraphic transfer is similar except the instructions are sent by cable, phone, telex or electronic transfer.
This is the fastest payment method but also the most expensive in bank charges.
(iii)
Bills of exchange : A bill of exchange is a written order (similar to a cheque) addressed and signed by the exporter to the importer, requiring the latter to pay on demand or at a future set date, a sum certain in  money in the exporter's domestic currency or other currency to the order of the exporter or some other party.
Bills of exchange (trade bills) are extremely flexible and suitable for settling international trade debts.
They have been widely used for over a hundred and fifty years.
Some, known as ‘sight bills’ must be paid by the importer on presentation.
More useful are term bills where a period of credit is allowed.
The importer signifies his acceptance to future payment by signing his name across the bill's face.
This form of acceptance is a legal acknowledgement of debt which provides a measure of security to the bill's holder, as legal procedures exist in most countries to recover money due on a bill.
The most common situation is for the exporter's bank to send the bill of exchange to its overseas branch or correspondent bank in the importer's country.
The latter, known as the collecting bank, then obtains payment or acceptance against the release of the documents of title to the importer.
This is known as a documentary collection.
Bills of exchange can have terms of up to 180 days before settlement takes place and can therefore be used to bridge a financial gap between the exporter making shipment and the importer taking delivery and selling the goods.
The exporter may sell his accepted bill at a discount for cash at his bank, e.g. three month trade bill £100,000, discount rate 10 per cent, exporter receives approximately £97,500 
Alternatively, the exporter could seek a loan against it or negotiate it to another party in settlement of a domestic trade debt.
The bank or third party collects the proceeds of the bill (full face value) on the maturity date from the importer (or his bank).
For the importer it provides short-term finance, pending the re-sale of the goods in his domestic market.
Credit provided by bills of exchange thus lubricates and assists trade development.
(iv)
Documentary letters of credit : This facility may be incorporated into a contract's terms to make payment by a bill even more secure.
An importer gets his own bank to guarantee payment by issuing a letter of credit.
Most are irrevocable which means the issuing bank is unable to amend or cancel its terms without the consent of all the parties, including the exporter.
If the domestic bank advising the exporter of the letter of credit confirms it, the document is known as a confirmed irrevocable letter of credit which means both the issuing and advising banks guarantee payment.
This might be necessary and advisable if the issuing bank's credit standing is suspect or country risk exists.
This is obviously the safest payment method and has become more  common because of foreign exchange shortages in LDCs.
The exporter's main obligation is to ensure the documents of title and bill of exchange(s) are in order, as any discrepancies may result in nonpayment or acceptance by the confirming bank.
Bills are either sight or term (thirty days, etc.), drawn by the exporter on the issuing or confirming bank; if it is a term bill it can be discounted.
For the issuing bank, the documents of title provide some control over the goods and may be used to ensure re-sale proceeds of the importer are paid to it.
Banks, trade credit and insurance
Most banks are prepared to make finance available to exporters to cover the whole cycle of negotiations, production, shipment and payment by the importer.
Similarly, banks make merchandise loans to enable customers to cope with seasonal imports especially where bulk purchases might ensure considerable discounts.
Loans provided to traders by banks can be either in domestic or in foreign currency.
As regards export credit, two types are available from most banks.
Firstly, there is supplier credit where the exporter extends credit to the overseas buyer, and the exporter in turn is financed by the bank.
This method is applicable to all the above payment methods (except advance payments).
The bank has recourse (loan recovery) against the exporter.
Such lending (generally up to two years) can be unsecured but often some form of security, i.e. collateral, is demanded such as legal ownership of all or some of the exporter's business assets.
Secondly, there is a buyer credit where a bank in the exporter's country provides a loan to the importer.
Payments are made to the exporter by the bank on presentation of documents certifying compliance with the original contract.
Under this arrangement, repayment obligations rest on the overseas borrower.
The importer is generally required to pay up to 20 per cent of the contract's price out of his own resources.
As noted earlier, exporting involves considerable risks — default, exchange control, wars — so it is preferable for an exporter to insure against such risks.
In most countries this is done either through a government export insurance agency or a private insurance company.
Various insurance policies are generally made available.
Some are comprehensive and cover short-term exports on a continuous basis, others are tailored for specific contracts.
Most government agencies provide up to 90 per cent cover, with the exporter carrying the balance of risk himself.
Such agencies might also assist in the provision of finance by issuing guarantees to banks which provide export loans.
Some large international banks operate separate export service subsidiary companies that make credit available to overseas buyers.
Payments  are made direct to the exporter in accordance with the contract's terms, with the bank having no recourse against the exporter in the event of the foreign importer's default.
Underdeveloped countries, as to be expected, make full use of supplier and buyer credit facilities available in the industrialised nations.
Loans repayable in half-yearly instalments over two to five years are generally on offer at fixed or preferential interest rates.
The banks receive a government subsidy to cover the differential between market interest rates and the loan's fixed interest rate.
Obviously, such credit facilities help to increase the supply of capital goods to LDCs, thus aiding their economic development programmes.
The terms vary with each contract, however, in order to avoid destructive competition through subsidised credit (an international consensus on export credit facilities exists between major OECD countries).
Existing agreements lay down guidelines for the maximum credit period and the minimum interest rate.
Banks and bonds (guarantees)
From the early 1970s onwards an increasing number of Middle East capital goods importers have demanded bonds (or guarantees) from exporters due to the cash or short-term credit nature of their import contracts.
A bond is normally issued by a bank to an importer guaranteeing the exporter's compliance with his contractual obligations, otherwise the importer must be indemnified for a stated amount.
Three main types of bonds are associated with export contracts:
(i)
Tender bonds : This provides an importer seeking competitive bids for a contract with a guarantee that an exporter (or contractor) is making a responsible bid and is technically/financially competent to undertake the contract.
If the exporter fails to comply with the tender's conditions and/or enter into the contract, the bank is liable to pay any costs (limited to the bond's value) incurred by the importer in re-awarding the contract.
Such bonds are generally equal to about 5 per cent of the tender's value.
(ii)
Performance bonds : A performance bond is a guarantee by a bank that an exporter will complete the contract.
The bank's liability is generally about 10 per cent of the contract price, but, however it can be higher.
(iii)
Advance payment bonds : Many export contracts contain provisions for advance payments to meet the exporter's costs.
Under this bond the bank guarantees repayment of such funds in the event of an exporter's liquidation.
These are normally for 20 per cent of the contract value.
Banks have full recourse against an exporter (or contractor) in the event  of a bond being implemented, so they are naturally concerned with his creditworthiness and commercial/technical expertise.
Importers stipulate the wording of bonds and which banks are suitable.
The banks, in turn, charge customers for providing bonds as they represent a real obligation undertaken by a bank.
LDCs and trade finance
The commitment of OECD governments to end subsidised trade finance, higher export insurance agency premiums and the poor credit-ratings of some importing LDCs with external debt problems have forced banks, exporters and importers to examine alternative financing arrangements.
One such arrangement is forfaiting which enables capital equipment exporters to obtain medium-term finance (two — five years).
Under this method non-recourse trade bills guaranteed by the importer's bank are discounted at the exporter's bank; the latter may commit itself to purchase the bills before the export contract is signed.
For bills to be eligible for forfeiting it must carry the guarantee of an internationally known and sound bank in the importer's country.
The guarantor's name is obtained by the importer.
This is commonly known as an aval .
The guaranteeing bank receives commission for this service.
The bill must be unconditional and not dependent on the exporter's subsequent performance, and the purchasing bank of the bill has no recourse against the exporter.
Once a bank purchases such bills it can hold the bills to maturity or sell them in a secondary market to any other bank(s).
It provides a LDC's importer with credit, as he pays the bills only on their due dates when they are presented for settlement at his bank.
However, with many LDCs suffering from external debt problems, the guarantee of a local bank might not be acceptable to the exporter's bank.
Such countries may resort to counter-trade.
Counter-trade is used by countries that suffer from acute foreign currency shortages and have little or no credit facilities to finance normal trade flows.
Other countries use it to increase their exports.
Under counter-trade a sale of good is contractually linked to an obligation to purchase goods or resultant output from the same country.
In effect the exporter assumes the role of a buyer and has to market the counter-purchased goods.
With an ever-increasing proportion of international trade involving some variety of barter deal, multinational corporations and international banks have established departments to deal with this aspect of trade.
A clear recognition now exists that counter-trade complements the more  normal methods of trade finance.
However, readers must remember that the vast bulk of international trade is settled and financed by the techniques outlined in previous sections.
Try to ascertain the financing techniques used by your own country in its international transactions with the rest of the world.
The foreign exchange market
Introduction
International trade and capital flows provide the reason for a foreign exchange market(s) because, despite increased economic interdependence in the world, each country maintains its own national medium of exchange.
Thus transactions between residents of two countries each using its own units of account necessitates the exchange of one for another.
Without this, trade would be impossible, as an exporter cannot generally pay employees in the foreign currency of his buyer, i.e. foreign importer.
Foreign currency receipts must be converted into the domestic currency in use in the exporter's country.
No single world currency exists (or is ever likely to exist) to facilitate trade and financial flows although some do perform monetary functions outside their national boundaries.
The most important is the US dollar ($) which is the world's major vehicle (trading) currency.
This means that non-US residents are prepared to use the dollar in settlement of debts, as a unit of account and as a store of value.
In its last role the dollar acts as a reserve (investment) currency.
Other countries' currencies are either fixed in value or fluctuate against the dollar in the world's foreign exchange markets.
The reader might wonder what constitutes foreign exchange.
Foreign exchange can be thought of as all liquid claims to currency payable abroad held by a country's residents.
For a country, exports (visible and invisible) together with capital inflows represent sources of foreign exchange claims.
The converse is true of imports and capital outflows, i.e. a depletion of foreign exchange claims.
Such claims take the form mainly of bank deposit balances denominated in a foreign currency.
Foreign currency bank notes held can also be classified as foreign exchange; however, as a percentage of total foreign exchange claims, notes are relatively insignificant.
The world's major currencies are all convertible into other currencies on demand by residents and non-residents of those countries.
Some countries' currencies are only partially convertible into other currencies  and their use for specific purposes, e.g. overseas investment, might be restricted by the central bank.
The reader should ascertain the position regarding his own domestic currency.
The term ‘exchange rate'’ relates to the price at which bank deposits (claims) in various currencies are exchanged against each other.
In other words, national media of exchange are purchased and sold against each other by residents and non-residents.
Consider a simple two country model -USA and West Germany.
If a German resident wishes to acquire a dollar deposit balance, he must sell his own DM deposit balance to an American (in reality the dollars could be purchased from a non-US resident).
The desire of the German to acquire dollars and the willingness of the American to sell them will determine the price, i.e. exchange rate, of swapping the deposits.
Once the deal is completed the German holds a dollar bank deposit and the American holds a DM bank deposit.
This is the reality of the foreign exchange market.
The actual bank deposits do not cross national frontiers in the manner that tourists carry foreign bank notes among their holiday belongings.
This key point about the exchange of bank deposits must be committed to memory by readers as it forms a basis for understanding the nature of the foreign exchange market and operations of banks within it.
Correspondent banks
All banks involved in international finance maintain deposit balances in foreign currencies with banks overseas.
For example, Albion Bank might have a dollar balance with Big Apple Bank in New York and a DM balance with Fritz Bank in Frankfurt (am Main).
At the same time Albion Bank will maintain deposit balances in domestic currency within London for these overseas banks, e.g., Big Apple Bank will have a sterling balance.
A bank's currency accounts held with overseas banks (correspondents) are known as nostro accounts (nostro is Latin for ‘our’).
If a customer (importer) of Albion Bank wishes to make a dollar payment for goods imported from the USA, then Albion Bank (AB) will instruct Big Apple Bank (BAB) to debit its nostro (dollar) account in New York and pay the required sum of dollars to the US exporter.
Meanwhile AB will debit (deduct) its customer's (importer) account in London with an equivalent value in sterling.
In effect AB sells the importer part of its dollar balance in New York in exchange for part of his sterling deposit.
The price, as already explained, is known as the exchange rate, i.e. the exchange price of dollar and sterling bank deposit balances.
Likewise BAB will instruct AB to make sterling payments due to UK exporters by debiting its nostro sterling account in London.
This two.way system of buying and selling bank deposits is the basis of the foreign exchange market.
No matter what payment method is used the importer's bank experiences a decline in its foreign currency balance abroad, and the converse is true of exports.
Banks replenish their nostro accounts by purchasing foreign currency bank deposits (claims) in the foreign exchange market from banks and non-banks which hold excess foreign currency balances in relation to their needs.
To acquire a dollar deposit a bank must sell a deposit (claim) in its own currency or the currency of another country.
AB could acquire dollars by selling a DM balance held in Frankfurt.
Assume AB holds $100 and DM 400 in its nostro accounts.
The exchange rate is $ = DM 4.
AB decides to sell DM 200 for $50 (DM 200 ÷ 4).
Consider the impact on the balance sheets of the three banks at these exchange rates: £ = $2; £ = DM 8.
Foreign exchange market operators
The main task of the foreign exchange department of a bank is the conversion of private or corporate bank deposits in one currency into another, e.g. $ into DM.
Banks have a dual role, as agents for their customers who buy and sell foreign exchange, and as dealers themselves in foreign exchange.
There are many foreign exchange markets, e.g. London, New York, Zurich, but however the main one is the London foreign exchange market.
It has an estimated daily turnover of $90 bil or over $22 tril per annum in  various currencies.
The foreign exchange markets of the world have an estimated daily turnover of over $200 bil, making it thus, possibly, the largest market in the world.
Within London, approximately 300 banks (British and non-British) offer foreign exchange services but only major banks, e.g. Barclays, Bank of America, Deutsche Bank, provide the dual role of active dealers and market makers.
To be an active dealer entails taking positions in currencies such as going long in the dollars and short in DMs.
Long means a bank is purchasing and accumulating deposits in a currency whereas short implies a run-down of deposit balances in a currency (possibly even a loan situation existing in a nostro account with a correspondent bank).
Such positions are taken by a bank on the basis of its view on how exchange rates are likely to fluctuate in the near future.
A market maker (price maker) is a bank which will always deal in one or more currencies.
Such a bank provides a major service to other participants by giving the market depth, continuity and ability to handle customers' requirements.
It is important for the reader to realise that no physical foreign exchange market exists.
Instead it consists of telephones, telexes, visual display units and other electronic gadgetry which link together the foreign exchange departments of banks in London and overseas.
Modern communications have created a truly worldwide market for major currencies.
Foreign exchange rates
The Bretton Woods Conference (1944) established a fixed exchange rate system whereby each currency had a fixed parity (value) in relation to the dollar.
The devaluation or revaluation of a currency against the dollar was permitted only when a country faced a severe economic crisis.
Such adjustments had in most cases to be sanctioned by the IMF.
Due to a number of factors, e.g. inflation and current account imbalances, the fixed exchange rate system collapsed in March 1973.
Since then major currencies have floated in relation to each other.
A flexible exchange rate system leaves demand for and supply of bank deposits (claims) in a particular currency in the market to fix its external value (price) in relation to other currencies.
Sometimes central banks intervene to smooth out price fluctuations but overall independent market forces determine foreign exchange rates.
Since 1973 violent fluctuations in the external value of some currencies have been witnessed, unlike the long-run stability of the 1950s and 1960s.
Fluctuating or flexible exchange rates have, perhaps, unsettled financial markets and contributed to world trade and investment problems.
It should be noted by the reader that only the world's main currencies  fluctuate in relation to one another.
Most countries, particularly the LDCs, have fixed the external value of their currencies to one specific currency such as the dollar, the French franc or a composite unit of currencies weighted according to individual trade flows.
In Europe a number of countries participate in the European Monetary System which attempts to stabilise exchange rates and thereby facilitate trade and investment flows between trading partners.
Exchange rate terminology
Three exchange rate terms are used in current economic and banking literature:
(i)
The nominal exchange rate :
This is the exchange rate of one currency in relation to another, usually the dollar.
(ii)
The effective exchange rate :
This measures the value of a currency against other major currencies on a trade-weighted basis.
An index is prepared by the central bank to measure appreciation or depreciation of the domestic currency's external value over time.
(iii)
The real effective exchange rate :
This adjusts the above index to take account of inflation differentials between various trading nations.
It measures a country's competitiveness in world markets.
If a country has a high inflation rate (relative to trading partners) and this is not offset by external currency depreciation then it will become increasingly uncompetitive in the world's markets for goods and services.
The reader should endeavour to obtain information on the various exchange rate statistics published by his own country's central bank or finance ministry.
Foreign exchange rate fluctuations
Exchange rates of the world's main currencies fluctuate in an unpredictable fashion as new information on inflation and interest rates, etc., is incorporated into market operators' expectations on future exchange rates -as the reader will appreciate volatile expectations result in volatile exchange rates.
Despite this assertion some economists and bankers believe exchange rates can be forecast by examination of key economic variables.
Estimates of future inflation rates in various countries might be used as a guide.
A country with a high inflation rate relative to competitors will  generally experience a depreciation in the future external value of its currency.
Some predictions are based on the existing and future balance of payments current account position of a country.
A substantial surplus or deficit will generally necessitate an exchange rate adjustment to restore equilibrium in the current account — a surplus is an indication of a strong (appreciating) currency and vice versa with a deficit.
Differential inflation rates and current account disequilibria probably influence exchange rates over the medium-term, i.e. two-five years.
Short-term adjustments in exchange rates appear to be more influenced by interest rates, economic factors (oil prices, strikes, money supply growth) and political events (elections, wars, East-West tension) in individual countries.
Thus exchange rates are regarded by some as being completely unpredictable.
The reader should try to follow and be aware of current developments in the foreign exchange market (and rates).
The spot and forward market mechanism
The spot market
In the foreign exchange market all currencies are quoted against the dollar therefore the number of individual rates are reduced, as market operators can quickly ascertain cross rates between various currencies.
Banks quote spot rates against the dollar.
This means the exchange rate is fixed immediately for delivery of the currency two working days from the date of the deal.
Assume a spot $/DM; rate of DM 3.98.4.02, i.e. units of DM per $.
This means a bank's foreign exchange dealer is willing to sell a $ for DM 4.02 and purchase a $ for DM 3.98 from customers.
A dealer's basic rule for a currency quoted against the dollar is sell high and buy low .
If a customer approaches Albion Bank (AB) in London with a $10,000 bank deposit and requested AB to make a payment in Germany, he would receive DM39,800 ($10,000 × DM3.98).
The transaction would be completed two days later after the appropriate cable instructions had been transmitted to the correspondent banks.
AB's nostro account with BAB in New York would be credited with $ 10,000 while AB's nostro account with  
Fritz Bank in Frankfurt would be debited DM39,800.
The latter sum would be transferred into the customer's name for his use.
In the market the completion date is known as the value date .
If a second customer approached AB with a DM40,200 bank deposit to sell and requested dollars in exchange, he would receive $10,000 (DM40,200 ÷ DM4.02).
The difference in DM between the two transactions equals DM400 (or £100 if £ = DM4 = $), this represents the bank dealer's profit which arises from the spread or margin between the selling and buying rate, i.e. DM0.04 per $.
In the actual foreign exchange market margins are narrower (DM0.0 15) and exchange rates are constantly fluctuating.
Bank dealers attempt to offset customers' purchases and sales, and cover any resultant currency exposures (long or short) by dealing with other banks.
In our example, after the first transaction AB was long in dollars as it had acquired additional dollars and short in DMs as it had sold part of its DM balance to a customer.
These exposures were subsequently eliminated by the second transaction.
A long or short position can result in a profit or loss for a bank if the exchange rate alters from that quoted in the initial transaction.
Assume after the first transaction the dollar depreciates (DM appreciates) and was worth only DM 3.88–3.92, then if the second customer once again approached the bank with DM40,200 and requested dollars he would receive $10,255 (DM40,200 ÷ DM3.92).
AB would thus incur a net dollar outflow of $255 on the two transactions.
Its nostro account with  BAB was credited US $10,000 (1st transaction) and debited $10,255 (2nd transaction).
To offset this cost partially, AB would have DM400 more (net gain) in its nostro account with Fritz Bank (bought DM40,200, sold DM 39,800) worth approximately $ 102 (DM400 ÷ DM3.90).
The overall loss would be $153 ($255 minus $102) for Albion Bank.
In each foreign exchange market the opening spot rates are established by noting the previous day's exchange rates plus those in earlier time zones.
London takes note of foreign exchange rates quoted in Tokyo, Singapore and Bahrain.
The spot rates for each currency change throughout the day and are used as a basis for establishing appropriate exchange rates for mail transfers, travellers' cheques and currency notes.
The spot rate is also known as the basic rate or telegraphic transfer rate.
If the financial press states the dollar appreciated against other currencies then exporters or non-US residents due dollars will receive more in their own domestic currency for subsequent dollar receipts.
Assume a West German exporter has sold goods in the USA worth $ 10m.
The initial exchange rate is DM 3.98–4.02 therefore the exporter will expect to receive DM39.8m ($10m × DM3.98).
If before receiving payment from the US importer the dollar appreciates to DM4.08–4.12 then the exporter will receive DM40.8m, an overall gain of DM1m.
Importers or non-US residents owing dollars will have to pay more in their own domestic currency to acquire the dollars they require to settle outstanding indebtedness.
Assume a German importer has $4m to pay for US cotton, then at DM 3.98–4.02 this will cost DM 16.08m ($4m × DM4.02).
At the new exchange rate DM4.08–4.12 it will now cost DM 16.48 m ($4m × DM4.12).
The additional cost is DM400,000 for the German cotton importer.
Such exchange rate movements have therefore an impact on exporters, importers and foreign investors.
Potential profits on overseas transactions can be reduced, eliminated or enhanced by adverse or favourable exchange rate movements.
The forward market
In order to avoid the risks associated with exchange rate movements, traders (and investors) can enter into a forward contract with a bank whereby the exchange rate is fixed for future delivery or receipt of a foreign currency more than two working days from the date of the deal.
The bank accepts the foreign exchange risk exposure.
The forward rates quoted by banks in the foreign exchange market stand either at a premium or discount in relation to the spot rate.
The size of a premium or discount for a currency depends on demand and supply in the forward market for it.
This is influenced by interest rates, economic and political developments or expectations.
Forward rates are quoted as an adjustment on the spot rate by banks and are published daily in the financial press of most non-Communist countries.
The following example(s) will explain the basic principles behind the forward market.
Assume a German exporter is due $10m in three months' time.
The spot rate at the export date is quoted as DM3.98–4.02.
So the contract value is DM39.8m.
It is possible that three months later the spot rate could be DM3.88–3.92 (dollar weaker/DM stronger) in which case the contract value will be DM38.8m (alternatively the spot rate might be DM4.08–4.12, therefore the contract value is DM40.8m).
A potential gain or loss of DM 1m might occur.
The Fritz Bank foreign exchange dealer in Frankfurt might quote the exporter a three months' DM forward rate at a premium of DM0.05–0.04.
This indicates that market operators expect the DM to appreciate over the three month period against the dollar.
A premium is deducted from the existing spot rate.
Under a forward contract the export receipt of $ 10m is worth DM39.3m ($10m × DM3.93).
This is guaranteed by the bank, irrespective of what happens to the spot rate over the next three months.
A forward contract thus insures the exporter against foreign exchange risk.
Like all forms of insurance there is a cost, in the above case DM0.5m (difference between the now spot rate DM3.98 and the forward rate DM3.93).
Forward premiums are deducted from the existing spot rate whilst forward discounts are added to the spot rate, in order to ascertain the future value of receipts and payments for exporters and importers in their own domestic currencies.
A discount indicates the market's view that the DM will weaken against the dollar.
Assume a different three month period.
Exporter's $10m receipt in three months' time under a forward contract will be worth DM40.4m.
Forward contracts can be either fixed or optional .
The former sets a specific date for delivery or acceptance of foreign currency by the bank's customer.
The latter enables delivery or acceptance to take place between the two dates (the contract itself is not optional, it must be fulfilled by both the bank and the customer).
The forward exchange market is thus used by traders (and investors) to insure against adverse short-term movements in exchange rates.
As previously stated, forward rates are quoted as an adjustment to the spot rate for all the world's principal currencies by bank dealers operating in the foreign exchange market.
It has been estimated that 65 per cent of the deals are spot and the remainder are forward deals.
Forward rates can be quoted for various delivery dates but the most common time intervals are one month, three months and a year.
The undernoted figures have been extracted from the London Financial Times for the reader's guidance.
Alternative foreign exchange risk cover techniques
What other choices are available to the German exporter to eliminate foreign exchange risk?
First of all, he could borrow dollars from the Fritz Bank and sell them in the spot market for DMs.
At the end of three months, the dollar receipt would repay the dollar loan.
The exporter would have to assess the interest differential between borrowing in dollars and investing the spot sale proceeds in DMs, against the cost of a forward contract.
In reality the costs would be very similar as the banks themselves cover their own forward contract exposures through money market operations in the various currencies involved.
Secondly, the exporter could insist on payment or make out a bill of exchange in DMs and thus transfer the foreign exchange risk to the importer.
However, this depends on the existence of a sellers' market (exporters in a strong bargaining position) which might not always exist; the importer might insist on being invoiced in his own currency.
Failure to meet this request might result in a lost contract.
Finally, the exporter could open a dollar account at his own bank in Germany,(or with BAB in New York) and then use the proceeds of his exports to pay for imports from the USA and other countries.
Conversion risks and costs are avoided.
This cover technique is used by multinational corporations.
The holding of dollar deposits outside the USA will be dealt with in the chapter on the euro-currency market.
Other bank services in connection with foreign trade
Apart from international money transmission and the provision of credit, banks provide other facilities to assist customers engaged in international trade.
Some of these but by no means all, are listed below:
Information service
Banks, by overseas representation and correspondents, are able to provide advice on economic, financial and commercial conditions in other countries.
Alterations in exchange control regulations can curtail a market  and/or result in payment difficulties for exporters.
A trader knowledgeable of such developments can take appropriate action.
Banks can also provide information on prospective markets, competition (domestic and foreign), customs and traditions along with traditional credit assessment on overseas importers.
Some large banks have trade development departments which can promote LDCs' exports in conjunction with various trade agencies.
Economic surveys
Economic and political reports on most countries are made freely available by most banks to their customers.
Again, these can be used to assess potential export demand or continuity of import supplies.
An adverse current account could signify new exchange controls or currency rationing while political unrest could mean non-payment or destruction of an export market.
Such reports might also be used by customers to assess the financial viability of establishing a presence abroad through a foreign subsidiary or joint venture.
Overseas marketing arrangements
Banks via their correspondents can obtain specific marketing information on behalf of exporters.
Most of the large banks employ trade promotion experts who can give information on local economies and trading practices.
Some countries conduct all foreign trade through state corporations which assess needs according to their current economic development programmes.
The supply of aid or multilateral finance to an LDC might be an indication of future import contracts.
Export factoring
Some large international banks offer their customers export factoring services whereby the bank despatches debtor statements to importers and ultimately collects payment.
It allows exporters to borrow in advance an agreed percentage (up to 75 per cent) of importers' debts outstanding and unpaid.
This helps to improve the exporters' cash flows and reduce overall debt administrative costs.
The banks make a charge for factoring services.
Travel services
A business executive going abroad can obtain foreign currency notes and travellers' cheques from his own bank.
Most banks are also able to offer travel insurance.
Summary
Hopefully, the reader has now some appreciation of the various payment methods, sources of finance and risks associated with international trade.
Perhaps, once again, a local bank may supply free literature on the exact procedures (and controls) used in your own country.
Obviously, trade finance or credit is important for importers in LDCs, especially where foreign currency is strictly controlled by the central bank due to a lack of adequate export earnings.
The review of the foreign exchange market, both spot and forward, provides some indication of how fluctuating exchange rates affect exporters and importers.
It is obviously a very complex subject, especially the various methods of foreign exchange risk cover which are available to traders and investors.
Some of the test questions will give you a chance to check your understanding of simple foreign exchange arithmetic.
Test questions
1.
Describe the risks associated with foreign trade.
2.
What methods of payment are available to an exporter?
3.
Differentiate between buyer and supplier credits.
4.
Explain counter-trade.
Why do some LDCs use it?
5.
Why is there a foreign exchange market?
6.
Explain the terms ‘active dealers’ and ‘market makers’.
7.
Define:
(i)
nominal exchange rate;
(ii)
effective exchange rate;
(iii)
real effective exchange rate.
8.
What methods can be used to reduce foreign exchange risk?
9.
Describe other bank services in connection with foreign trade.
10.
Using the undernoted information calculate: $/DM; 3.98–402 one month 0.04–0.03 pm three months 0.08–0.05 pm
(i)
German exporter receives $100,000, sells spot for DM.
(ii)
German importer requires $250,000 spot for DM.
(iii)
German exporter expects to receive $ 100,000 in three months' time.
(iv)
German importer requires $250,000 in one month's time.
Answers : DM398,000; DM 1,005,000; DM390,000; DM997,500.
Global banking
Introduction
Banking can lay claim to being one of the world's earliest multinational industries with financiers in Lombardy (Italy) lending money to various European royal houses in the 1300s.
Some of the Lombard banking houses maintained a presence in several of Europe's main trading centres, e.g. London, Paris and Amsterdam.
In the 1800s European banking links were further strengthened by agricultural and industrial developments which encouraged international trade.
This early form of international banking was aided by Europe's relatively compact size in which different countries used their individual currencies, thus giving rise to foreign exchange transactions.
However, it was the establishment of colonies and overseas trading companies that necessitated the development of international banking, i.e. overseas branch networks, as we know it today.
Colonial banking
British banks
British overseas banks were set up to finance trade between Britain and its Empire.
In effect the banks followed the flag of the Empire.
Most commenced with offices in the main ports of colonies, e.g. Bombay and Cape Town, and then spread inland as settlement took place or a military presence was established.
Retail banking facilities were provided to meet the needs of settlers.
In most cases the existing indigenous population was largely ignored due to its non-participation in the cash economy, or by the utilisation of existing arrangements.
Some British overseas banks also established a presence in non-colonial areas — Latin America, China, Middle East — to finance trade and investment.
Most British overseas banks — Barclays DCO, Grindlays, Standard, etc. -had branches in various colonies while their head offices were situated in London.
No exchange rate or exchange control problems arose as sterling was used to finance trade and most colonial currencies were backed by sterling balances held by colonial monetary authorities.
This facilitated the  switching (transfer) of funds within the Empire.
Funds for economic development were provided by means of sterling bond issues in the London capital market.
With independence, most former colonies established their own central banks and separate currency issues.
This curtailed global fund switching within overseas banks especially as most countries introduced exchange control regulations.
LDCs' governments also insisted on domestically-generated funds being used to finance economic development programmes and thus sought a greater degree of control over the operations of British banks.
Overseas branches had to conform to LDCs' central bank requirements.
To satisfy political aspirations some LDCs' governments nationalised (took into state ownership) foreign banking operations, whilst others insisted on local incorporation into a subsidiary company in which the government or its nationals had a shareholding.
Sometimes the overseas bank's shareholding in the new subsidiary was less than 50 per cent and thus effective control over banking operations was lost.
Such minority interests were often sold.
Despite the British Empire's demise, British commercial banks still conduct much of their overseas banking business through a network of some 3,500 worldwide branches.
These overseas banks, branches and operations provide finance for trade and foreign-based British subsidiary companies.
They participate in the euro-currency markets and local money markets of various countries.
Most British overseas banks are linked, or are part of, British domestic banks, e.g. Barclays Bank or Lloyds Bank.
French banks
French banks also established a presence in France's colonial possessions.
In most, they established a note issuing authority which was dependent on the Bank of France and the Ministry of Finance in Paris.
Again the link between the French franc and colonial currencies facilitated trade within the French Empire.
Most colonial commercial banks were direct offshoots of the main domestic French banks.
In Algeria, for example, prior to independence in 1962, these banks had 447 branches and, as a result, the Algerian banking system was similar in structure, working practices and supervision principles to banks in metropolitan France.
With independence from French colonial rule, most of these overseas banking operations were nationalised by LDCs' governments.
However, large French banks still maintain an overseas presence in many of France's former colonial possessions.
This has been assisted by  some former colonial possessions in Africa maintaining strong economic, financial and trading relationships with France.
Many of them maintain a fixed parity between their own currencies and the French franc.
This monetary union — the French franc Zone — facilitates trade and investment.
International banking today
Modem methods
The evolution of the international economy in the 1970s encouraged major banks in most countries to seek overseas representation and involvement.
Such overseas business represented not so much diversification as a natural development of banking facilities to meet customer needs.
Prior to the 1970s most banks relied on their networks of overseas correspondent banks (sometimes referred to as the banks' own banking system) to meet customer needs as regards international trade payments and finance.
In spite of increased overseas representation, correspondent banking relationships remain important as domestic branch networks of correspondents facilitate efficient global money transmission without which trade would be seriously inhibited.
However, such facilities fail to meet all the financial requirements of multinational corporations in today's world; thus banks have increased their capabilities by offering more extensive and comprehensive banking services via direct representation overseas or by strengthening correspondent relationships via consortium banks and clubs.
The reader should note that direct representation in various countries only marginally reduces the need for correspondents.
International banking in the 1970s and 1980s
Several interrelated factors account for the development and growth of international banking in recent years:
(i)
Customer needs : As stated, major banks in industrial countries have to pursue an international strategy to service the needs of their large corporate customers.
It is also essential for banks to be directly involved in the world's main financial markets, e.g. London, New York, Bahrain, Singapore.
The euro-currency markets have aided this process, as no one specific market centre exists.
(ii)
Profits : By having extensive overseas interests, banks can take advantage of different economic growth rates and stages of the business cycle in various countries, so enabling them to stabilise their profits.
This is assisted not only by meeting domestic customers' overseas needs but also by establishing banking relationships with indigenous customers in various financial centres.
Overseas participation enables American, European and Japanese banks to benefit from the dynamic industrial growth experienced by some NICs.
An additional source of business has been the increased use of external bank finance by non-oil LDCs in financing their economic development.
(iii)
Domestic saturation : At certain times economic stagnation and competition have put pressure on individual banks' profit margins, thus encouraging them to service effectively their domestic customers' international needs and seek out foreign markets for profit growth.
Most OECD countries are over-banked and also with the development of international money markets it became possible for banks to seek a wider source of deposits for their lending operations.
All these factors encouraged diversification of banking business outside national boundaries.
(iv)
OPEC petro-dollar surpluses : After the 1973–74 oil price rise the euro-currency markets developed at a rapid pace with banks in most countries establishing overseas branches or subsidiaries in the main financial centres to participate in the petro-dollar deposit pool and to solicit loan custom.
Summary
Many of the above points will be explained more fully in later chapters.
However, even at this stage the reader will appreciate that global banking is now an established feature of international financial arrangements.
Its development in the 1970s was closely associated with periods of petro-dollar recycling but, probably more important, it is the direct result of increased integration of national economies into a truly integrated international economy.
The euro-currency markets have altered the structure and operations of most major banks by encouraging overseas representation and making them innovative and adaptable to changing economic circumstances and customer needs.
Thus the euro-currency markets have affected virtually every aspect of the world's financial system and institutions.
One of the distinguishing features of modern international banking is its cross-border banking aspect.
This can be summarised as having assets in one market and liabilities in another.
Unlike the old colonial banking systems which mainly borrowed and lent locally, cross-border banking enables a bank, e.g. USA or Japanese, to borrow funds in one market (e.g. Europe) and lend to borrowers in another (e.g. Latin America).
It  necessitates active asset/liability management due to a bank's exposure to currency fluctuations and volatile interest rates.
Cross-border banking is essentially wholesale banking and has to a large extent been dependent on euro-currency deposit growth.
Finally, it should be noted that the development of international banking has resulted in an interchange of ideas and philosophies on banking evolution between banks in various countries.
It is now unrealistic to consider even domestic banking developments in any country in isolation, especially as so many countries are now deregulating their banking and financial services industry.
Direct representation
Overview
Most European banks, prior to 1970, were reluctant to establish direct overseas representation, apart from those with networks in former colonial possessions.
However, the needs of the 1970s to the present day have made representation in established and new financial centres absolutely essential.
Some have sought to establish a full banking presence in countries where regulations permit the opening of branches, but, as the reader will appreciate, this is an expensive exercise.
Others have found it more advantageous to acquire a local bank or set up a joint venture with local banks.
An acquisition provides immediate access to the local deposit market (and lending opportunities) while the existing management should be knowledgeable of the local economy.
This saves the new owner of the local bank considerable set-up costs.
Direct representation enables an international bank to introduce new products and lending techniques into, perhaps, an underdeveloped banking market.
Its international stature alone guarantees the attraction of custom, particularly from traders involved in export/import finance deals which small domestically-orientated banks might find difficult to cope with on their own.
In countries where a full banking presence is not permitted banks sometimes establish representative offices which do not engage in deposit-taking or lending but act as marketing agencies for other branches of a bank.
To participate in the euro-currency markets and international bond issues, most large banks have established branches, etc., in London, New York, Luxembourg, etc., along with some involvement in the Middle and Far East, e.g. Bahrain, Kuwait, Singapore and Tokyo.
Some European banks have opened branches and acquired local US banks to give them a stake in a country committed to free enterprise and profit, along with access to the domestic dollar market.
Consortium banks and clubs
The need to satisfy corporate customers' international financial needs has also encouraged banks to establish consortium banks based on existing correspondent ties.
Although no precise consortium bank definition exists, the Bank of England defines it as one owned by other banks in which none has more than 50 per cent ownership and at least one shareholder is an overseas bank.
It is a joint venture with a separate legal entity owned by a group of bank shareholders.
Most clubs tend to be rather informal arrangements by a group of banks in different countries which agree to support and provide a better customer service by means of reciprocal lending arrangements.
Most clubs are European in origin.
In London about thirty consortium banks exist.
Some were established to serve specific regional or industry needs whilst others enabled small domestically-orientated banks in various countries to participate collectively in the euro-currency markets.
Sometimes competitive pressures in the international loan market or the acquisition of sufficient financial expertise by shareholder banks has encouraged the disposal of stakes in a consortium bank or its acquisition by one of the shareholder banks.
Despite such trends, new consortium banks are still being created around the world (about one hundred such banks exist).
The main functions of a consortium bank are: to provide banking facilities to multinational corporations; to enable funds and instructions to be channelled between various countries within one organisation; to assist members lacking in expertise and financial standing to participate in the euro-currency markets.
International bank representation and LDCs
As previously noted, the changing political and economic environment (nationalisation, former colonial bank disposals plus outright bans on new entrant banks) has reduced the relative importance of overseas bank branch representation in many LDCs.
However, in some countries, overseas banks still perform the vital functions of mobilising savings resources and providing retail banking services to the indigenous population.
In addition, large overseas banks, e.g. Standard Chartered Bank, also provide vital access to international capital and credit markets for LDCs so enabling them to tap external funds to finance economic development programmes.
Us international banks
During the 1800s several US private banks established branches in Europe to finance trade and participate in the overseas marketing of US bonds, the latter being issued to raise funds to finance the USA's economic development.
Only in the early 1900s did serious US overseas bank involvement begin to take place.
This delay relative to Europe was due to the USA's later economic development and lack of colonial possessions.
The first US bank branches were established mainly in China and Latin America to facilitate trade finance and supplement, in most cases, unsophisticated local banking structures.
The main surge in US international banking took place in the 1960s and 1970s, aided by the dollar becoming the world's main vehicle and reserve currency.
It was also an era when many US corporations established manufacturing facilities overseas and, as to be expected, US banks opened overseas branches to meet their requirements.
Controls on overseas lending by domestic US banks plus the quest for new profitable markets encouraged large US banks to establish branches in the main centres of euro-currency business, e.g. London and Luxembourg.
Some of the largest US banks, e.g. Bank of America or Citibank, have earned up to 50 per cent of their annual profits from international operations; thus a US banking presence overseas is likely to be maintained or increased in future years.
Arab international banking
The internationalisation of Arab banking was encouraged by the oil price rises of the 1970s which generated large petro-dollar surpluses for a number of Persian Gulf states.
With these funds at their disposal, various governments, central banks or monetary authorities actively supported Arab bank involvement in the recycling operation rather than leaving it entirely to non-Arab banks.
The Gulfs economic environment also provided only limited regional outlets for funds which meant that a diversification of loan risks necessitated overseas involvement.
Initially, involvement with international banking was provided via consortium banks which offered Arab banks access to the euro-currency markets and other sophisticated financial operations.
This involved a minimal cost while enabling them to accumulate expertise and gain entry  into new markets.
Subsequently, European partners were bought out and Arab banks transformed them into international banking subsidiaries.
In the early 1980s a greater number of Arab banks was represented in London than in any Arab capital or financial centre.
With most banks having strong capital resources and ready access to the Middle East market, the future of Arab banking is assured.
Already Bahrain has become a major international banking centre with over one hundred and fifty bank branches and representative offices, although oil market developments plus the political environment of the region could curb its rate of progress.
London: The main international banking centre
London is the world's main international banking centre for the following reasons.
Firstly, the political/social stability of the UK attracts foreign representation in London while the risk of British governmental interference has been almost minimal, so far.
Secondly, sterling's former role as the major international currency enabled London's financial community to accumulate vast expertise in handling foreign finance associated with trade and investment.
To this is added the stability of the UK domestic banking system and money markets together with supportive services, e.g. telecommunications.
Thirdly, foreign banks have been subject to minimal regulations on their foreign currency (non-sterling) deposit and loan business by the Bank of England.
The latter has pursued an ‘open-house’ policy which has encouraged the establishment of foreign bank branches and offices in London.
It has thus indirectly promoted fierce competition in international banking.
Fourthly, London is situated in a favourable time-zone between the Far East and North America and thus acts as a valuable/key link between various national money and foreign exchange markets.
In the mid 1980s approximately four hundred foreign banks were directly or indirectly represented in London with American, Japanese and Arab banks dominating the scene.
A major attraction was the development and growth of the euro-currency market in London.
Apart from participating in that market, foreign banks in London also provide a number of other roles or functions — provision of banking facilities to multinational  corporations and their own nationals based in the UK; active London foreign exchange market dealing; sterling money market operations for clients; provision of banking services to British nationals and corporations.
This list, by no means exhaustive, will provide the reader with some idea of the width and depth of foreign bank activities in London.
Summary
This chapter has prepared the ground for the next few chapters which deal with the development of the euro.currency markets.
The main reasons for the development of international banking have been dealt with in this chapter.
The reader should ascertain the degree of foreign bank involvement in his own country.
Perhaps, a locally based bank(s) is represented in London (and other centres) in its own right or through a regional consortium bank.
It is by following up such topics that this subject can truly come alive for the reader — banking and finance (domestic or international) influence the everyday life of most people.
Test questions
1.
Why did the British establish overseas or colonial banks?
2.
Explain the growth of international banking in recent years.
3.
What are the advantages of direct representation?
4.
Define consortium banks.
Explain their role.
5.
Why is London the main international banking centre?
6.
What services are performed by foreign banks in London?
7.
Explain Arab banks' international involvement.
The euro-currency market
Definition of a euro-currency
A euro-currency is a time deposit held in a bank located outside the country (or central bank's jurisdiction) responsible for the currency in which the deposit is denominated, e.g. a dollar time deposit held in any bank's branch in London or a DM time deposit held in any bank's branch in Luxembourg (both financial centres are outside the USA and West Germany respectively).
The dollar is the most traded currency in the euro-currency market (ECM) thus the term euro-dollar market is frequently used to describe the entire market.
To assist the reader to understand fully the ECM this chapter will concentrate attention on the euro-dollar market.
A euro-dollar deposit is a time deposit denominated in dollars in a bank branch (US or non-US owned) outside the United States whilst a euro-dollar loan is a dollar-denominated loan made by a bank branch outside the United States.
The key factor is whether the deposit or loan transaction is entered in the books of a bank branch based in the USA or elsewhere — the former (USA) are dollar transactions whereas the latter are euro-dollar transactions.
Since December 1981 it has been possible for non-US residents to hold euro-dollar deposits and obtain euro-dollar loans from international banking facilities within the USA.
Such transactions are exempt from Federal Reserve Board (USA's central bank) controls providing they are completely separate from domestic dollar banking business.
These facilities will be examined at the end of the chapter.
Euro-dollar deposits and loans are virtually identical with deposits and loans in US-based bank branches.
Thus bank money managers and corporate treasurers readily switch funds between the internal and external dollar markets.
The important distinction between both dollar markets lies not in the nature of deposits or types of loan granted but in the  fact that euro-dollar banking is not subject to US domestic banking regulations.
Banks are not obliged to hold (liquidity) requirements against or insure euro-dollar deposits.
No interest rate controls operate in the euro-dollar market.
It is essentially a wholesale deposit market with most deposits in excess of $1m.
These factors enable the euro-dollar market to offer more competitive deposit interest rates than the domestic market.
It is this interest differential that distinguishes euro-dollars from domestic dollars; both have the same exchange rate against other currencies.
Euro-dollar time deposits are held by residents and non-residents of the USA.
There is nothing to prevent a US resident transferring a time deposit denominated in dollars from Big Apple Bank's New York branch to its London branch to earn a higher interest return as a euro-dollar time deposit.
However, the domestic dollar deposit remains as always within the US banking system, only the ownership of it changes (see Chapter 3, Foreign Exchange Market: Introduction).
The dollar deposit is money within the context of the US economy while the euro-dollar deposit is near money held by a bank branch in an offshore money market, e.g. London.
So the euro-dollar market is a place where banks outside the USA accept (borrow from customers) and place (lend) dollar deposits.
As there is no real dollar clearing and settlement system outside the USA, all euro-dollar transactions/settlements must take place through banks in New York  using their clearing house system.
Therefore all banks dealing in euro-dollars must hold demand deposit accounts with US banks in New York through which receipts and payments can be effected.
These accounts are also used to settle banks' foreign exchange transactions and to enable them to conduct normal correspondent banking relationships (see Chapter 3, Foreign Exchange Market: Correspondent Banks).
Thus nostro accounts, i.e. deposit balances with correspondent banks, are the basis of the euro-dollar market in London and elsewhere.
Euro-dollar demand deposits or accounts are seldom used or available as the balances of such accounts would be volatile and the costs incurred in such a service would reduce the overall efficiency and competitiveness of the euro-dollar market.
It is the latter factor that encourages euro-dollar time deposits from interest-rate-conscious corporate treasurers and investment agencies.
Although the term euro-dollar (or euro-currency) might imply a market based exclusively in Europe, as was once the case, there is now an active Asian dollar market based in Singapore and Hong Kong which enables banks in the Far East to intermediate in external dollar deposits.
A Middle East dollar market exists in Bahrain where euro-dollars (and other currencies) are intermediated in by a number of Arab and non-Arab banks.
Collectively these various banking centres make the ECM one of the largest money markets in the world.
Any freely convertible currency intermediated in (borrowed and loaned by banks) outside its country of origin is a euro-currency, e.g. euro-£ in Paris.
A bank with a Luxembourg branch holding euro-DM deposits will instruct its correspondent bank in West Germany on how to deal with its DM nostro account balance, as the euro-DM deposit is loaned to another bank or non-bank borrower for use (for an explanation of the euro-currency loan market and  diagrammatic treatment of such transactions see 5.4.1).
Sometimes domestic residents in a country are prevented from holding external bank deposits, e.g. French residents might be prohibited from holding euro-French franc time deposits in London or Luxembourg.
Other countries, e.g. West Germany and Switzerland, have occasionally restricted the payment of interest on non-resident accounts within their national frontiers.
However, both these situations do not prevent the development of a euro-market in the currency concerned, providing it is fully convertible for non-residents of those countries and is deposited in a bank outside of their national boundaries.
It is to be hoped the reader now understands fully the meaning of the term ‘euro-currency’; if not, read this section over again.
The remainder.
of this chapter and next three deal with all aspects of the ECM.
The growth of the euro-dollar market
The euro-dollar market's origin and development can be attributed to the following interrelated economic, financial and political factors.
(i)
The 1950s and 1960s witnessed the dollar's development as the world's main vehicle (trading) currency, in place of sterling.
This generated a demand for an efficient external dollar money market (free from restrictive US banking regulations) to finance international trade and investment.
(ii)
The Soviet bloc shifted its dollar deposits from US banks in New York to West European banks in London to prevent its deposits possibly being frozen by the US authorities during the ‘cold war’ era of the 1950s.
Security of deposits was provided by the correspondent relationship these London-based banks had with US banks in New York, the true identity of deposit ownership being hidden.
These euro-dollar deposits were then used by banks to finance international trade and investment.
(iii)
The US balance of payments capital account deficit in the early 1960s which was undermining foreign confidence in the dollar, encouraged the US authorities to restrict overseas lending by resident US banks and the domestic financing of direct investment (multinational plants) abroad.
These measures encouraged US companies and  foreign borrowers to raise dollar capital/finance requirements outside the USA.
This provided a tremendous boost to the development of London's euro-dollar market.
The US deficit also enabled most West European central banks to accumulate dollar reserves and as a consequence most of their currencies became fully convertible for non-residents after December 1958, which further facilitated the international transfer of funds.
(iv)
In the early years of the euro-dollar market's growth, the USA incurred an increasing external deficit which led to a considerable accumulation of dollar claims (deposits) by non-US residents.
To some there appeared to be a direct relationship between US deficits and the euro-dollar market's growth.
However,(apart from points noted in (iii)), no direct causal relationship or correlation has ever been established between the US balance of payments position and the euro-dollar market's growth.
This can be substantiated by reference to the facts on both.
Firstly, the market has expanded even when the USA has had an external surplus.
The market's size far exceeds cumulative US deficits over the last thirty years.
Moreover, the initial development of the euro-DM market in the mid-1970s occurred when West Germany had substantial external surpluses.
An external money market in a currency is not dependent on external deficits.
Secondly, euro-dollars (or any euro-currency) can be held by US residents and non-residents.
Both have the choice of investing their dollar funds in domestic or in external money markets.
The course of action taken is influenced by the return, risk and liquidity available on various money market instruments, e.g. dollar time deposits, euro-deposits or US Treasury bills.
With the abolition of US capital controls in 1974 all US residents and corporations have had total freedom to invest their funds inside or outside the USA.
Thus the euro-dollar market's survival depends on it being able to offer competitive rates of interest on dollar deposits.
(v)
The OPEC petro-dollar surplus provided a major boost to the euro-dollar market's growth in the 1970s.
International banks intermediated (or recycled) dollar funds between the surplus and deficit units in the international economy (see Chapter 2, LDCs; OPEC).
the euro-currency market's essential features
From the previous two sections the following points have, perhaps, already become apparent to most readers.
The ECM being essentially free and unregulated is governed by the principles of competition while most domestic money markets have been riddled with monopolistic elements and restrictive practices, e.g. credit (loan) allocation rules, which sought to secure a privileged position for certain vested parties such as government borrowers and domestic banks.
In the ECM the avoidance of reserve requirements, etc., permits the payment of higher interest on deposits (competition forced these cost savings to be passed on to depositors) while large loans are arranged in many cases by telephone or telex, and thus operating costs are kept to a minimum.
It thus provides lower cost loans by operating with narrower interest rate margins than those of domestic banking operations.
With new banks entering the market at will, competition is guaranteed in the ECM.
For the international economy it hopefully brings about a more efficient allocation of investment or financial resources.
In the final analysis it must be recognised that the ECMs are demand determined, their ability to provide large loans quickly and efficiently as required by banks, multinational corporations and governments being the main justification for their existence.
The euro-currency market's three components
The euro-currency loan market
In this short-term money market most loans mature within twelve months.
It is primarily an interbank trading market where banks lend and borrow overnight or up to one year on an unsecured basis.
This market accounts for up to 70 per cent of the ECM's gross (total) size.
It provides the breadth and depth of financial resources required to enable banks to adjust their liquidity positions with relative ease.
To explain the mechanics of the interbank market, readers should examine and carefully follow the following sequence of fictitious transactions between banks operating in the London euro-dollar market.
Stages:
A
Shell sells $10m of North Sea oil (shipment) to an Exxon refinery in the UK.
Exxon which banks with Bank W, transfers $ 10m from Bank W to Bank X to settle its debt with Shell.
Bank X is Shell's bank in the USA.
(Fed (Asset) balance used for illustrative purposes only, it could be other assets, e.g. money market loans or Treasury bills.)
Note, after transfer to Shell, Bank W (excluding all its other business) now has a ‘nil’ balance on both sides of its balance sheet.
The deposit and Fed balance of $10m are transferred to Bank X.  
B
Shell transfers $10m deposit to Barclays Bank, London.
This is the initial euro-dollar deposit.
Barclays' nostro account is held at Bank Y in the USA, therefore $10m is transferred from Bank X to Bank Y in New York.
This transfer is effected through the New York clearing house.
Note, Bank X's liability/asset balances are now ‘nil’.
Shell has $ 10m euro ‘dollar time deposit in Barclays Bank, London which has an asset of $10m in the name of its correspondent bank, Bank Y. In Bank Y's books Barclays’ balance is a liability, while the asset held against it is the original Fed balance.
C
Barclays Bank lends $ 10m deposit to Lloyds Bank, London via the interbank market.
As Lloyds Bank's nostro account is at Bank Z in New York, a transfer from Bank Y to Bank Z takes place.
Bank Y now has ‘nil’ balances.
Note in Barclays' books Shell still has a $10m euro deposit, only the asset composition has changed from a balance at Bank Y to an interbank loan given to Lloyds Bank, London.
In Lloyds Bank, the deposit (claim) for $10m is in Barclays' name and the asset held is the $10m with Bank Z.
D
British Petroleum (BP) requires to make a $10 in payment to Exxon for gas supplied.
Lloyds Bank lends BP $ 10m.
BP's payment to Exxon in the USA results in $10m transfer from Bank Z to Bank W in the USA.
Bank W, once again, has an Exxon deposit of $ 10m and a Fed balance of $10m.
Meanwhile Bank Z has ‘nil’ asset/liability balances.
A summary of the final balances are shown below:
Summary
At some future date BP must acquire dollars (from oil/gas sales) to repay Lloyds Bank, which in turn can repay its interbank loan to Barclays Bank, and the latter if required to do so can repay Shell's deposit of $10m.
These simple diagrams highlight the creation of a euro-dollar deposit (by Shell), an interbank market loan (loan/deposit by Barclays Bank with Lloyds Bank in London) and the making of a euro-dollar loan (Lloyds Bank loan to BP).
It illustrates the pyramiding effect of interbank lending which means that no single customer or bank can be sure of where credit, i.e. deposits loaned, it extends will end up (Shell's deposit was loaned by Barclays to Lloyds and the latter used it to grant a loan to BP).
A vast chain of bank intermediaries thus links the suppliers and users of ECM funds.
Banks use the interbank market either to finance international loans or  to meet liquidity requirements, i.e. deposit repayments.
Despite this market's importance to the existence and operational efficiency of the ECM, it operates on a very informal and unregulated basis.
Transactions are effected by means of telephone, telex and electronic messages between money market dealers who have an inherent trust in each bank's ability and willingness to repay these short-term loans (deposits).
However, having made the above comment, it must be stated that in the early 1980s the external debt situation of some LDCs made banks more cautious in their dealings with smaller and less well known banks and financial centres.
As a consequence, the interbank market experienced some contraction due to country risk, concentrating business on large banks in established and well supervised financial centres.
The euro-credit market
This market deals with the provision of medium and long-term loans on a fixed or variable interest rate basis by banks to corporations and governments.
Prior to 1970 most loans were utilised to finance international trade and investment, and since then governments have also borrowed funds to meet import bills and finance economic development programmes.
An examination of euro-credit lending techniques will be made in the next two chapters.
The euro-bond market
Euro-bonds are issued by corporations, governments and international agencies, e.g. World Bank.
Most bonds have fixed or variable interest rates and are listed/quoted on major stock exchanges.
The bonds are placed (sold) by banks with their investment clients worldwide.
It is essential to realise that investors hold bonds (securities) issued by the ultimate borrower, unlike the euro-currency bank market where investors hold short-term claims on banks (intermediaries).
Chapter 9 will examine the foreign bond and euro-bond markets.
Operational aspects of the euro-currency markets
ECM requirements
Three conditions must be fulfilled for the development of an external money market in any currency:
(i)
Foreign-based banks must have a nostro account(s) correspondent banks in each currency's financial centre, e.g. dollars in New York, French francs in Paris.
No restrictions must exist on non-resident transfers and banks require freedom to maintain and transfer nostro demand deposits.
(ii)
Banks must be able to offer competitive interest rates on external deposits and grant loans at favourable interest rates in a convenient location with an adequate economic/financial infrastructure, e.g. staff, telecommunications.
(iii)
Adequate demand must exist for external currency loans from corporations and governments.
Apart from the above conditions, the externally intermediated currency, e.g. dollar, DM, Sw.Fr., etc., must be reasonably sound and held by non-residents in substantial amounts for trading and investment purposes.
Size of the ECM
The exact size of the ECMs is not known.
Various estimates are published by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), central banks and commercial banks.
More accurate figures are being made available with improved central bank supervision of external money markets.
In the early 1960s the market's gross size was probably $20bil.
This increased to around $80bil by 1970.
During the 1970s dollar outflows, fluctuating exchange rates and OPEC petro-dollars resulted in an annual growth rate of 25 per cent, until by December 1985 the market's gross size was $2.8 tril.
The gross size represents total foreign currency liabilities of banks in major financial centres.
This includes liabilities between banks within the market, as well as deposits from official monetary institutions (central banks) and non-banks.
It thus provides a gross measure of the extent of euro-currency intermediation.
As previously illustrated in the euro-dollar market diagram there is a considerable amount of re-depositing between banks in ECM centres, so that the gross size overstates the amount on deposit from non-bank sources and made available to ultimate borrowers.
Interbank deposits regularly account for about 70 per cent of the market's gross size.
The above figures (like all others) are just a rough approximation of the ECM's overall size.
However, they do provide the reader with some indication of the growth and size of the overall market.
Demand and supply of funds in the ECMs
The ECM's overall size and activity is influenced, like all competitive markets, by demand and supply factors.
On the demand side of the equation, world monetary conditions, e.g. interest and exchange rate volatility, international trade needs and external account disequilibrium, influence users' needs for finance.
To this can be added funds required for portfolio (share/bond) investment and direct investment in projects and joint ventures by domestic and multinational corporations.
On the supply side, funds are deposited in the market by governments, central banks and international banks.
It has been estimated that OPEC supplied approximately 50 per cent of the market's funds in the 1970s.
These funds were supplemented by transfers made by domestic banks and residents from internal to external money markets in their own currencies.
Interest rates on offer appears to be the key factor influencing these deposit transfers.
The ECM's growth is also influenced by bank attitudes.
Inadequate capital resources, insufficient euro-currency intermediation profits or worries over loan exposures influence the willingness of banks to accept and lend funds.
Some of these factors will be examined in the next few chapters.
The reader will now realise that the size and growth of the ECMs are influenced by a complex array of demand and supply factors.
It is essential, for example, to realise non-residents (and residents) of West Germany holding DM deposits have a number of choices.
The DMs could be converted into the holder's domestic currency or another currency.
If DMs continue to be held then the funds might be invested in Germany's domestic money or securities markets, or alternatively the DMs could be  deposited in the euro-DM market.
The non-resident's choice will depend on his needs, interest differentials and risks associated with each course of action.
Two questions in relation to ECMs
Why do all the world's bank depositors and borrowers not establish and use euro-markets in their own currencies?
Firstly, in most countries (especially LDCs) residents are prohibited under exchange control regulations from holding external bank deposits.
Secondly, the ECMs are essentially wholesale money markets where banks deal only in large sums of money.
Only wealthy private individuals use the ECMs; for most people the inconvenience of holding a bank deposit abroad would outweigh any additional interest return.
Thirdly, most countries' residents have no knowledge of the existence or operational aspects of these markets.
If no ECMs existed what other possibilities would be available?
Assume the most drastic situation, complete closure of the entire euro-dollar market.
What would existing and potential depositors and borrowers do in this situation?
The ‘refuge’ dollars would simply be re-deposited in the US domestic money market.
US-based banks (in New York) would lend more dollars externally and greater use would be made of the New York bond market.
However, depositors would generally get lower returns and potential borrowers would find loans more expensive.
ECM centres
Chapter 4 noted the reasons for London's dominance as an international banking centre.
Like the foreign exchange market, no physical euro-currency market exists but instead it consists of telecommunications between banks.
Most ECM business is handled by each bank's foreign exchange department because of the close similarity between buying/ selling bank deposits and borrowing/lending bank deposits.
Both types of transactions necessitate the use of nostro accounts with correspondent banks.
Also the combination of both activities enables banks to reduce overall operating costs.
Other major centres of euro-currency activity are Luxembourg, Paris, Bahrain and Singapore.
Up to December 1981, the Federal Reserve Board actively discouraged domestically-based US banks from taking foreign currency time deposits, e.g. DM, Sw.Fr., by insisting on their being made subject to reserve requirements.
To overcome this obstacle and also to participate in the euro-dollar market, US banks opened branches abroad.
However, the realisation that New York and other US centres were losing potential  business with accompanying employment and income encouraged the authorities to permit the establishment of International Banking Facilities (IBFs) in December 1981.
These IBFs exist in domestic branch offices of US banks and will accept time deposits and make loans only to non-US residents in dollars or other currencies.
Such transactions are recorded in a separate set of books from purely domestic banking business.
No deposits can be accepted or credit extended to US residents or corporations.
Dollars borrowed must be used outside the USA.
Only time deposits in excess of $ 100,000 can be accepted by IBFs.
No reserve requirements exist.
Euro-dollar business booked in IBFs while not strictly ‘foreign’ will be similar to business booked in foreign branches of US banks in London or elsewhere.
Summary
This chapter has provided a detailed description on how the ECM operates and the reasons for its existence and growth.
Subsequent chapters will build upon many of the concepts covered, especially country risk, euro-credits and euro-bonds.
If the reader has any doubts in his own mind as to the mechanics of the ECM (and foreign exchange market), a revision of the main points in this chapter (and Chapter 3) should be made.
Test questions
1.
Define a euro-currency.
2.
What factors encouraged the euro-dollar market's growth?
3.
Try to visualise (or set out) euro-currency transactions in the books of banks.
4.
State three requirements for the existence of a ECM in a currency.
5.
How is measurement of the ECM's size made difficult?
6.
Identify the demand for and supply of funds within the ECMs.
7.
Can your own country's residents deposit and borrow in the ECM?
8.
What is the nearest ECM centre to your own country?
country risk assessment and sovereign loans
Introduction
In the domestic environment a banker knows his customer.
He is fully aware of the economic, political and legal framework within which he grants loans and accepts collateral, i.e. securities.
The international environment with its different economic, political and social values results in additional risk for the lending banker.
Some risks can be reduced through asset diversification, i.e. a wide spread of loans to various borrowers in different regions of the world.
Banks lending to private sector corporations concentrate on cash flow (cash income and expenditure) projections to generate questions on the use of potential loan facilities and possible repayment sources.
It is a tool or aid to a banker making a lending decision.
Concentration on a corporation's asset values (land, buildings, etc.) is of dubious value to a banker, especially if such assets are situated in foreign countries.
Asset values are certainly not applicable as security for government loans, as countries cannot be liquidated.
In the case of private sector corporations the bank's problem is compounded by the lack of international uniformity in accounting and legal standards.
To overcome such problems a banker must examine the available financial statistics to ascertain the creditworthiness of the proposed borrower.
Additional information may be sought from industry/ economic experts and from correspondent banks in the borrower's country, thus the external residence of a borrower adds new dimensions to bank lending decisions.
country risk — overview
Country risk distinguishes international (cross-border) banking from domestic banking.
Irrespective of whether the loan proposal is made by a government, state enterprise or private corporation, an appraisal of the  economic and political situation of the borrower's country must be made to assess the risk involved.
Banks deal with loan requests from numerous countries with differing economic/political prospects.
The risks associated with each loan must be assessed.
Risk analysis provides a framework for tabulating available information -economic, financial and political — in order to measure risk.
As the reader will appreciate, the degree of risk varies depending on the nature, size and use of each loan, e.g. a three month trade finance loan compared with a twelve year project loan.
With the growth of international lending in both domestic and foreign currencies most banks have increased their staff numbers and resources devoted to the assessment of country risk, although it has to be recognised that such a subject can never be reduced to an exact science.
Let us now consider some of the economic and political factors generally incorporated into country risk assessment models applicable to non-OECD countries.
Economic factors
An analysis of economic facts can provide some indication of a country's stage of economic development and progress.
Data used will be in the form of statistics for the last five or ten years, the examination of which should assist bankers assessing country risk.
Some of the undernoted terms were dealt with in Chapter 2 on LDCs.
Gross national product
Real economic growth rates can be used to assess the expansion in a country's output of goods and services.
A high positive rate is nearly always associated with rapid industrialisation and export diversification, both of which enhance a country's credit rating among world bankers.
Per capita real income
This measures a country's ability (or inability) to increase real output at a faster pace than population growth.
Statistics over five or ten years will provide definite evidence of increasing, stagnant or declining per capita incomes.
It is probably true to state that a country must achieve sustained increases in real GNP per capita to avoid social and political tension.
Declining per capita income over a prolonged period of time usually results in a change of government, sometimes after a revolution or a military coup.
Such an event might result in the new government being  unwilling or unable to service external debt, including bank loans, i.e. nonpayment of interest and/or the principal sum loaned.
A further factor of significance might be the distribution of income (and wealth) in a country.
Equality in poverty might mean civil population contentment whereas glaring inequalities sow the seeds of a class struggle or revolution.
Inflation rate
If a country is prone to high inflation then its currency will have to be devalued at regular intervals to maintain the price competitiveness of its exports.
Devaluation will increase the local currency costs of servicing foreign currency-denominated debt.
However, providing foreign currency receipts from exports are available to service external debt, no real problems should arise.
Sometimes high inflation is associated with rapid economic growth and structural changes in an economy.
If, on the other hand, the economy is stagnant and hyper-inflation is being experienced then a country could be heading towards economic, social and political chaos.
Economic structure
Agriculture's share in total output and employment can often be taken as a guide to a country's stage of economic development.
Those economies which have successfully switched underemployed agricultural labour into manufacturing and service activities have generally achieved significant real economic growth rates.
Another valuable indicator is the ratio of real capital formation (investment) to GNP.
A high ratio invariably means future output growth and, hopefully, improved external debt servicing capacity through increased exports.
As noted in Chapter 2 the real problem for most LDCs is the inadequacy of domestic savings in relation to investment needs, thus the need to resort to external finance.
Obviously, any improvement in the ratio of domestic savings to GNP will reduce reliance on external finance, and this might be achieved by means of a more efficient and comprehensive domestic banking system.
Balance of payments
Most country risk analysts regard the balance of payments as the most relevant economic statement for assessing a country's ability to service existing (and future) external debt.
(i)
Exports : A steady growth of export income from a diversified product range is the most desirable situation.
Most of the successful NICs have increased their share of manufactured goods imports into the OECD countries.
If a country depends on one or two primary products, e.g. bauxite or coffee, for the bulk of its export revenue then a fall in world demand and prices for these products can have a disastrous impact on export revenues, GNP growth and economic development programmes.
A country can also derive export revenue from service income, e.g. shipping and tourism, together with remittances from overseas workers.
For many countries (e.g. Pakistan and Turkey) the latter income source is important as large numbers of their nationals are employed in oil-rich states or advanced industrial nations (Saudi Arabia or West Germany).
(ii)
Imports : The composition of imports will be closely examined by a bank's risk analyst.
For most countries, raw materials, food, and oil imports must be maintained at an adequate level to allow the economy to function.
Any curtailment of such imports might damage a country's export potential and economic development.
Imports of luxury goods (TVs, cars, etc.) and military equipment can be severely curtailed to save foreign currency earnings without damaging the economy, although the non-availability of such items can lead to unrest.
The interest on external debt is treated as import expenditure, i.e. the service cost of imported capital.
(iii)
Current account surplus or deficit : The deficit difference between exports and imports provides a country's current account position.
A surplus may be taken as an indication of a country's ability to service its external debt, whereas a deficit might imply, if not corrected or offset by capital inflows, future debt servicing problems.
(iv)
Debt service ratio : This ratio is calculated by combining debt principal repayments and interest payable in a single year and dividing it by the country's exports for the equivalent period.
There is no maximum ratio for LDCs but, probably, a ratio in excess of 25 per cent can be regarded as indicative of future debt servicing problems.
Several major Latin American countries have had debt service ratios in excess of 100 per cent which resulted in debt servicing problems.
Unfortunately, for bankers assessing country risk, this ratio has two major deficiencies.
It ignores capital flows which, in the short-term, can be used to service existing debt.
But, probably more important, available debt statistics often relate only to government-guaranteed debt; details on private debt are not always available.
(v)
Reserves .
These consist of gold and foreign exchange deposits held by a country's central bank which can be used to finance imports in the event of an export shortfall.
A low reserve level in relation to annual imports or debt obligations could signify future problems.
Reserves in excess of the value of three months' imports are generally considered adequate.
Unfortunately, for some non-oil LDCs such reserves can be measured in terms of weeks rather than months.
These various economic indicators (past, present and projected into the future) are used in country risk assessment and thereby aid banks in their loan management.
Although such assessments are supposed to be objective, i.e. based on data, the value of such studies is necessarily limited by out-of-date official statistics in many LDCs.
Despite this major problem, banks must endeavour to monitor the external debt position of countries.
Political factors
A lending bank must concern itself as to a country's political stability.
By its very nature, political risk assessment must be subjective, i.e. not based on numerical data.
Despite this many bankers consider it to be more important than the aforementioned economic factors.
A bank is concerned that a loan can be serviced throughout its term, even although fundamental changes might take place in the political system of the country in which the borrower is resident.
Many LDCs are apparently vulnerable to political upheavals, perhaps due to the immaturity of their political institutions.
In the final analysis a judgement on the political stability of most countries must be highly subjective.
However, having stated this, the following are some factors taken into consideration.
Political leadership
A bank's country risk analysts must consider a country's political structure.
Is the country a one man or one party state?
Many LDCs have such governments which can be reasonably stable if they enjoy wide support among the population.
Such a political system might be beneficial for economic growth, as industrialisation and agricultural development programmes may be easier to implement.
The political ideology (philosophy) of a government must also be considered by a lending banker (or investor).
The strength of political opposition, perhaps underground, must be ascertained together with any past or potential conflicts involving minority, religious or ethnic groups.
History has shown that the insensitivity of civil or military rulers to such pressures often results in a civil war, coups or revolutions which can bring about a sudden change in a country's political ideology and attitudes to private enterprise.
For a bank this could result in the disruption of debt service payments by a government, state enterprise or private corporation.
Finally, how dependent is a country on the leadership of one man, perhaps, a former opponent and leader against colonial rule?
Perhaps his demise through age, ill-health or death might usher in an era of political instability.
Social conditions
The rate of economic and social advancement of a country's population can influence political stability.
An inequitable distribution of wealth, income and employment can result in future political instability.
Urban deprivation (overcrowded city slums) and an ossified (permanent) political/social structure are also causes for concern.
Information on these factors can be obtained by bank risk analysts from published material, the media and by personal visits of bank executive personnel to correspondent banks.
External relations
If a country is under threat from aggressive neighbours, scarce financial resources may be diverted from economic development programmes to defence needs, e.g. the importation of military equipment.
A country's strategic geographical position might invite super-power attention and meddling in its internal affairs.
Consideration might also be given to a country's membership and relations with international agencies such as the IMF or World Bank.
Summary
With the aid of these economic, political and social indicators banks endeavour to assess country risk.
Some factors are given more importance than others by risk analysts.
A country's assessed risk will influence loan terms — size, term and loan interest — to resident borrowers.
A bank will also consider overall exposure to each country which will determine the need for loan portfolio diversification.
Despite the use of country risk analysis it must be conceded that competition for loan business has sometimes encouraged banks to ignore  their own country or regional risk assessments and indulge in what can be described only as imprudent bank lending (dealt with in Chapter 8).
Bank lending to LDC governments and state enterprises
Over the years, international banks have experienced an increasing number of loan requests from governments and state (owned) enterprises.
In many cases the granting of such credits has depended on a country's general creditworthiness.
A bank in this lending situation must assess the borrowing country's external and internal economic/political health.
It is anticipated that borrowing of this nature will continue to constitute a large proportion of future cross-border lending.
Governments borrow funds for numerous reasons.
Some seek external bank loans to support the overall budget due to domestic taxation and borrowing being inadequate.
Repayment of such loans might be guaranteed by expected future mineral or commodity exports, yet to be developed.
Some bank loans will be used in specific projects — road construction, water supply, docks, etc. — or to help finance a general economic development programme, e.g. agricultural improvements.
The import element of such schemes can be financed by foreign currency bank loans.
However, for a banker such loans are not directly self-liquidating, as little or no foreign exchange is directly generated from such projects to service external debt.
Instead, the bank assumes that such schemes will boost overall economic growth and exports, thereby providing the necessary foreign currency receipts.
State enterprises, e.g. steel, oil and shipping corporations, also borrow from international banks to finance expansion, modernisation and the importation of expensive capital equipment.
In most LDCs both the exploitation of natural resources such as oil, copper and bauxite, and also certain key industries, are state owned.
Despite this, externally borrowed funds are used to supplement domestic funds made available to finance their development by the government.
As with sovereign governments many of these state enterprises will not directly earn foreign exchange.
Instead, the conversion of domestic currency cash flows, e.g. rail traffic receipts, at the borrower's central bank into foreign currency will be necessary to service external debt.
It is thus essential for LDCs' finance ministries to control the foreign currency borrowing of state enterprises.
For lending banks, the need for such prior authorisation might place a moral commitment on a country's government to repay bank loans incurred by state enterprises.
The general trend over the years has been for LDC governments and state enterprises to rely increasingly on international banks rather than official transfers, i.e. foreign aid, to meet their foreign currency financial needs.
Whether banks should have become so involved in such financial flows is an issue for debate among academics, bankers, finance ministers and official agencies.
Few deny the importance of capital inflows as a means of accelerating economic development in LDCs but in past decades most development capital was provided by private and institutional investors purchasing medium and long-term bonds (dealt with in Chapter 9).
In some cases investors lost their money due to East-European and Chinese borrowers repudiating their debt obligations.
It was for this very reason that banks, prior to the 1970s, avoided such risky long-term lending and concentrated on short-term trade financing.
Over and above country risk associated with bank loans granted to governments and state enterprises there exists an additional risk —sovereign risk .
The special significance of sovereign lending for a bank lies in the risk that it might prove impossible to secure restitution (recovery of loan) through legal action because a sovereign borrower can claim legal immunity or ignore a foreign court's judgement by pleading ‘force majeure’(superior power).
Despite sovereign risk, governments and state enterprises remain major users of international bank loan facilities because bankers know such borrowers normally repay external debt and will make every effort to do so.
Most countries seek to preserve their international credit rating, as long-term loans are required to finance economic development.
Finally, national prestige is also at stake.
Some of the issues discussed in this section will be re-examined in Chapter 8.
LDCs and project finance
Various definitions of project finance exist but the key feature to all is the provision of finance for an identifiable project which on completion will hopefully generate an adequate cash flow to service outstanding bank loans and other debt.
Pure project finance
This has occasionally been used within the USA, where political risk is minimal, to finance the development of a new oil well(s) or field.
Sometimes an oil exploration company is unable to provide sufficient collateral to support the necessary borrowing of funds to develop a new oil discovery, in which case a separate company is established to obtain the necessary finance.
The project's resultant operating cash flow (from oil sales) is used to repay bank loans.
No recourse (security or restitution) exists for a bank(s) against the oil exploration company if the project falls or generates  insufficient cash.
Obviously, a bank will expect to receive loan interest plus, perhaps, a royalty on subsequent oil output for the additional risk incurred, although the latter might be reduced by obtaining agreements which contractually guarantee a market for resultant oil output.
Many projects contain some elements of such financial arrangements, e.g. during the period of project construction loan recourse exists for the bank; on production of the end product (or output) the loan becomes non-recourse for the bank.
Project financing
The increased use of project financing in the last twenty years can be attributed to two factors — increased capital investment needs and economic risks.
Many LDCs' projects involve advanced technology on ‘greenfield’ sites, e.g. petrochemical complexes, integrated iron and steel works, which are beyond the capital resources and acceptable risk levels of private corporations or investors.
As a consequence, banks have become more heavily involved in project financing, a trend reinforced by other factors affecting banks.
For some banks, worried about lending to LDCs, proposed project financings offer the possibility of convertible currencies being generated to service debt payments rather than the previously mentioned programme, or budget loans where no identifiable repayment source exists.
Some banks were encouraged by industrialised countries' governments to provide competitive financial packages to overseas buyers in order to win export contracts for their depressed manufacturing industries.
Project evaluation
Before a bank becomes involved in the provision of finance for a project it must be satisfied as to the project's financial viability, especially its potential cash flow.
Consideration of a project's total costs, its operational life and final product/revenue are essential to the assessment of future cash flows.
The latter risk of inadequate demand for the final output can be partially solved for a bank by ‘off-take’ agreements whereby the project developer and other parties enter an agreement to supply and accept an agreed amount of output at a specific price.
This provides an assured market for the product and thus serves as a loan repayment source.
Banks financing oil and gas pipeline projects are given similar guarantees by means of through-put agreements which set the minimum usage of the facility by the various contracting parties.
The revenue so generated is used to service the pipeline's project debt.
6.6.4 Project finance objectives
A bank organising project finance in conjunction with a LDC's government or state enterprise will seek to use concessionary (low-cost) finance sources along with funds from the world's capital and credit markets.
Three objectives are generally paramount in financial negotiations relating to the project.
One is to make maximum use of long-term debt, so as to avoid loan repayments before the project's completion.
Next is a desire to maximise fixed interest rate financing thereby providing some degree of certainty as to the project's financial cost.
Finally, it is essential to minimise re-finance risks by ensuring that flexible bank loan facilities are made available to meet certain expenditures associated with the project.
Sources of finance
With the previous points in mind some possible sources of finance can be identified.
Most are dealt with in later chapters.
(i)
World Bank Group : For LDCs, the utilisation of World Bank facilities guarantees the provision of long-term funds at the lowest possible market-related interest rate.
Also, international banks take comfort from the World Bank's financial involvement in a project and thus their perception of less risk might entail more (and cheaper) funds.
(ii)
Export credits : Various OECD countries provide subsidised buyer credits (see Chapter 3) to finance the import component supplied by their own manufacturers for a LDC's project.
In most cases this involves the provision of bank loans.
Some innovative banks and overseas aid departments of OECD governments do sometimes combine finance and aid to provide low-cost financial packages for LDCs' projects.
(iii)
International credit market : The main aspects of the euro-credit market will be dealt with in the next chapter; suffice to state that international banks must consider country/sovereign risk in relation to project loans.
Banks and project finance
Project financing is dominated by large US and European banks which have accumulated expertise in such financing techniques.
This advantage  is reinforced by the ability of such banks to raise large loans in the euro-currency markets by acting as syndicate leaders.
Only the largest banks in the world can afford to employ a team of specialists — lending officers, economists, accountants, engineers, etc. — to assess economic and financial risks associated with projects in LDCs.
Sometimes projects are suggested to the governments of LDCs as part of an overall economic development programme, especially where such projects have the potential to generate export earnings in foreign currencies to service loans provided.
The number of potential project financing schemes put forward by and to LDCs declined in the early 1980s due to the scale and nature of the external debt problem.
Many proposed projects provided little or no guarantee of generating convertible currencies, and this made banks cautious in their approach to such projects.
LDCs' oil resources
Oil is the world's most important energy source.
It is an extremely versatile commodity in that it provides petrol, fuel oil, chemicals and synthetic fibres, etc.
A country's energy (oil) consumption tends to increase with its economic development.
For this reason, plus the fact that many LDCs are energy deficient, the discovery and exploitation of oil resources is a major priority for many governments.
Unfortunately, oil exploration/exploitation is an expensive business.
Even the largest oil corporations have to rely on external finance to develop new oil fields.
Most LDCs' governments with reasonable oil potential or prospects establish a state-owned oil corporation either to operate independently, or to enter into joint ventures with major international oil corporations, e.g. Exxon, Royal Dutch/Shell.
The reader will appreciate that in most cases oil field development necessitates the use of external finance.
State oil corporations are funded by individual governments.
The issue of shares to residents or non-residents (overseas investors) might be against the government's policy on the ownership of national natural resources.
In this situation external finance for the purchase of foreign equipment and expertise is provided by international banks.
Loans provided are generally secured by proven oil reserves or guarantees received from any major oil corporation partner in the venture.
In the language of project finance it will be a recourse loan.
Once oil production commences the loan might become non-recourse and be secured only by resultant oil output and revenues.
Such loans might be provided by a syndicate of banks including some of the country's own  banks as participants.
Banks involved in oil project financing have to evaluate financial and country risk in the manner previously described.
Summary
This chapter has reviewed an extremely important aspect of international banking — country risk assessment.
It highlighted the various economic and political considerations taken into account by bank risk analysts.
Although not an exact science, it does enable banks to give countries some sort of credit rating and, from this, bank lending officers can make a decision on whether to grant or participate in a loan.
Loans to LDCs' governments and state enterprises along with project finance were also dealt with in this chapter.
Some of the reasons for the use of bank finance were provided, and how banks seek to secure their positions through guarantees or a project's expected future income was considered.
Perhaps, your own local newspapers or finance journals contain information on the financing of large projects in your country which involved the use of foreign equipment and expertise.
Try to find out, because only in this manner will some of the concepts dealt with in this chapter which, perhaps, seem a little abstract from everyday finance, become more understandable.
The next chapter reviews actual bank lending techniques and practices.
Test questions
1.
What is country risk?
2.
Describe the main economic and political factors considered by risk analysts.
3.
Why do LDCs require external bank loans?
4.
Define sovereign risk.
5.
Explain the main features of project finance.
The euro-credit market
Introduction
In this chapter various aspects of the euro-credit market such as syndicated loans and loan book funding are examined.
However, first of all it is necessary to deal with certain key terms used in the market, together with the types and uses made of loans.
Key features of the euro-credit market
London interbank offer rate (LIBOR)
The interbank market in any currency determines the marginal cost of funds to banks operating in the euro-currency markets.
It is also used as a reference point for interest chargeable on variable rate loans.
Major banks in the interbank euro-dollar market usually quote a  per cent difference between bid and offer rates, i.e. deposit and loan rates.
LIBOR, as to be expected in a competitive market, is determined by the demand and supply of euro-dollar (or any other euro-currency) funds.
However, the free flow of funds between national and international money markets ensures that key domestic interest rates influence the cost of funds.
Movements in US domestic-based banks' prime lending rates influence the euro-dollar's LIBOR, and the same applies to deposits and loans in other currencies.
Each working day the bid and offer rates on three month and six month euro-dollars for $ 10m are obtained at 11 a.m. from five reference banks in London.
The average bid and offer rates then calculated are known as the London interbank fixing rates and are used for reference purposes in variable interest rate loan agreements.
Spread (or premium)
This is added onto LIBOR at the appropriate reference dates (every three, six or twelve months) to determine the total interest cost on a variable rate  loan over its term.
The spread compensates the bank(s) for providing the loan.
The actual spread size, e.g. ¼ or 2½ per cent, is taken as a reliable indicator of lending conditions in the loan market.
Probably, demand in the loan market and the perceived risk associated with a loan are the two most important influences on spread sizes.
Prime OECD borrowers have managed to get spreads as low as ⅛ per cent over LIBOR, whereas non-oil LDCs have sometimes had to pay spreads of 2½–3 per cent over LIBOR.
Obviously, spread sizes even for individual countries vary over time as the market makes different judgements on their creditworthiness, e.g. Brazil 1976 = 2½ per cent; 1978 = ⅝ per cent ; 1982 = 2¼ per cent .
The reader will appreciate that a large number of diverse factors — general interest rate levels; competition for loan business; new entrants to the ECMs — influence spread sizes.
The borrower's total interest cost
Each borrower under a variable interest rate loan pays the lending bank(s) LIBOR plus the agreed spread at pre-determined reference dates set in the loan agreement.
The prime consideration for the borrower is movements in LIBOR as this determines the actual interest cost each three, six or twelve months on a loan.
Interest received by the bank(s) is used, firstly, to meet what are referred to as the funding costs of the loan.
A bank, to lend out money, must bid for deposits in the market, as most have no access to interest-free sources of funds.
The bid rate paid by a bank for deposits depends on its standing in the market.
Large US banks can generally obtain euro-dollar deposits at lower bid (interest) rates than smaller, less well known, European banks.
From the loan's spread a bank endeavours to make some return on its capital resources (approximately 4 per cent) used in funding each loan, provide for any subsequent bad debts and meet administrative costs of the lending department.
Types and uses of currency loans
(i)
Types of loans : Some bank loans are made on a fixed interest rate basis which means the interest rate plus spread are set for the loan's entire term when it is granted.
This benefits the borrower as the loan's  exact cost at the outset is known.
However, the borrower does incur the disadvantage of being unable to benefit from any subsequent decline in market interest rates over the loan's term.
A lending bank will try to fund such a loan by means of a fixed interest rate deposit(s) for the same term as the loan.
As most interbank deposits are for less than one year, few banks will grant such a loan with a term of more than one year.
The interest rate risks associated with fixed rate loans funded by variable rate deposits have encouraged banks to make floating or variable interest rate loans (sometimes referred to as roll-over loans).
As the cost of funding a loan(s) fluctuates in the interbank market this is taken account of in the determination of interest rates payable by the borrower at pre-arranged reference date intervals of three, six or twelve months as set out in the loan contract.
As previously explained, to the new LIBOR for each period is added the spread to provide the loan's interest cost to the borrower over the next three, six or twelve months.
With a floating rate loan the borrower incurs uncertainty as to the loan's cost over its term but benefits if market interest rates decline from their initial level when the loan was granted.
For a bank(s) it reduces the element of interest rate risk associated with fixed rate loans.
Some bank loans are provided in the form of a standby-credit or commitment which means a bank will provide funds if required to do so over a stated period, either on a fixed or floating rate basis.
A commitment fee of approximately 1 per cent is charged by a bank on undrawn funds under such a facility.
(ii)
Loan uses : Fixed and floating rate euro-loans can, as noted in previous sections be used to finance a wide range of activities — loans to finance government expenditure, projects, trade and investment.
Most large corporations, irrespective of their domestic base, usually seek to establish a presence overseas by direct investment in a subsidiary unit or joint venture.
Foreign currency loans from banks are often used to finance such expansion and diversification.
Foreign currency loans are used extensively in foreign trade finance.
An exporter to reduce his foreign exchange risk may borrow in the currency of his expected export receipt or an importer may require a currency loan to pay for imports which may be re-processed for an overseas market.
Banks may also provide buyer credits in foreign currencies to overseas importers to aid a country's exports (see Chapter 3).
Borrower considerations
For governments, state and private corporations foreign currency borrowing represents a departure from traditional fund sources — domestic  currency borrowing from local banks, money and capital markets.
This can have advantages where credit restrictions on local banks make foreign currency borrowing the only source of finance available or if interest rates are lower than domestic currency loan rates.
Against such benefits the borrower has to consider the possibility of domestic currency depreciation against the loan's currency which would increase overall debt service costs.
The most desirable situation is to ensure, if possible, that the export or project's receipts are in the currency of a loan as this facilitates interest and principal payments.
Thus, all borrowers must carefully weigh up the benefits and potential costs of using foreign currency loans, as opposed to domestic currency loans, to finance trade, investment and public expenditure.
Syndicated lending
Introduction
Most loans for financing international trade and investment, etc., are made by individual banks to their customers without the assistance of other banks.
Loans can be secured or unsecured and have a fixed or floating interest rate.
In most cases the bank has a formal loan agreement with its customer.
A considerable proportion of euro-credit lending takes this form but the granting of large loans of over $50m has encouraged banks to provide funds via loan syndication.
Some sovereign government loans are in excess of $1bil.
The use of multi-bank loans is quite common in the USA (and other countries) where domestic regulations limit the size of loan that a single bank can grant to any one customer.
Multi-bank loan techniques were readily adopted in the euro-currency markets, especially as US banks are mayor market participants.
The syndicated euro-credit market's development was encouraged by the increasing size of loans requested by governments and corporations for development programmes and projects.
For such borrowers the use of syndicated loans enables the managing bank to obtain funds more quickly, in greater amounts and at a lower cost than would be the case in conducting separate negotiations with up to fifty lending banks.
The terms attached to such loans are dictated by market conditions and the usual criteria of security, creditworthiness and risk.
Syndicated euro-credits also enable banks to spread or diversify their risks by having a wide loan portfolio rather than being over-committed to a few customers.
In addition, some banks seek the publicity associated with such large loans plus the possibility of establishing profitable working relationships with other banks and non-banks.
Syndicate parties
A syndicated loan has three parties — the borrower; the syndicate leader; the participating banks.
The borrower seeks to obtain funds in a convenient, economic and flexible manner together with maintaining its financial status in the world's capital and credit markets.
Details on the size, use and security for the loan are provided by the borrower to the syndicate leader.
The latter must have adequate experience of such lending techniques and high standing in the international banking community.
The syndicate leader has obligations both to the borrower and to participating banks.
It must assess the viability of the loan proposal programme or project.
This might require specialist knowledge in some industry or region of the world.
To a certain extent participating banks can, if they wish, avoid a detailed analysis of each loan proposal by relying on the syndicate leader's expertise and good faith.
This is sometimes referred to as the comfort factor by bankers.
Participation in loans by other banks is often influenced by which bank is the syndicate leader.
The participating banks rely on the integrity of the syndicate leader who has a moral obligation to ensure the information provided by the borrower is correct.
Whether there is a legal obligation is unclear at present.
The participating banks collectively provide the bulk of the funds.
Syndicate leader functions
The syndicate leader seeks out loan business, structures a suitable loan proposal, sells it to other banks and ensures the loan is serviced according to its contract terms.
Let us very briefly examine these four roles.
(i)
Loan proposals : The syndicate bank must seek out creditworthy borrowers and entice them to use its expertise.
A steady income stream is required to meet the costs of the syndicated lending department.
Competition between syndicate leaders is conducted on the basis of spread size and other loan conditions.
The leader must choose a suitable spread to get a borrower's loan business and yet at the same time convince participating banks that it is a realistic return relative to the loan risk(s) involved.
Obviously, borrowers constantly seek to reduce loan spreads but if the market regards it as inadequate, participants will not be found and the loan proposal will fail.
(ii)
Loan contract terms : The syndicate leader makes a full appraisal of the borrower's economic/financial situation to determine ability to meet subsequent loan commitments.
Loan terms incorporate details on grace periods, repayment and  prepayment.
Sometimes grace periods are granted which means that no repayment of the loan's principal is required for the first few years.
Repayments generally take place on a half-yearly or annual basis.
In a few cases the loan may be repaid in one lump sum at the end of its term.
Many loan contracts enable prepayment to take place without penalty.
A loan's spread depends upon market conditions and the risk associated with a particular borrower.
Notwithstanding the spread size, the critical factor for any borrower is fluctuations in LIBOR which determines most of a loan's interest cost.
Various fees are paid by the borrower.
A management fee is paid to the syndicate leader(s).
Its size is determined by the complexity of the loan deal and initial competition for the business, e.g. ¾ per cent on $ 100m loan = $750,000.
Out of such a fee the syndicate leader has to pay external parties (accountants, lawyers, etc.) for their specialised work involved in the loan documentation.
In some large syndicate loans the management fee may be shared with co-managers and large participants.
A commitment fee is payable on an unused facility until it is drawn-down by the borrower while an agent fee is payable to the agent bank.
The latter is usually the syndicate leader bank which handles interest and loan amortisation payments.
The agent bank also administers securities held and deals with defaults.
(iii)
Selling loan participations : Initial loan offerings are made by telephone or telex to a selected group of banks.
The general terms, financial data and proposed loan conditions are provided to enable potential lenders to assess and indicate a willingness to participate in the loan proposal.
If the response is favourable a full placement memorandum, i.e. loan prospectus, is made available to participating banks.
The actual selection and number of participating banks depends upon the loan's size (some are for several billion dollars) and any special relationships between banks, e.g. consortium banks and clubs.
Sometimes the borrower might insist on certain banks being included in the syndicate.
The completion of the loan contract in most cases is publicised with the aid of a ‘tombstone ’(advertisement) in the world's financial press and journals.
It provides outside parties with a few limited details on the borrower, loan size, term, currency, syndicate leader and participating banks (see specimen tombstone at the end of this chapter).
(iv)
Loan service : Apart from interest and principal repayments, the agent bank is responsible for ensuring that current information on the financial position of the borrower is available to the participant banks in the loan.
Although the agent bank may have power to renegotiate the loan contract, a consensus is required on any major adjustments relating to interest and repayment, e.g. debt or loan rescheduling.
This brief summary of syndicated euro-credit lending will provide the reader with some idea of the complexity of such deals.
Perhaps, in your own country, state enterprises or private corporations have been involved in such loan procedures with international banks.
It might be that some of your own domestic banks participate regularly in syndicated euro.credits.
Funding a currency loan book
Introduction
The key features section at the beginning of this chapter emphasised the need for banks to attract deposits to fund their euro-loan book.
Medium-term loans are to a large extent funded by short-term deposits which have to be repaid and then re-borrowed on a continuous basis.
This, as was pointed out, necessitates the use of roll-over dates in loan agreements to deal with fluctuations in the interest cost of funds.
If deposits are renewed at shorter time intervals than the loan roll-over dates (mostly six months), a bank might increase its profits, as seven day deposit funds are usually cheaper than six month funds.
This is known as trading in maturities, but, however, it does involve an element of risk for a bank.
If during a six month funding operation, seven day money suddenly becomes more expensive due to higher money market interest rates, then a loss might be incurred.
Interest received from the borrower over the six months might not be sufficient to cover the bank's own interest costs on deposits.
The survival of international banking and the euro-credit market depends on adequate money market funds in each currency, the alternative for a bank being to purchase foreign exchange with domestic currency and thus incur a potential foreign exchange risk or lend its own domestic currency to overseas borrowers, e.g. Albion Bank lends sterling to overseas customers.
At this juncture it should be noted that a considerable proportion of international lending does take this latter form.
US domestic-based banks do lend domestic dollars to Latin American customers, just as German banks make domestic DM loans to East European borrowers.
Fund sources in the euro-credit market
As international banks lend in currencies other than their own they are forced to bid in funds to support these operations, as for most no  domestic deposit exists (see Chapter 1, Albion Bank's balance sheet).
The competition for reliable deposits is intense.
Depositors are concerned basically with available interest returns, liquidity and safety of funds.
Deposits come from a variety of sources — governments; state or private corporations; institutional investment funds; borrowings re-deposited in the market; central bank foreign exchange reserves, etc.
Three major sources of funds exist:
(i)
The Interbank market : Most banks deposit and borrow funds in this market at competitive interest rates for varying maturities (the majority range from seven days to six months).
There are often several layers of interbank transactions before funds deposited in the market are made available to the ultimate user (see Euro-Dollar Interbank Market Fig. 5.3 p.90).
It is essential for banks to remain active in this market in order to keep abreast of market developments and to be seen as a taker/supplier of interbank funds.
Banks tend to be tiered in this market according to their perceived creditworthiness which determines the overall cost of a bank's funds.
(ii)
Time deposits : Interest rates negotiated on customers' time deposits are influenced by bid rates in the interbank market.
Depositors may place funds with a bank for a fixed term at a fixed interest rate.
To avoid penalties, such time deposits must be held for their full term.
In order to overcome this inflexibility, certificates of deposit (CD) are used in the euro-currency markets.
A CD is a negotiable bearer instrument issued by a bank which certifies that a stated sum has been deposited for a specific time period at a particular interest rate.
The key feature of a CD is that it can be sold by the holder in a secondary market, prior to maturity.
It is thus an extremely liquid investment instrument.
In London CDs cannot be issued by banks in currencies where the responsible monetary authority seeks to discourage the use of its currency in this manner.
(iii)
Medium-term euro-credits : Medium-term syndicated loans are sometimes used by LDCs' banks to fund loan books.
Although it is more expensive than the above methods, the funds are reliable.
A bank using this technique of funding must charge a higher spread on its own euro-credits than it is paying.
Most large international banks have issued floating rate bonds (or notes) as a source of medium-term funding.
This is dealt with in Chapter 9.
Asset-liability management
International banks engage in active asset-liability management to reduce risks and enhance returns.
Such management necessitates a continuous review of a bank's overall balance sheet in order to avoid excessive mismatching of assets and liabilities (refer to Chapter 1 for analysis of bank's balance sheet).
It is important to have a diversified deposit base without undue reliance on one particular economic sector or region of the world.
For non-US banks operating in the euro-dollar market such precautions can be reinforced by establishing (for a small fee) standby facilities, i.e. borrowing agreements, with US banks.
In the 1980s such asset-liability reviews are assisted by computerised accountancy systems which can present information on a bank's total exposure by country or customer on a daily basis.
Also in most countries (and financial centres) such operations are closely monitored by central banks and monetary authorities.
Euro-credit market: recent trends
Table 7.1 indicates that the volume of new euro-currency bank credits rose from $74 bil in 1983 to $112 bil in 1984 ($110 bil in 1985).
But the latter figure includes $30 bil in exceptional credits arranged for US  corporations engaged in takeover battles; without such deals new business remains below 1981 levels.
The lending bonanza of the 1973–81 period is over.
Business has become scarcer, competition keener and profit margins slimmer.
In fact the syndicated euro-credit market has been seriously affected by rescheduling problems in Latin America.
Once this is resolved it might become a major source of LDC finance in the future.
Summary
The reader should now have a reasonable understanding of the main terms and mechanics of the euro-credit market.
Together with the previous chapter's review of country risk this should provide a sound foundation for the next chapter on the external debt problem.
The reader might be well advised to read over Chapter 2 on the LDCs just to refresh his memory on the economic and social problems confronting these nations.
Test questions
1.
Define the following:
(i)
LIBOR;
(ii)
spread.
2.
Compare and contrast fixed rate and variable rate loans.
3.
What is a syndicated loan facility?
4.
Identify the main functions of the syndicate leader.
5.
How do banks fund their currency loan books?
6.
Define asset-liability management.