

There was a time…
There was a time when meadow, grove and stream
The earth, and every common sight,
To me did seem
Apparell'd in celestial light,
The glory and the freshness of a dream.
Wordsworth
I can still feel the cold marble under my bare feet.
I was standing on top of the wash-stand, and we were playing pirates.
I don't suppose I even knew what a pirate was, but I remember it vividly.
My brother was seven and I was two, and the year was 1925.
This is my earliest recollection.
I remember the day my baby sister was born, but the pirate incident is earlier, for from the time Ann was born, she and I shared a room, and Robert had his own.
I remember very distinctly the morning when my father came to tell us we had a new baby sister.
Those are my only remaining memories of the first five years.
I can't remember much about infant school, but I do remember that there was a big chart on the wall showing a buttercup and all its parts.
I can't remember learning to read, but I do remember the plasticine — how beastly it felt, and how it always finished up grey.
Then came junior school.
Elementary school it was called in those days.
We sat in desks for two, in classes of about thirty, and we spent most of the day in those rows of desks.
I remember mental arithmetic, which I enjoyed.
I loved writing stories, too.
One of my school reports, when I was about nine, said of my history attainment, ‘Molly writes a good story which is not always history.’
The comment for conduct was frequently, ‘Good, but rather talkative.’
Children today are almost invariably talkative, and the idea of sitting in silent rows in desks must seem to them unthinkable.
But in those far off days, we were not expected to speak in class except to answer a teacher's question.
Children had the cane for talking more frequently than for any other misdemeanour.
Robert, Ann and I were in a peculiar position in the elementary school for the Headmaster was our father.
When we were discovered by an irate householder, on our way home from school, knocking on a door and running away, or performing some other piece of naughtiness, if the injured party said, ‘I shall tell your father of you,’ we were alarmed.
If they said, ‘I shall tell the Headmaster of you!’ we said to each other,
‘It's all right.
She doesn't know us.’
These are the years I look back on as having consisted entirely of long hot summers.
It can't have been like that really, though I believe records show that the summers in the late Twenties and early Thirties were warm and dry.
I remember how the tar used to boil out of the tarmac and stick to the soles of our shoes, and from there to our socks and our legs.
I used to skip to school with a skipping, rope, at skipping time.
Games came in seasonal cycle: skipping, bowling, hoops, whipping tops.
One year there was a craze for Diabolo — a game where an hourglass-shaped piece of wood was balanced on a string held by two sticks, spun and tossed and caught again.
In the winter, if it were cold enough, there would be magnificent slides in the playground.
An area of the playground was allowed for this, though it was forbidden to slide on the pathways leading to the Boys' Entrance and the Girls' Entrance.
The bell was rung for five minutes before both morning and afternoon school.
‘Please, sir, may I ring the bell?’
If there were several children queuing up for this delight, the second-comers were told, ‘You can ring tomorrow.’
The bell-rope hung from the ceiling in the hall, and pulling the bell felt very satisfying.
When the bell stopped, we all went into lines according to our classes, outside our appropriate entrance, and were marched into our classrooms.
If it was raining, a handbell rung at the door indicated that we were to go straight to the classrooms.
(I was amazed to see children in a playground in a Sydney suburb lining up in this fashion in the late Seventies.)
I enjoyed school.
I first learned there to love poetry.
Learning by rote has been long out of fashion, but I loved reciting poetry, and can remember long poems learned when I was too young to understand the words, but just loved the sound of them.
I shall always be grateful to the teachers who required us to memorise both poetry and Bible passages which are now part of me.
But I know how many of my generation hated learning by heart.
I suppose one is born in love with words, if one is lucky.
One way of entering the teaching profession in those days was by being a Pupil Teacher.
At the age of fourteen, young people would begin to learn the job on the spot, as it were.
They would spend the day in the classroom with the class teacher, observing and assisting, and gradually learning to take over some of the lessons; at the same time pursuing their own studies.
It must have been very hard work.
I remember with great affection, Teacher Doris and Teacher George.
They were only months older than the senior pupils, of course.
When I was nine, I spent a school year in Miss Onion's class.
She  must have been in her late thirties then, but to me she seemed timeless.
She was a wonderful teacher, belonging to a now-vanished age, an uncertificated teacher.
How ironic!
She didn't have a degree, a diploma or any piece of paper to say she could teach.
Her salary, like that of all uncertificated teachers, was very low, but she was an excellent teacher and a loyal colleague.
Her discipline was faultless.
I never saw her treat a child harshly or unkindly; in fact, she would frequently share a joke with us.
No one, however, risked playing up, for Miss Onion's mysterious words, ‘I shall walk round you smartly in a minute, my boy!’ directed at someone who was momentarily out of line, were quite sufficient.
One very severe winter, when all public transport was temporarily halted, and cycling quite impossible, Miss  Onions walked daily over the five miles of frozen fields between her village and our school.
We had prefects.
They were thirteen or at the most fourteen years old, but to me they were very grand grown-ups.
I think we forget, in these days, that in the Thirties a young person left school at fourteen, and in many cases, went straight to a job.
There really was no such thing as being a teenager.
Young girls with long hair left school and ‘put up’ their hair — plaits round the head or ‘ear-phones’.
I'm glad young people don't have to go to work so early these days, but for many of my generation, it was the accepted way of life, and most of them were happy in it.
There were no playing-fields at the school, but in the summer we walked to The Heath for cricket or rounders.
The Heath is a large area of downland common, where the local golf club has its course, the local cricket team plays, and the racing stables exercise horses.
It is a beautiful place to walk, as there are several plantations of trees beyond the golf course.
Our favourite place as a family was on the Church Hill, a pleasant area at the edge of The Heath.
Ours was a very happy home.
We were not well off, for my grandfather, my mother's father, was a very old man, living in his own cottage with a housekeeper.
To the end of his days, he believed that his ten shillings a week pension kept him, but of course it was my father who kept the two homes going.
For several years, Grandad was Royston's oldest inhabitant.
He was blind and very deaf, but he remained cheerful and interested in all our doings.
We used to call and see him every day, often on our way to and from school, and so did our parents.
We used to take him for walks, and this could be embarrassing, for we had to shout very loudly in an attempt at conversation.
As the war drew near, and gas masks were issued, an official came to my Grandad's house to fit him and his housekeeper with the right sized  masks.
Dear Miss Royal had hers fitted, and then it was Grandad's turn.
‘Leave a big one for him,’ said Miss Royal.
The official protested, but Miss Royal said, ‘I am NOT having the poor old man frightened.
You are not to show it to him!’
How right she was!
He died just a few months before the war began, aged ninety-six.
But the war is another part of my story.
We lived in a detached three-bedroom house on the edge of the town.
My father bred cocker spaniels, and these endearing animals were very much part of our childhood.
Morning and evening they were exercised in the nearby meadows, and we often accompanied our father on these walks.
In fact, for some years I had my own dog, first Bess and then Judith, and she was my responsibility to feed, groom and exercise.
My father trained his dogs to be obedient and some were trained as gun dogs.
To us, my father often used the expression, ‘Do be human!’ if we were misbehaving.
On one occasion, to our eternal delight, he addressed a cavorting puppy, entangling itself and him in its lead, ‘Oh, be human, dog, do!’
My father was very strict, but at that time this was nothing unusual.
I am sure being a headmaster did affect his ideas on child-rearing, but as I said, we were very happy.
Our mother was very gentle.
I cannot recall her ever being angry with us.
If ever I felt I had been rude to her or disobedient, I always felt ashamed.
Interestingly, although he was the fierce one, he was more demonstrative of affection than my mother, who kept her feelings very much to herself.
To his great credit, my father never mixed school and home.
He was ‘Sir’ at school and Daddy at home.
However naughty we might have been at school, this was not mentioned at home.
He did not, in fact, discuss school much at home.
Occasionally, he would tell my mother something about events at school, and if he realised that one of us had overheard it, he would say, ‘You're deaf!’
We knew this meant that we were not to repeat it.
I've always talked a lot!
I remember on numerous occasions, when I entered an adult conversation at the table with a remark of my own, he would ask, ‘Did anyone ask for your opinion?’
‘No, Daddy.’
I adored my older brother.
He was very kind to both of us, and played with us in the days when older brothers did not expect to play with ‘little kids’.
I remember games on The Heath, in the back garden and card and  board games in the winter evenings.
But of course, five years difference meant that he and I were not relating as equals until I was about sixteen, and then the war separated us.
School and college for Robert divided us anyway, and it was Ann and I who spent all our time together.
As little girls, we played endless ‘pretend’ games.
On our walks to The Heath or to nearby Melbourn, we were always somebody else.
‘Pretend you are a princess and I'm a prince in disguise.’
‘No, that's silly.
Pretend I'm the farmer and you are the horse, and we're going to buy some pigs.’
When Ann was little, she had three imaginary companions: Miss Asho, Miss Barko and Miss Nudderwar.
I am sure the last named came from the sinister words occasionally overheard, ‘If there were another war….’
Like all the children born shortly after the Great War, we knew that to our parents, the war was the great divide.
‘That was before the war,’ we would hear.
Everything had been different before the war.
Our mother's brother, killed in France, had been alive then.
Our father hadn't had the cough which racked him.
Clothes had been different: our mother's hat in her wedding photo fascinated us, with its wide brim heavy with flowers, and pictures of all our female relations in their long skirts.
Before the war was clearly the olden days.
Sometimes a tramp would knock on the back door, begging for food or offering to do a job for a few coppers.
These men were walking from work-house to work-house.
My father was always desperately sorry for these jobless, penniless people, especially those who were ex-service men like himself.
Many came to the door attempting to sell brushes, polish and so on, often carrying a card from the firm employing them explaining that they were disabled servicemen, I tremble to think that we could ever return to conditions like these.
Our weeks followed the same pattern.
When we were very small, we called the days, Chapel Day, Washing-day, Chicks-day (‘Chicks’ was a paper for tiny children called Chicks Own , a baby sibling, as it were, for Boy's Own and Girl's Own papers), Market-day, Cooking-day, Kitchen-day and Saturday.
Contrary to popular opinion, the non-conformist Sunday was not a dismal day full of restrictions.
It felt a very special day.
There was chapel in the morning, then Sunday dinner, usually the traditional roast.
My parents wrote their family letters in the afternoon, while we went to Sunday-school.
Frequently they would meet us at the Sunday-school gate, and we would go for a walk before tea.
The favourite walks were the Pine Wood, Green Walk and  thre Stile Plantation, or Lover's Walk.
I wonder if these still exist.
Many years later, married and  with small children, I was to live in a house with a garden which had a gate into Green Walk, the only place where I've actually seen a nightingale.
After tea, when we were small, we stayed with our mother while our father went to evening service.
Sunday winter evenings by the dining-room fire were very special — crumpets toasted on a long toasting fork by the fire; watching the changing colours of the flames, and the sparks which shot into the chimney.
Mummy often read to us before we went to bed, ‘William’ stories were our favourite and hers.
Monday, the traditional washing day, was a heavy day for all mothers then.
We had a gas copper, which was lit before we went to school.
When we came home for a mid-day dinner, the washing lines in the back garden would be hung with sheets, towels, our clothes, hankies and so on.
There was a small line close to the house where dusters and polishing rags were hung.
As in most houses in those days, old garments were used for this purpose.
We used to be mortified to think that a recognisable vest or discarded pair of pants, now grey, torn and shapeless, should be thought by a neighbour to be worn by one of us.
I still think of this when I rip up an old vest for a piece of silver-polishing rag.
Monday dinner was always cold meat, for the washing would have taken all morning.
When we came home for tea, Mummy would still be ironing.
I loved helping her fold sheets.
The great fun was doing the pulling which seemed to be an essential part of the process.
Ironing often went on into the evening.
If the day had been wet, the kitchen range would be surrounded by a huge clothes horse hung with wet washing, and the room would smell of steam and drying clothes.
Tuesdays my mother ‘did’ the bedrooms.
I can't remember which days were allocated to the other rooms, but Friday, Kitchen-day, was unforgettable.
My mother got up before six o'clock to ‘do the flues and stove.’
This involved the cleaning of the kitchen range flue, virtually a chimney-sweeping task, and then black-leading the stove.
We had this range for cooking and heating until my mother was quite elderly, when it was replaced by a coke boiler and an electric cooker.
Getting up on a freezing cold day was an ordeal which today's children cannot imagine.
Bedrooms were not heated, and there was no hot water for a quick wash: the geyser was lit for baths only.
That geyser dominated the bathroom like a ferocious monster.
The pilot was lit with a taper, and then the burners under the copper boiler would ignite with a great whooshing sound, and the hot water begin to flow very slowly.
Let us get back to the chilly bedroom!
To step out of bed on to the cold  lino, and to begin dressing and shivering, took considerable courage.
If we were ill, a coal fire was lit in the bedroom, but this was a rare occurrence.
A visit to the market on Wednesdays was a highlight of the week when we were too young for school.
Such a market does not exist in England today, though similar places can be seen in France.
Cattle and sheep in pens, rabbits and hens in cages, stalls for food, clothing and cheap toys, all higgledy-piggledy down either side of the wide street.
This market-place was the site of the annual fair, when swings, a roundabout with proper horses and a steam organ, shooting galleries, side-shows of all kinds and numerous stalls came to the town for three days.
A favourite character was the Rock King, who sold all kinds of rock and nougat.
The fair came to us in November, and from dusk on until midnight, the dank and misty air would be full of the harsh music from the steam organ, the cries of the stall-holders calling their wares, the shouts and laughter of children, and the hiss of the naphtha flares which lit the booths.
We didn't have television, of course.
We had no radio until I was about nine years old.
The first wireless of any kind was a crystal set which my brother made.
We crowded round the table, straining our ears for the magic sounds, while Robert adjusted the cat's whisker.
Like most families in those days, we made our own entertainment.
Singing round the piano, playing cards with each other or with our parents, board games of various kinds, and a word game called Lexicon were all family favourites.
It must all sound rather tame to today's children, but it was a happy time; a time of predictable routine, which gave us a sense of security.
The really outstanding events of the year were the Powells' party and the summer holiday in Cornwall.
Every year, the Misses Powell, whom we called Auntie Maude and Auntie Ivy, gave a very splendid Boxing Day party for their friends.
My parents were always invited, and when we were old enough, we went too.
The Powells' house was a far grander residence than any other in our immediate ken.
It had central heating, a rarity in the experience of people like us who depended on open coal fires.
Most impressive of all to us children was the fact that the house had two staircases, the staircase we could see from the front door, and the back stairs, used by the servants.
The garden was beautifully kept by the gardener, and sometimes on summer Sunday afternoons we had tea in the garden with Auntie Maude and Auntie Ivy.
The parties were magnificent!
About twenty or twenty-five guests would assemble at six o'clock, and we would play party games until supper.
Most of the ladies would be in long dresses, and men in dinner jackets.
We children wore our party frocks.
We all sat round an enormous dining-room table for supper, which, as it was Boxing Day, was always cold turkey with all the trimmings, sausages, pork pie, beetroot and celery.
Then — the pièce de résistance — the trifle!
I don't know what secret Auntie Maudie had, but her trifles were the best I have ever tasted.
There were crackers, too, amazingly beautiful to our childish eyes, far bigger than those we had had for our Christmas festivities the day before, with elaborate decorations on them and exciting contents.
After supper there were always some musical items provided by supposedly talented guests, and I remember once being requested to recite.
I don't remember what I recited, but I do remember being acutely embarrassed on another occasion when people were telling anecdotes, and I recounted one about a soldier being saved from a court martial because he had heard a clock strike thirteen at midnight, and this fact had saved him from being found guilty of sleeping on duty.
When I had finished my story, everyone burst out laughing.
I had repeated a story  told some weeks before by our minister at the chapel, and he was one of the party guests.
Red in the face and thoroughly hot and uncomfortable, I waited for the laughter to subside.
Then the minister said, ‘It's all right, Molly.
I am glad you remembered it!’
This was typical of his kindness, which I shall never forget.
I remember his telling us in chapel that ‘sincere, came from the Latin,sine cera , without wax.
In ancient times, he said, deceitful sculptors would patch up the cracks with wax, but a man of integrity would make his statues without wax.
I decided then and there that it was a good thing to be without wax.
The grand finale of the Powells' party was always charades.
This involved quite elaborate dressing-up, and the fun and laughter of those Boxing Day nights was a treasure indeed.
We have tried in our family, as we have watched our children grow up, and now our grandchildren, to capture that sort of fun and companionship for them.
The annual holiday in Cornwall was eagerly anticipated for months.
A few days before we were due to go, my mother would begin packing.
An enormous tin trunk was brought down from the attic, and systematically packed with everything needed for a month's holiday.
It is incredible to think that this trunk was collected from the house by the station Lorry, was sent by rail, Luggage in Advance, and was awaiting us when we arrived at our grandparents' house.
The journey from the nearest railway station to Grandad's village, about seven miles, was particularly exciting for us.
In my very early childhood, it was in Mr Knight's pony and cart; but then Mr Lewarne had a motor car, and from then on he fetched us from the station.
When I was about nine years old, my father had his first car.
It was a 1925 Wolseley, and it cost £15.
For several years we drove all the way down from Hertfordshire to Cornwall, very slowly, starting in the early hours of the morning and arriving about tea-time, if we were lucky.
My father always used to say, ‘The holiday begins the moment we set off on the way.’
Nowadays, having myself experienced long car journeys with three young children, I appreciate what brave words those were!
The long drive in an ancient car must have been very trying.
We suffered to some extent too.
I remember my mother dozing off on one occasion, over the miles of Salisbury Plain, and saying in a sleepy voice to Ann who had perched on her knee, ‘Ann dear, may I have my leg back?’
Cornwall was like another world.
My grandparents' village was a small place off the main road, away from busy roads and with no mains services.
Their house was lit by oil lamps downstairs, and we carried  candles up to bed.
There was no water laid on, of course, but the early days of fetching water from the village pump were succeeded by the excitement of a pump inside the house.
A well was sunk in the back garden, and water could be pumped up from it into the kitchen.
This was luxury indeed.
There was no bathroom, needless to say.
On Saturday nights we had a bath in a tin tub by the fire, but for the rest of the week, washing was done in the bedrooms.
The fancy bowls, water jugs and chamber pots, now so beloved of antique dealers, were in every bedroom.
The wash bowl, jug and soap dish were on top of the wash-stand, and the chamber pot discreetly underneath.
Some of these toilet sets were really very beautiful, with floral designs or pleasant patterns.
There was frequently a hair-tidy of the same design on the dressing-table, a little dish with a lid, and a hole through which one could push the hair that came out on the comb.
The lavatory was a little shed in the garden.
A wooden seat with an appropriately sized hole over a bucket, and a container of earth with a shovel was all its furnishing.
Emptying the bucket and burying the contents in the garden was a daily task for my father.
I suppose my aunt performed this duty when we were back at home.
Aunt Dorcas, or Auntie Dor as we called her, was a wonderful person.
She ran the village shop, and hers was a busy life indeed.
The shop opened early in the morning and was open all day; on Saturdays, late into the evening.
It sold almost everything you could think of except cigarettes.
(Smoking and drinking were sins to Auntie.)
She sold all kinds of goods, vegetables from her garden, sweets, paraffin, patent medicines, books, socks and stockings, knickers and toilet requisites.
She would order things specially for customers and on her periodic visits to ware, houses in Plymouth, would bring back garments thus ordered.
She acted as an unofficial bank, cashing cheques for customers.
I think she was a very brave person, for until she retired from the shop, long after our grandparents had died, she slept alone in the big old family house with the shop's takings under her bed.
Grandad had been a gardener for the local Big House.
Many of my father's family had worked for Sir Roger, or Sir Richard before him, or his father before him.
Great-grandfather had been a coachman in the days of horse-drawn carriages.
The village life was quite feudal still.
Another landowner was known as Squire.
His daughters came on their ponies to Auntie's shop to buy sweets, and they were educated at home until they were old enough for boarding-school.
Everyone was either Church or Chapel, and these two places were  the centres of village life.
The Rector, the Squire and the schoolmaster were the respected members of the community to whom the village looked for advice and help.
It was, of course, primarily a farming community, and on Sundays the local farmers came in, either to church or chapel, in their Sunday best.
We loved the Sundays.
It was the only day of the week on which we saw Grandad in a suit with a tie, and in his Sunday boots.
The shop was shut and a feeling of peace and serenity prevailed.
Sunday dinner was always a special one, culminating in Auntie's home-grown fruit, stewed and covered in thick Cornish cream.
For tea, there would be splits with jam and cream, yeast cake, saffron cake and often fruit again.
The Sunday afternoon walk along the lanes was always interesting, even to very young children, for the high banks towered on either side of us, covered in wild flowers — campions, hemp agrimony, foxgloves, honeysuckle and many, many more.
The abundance of flowers meant butterflies, too, in a profusion which today, sadly, children never see.
There were handsome bumble-bees, ladybirds and many birds, including the occasional buzzard, hovering above some unsuspecting little creature.
I can hear the murmur of it all in my head, and smell the sweet air.
We were only a few miles from the coast, but in the days before we had our own car, visits to the sea were exciting expeditions.
Mr Lewarne would take us in his car to one of the nearby beaches.
We would take our swimming costumes, buckets and spades, and a picnic lunch consisting of Cornish pasties — meat and potato ones for the main course, and apple or jam pasties to follow.
Many of the beaches were almost deserted in my early childhood, and to walk on a newly washed shore as the tide receded, and look back on the footsteps in the shining sand was a delight.
The north Cornish coast is rocky, and climbing the rocks was a constant challenge and excitement.
We visited our farming cousins and enjoyed the delights of a life so different from our own.
Harvest was a particularly enthralling experience.
The horse-drawn reaper-and-binder machine would circle the field, working from the perimeter towards the inside.
The sheaves were stooked by hand, a task we enjoyed.
At the end, a small piece of uncut corn would be left, full of terrified rabbits who had been driven further and further into the centre by the binder, the men and the noise.
It was with a mixture of excitement and pity that we watched, as some of the escaping rabbits were shot.
We knew they would finish up in rabbit pie.
In the very centre of the village, close to the church, was the blacksmith's forge.
Daily we would hear the bang of the hammer on the  anvil, and would run across the road to watch from the door, as the hot shoe was pressed on a patient cart-horse's hoof, with the familiar sizzling noise and smell of burning.
The furnace, blown by bellows, was a marvellous sight, fiery red and roaring, and the smithy was a hot, exciting place like no other.
Sometimes we walked to the nearest cove.
It was about six miles, a fair way for children, but we delighted in the story of what my father had done at the age of six.
The Sunday-school Treat was a day at the seaside, and the children were taken in the horse-drawn wagons.
Only the sevens and older were to go, the others being considered too young.
Our Uncle-George, then eight, was to go in the wagon, but Mark was not old enough to go ‘Never mind, boy!’ our grandad said, ‘you shall go.
We'll walk.’
And they did.
We were glad to know that the little boy was allowed to ride home with the others.
No doubt Grandad walked.
For many years he was a Methodist Local Preacher, and always walked to his appointments anywhere in the Circuit, so that he did not cause anyone else to work on a Sunday.
Those days in Cornwall are part of a vanished age.
I think L was very fortunate to have been a child in the days when children could roam in woods and fields, unafraid, and when doors could be left unlocked; when there was less traffic, less noise and less hectic rush.
A wonderful time for children, but not so good for thousands in cities, nor for the countrymen who lived at subsistence level, and never knew what it was to have a holiday.
My grandfather never left Cornwall in the whole of his life.
In these days of food fads, concern about obesity, campaigns for fresh food and organic farming, and indeed more understanding of nutrition, I sometimes wonder how we all survived in the Twenties and Thirties!
When I think of all those Cornish pasties, Cornish clotted cream and many of our eating habits in our childhood, I wonder whether all these panic measures are entirely necessary.
This is appalling heresy, I know, but I suppose we were saved from our excesses because we walked everywhere and lived very active lives.
Most families were limited by income, anyway.
There were no ‘convenience’ foods, except tinned vegetables and fruit.
Patterns of eating depended very much on the season.
Many a summer evening was spent in slicing runner beans which were then packed in layers of salt in large crocks for the winter.
Carrots from the garden were stored in containers of sand in the cellar.
This was a beautifully cool place, cut out of the solid chalk and whitewashed annually by my mother.
Here the meat safe was kept, and the butter and milk.
We tended to have the same meal on the same day of the week: roast on Sunday, cold meat on Monday, a steak-and-kidney pie or pudding on Tuesday, stew on Wednesday, salt beef on Thursday, fish on Friday and toad-in-the-hole on Saturday.
We always had plenty of vegetables, for my father grew them in the garden, and during the Second World War, had an allotment too.
We loved Mummy's puddings, particularly treacle pudding.
As my own children came along, they loved to go to Granny's for treacle pudding!
In my childhood, shopping was very different from the supermarket shopping of today.
Every shop had its errand-boy, and meat, fish, green, grocery and almost any commodity you can think of could be delivered to the door.
The errand-boy, huge basket on the handlebars in front of him, was a familiar sight.
The grocer would come to the house for the orders of his regular customers, and these would be promptly delivered.
Milk was delivered twice a day, and bread daily.
The local draper's shop was a fascination for us because of the  arrangement for payment.
Someone sat in a little cubby-hole of an office, and there received money conveyed by means of a complicated system of overhead wires.
Each department of the shop, millinery, haberdashery, coats, children's clothes, and so on, had its own assistant behind the counter, and above his head was the contraption consisting of springs and wires by means of which, by pulling down a handle, he could send money and the bill in a cylindrical metal container hurtling at speed towards the cashier.
After a few moments, the receipt and change, if any, came speeding back, arriving with a clang and the ring of a bell above the counter.
Thus would Kipps and Mr Polly have received their customers' money.
My grandchildren in America ask me about how much things used to cost in those days.
It is hard to make a direct comparison, for relative prices have changed.
Housing, for instance, nowadays takes a much higher proportion of earned income.
Those were the days when a farm worker earned about thirty shillings a week, and three pounds was quite a good wage, so it is not surprising that a Saturday afternoon at the cinema cost tuppence, and four different sweets could be bought for a penny.
(Remember a penny then was not a penny now — there were 240 of them to £1!)
Choosing a penn'orth of sweets could be a long job: a gob-stopper, a liquorice wheel, liquorice rope, a chew, each could be bought for a farthing, and many boiled sweets and toffees were only tuppence a quarter.
For many children, spending money was a Saturday penny and a Wednesday halfpenny.
A sweet shop then was a veritable Aladdin's Cave for children, for most sweets were sold loose.
On the shelves would be row upon row of glass bottles, full of gaily-coloured sweets: winter mixture, bull's-eyes, barley sugar sticks, lollipops and many kinds of toffees.
It must have been very hard in those days for parents with a large family and a very low income to clothe their children.
I remember Christmas Eve 1930, when we went as we always did on that day to the High Street to look at the lighted shops, seeing a little girl in a tattered dress and with bare feet, her nose pressed at the toy-shop window.
I didn't say anything about this to my parents at the time, but the sight haunted me for years.
Every Christmas Eve I think of it again.
It seemed like something out of a Hans Andersen story.
I suppose had I lived then in a Northern city, the sight would not have been remarkable.
We had each year new clothes for Sunday, then next year these would become everyday clothes.
My mother had an admirable system for herself.
She would have a new dress for Sundays, which next year became  an afternoon dress, and the next was worn in the mornings for doing her housework.
There would be a new winter dress and a new summer one each year, plus a few cotton dresses for hot weather.
She would have a new coat for winter once in about three years, and the same for summer, with a suit for ‘in between weather,’(spring and autumn), so there was only one of these major expenses each year.
Hardly anyone had ‘leisure, clothes in those days.
People who played golf did, of course, and rich people, but the majority of people wore the same sort of clothes all the time.
This is why comic picture-postcards of the time show people at the seaside, paddling in the sea with their trouser-legs rolled up to the knee, or little girls with their dresses tucked into their knickers.
I am deeply grateful to my parents for the fact that until I was twelve years old and started at the grammar school, I was completely unaware of class distinctions.
We knew that some people had more money than others, and some people had bigger houses than others, but consideration of status was something unknown to us.
All our friends were welcomed to our house and our lives completely unaffected by ‘the done thing.’
My mother was very particular about good manners, but this was emphasised as being consideration for the feelings of others, not a mark of status.
Much that was written in those days now sounds appallingly snobbish, and I think it is a great tribute to my parents that we were kept ignorant of such distinctions.
The move to the grammar school was a cultural shock in this respect.
Family entertaining tended to be Sunday tea.
We loved having visitors, especially if there were other children.
Wafer-thin bread and butter, home-made jam, fruit cakes, sponge cakes, chocolate biscuits were the usual fare.
I was especially fond of the chocolate biscuits decorated with crystallised violets.
Supper parties were only for grown, ups.
We usually had a Christmas party for our friends, but not birthday parties.
Birthdays were family affairs, involving a family treat.
Robert's birthday is in June, and for a number of years, his birthday treat was for all the family to go to Cambridge on the bus, to go punting on the Cam, and then to have a strawberry and cream tea.
I am sure illnesses stand out in all childhood memories.
Two serious illnesses which I have been told about, but cannot remember, occurred before I was three.
The family folklore has it that when delirious I had said, ‘A big black dog sat on the bed and said, ‘Can I  holp you?’
But I don't remember that.
I do remember having my tonsils out — a very common practice in those days.
My throat hurts again at the very  thought!
When Robert was twelve and I seven, both my parents and Ann were smitten by a particularly virulent flu germ.
There was an epidemic at the time, and we had to cope as best we could.
My parents' solution was to take Ann into their bed, and Robert and I did what we could to look after them.
I remember the minister's housekeeper, Miss Lumb, calling to see if she could do anything to help, and the four-year-old Ann saying in a plaintive voice, ‘There isn't any room for Miss Lump in this bed!’
Robert had scarlet fever a few years later.
In those days, scarlet fever victims had to go to the Isolation Hospital just outside the town, and remain there for about six weeks, until all the affected skin had peeled off.
The transport was a yellow fever-van drawn by a horse, and I remember my mother weeping after the bizarre vehicle had made its way slowly up the road.
The house had then to be fumigated, and Ann and 1 were in quarantine for six weeks.
I always think of buttercups when I think of this time, for the fever hospital was at the end of a lane with meadows on either side, and these fields were bright with buttercups.
My mother used to visit Robert every afternoon and talk to him through glass.
We went too, but were not allowed in the hospital, so we played in the buttercup fields.
Robert was the only patient in the hospital at the time, and used to play darts and other games with the Matron.
One thing we all dreaded was Daddy getting a cold.
This was because he had had TB at the end of the Great War,(the First World War) and any cold was liable to turn to pleurisy.
I think this made all of us more aware of germs than we would otherwise have been.
When his illness was at the active stage, he was very particular about keeping his own utensils separate from everyone else's, and would joke about it, saying as he sat down at the table, ‘Make way for the leper.’
Ann astounded a Sunday-school teacher, who was telling the children about leprosy, by saying, ‘My father is a leper.’
‘Oh no, Ann, I don't think so,’ said the teacher.
‘Yes, he is — he said so!’ insisted Ann.
How easy it is to give children the wrong idea!
I was going shopping twenty years later with my parents and my own little girl Sara in her push-chair, when my mother said to my father, ‘Are you going to nip into the Post Office?’
My father assented, and we all continued our walk towards the shops.
After some time, Sara's little voice said, ‘I'm waiting to see Grandad nip.’
We shall never know what diversion she expected.
I moved from elementary school to grammar school when I was twelve.
On the whole, I enjoyed school very much, but it was a very different environment from the one left behind.
The restrictions on dress, behaviour and one's own free time were quite intimidating at first.
I think it was a very good school for its time, and I am deeply indebted to it for all I learned, but it was, I consider now, very strict.
There was a long list of school rules.
I can't remember them all now, but I know that no speaking was allowed in the class-rooms, corridors or on the stairs; no running anywhere indoors; no borrowing of any kind; all long hair had to be plaited; indoor shoes were never to be worn outside, nor outdoor shoes inside, and there were specific shoes for games, gym, hockey and so on; school uniform was strictly enforced, and hats compulsory.
Then there were the unwritten rules: girls travelling by train were not to travel in carriages with boys, and walking to school in the mornings, boys walked on one side of the road, girls on the other.
In summer, we had to wear a panama hat with the school band round it.
To get a panama hat wet is to court disaster.
The hat becomes limp and shapeless, and most girls tried quite desperately to avoid this mishap.
One June day, my sister was caught in a thunderstorm, and the deluge completely ruined her hat.
Knowing that other girls would laugh at her, Ann decided that being notorious was preferable to being ridiculous.
‘We'll make a proper job of this!’ she declared, and putting her fist into the crown, she forced it up as high as she could push it, and wore the resulting sombrero for the rest of the term.
My poor mother was horrified.
We had quite a lot of homework, so that those of us on a train journey involving an hour on either side of the school day, and then a couple of hours work, were not left with much free time.
Weekend homework always included an essay.
We learned a lot of poetry by heart.
Both of these activities I enjoyed very much, but maths was a torture!
I was very bad at gym, and really hated ‘apparatus’, where we hurled ourselves over boxes and horses, or hung upside down on parallel bars.
A usual ploy was to have to re-tie one's gym shoe just as one's turn came round, but  it only staved off the evil moment.
One physical activity (really enjoyed was swimming.
We were fortunate in having an outdoor swimming-pool, and it was there that I learned to swim, and have continued to enjoy swimming the rest of my life.
We had an annual swimming display at school, and this always ended with someone pretending to fall in accidentally, fully clothed, and being rescued by someone who dived in from the side, again fully clothed.
The school entered large numbers of girls for Royal Life Saving Society's bronze and silver medals.
Non-swimmers wore coloured bathing hats; those who could swim at least a length wore white hats, those who had passed the bronze medal wore black caps, and a very few wore silver for the silver medal.
There was a wood in the school grounds, and we were allowed to walk in it in fine weather, keeping to the paths.
The first week I was at the school, I attempted to climb a tree, and was reproved by a horrified prefect.
The wood was out of bounds during the nesting season, as it was the home of hundreds of rooks.
Bespattered gym-slips were thus avoided.
Social attitudes at school and at home were rather different.
I remember saying something at home about Watson the gardener.
‘What did you say?’ asked my scandalised father.
I repeated the name.
‘Mr Watson, to you, my dear,’ said my father.
‘Don't ever let me hear you say that again.’
There was a definite social scale in the school: the boarders at the top, then the fee-paying day-girls, then the scholarship girls.
It is quite horrible to contemplate now.
Every morning began with prayers.
We sat on the hall floor, cross-legged, in our forms, with our form-mistress beside us, so as the Headmistress stood on the platform, she looked down upon a sea of faces, rows and rows of black-stockinged legs, and a long line of mistresses sitting on their chairs.
When she first mounted the platform, we all stood up.
Into the complete silence of the waiting school came her quiet voice, ‘Good-morning, children,’ and we replied in chorus, ‘Good-morning, Miss Chambers.’
Then the hymn was announced.
We stood for the hymn, sat for the Bible reading, knelt for the prayers.
Those of us lucky enough to be in the choir were sitting on benches in the corridor beside the hall, an open corridor where we sat at right-angles to the rest of the school.
In my latter days at school, this old hall became the gym, and we had a new, much larger hall with room for chairs.
It never struck me as odd until I had left school, that a school of girls aged from eleven to eighteen should daily be addressed as ‘children’.
Sitting cross-legged on the floor for a lecture was a painful business.
I suppose yoga enthusiasts would find it painless, but for most of us an hour spent in this position was an ordeal.
We had visiting lecturers delivering a variety of information, none of which I can recall.
I adored acting and singing, and was fortunate in having opportunity for both at school.
In the Sixth form, we put on a number of plays ourselves, and in earlier forms we had plays produced by mistresses.
I had to understudy for Prospero, one year, and still remember large chunks of the beautiful Tempest verse.
Unfortunately aptitude for singing and acting was not regarded as important.
The real business of school was maths and English and science and history and so on.
We had a wonderfully imaginative French teacher who spoke only French in the class-room, taught us French songs, introduced us to French games, and brought the lesson to life.
From her, most of us acquired good French accents.
We had many school clubs and societies.
I joined the Arts Club, with its opportunities for play-readings and occasional plays for performance to school or parents; the Music Society, which had weekly meetings too; and the school branch of the League of Nations Union.
Memories of that now vanished organisation are sad to recall, for as the international situation grew graver, and the shadow of war began to fall on all of us, enthusiasm waned.
From the time of the Anschluss in March 1938, until the outbreak of war in September 1939, hopes of peace gradually faded and we began to prepare for the grim reality.
I was about to enter the Sixth form at the outbreak of war.
School did not open at once, for we were preparing to receive a school evacuated from the south coast to share our building.
Royston was a ‘reception area’.
The evacuation of children, and the mothers of children under five, from London and other large cities began a few days before the outbreak of war.
I worked at the billeting office until the school reopened.
In military terms, I was called a runner, and as I had no bicycle at that time, running was literally what I did!
I was sent hither and thither on messages, and sometimes went in the car with a billeting officer to help him or her with young children who were being placed in homes.
The little ones with their mothers were, I think, fortunate compared with the others.
Householders were usually reluctant to take in evacuees, but the system was compulsory.
Many people became very fond of their evacuee children and were very kind to them, but others treated children with harshness or neglect.
I was at the station with my father when the first trainload of children arrived.
He was there to greet the head-teacher of the incoming school, and I was there to do whatever was required of a runner!
I shall never forget the sight of all those little people emerging from the train with their gas masks in cardboard boxes slung over their shoulders, and their little cases or brown paper parcels containing their clothes.
A little girl called Jeanne was billeted with us.
She spent about seven weeks during which time her mother spent a weekend with us too.
Then, as nothing seemed to be happening, her mother took her home again.
Many evacuees went home during that first winter, but when the blitz began, there was another exodus from London.
Robert had been called up in the First Militia, as it was named, the beginning of National Service which was to continue until some years after the war ended.
He was posted first to the Artillery, but then transferred to the Royal Engineers because he had a driving licence.
In fact he spent all the first winter of the war pontooning, and then was driving lorries on bomb disposal.
On one of his seven-day leave periods, he bought me a bicycle.
It cost £7, and how he afforded that out of army pay, I shall never know.
That bicycle gave me so much joy for many years.
The last term I was at school, I was eighteen, and therefore not entitled to a half-price season ticket.
The price of a full season ticket was going to be as much as a term's school fees, and when I saw my father's horrified face, I said, ‘I can cycle.’
So I did, just for a fortnight, but it was fourteen miles there in the morning, and fourteen back at night, and I'm afraid I threw in the sponge!
When school reopened in September 1939, we returned to find sandbagged corridors, sticky tape on windows to stop flying glass, and regular safety drills.
One period a week, we did our lessons in our gas masks.
A favourite trick was to breathe out as hard as possible, to make the rubber at the side of the face make a noise rather like that of a whoopee cushion.
I can remember one unfortunate teacher, faced with a whole class engaged in this feat, saying with a very red face, ‘Any girl who makes that noise will have an order mark!’
The school building was shared with another school, so space was very limited.
Some classes trooped down Windmill Hill to a hall which had been commandeered, and areas for private study were very limited.
Sixth-formers could be seen working in corridors, at the back of other classes, or in any odd corner.
Many forms had days when lessons finished at midday, and study had to go on at home.
It is to the school's credit that such a successful attempt was made to keep life as normal as possible.
Before the war began, listening to reminiscences of those who had experienced the last war and sensing their dread, I imagined that once a war had started, no one would ever be happy again.
The reality surprised me at first, and then like everyone else, I took it for granted.
The rationing of food and of clothes, the air raid warnings which sent us into shelters, the trains which ran late and were always overcrowded, these things became an accepted part of life.
Far from the atmosphere of doom and gloom which I had imagined, there was far more camaraderie and cheerfulness than is shown nowadays.
It is a sad reflection on life that it takes danger and suffering to bring people closer together.
We were all subjected to propaganda as never before.
Health information was broadcast by a much-loved Radio Doctor, whose down-to-earth advice always seemed to contain some reference to bowels.
The underground trains, buses and other public transport carried the notice, ‘Coughs and sneezes spread diseases.
Trap the germs by using your handkerchief.’
Not only health matters were advertised: ‘Careless Talk Cost Lives!’ was another well-known slogan, and ‘Be like Dad — keep mum!,
There was a catch-phrase which was used for anyone who was grumbling —‘Don't you know there's a war on?’
As the news became grimmer, a poster appeared with the words, ‘We are not interested in the  possibilities of defeat — they do not exist!’
When the invasion of England seemed imminent, all signposts, station names and place names were removed.
This made cycling quite exciting, for if you got lost, there were no indications to follow, and people were discouraged from giving directions to strangers.
Much of the coastline became inaccessible too.
The story of the Home Guard is well known thanks to ‘Dad's Army,’ but it is nevertheless an amazing tale.
We laugh about it now, but it is sobering to think that thousands of men, either too old or too young for the Services, should have gone quite voluntarily, many nights a week, to drill and to manoeuvre, seriously believing that they might have to encounter an invading army.
For the first few months of the campaign they had very few weapons and virtually no ammunition.
Leaving school during the war when clothes were rationed posed problems.
The everyday school uniform, now useless, meant that one had hardly anything to wear!
Stockings were rationed, of course, so in warm weather, girls painted a thin line up the back of the legs to look like a stocking seam, and went without.
Not having the courage for this ploy, I just went without.
Like a good many others, I had one pair of lace-up shoes for winter and a pair of sandals for summer, and that was it.
There were a very few sources of material which were unrationed: parachute nylon could be bought sometimes and this was used for underclothes and men's shirts.
There was also some knitting yarn which was unrationed.
I remember my mother, who was an accomplished knitter, spending many hours knitting a yellow jersey from this yarn for my sister.
It looked very attractive until it was washed, when it stretched so appallingly that it reached to her knees!
I left school in 1941, and went for a year as a student teacher in my father's school.
At first I observed, then began to take some lessons.
For the last term, I had the school-leavers for English, maths, scripture and French, and taught music to several classes.
This experience was invaluable when I went to college, for it was at a time when students in training were being told that if a lesson was interesting enough, children would listen.
A year actually on the job had taught me that it wasn't quite so simple!
I have never subscribed to the view that schooldays are the happiest days of your life, but I do think that student days are among the happiest.
The two years at Homerton flew by.
The work was interesting but not so demanding that there was no time for anything else.
Cambridge is a beautiful place, and although ours was a training college and not part of  the University as it is now, many University societies were open to us.
I was very happy at Emmanuel Church and the University Congregational Society, and it is a joy for my husband Michael and me that we are still in touch with so many friends from CongSoc, and in fact some of us still meet every year for a few days in the Lake District.
I am sure that it is an unpopular thing to say, but I really did enjoy School Practice.
Many students found these periods in school, reaching under observation, almost unendurable.
I think I was very lucky to have had a year in school, and therefore to know that ‘real’ teaching was not like School Practice.
One colourful character in my year said to her class of eleven-year-olds, ‘I'm on trial for my life, so mind you behave yourselves!’
My two main subjects were English and music, so I was spending a large part of every day doing the things I loved most.
No wonder I was happy!
I had a part in the second-year play, and sang a solo at the Christmas concert, so I was very lucky.
During my time at college, my brother went for officer training and was commissioned in the Sherwood Foresters.
I went with my mother to the station to say goodbye to Robert at the end of his embarkation leave.
We did not know where he was going.
For my mother, who remembered seeing her only brother, also called Robert, off to France in the First World War, never to see him again, this farewell on the platform must have been agony.
This her only son, born in the First World War, was now travelling to unknown horrors.
She showed no emotion whatever, but said goodbye with a smile on her face.
When the train had gone, she said, ‘We'll just call in at the grocer's, dear.’
As we entered the shop, she tripped over the step, and then I knew that her eyes were full of tears.
On leaving college, I started teaching in a North London suburb.
It was at the time of the doodle-bugs, the flying bombs, and air raid warnings were frequent.
The time to worry was when the noise of the doodle-bug overhead stopped, for then it was going to fall.
I was buying a ticket one evening on King's Cross station, saying, ‘Return to Cambridge, please.’
Just as I spoke, there was a tremendous bang, and the whole station shook.
Without any change of expression or flicker of an eyelid, the girl in the ticket office said, ‘Where did you say, ducks?’
Travelling by train during the black-out was a dismal business.
There was only a small, shaded light in each carriage, and stations were in darkness.
Once I forgot to take a flashlight with me when visiting a friend, and found myself outside the house in pitch blackness, unable even to find the edge of the pavement or the garden hedge.
My eyes gradually became accustomed to the gloom, and I managed to grope my way to the station.
Air raid wardens patrolled the streets to make sure no lights were showing in houses.
The cry of ‘Put that light out!’ would be followed by a hasty adjustment of a black-out curtain.
The school was a delight.
It was one of the new secondary modern schools with a Headmaster who was an idealist.
He felt that the transition from junior to senior school was difficult enough without making the children go to a different teacher for every subject, so the three first-year forms had their own class teacher for maths, English, scripture, history or geography (one teacher took one or the other for two classes) and science.
At the end of my first term, I was relieved of the science, for obvious reasons, and given two classes of art instead.
After another term, I was given more art, and my class-room became an unofficial art room, much to the distress of the caretaker, who accused me of having the dirtiest class-room in the school!
I was rather distressed about this, but the Head said, ‘Don't worry!
To Mr Smith, a good teacher is a clean teacher.
I know you can't help the mess in your room.’
The Head was a wonderful person with whom to begin a career.
He was genuinely concerned for the children and considered their happiness  and development as responsible citizens to be more important than exam results.
I think it was my time with him which explains an incident which took place thirty years later.
I was teaching English in the boys' grammar school in the town where we lived then, and a teacher in the infant school asked my little daughter, ‘What does your Mummy teach at the College?’ and she replied, ‘She teaches boys.’
I remember many of the children in that first school with great affection.
There was the charming Denis whose paintings were always a delight.
A splendid Arctic picture with snowy mountains, icebergs and so on had as a centre-piece a small hole in the ice with a board saying, ‘Danger’.
Another time he painted a scene of the angel appearing to the shepherds to tell them of the Nativity.
The angel was there, the shepherds in brightly-coloured garments, and an amazing assortment of colours in the sky.
‘The glory of the Lord round about them,’ be explained.
Then there was Brian, who had frequent fits, poor lad.
The other children were very kind to him and would help to cope with him when necessary.
One day he wrote ‘battting’, and when I queried this, he said, ‘Well, I knew it had two t's, so I put three to make sure!’
Maisie and Joan, who collected catkins in the woods with me; Lucy, who was always polite and a beautiful writer; three very naughty boys who sat in the front row and made a nuisance of themselves: every teacher has memories like these.
On 7th May 1945 it was announced that VE Day would be celebrated next day.
The noise in the night was tremendous: first fireworks and dancing in the streets, then a dramatic thunderstorm.
There was no school on VE Day, of course, and I went home.
Robert had returned from Italy where he had been serving ever since he had been commissioned eighteen months before.
He had written to me every week when he could, and I was longing to see him again.
He had to be in hospital for some months after his home-coming, but he was at home for VE day.
There was an atmosphere everywhere of intense relief, and people expressed it by dancing, singing, bonfires, flags, balloons and general rejoicing.
Many wept too.
It was to be another three months before the war finally ended, on VJ Day.
By then, I think everyone was so exhausted, sickened by the realities of war and its appalling cruelties, that celebrations were somewhat quieter.
The war was over, thank God!
We had another seven years of rationing to come, though we didn't know it, and it was to be many years before things returned to normal, but the war was over.
The carnage had ceased.
We could look forward.
Our parents' wedding day, June 1991
Our mother with Robert, 1918
Four generations in 1919 — Robert with great-grandfather, father, and grandfather
Robert and Molly, 1923.
Molly and Ann, 1928
Sara, Gregory and BARNABAS, 1957
St Tudy in Cornwall — blacksmith's shop on right, village store in the house facing camera
Molly, Michael, and their four children — Ruby Wedding Day
Shanti in 1969
Shanti in 1987
Nothing could be quite the same again.
For those who had died, there was no future.
For those widowed or bereaved in other ways, victory must have had a hollow sound.
For men, returning home after years away from their wives and children, a new beginning had to be made.
Some were wounded; others so damaged by their experiences that it would take years to return to normal.
Marriages had been made during the war, but many damaged or broken by war, too.
One good thing which happened immediately was that Universities offered shortened degree courses to suitably qualified ex-service men.
For many, this must have been a therapeutic way back into civilian life.
I was twenty-two.
Childhood and youth were behind me, and I was looking forward.
In my wildest imaginings, I could not have foreseen what a wonderful life lay before me.
Ahead there was marriage to a man I dearly love, the birth of a daughter and then two sons, and a full and happy family life.
There was to be the usual share of pain and difficulties which all families face: nursing sick children and elderly parents, for instance; financial problems in the early days, coping with children's temperamental difficulties and problems at school.
Every parent knows this scenario!
I could never have imagined, however, how rich my life was going to be: how many friends we were to make, the places in the world we were to visit, and all the wealth of love and kindness from others we were to experience.
I had always wanted a big family, and we were fortunate enough to be allowed to adopt another little girl.
Child of Joy
‘You can't do it!’ we were told.
‘You can't take a black child into a white home and bring her up as your own.’
But we had and we did.
Everything about Shanti's adoption was against accepted practice.
There was none of the careful preparation and gradual introduction which usually precedes the adoption of a child beyond infancy.
This little girl, twenty-one months old, came to us straight from her mother's arms.
Much as we longed for another child, and overjoyed as we were that we were to have another daughter, we both said that it was the hardest thing we had ever done, to see a lovely young mother say goodbye to her daughter.
Shanti's mother loved her very dearly, and had tried for nearly two years to cope with the situation where she, as an Indian, had a baby with an African father.
It was the total opposition of the extended family which made her position impossible.
Reluctantly she decided that adoption was the only solution.
We promised to keep in touch with her, but asked her not to communicate directly with our new daughter as she grew up, feeling instinctively that a child can't cope with having two mothers at once!
We always hoped that one day there would be a reunion.
The year was 1965.
We had a daughter of nineteen at Teacher Training College and two sons, sixteen and thirteen, still at school.
Our older son was not too keen on having a baby in the house.
‘It will be the end of family life as I know it,’ he said, which of course it was.
A new baby always changes family life.
The first day Shanti was with us he did not come home from school till very late.
The next morning, at breakfast, he looked down at the little girl sitting in her baby chair.
She stared at him with her beautiful Indian eyes, puzzled I am sure by this tall man looking down at her.
When I looked at him, there were tears in his eyes, and he said, ‘It's not us who'll have the problem, Mum.
It's her.’
I think we underestimated the problems for the child.
It was a clear case of fools rushing in.
I can only hope that we gave her sufficient help and support when the problems came along.
For nearly two weeks, Shanti was incredibly docile.
She would be washed, dressed, given meals, taken out for walks, played with, bathed, put to bed, all with little reaction.
I think she must have been in a state of shock.
Then the crying began.
Every afternoon she would wake from her afternoon sleep and cry pitifully, sometimes for as long as two hours.
There was nothing anyone could do.
I used to sit with her in my arms, and sometimes I cried too.
I suppose looking back on it, she needed that time of grief.
We became very close to each other at this time, in the same way as a new baby and mother come very close through constant physical contact.
For nearly two years, Shanti was reluctant to let me out of her sight, and would follow me from room to room, into the bathroom, wherever it might be.
Up to the time she started school, she was very clinging.
I think this was to be expected.
I suppose in some ways her emotional life had to start again.
As Christmas approached, the excitement of preparation began to get through to her.
The crying sessions faded away and the basically happy and positive person she is began to be evident.
She would play noisily with the boys, copying their vocabulary and phrases.
They were both very good to her, amusing her and obviously enjoying her company.
Both of them were quite happy to push her out in her pram and she was often the centre of attention when their friends visited.
At weekends when our daughter was at home from college, she too enjoyed the child's company.
Part of the college course was to do a child study of a baby or very young child: Sara studied her own sister.
Their relationship became very special and has remained so.
(Some years later, when we were abroad for a year, taking just Shanti with us, when things got difficult she would say, ‘I want my Sara.’)
Christmas came just three months after Shanti joined the family.
It was the typical extended family time with grandmother and other visiting relatives.
The most vivid memory I have of that Christmas Day is of Shanti, now almost two years old, walking round and round the long dining-room table, pulling a little toy engine given to her by one of the boys, round and round, smiling and smiling.
The day we brought Shanti from London to our home, we stopped on the motorway for a meal.
I took Shanti into the babies' changing room.
A woman attendant asked me, ‘What are you doing with that black child?’
This was the very first person who had spoken to me since we had left London.
‘She's my adopted daughter,’ I said, for of course she was so in my  mind although not yet in fact.
‘It's all wrong,’ said the woman, ‘they ought not to be in white homes.
They ought to go back where they belong.’
At that moment I decided that I was not going to answer questions about her origins or discuss Shanti in any way in front of her.
Sometimes in the weeks and months that followed, I would say I would rather not talk about her in front of her.
‘She's too young to understand,’ was often the reply, but I didn't want her to think of herself as an object of attention.
In the motorway restaurant, I chose a bland meal I thought suitable for a little girl, and had a chicken salad myself.
I was intrigued to find that Shanti picked out all the cucumber from my meal, preferred my chicken to her rather mushy dish, pointed at the pickle and selected an onion from her father's plate.
At home a few days later, she was pointing excitedly to a top shelf.
To my surprise, the pickled onions were the source of this interest.
We soon discovered, not surprisingly, that she could cope with a curry far hotter than we could eat.
All our friends reacted very favourably to our new daughter, though I am sure that some must have thought that it was an odd thing to do, to take another child when our own were nearly adult.
For me, a new and very delightful phase of life began, for I began to spend time with mothers of young children again.
We met in each other 's houses, and later in the pre-school play group.
I met at this time a number of adopted children, and realised that the problems we all faced were similar, whatever the child's colour happened to be.
Both my parents had died, and my husband's father, but his mother was still living.
Her first reaction was amazement and distress.
She couldn't understand why we had done such a thing.
A few weeks after Shanti had joined the family, we took her to see Michael's mother, both of us feeling a little nervous.
She was welcomed with love; in fact, Nanny had had a splendid soft toy hand-made for her, a cuddly rabbit fully dressed in the most beautiful hand-sewn clothes.
This toy is still to Shanti a great treasure.
For us it is a symbol of acceptance, for from that day on Nanny referred to Shanti as ‘my granddaughter’ and treated her exactly as she had always done the others.
Shanti was nearly three when the formalities of adoption were completed.
The day came when we were to go to court to legalise the situation.
Michael and I were both very nervous, for even at this stage something might arise which could mean that the adoption would not go through.
When we were called, we went and sat in front of the circuit judge, Shanti sitting on my knee.
The judge was looking at his papers, and said, still looking down, ‘I believe you want to adopt this little girl.
Then he looked at Shanti, who smiled, and he said ‘Enchanting!’
Within a few minutes, the court proceedings were over.
When we got outside I said to Shanti, ‘That nice man has said you can be our little girl for ever.’
It may sound trite, but how do you explain adoption to a three-year-old?
Especially is it difficult when a child can remember her own mother, and had in fact seen her again some months before.
Her mother spent a weekend with us about six months after Shanti came to us, to reassure herself that for us to adopt Shanti was really what she wanted.
I had a hand-tooled Mexican handbag with me that day in court.
For years afterwards, Shanti would remark, ‘That's the handbag you had when we went to court.’
I cannot know how she feels about that experience, but I think it must have been reassuring rather than distressing.
I hope so.
From the age of about three, at bedtime story-time, Shanti would often ask, ‘Tell me about when you fetched me from London.’
Then we would tell her the same story, in the same words, like a folk-tale: the ride on the motorway, the meal in the restaurant, her going to sleep and waking up to see sheep on the Derbyshire hills.
She loved to hear how she had pointed to them and said, ‘Moo!’ and we had said, ‘No, darling.
They are sheep.
They say Baa!’
Pre-school playgroup began when Shanti was three.
This was a very happy experience.
For three mornings a week she went to a playgroup run by a friend who was a trained Froebel teacher.
We felt this was important and valuable for otherwise she would have been so much in the company of adults.
It was an excellent playgroup, and she learned so much about co-operating with others, and developed skills in drawing and music in a happy, relaxed but structured environment.
A very good friend helped me in the house at this time in our lives, and Shanti loved her dearly.
One afternoon a week, I went to do some work at the Child Guidance Clinic, and Mavis looked after Shanti on these days.
If ever we had to be away for a night, Shanti used to go to spend the night at Mavis's house, and regarded it as a very great treat.
One day a boy who had been told to wash his hands said, ‘Shanti's lucky.
She doesn't have to wash, because chocolate doesn't show on her.’
‘No,’ she replied, ‘but ice-cream does.’
Another time when someone remarked on her colour, she said, ‘People lie on beaches to get as brown as I am.’
We did everything we could to encourage her to be pleased with being brown.
Later, at school, when racist remarks were  occasionally made, we used to assure her that people always made silly remarks about something slightly unusual, be it freckles, glasses, red hair or the shape of someone's nose, and to take no notice.
In her teens, she coped very well with racism.
I remember once seeing her turn into our gateway, and a boy on a bicycle spat at her.
She took absolutely no notice, but came into the house and said, ‘Please will you wash my blazer.’
I said, ‘I could kill that boy.’
She said, ‘Don't take any notice.
He's only showing his ignorance.’
At the time of the so-called race riots, Shanti and her friends were discussing the events in Manchester, and agreeing that the whole sad business had been more about unemployment than about race.
As they talked together, I was distressed to hear them recounting episodes of racial strife that they had seen.
I said, ‘You haven't encountered this sort of thing personally, have you, Shanti?’
‘You must be joking,’ she said, and began to tell me something of her experience as a black girl in a predominantly white city: of the boutique manageress who said to her assistant, ‘Watch that black girl — they pinch things.’
Of being searched in shops; of police moving groups of young people if they were black; of the woman who had screamed at her, ‘Go away!
Go away!
You are frightening me!’ and of a passer-by who had added, to the astonished Shanti, ‘You ought to be ashamed of yourself, frightening someone like that.’
(I was glad at this time to remember that a woman in our own suburb had said to her once, ‘I think you are the most attractive girl in the village!’)
After the friends had left, I asked her, ‘Did we do an awful thing?’
‘No,’ she replied, ‘if I'd had black parents to go home to, they would have been on the receiving end of aggro all day long as well.’
From the age of about four onwards, and at intervals over the years, Shanti would ask, ‘Didn't my mother love me?’
I think this feeling of having been rejected must be the hardest thing for any adopted child to cope with.
I am sure that to conceal from a child the fact that he is adopted is both foolish and cruel.
In our case, of course, it would have been impossible, but I know of cases where parents have attempted to keep their adopted children in ignorance of their origins.
I think that many parents want to think that the first parents are irrelevant, and I am sure that this is a mistake.
One adoptive parent told her adopted daughter that her first mother was just like the brown paper parcel the child came in.
I can't think that this can ease pain, but is likely to increase it.
When we were asked this difficult question, we used to say, ‘Yes, she did!
She loved you very much indeed, but she wanted you to have a mummy and a daddy and brothers and sisters.’
Later we explained about the difficulties of being a single parent; of financial strain, of the unsatisfactory life for a young child of being in a day-nursery from early morning till evening, and returning with an exhausted and lonely mother to a one-roomed flat.
These explanations were only given as answers to direct questions.
(This is a policy we have pursued with all our children, to answer as truthfully as we could just the question asked.
It was applied to enquiries of many kinds: about family history, about sex, about politics, about religion.)
I don't want to give the impression that we often talked about Shanti's origins; we only did so when she obviously wanted to.
A few days after she started school, I was meeting Shanti at the school gate and she ran out calling, ‘Mummy.’
‘That's not your real Mummy,’ said another four-year-old.
My heart sank.
‘Yes, she is,’ Shanti said in a matter-of-fact tone, ‘she's not my first Mummy, but she is my real Mummy.’
Now this was not a phrase I had ever used, but I hoped with all my heart that it was true.
There was a stage, when she was about thirteen, when I think Shanti had what psychologists would term an identity crisis.
It didn't last long, but it was painful for her and for us.
There were angry feelings on her part because we weren't brown like her.
Why had we taken her?
Why couldn't she be with her own people?
Looking back on it, I think it was only part of the painful process of growing up.
Every teenager goes through a period of deciding who he really is .
What she said to me on the subject of the race riots and how she felt in that context makes me think that this stage in her life was nothing to do with race.
Shanti had very little opportunity to meet other coloured children in the town where we lived then, but when she was three years old, a family came to live near us with a white mother and a Ugandan father, and she became very friendly with the five children.
At about the same time we made the acquaintance of a young Nigerian living in the town, and in due course his bride came to stay in our house until her marriage.
Those few months with Justina in our family were very happy for us, and the friendship with both these couples and their children has continued, though unfortunately great distances now separate us and we can only communicate by letter and send photographs.
Shanti made many friends in junior school.
The only other coloured children in the school, all as it happened adopted too, were much younger, so all her peers and all her friends were white; two of these have remained close friends into adult life.
One of the younger adopted children she had known at school, a very charming and beautiful girl of Indian parentage, some years later made contact with her again, and they talked about fashions and make-up together.
We tried to help Shanti to be pleased with her colour, to choose clothes that suited her, and to be co-operative with her over make-up and hair styles.
There were some rather dramatic episodes over hair styles.
Just before Christmas when she was twelve, she had her hair plaited in a hundred little plaits with a bead on the end of each plait.
It looks rather splendid, but it attracted so much attention that after two days she took it all out.
Then there was the rime when she was going on holiday with a schoolfriend and the friend's parents.
The day they were due to set off for France, Shanti had a swathe of her black curly hair bleached and dyed crimson.
I was horrified when I saw it!
She says that I said she looked like a bloody parrot.
I hope I only said parrot.
The parents of the friend consented to take her, but I think her appearance caused some consternation.
On the ferry coming home again a fortnight later, some French  boys questioned her about what had happened to her hair.
The crimson had now faded and there was a biscuit-coloured sweep of hair on one side of her face.
She explained that it had been dyed, and as the English-speaking French boy explained to his friend, she caught the word ‘Morte ’.
I think she was beginning to think she would have it black after all.
A few months later, like Picasso, she had a blue period.
Again the colouring was preceded by bleaching, and this time the colours were three shades of blue from the back of the head, across the crown and in the front.
We had to admit that it looked rather splendid.
She was at senior school by this time, of course, and the senior mistress sent for her, sat her down and began to question her kindly about conditions at home.
Was she getting on all tight with her parents?
Was she happy?
Was all well at home?
Assured that all was well, the mistress asked, ‘Then why this protest?’
‘Oh, it's not a protest,’ said Shanti, ‘I just like blue hair.’
Alas! school rules did not permit blue hair; it had to be dyed black again.
When relating the incident, Shanti said, ‘Oh!
I could have let you in for it then, couldn't I!’
We have always been so thankful that she has such a sense of fun.
It has stood her in good stead, for she has had to deal with very serious health problems and has never allowed these to depress or hinder her.
Of course absence from school and periods in hospital have been a disadvantage to her, but she has survived as a cheerful and courageous person.
Shanti has always been able to see the funny side of a situation.
She will joke about herself and is not touchy if other people risk a mild tease about colour.
Her attitude to us is very frank, for which we are glad.
One day she was looking rather appalled about something each of us had done, which she thought very silly, and said, ‘Thank goodness I can't inherit it!,’
When Shanti was about to enter the local college of further education, a friend said to her, ‘I don't know what you're going to do, Shanti.
All the black kids stick together and all the white kids stick together, and you aren't either, are you?’
‘Don't be silly!’ said Shanti, ‘I'm me.’
When Shanti had been with us for a few days, a friend said to me, ‘I saw Michael out with the baby in the pram, and I don't think I've seen a man look happier in my life.’
Michael has always taken a very active part in the upbringing of the children.
I know this is quite usual for fathers in the Eighties, but in the Fifties when we had our older children, and the Sixties when Shanti came, it was not quite so common.
Every Saturday morning he took her shopping with him, and this ritual became very important to her.
Since she has been grown-up she has told me how she remembers those Saturday mornings and how she loved them.
Isn't it strange!
We all remember episodes from our childhood so plainly.
The inside ‘me’ is the same person whether we are five or ninety-five.
Yet in dealing with children we forget this.
Every day is so precious in the life of a child, yet we forget this.
We hurry them on when they want to stop and look at some new marvel.
We tell them to be quiet because we want them to look at television, or say it's too wet to go out for a walk when they are wanting to wear their new wellies.
I admired my daughter-in-law so much the day I saw her stand a full five minutes waiting for her little boy who was watching a worm disappearing through a hole in the earth.
I know Shanti's first mother will forgive me if I say that when our little girl first came, she was in a very disturbed state.
To change mothers at twenty-one months old must be a very painful experience.
There had been other stresses too, and we felt that our first job was one of reassurance.
All we could offer Shanti was our love.
It was easy to give, for she was, and is, very lovable.
Our other children loved her dearly.
When she was two and a half, we all went on holiday in France with the two boys.
(Our daughter Sara was in Edinburgh with a college group at the Fringe Festival.)
The plan was to go down to the south coast and camp.
Unfortunately we had a major breakdown with the car, and were stuck in a tiny village with our tent and no transport.
The boys were marvellous.
They took Shanti out in her push chair and amused her as much as they could.
She says she can remember the breath-taking speed  of some of those tides!
Shanti was a bridesmaid for her sister Sara, and then again for our Nigerian friend Justina who was married from our house.
Greg was by this time at University, and Shanti missed him very much.
He had always been very kind to her.
In fact one of his Cambridge friends once said, ‘There are only two women in Greg's life: Philippa’(she is now his wife)‘and Shanti.’
She remembers going with me to fetch Greg and his trunk for the Easter vacation, and of meeting Big Bob the porter who remembered her Daddy too.
Barney, our younger son, was a very willing baby-sitter.
He would bath Shanti, tell her a story and put her to bed.
Once when he was at school camp, Shanti and I went to fetch him home at the end of the camp weekend.
He told me that as we got out of the car, a boy asked, ‘Who's the little nigger?’
‘My sister,’ he said, without further explanation.
I don't think the boys ever found her an embarrassment.
Indeed, once the mother of one of Greg's friends rang up about some arrangements the boys had made together, and she said, ‘Oh, by the way, I've only just learned that Greg's sister whom Richard talks about is adopted.’
I thought that was very interesting, for Richard had obviously never thought it worth mentioning that she wasn't white.
I am sure our experience with our youngest child has been very much due to the fact that the whole family has been involved.
Greg married very young, and he and Pippa have a daughter Emily who is only five years younger than Shanti.
Our younger son Barney and his wife lived with us for several years, and their son was born while they lived with us.
They used to ‘baby-sit’ for us at a time when teenagers resent a ‘sitter-in’, for we were glad to be able to leave Shanti in their care without her realising it — they were there anyway.
Now she baby-sits for their two children.
I am sure that the more love you receive, the more you can give: the more you give, the more you can receive.
It's too obvious to need saying, but I wonder whether we think of it enough.
Sometimes it is hard to love a rebellious and rude teenager, to endure the appalling racket of pop music, to cope with disobedience and flagrant disregard of rules laid down for family life.
It is the lot of all parents of teenagers, I presume, and all you can do is say, ‘I love you, but I hate what you are doing.’
I expect many mothers have had the experience of standing at the sink washing and re-washing dishes because a teenage son or daughter is standing in the kitchen talking about something important, and once  the dish-washing is over, he or she will go away.
On one such occasion, when Greg was sixteen, he suddenly asked me, ‘Mum, how do you see your role as a parent?’
Rather taken aback, and with no time to think of a suitable reply, I said, ‘Well, I suppose at your age I can only stand back and hope you don't make too many mistakes.’
‘Don't stand too far back, Mum,’ he said.
I believe a great deal of advice is available to adoptive parents these days.
It is good to know that people are carefully prepared for this great venture and that both the would-be parents and their home are thoroughly investigated as to suitability.
How ironic that we can, and do, produce our own offspring and become responsible for them without any preparation, any consideration as to our fitness for the job!
One of the pieces of advice offered to adoptive parents is to tell their children that they were ‘chosen’.
I remember a kindly elderly member of our church saying to Shanti, ‘Aren't you a lucky girl!
You were chosen.’
Shanti smiled pleasantly at her and seemed happy with this comment, but after the speaker had gone she said to me, ‘Big deal!
It still means adopted.’
A couple I knew who adopted three children found that only one of the three was at all interested in finding out about his natural parents.
The other two showed no curiosity in the matter.
I suppose when a very young infant is adopted, the temptation to the parents to pretend that the child was born to them must be very great.
In every way, the adoptive parents want to be the ‘real’ parents.
For this reason, I suspect that adopted children may pretend to have no interest in their origins in case their enquiries should hurt their ‘real’, that is, their adoptive parents.
As the law stands now, at eighteen, an adopted young person has the right to trace his natural parents, and to make contact with them if this is the desire of all concerned.
It is usually the mother who is being sought.
This is an area of human emotion so fraught with difficulty that attitudes to it are poles apart.
One has sympathy with adoptive parents who want ‘a clean break’, and no more contact, ever, with the natural mother.
But the natural mother is a fact!
We feel we are very fortunate to have known Shanti's mother, for we were able to tell her what her mother looked like, and speak of her lovingly as a person, not as the ‘brown paper parcel’ referred to before.
I think, on the other hand, that it is possible to exaggerate the importance of origins.
I saw once on television a programme where a  young woman of African parentage, adopted by a white couple, was asked by the interviewer, ‘Do you feel drawn to your African heritage?’
She laughed and replied, ‘Why should I?
I was born in Brighton.’
Many children who are born to their parents have fantasies about being adopted, about being changelings.
There are fairy stories and folk-tales in nearly every culture about changelings.
When children imagine that they have been adopted, the fantasy always involves some romantic idea like being a princess and not the daughter of the local estate agent or whatever the truth may be!
Shanti has told me that when she was about seven, she used to tell the children at school that she was really the daughter of an Indian princess, and used to pretend to talk in an Indian language!
I imagine such harmless make-believe was quite a comfort.
Home-grown teenagers look at their parents and think, ‘I can't have been produced by them!
I must have been adopted.’
At the time when Shanti was preoccupied with the subject of identity, she expressed the thought that she hadn't any choice in the matter: we had taken her whether she liked it or not.
I pointed out that Sara, Greg and Barney were all in the same position: they hadn't chosen to be born to us.
All four of them were stuck with us!
Although we did very sincerely attempt to treat all four children alike, we soon realised that in fairness we would have to modify that intention.
Our three older children enjoyed country walks and country pursuits.
Shanti loathed country walks, preferring gift shops, shops of all kinds, parties, and above all — people!
Her taste in music, books, clothes and almost everything was different, and it was very important to respect this.
I think perhaps this applies to all children, adopted or home-grown.
We ought not to assume that our own interests will be those of our children.
Most importantly, I think it is a recipe for disaster to assume that our children are going to pursue a particular career, and pressure them towards it.
I sincerely believe that all our children, whether born to us or entrusted to us by adoption, are not our possession.
It is almost as if they were lent to us for their infancy and formative years, and are then entirely free to go their own way.
If we believe this, I think it makes the challenge of bringing up adopted children an easier task.
At the same time, I believe that their claim on us is absolute.
Nothing that they can do can alter the fact that they are our responsibility.
Shanti and Chris met at school when Shanti was twelve and Chris fourteen.
At first they spent their Saturdays and an occasional evening  with a group of friends: shopping, at parties, going to the cinema or occasionally to a disco.
As time went on, they began to visit each other 's homes.
Then, when they were sixteen and eighteen respectively, they told us they wanted to be married.
It didn't seem sensible to consent to such a young marriage, but our son Greg and his wife were only nineteen when they married, and it is a successful and happy marriage.
We liked Chris very much and it was obvious that they were very happy together, and so we went ahead with plans for the wedding.
Shanti said, ‘I should like to see Patsy again before I get married.
Would you mind?’
I said, ‘Of course I don't mind!
I've always hoped you'd meet again.’
So we began the delicate task of preparing for a reunion of mother and daughter.
Patsy and I corresponded over a period of four months.
Various suggestions were made, and the final plan was that Patsy, her husband and their two little boys should come and stay in a hotel in our village for the weekend.
As the time grew nearer, Shanti began to call me Molly, and I could hear her on the telephone telling her friends, ‘I'm going to meet my mother.’
I wondered, to quote a phrase used by Greg fifteen years before, was this going to be ‘the end of family life as I knew it’?
Would I not be mother any more?
The choice was Shanti's, if choice there had to be.
Chris's mother was very worried about the proposed reunion, for she was afraid I should find it upsetting.
She could not have known how very distressing I had found the parting of mother and child; how I had been almost haunted by the memory of that day, of the poignancy of a mother kissing her baby goodbye.
I hoped very much that it could be a healing experience for us all.
Patsy and her sons arrived in the village on Friday evening and spoke to us on the telephone.
The plan was for Michael to fetch Patsy from the hotel to spend the day with Shanti and me, then Michael would take Patsy's husband, the boys and Chris to Manchester for the day.
Then we could 2–11 have an evening meal together.
After Michael had gone to fetch Patsy, Shanti said to me, ‘I'm scared!’
I said, ‘So am I, darling, but the one who is most scared is Patsy, and we must think about her.’
Very soon, there stood Patsy in the doorway.
It was a very emotional moment for all of us.
Michael and Chris went quickly away, and the three of us were left together.
Shanti and Patsy looked at each other.
‘You're so tall, Shanti!’ said Patsy.
‘Patsy, you're so little !’ said Shanti, and they laughed.
I left them together while I went to make some coffee, and when I came back into the room, Shanti was saying, ‘Patsy, where do I get my big feet from?
Yours are so tiny.’
It's going to be all right, I thought.
They are laughing, they are talking.
We had all cried a little too, through our smiles.
It is so difficult not to make it sound so appallingly emotional.
Somehow it was the kind of joy mixed with tears which one finds at weddings, at Confirmation, at baptisms.
It was such an important day, a day of healing, of explanation, of real dialogue between mother and daughter.
I kept out of the way most of the day.
They had so much to tell each other; it was their day.
In the evening, Michael came in with Patsy's husband, the boys and Chris, and we all had a meal together.
The little boys were so matter-of-fact about it all.
This was their big sister.
Chris was to be their brother-in-law.
They had climbed all over him in Tatton Park, looked at Granada TV studio sets with him, been with him to the Industrial and Air Museums.
We all called each other by first names.
In some ways I think the one in the hardest position was Patsy's husband, but he behaved as though it were the most natural thing in the world.
We all spent the next day together.
As they were leaving, Patsy asked Shanti, ‘Well Shanti, what are we going to be?’
What indeed, I asked myself.
Shanti smiled.
‘I think we are going to be very good friends,’ she said.
It is a tremendous tribute to Patsy and her husband that this is what they have become.
Patsy has made no emotional demands on Shanti at all.
Shanti refers to her as ‘my first mother’.
Patsy can refer to her as ‘my married daughter’ with no embarrassment and the boys are pleased to have a sister.
Shanti and Chris have stayed with them and they with us; in fact we have added four more people to our extended family!
Sara and Patsy are much the same age and are very fond of each other.
Chris makes jokes about having two mothers-in-law!
Shanti says, ‘Oh I do like her!
But she's not my Mum.’
I think this shows a wonderfully sensitive and unselfish attitude in Patsy that she is prepared to accept this relationship.
After the first meeting, Shanti had so many questions to ask me.
Why had I not told her this and that?
Much of what Patsy told her on that important morning, must have been therapeutic to Patsy, baffling to Shanti, and much of it unknown to me.
So when asked why I had not  told her the whole story, I replied, ‘Because you never asked me.’
I had only told her, as truthfully as I could, whatever she asked me.
I have told this story in the hope that it may be of some help to other adoptive parents, and out of the profound belief that love is the most important thing in the world.
In my third term in the Sixth Form, almost every girl in the form was made a prefect except me.
Very disappointed, I went to the Headmistress to ask why I had not been considered suitable.
She looked at me for several seconds without speaking, and then said, ‘Well, Molly, we all think you treat life as a joke!’
I was very hurt, because I thought I took life seriously, although it was true that there was always plenty to laugh about!
I suppose if I'd been a few years older, I would have replied, ‘Isn't that the only way to treat it?’
In some ways, life must seem to be a very cruel joke to millions of people on this earth.
How strange is this business of growing older!
It's just the same person inside.
I can still feel how I felt that day, nearly fifty years ago.
I can remember, too, the day my sister was born, and how excited I was.
I wasn't quite three years old.
I suppose we all have this ability to feel again the joys, the pains, the disappointments, the excitements, from early childhood to our dying day.
I remember clearly how I used to feel as a child in chapel on Sundays.
As I listened to passages of Scripture read aloud, or to the Preaching of the Word,(very important in non-conformist chapels!)
I used to be amazed how calmly grown-up people accepted it all.
I would hear gruesome or stirring stories from the Old Testament, miracles from the New, or rousing appeals from the pulpit, and think, ‘How can they sit there so still and do nothing if it's all true?’
I remembered this when one of my daughters asked how I could be so apathetic about the world and its problems.
I tried to explain to her that few elderly people can remain in a state of reforming fervour all their lives!
We may feel the same inside, but alas!
The energy to do something about it must be, for most of us, a thing of the past.
When I was at college, I used to think, ‘This must be the best time of life.’
I made sure that I enjoyed it to the full, although it was wartime.
When I left and went to teach in war-torn London, I knew I had been right to make the most of those precious two years.
Some years later, married and with small children coming along, I used to think, ‘This must be the very best time.’
If I said to my mother, ‘I'm longing for when he or she can do so-and-so,’ she would say, ‘Don't wish the time away!’
What good advice!
There is a well-known saying that life begins at forty!
In some ways, it does, I suppose, for many women; for children are beginning to grow independent and women can resume their careers or involve themselves more fully in their work if they have continued to work outside the home.
For me, it began again in one sense, for with our three home-grown children growing up, we adopted another baby.
Watching a family growing up is a wonderful experience.
I suppose ‘watching’ is the wrong word, for parents, especially mothers, are so involved in the whole process that they cannot be impartial observers.
The inevitable domestic dramas; the illnesses; the school exams; the trips to casualty departments of hospitals; the entertaining of foreign exchange schoolchildren; the ferrying to and fro to Brownies, school camp, music lessons, the station; the constant coming and going of teenage friends; the battle of the telephone: it is all so familiar to every parent, and it is so exhausting!
But the joys far, far outweigh the labour.
Whenever I hear the opening bars of Zadok the Priest , I remember the attentive, eager face of the eleven-year-old boy, singing in the school choir concert for the first time.
And the same boy, nearly ten years later, with much the same expression on his face, awaiting his turn in the Senate House to receive his degree.
The whole kaleidoscope is there in the memory: how proud we were of our daughter Sara's acting ability, at junior school, at senior and at college; and of our younger, very shy son, who managed a one-line walk-on part the last year in junior school, but wrote, acted in, sang in and played for a satirical revue at University.
There was always so much fun!
We used to have a good long walk somewhere in the Dales every weekend.
Now that we are both too decrepit to walk far, it is good to remember those family walks.
All that wonderful time is still with us: memory is a precious gift.
Our younger daughter came with us for a year to Australia, where Michael had a visiting Professorship at Sydney University.
Sadly, during that year, Shanti developed diabetes.
This meant first a period in hospital, then periodic visits to the clinic.
Every time we had to travel in from our suburb to the city for clinic visits, we made it a treat day.
Shanti was eight years old and we were determined that her childhood was not going to be spoiled by this disability.
So, we would go to the clinic, then have lunch and go on to some special place — an afternoon on a beach, a boat trip  round the harbour, a visit to Old Sydney Town or to Taronga Park Zoo.
Now she remembers the treats but never mentions the hospital.
The wedding vows are so easily said: ‘For better, for worse; for richer, for poorer; in sickness and in health.’
It is only after experiencing the vicissitudes of life that we realise how much the difficulties and pains enrich our lives almost as much as the joys and pleasures.
It is so often in illness and distress that we experience the concern and kindness of friends and family, and form closer relationships because of them.
With three of the family married, grandchildren coming along, the youngest still at home and the others visiting frequently, I used to think, This really must be the best time.
Michael has always been a very hard worker and has filled every minute of every day with activity.
When he has time to relax, he manages to put all that energy into enjoying himself.
So family life was always full, full of coming and going, full of laughter, full of activity.
Plenty of argument, too, from our own young people and their friends: political, religious, social topics discussed, sometimes fiercely.
What a joy grandchildren are!
Our older son and his wife came to live with us for four months, between University and his first job.
Their daughter Emily was fifteen months old when they came, and their son Tom was born while they lived here.
Soon after their second son Bill was born, they moved to America.
It was sad to see them all go, but a wonderful joy it is when they all come for occasional visits.
Our younger son and his wife live near us, and we see them and their two children regularly.
The relationship between children and their grandparents is something very precious.
I do try not to be a stupidly over-indulgent grandparent, but then I remember how my own mother would refill jam tarts for my children after they'd licked the jam out of the pastry, and they seem to have suffered no ill effects!
In 1953, I was sixty.
Michael was going to retire that year.
In the spring, he had to have a heart by-pass operation, and that was a time of anxiety and distress.
I learned then how very kind people can be in times of grave illness.
Michael made a good recovery, and was well enough to enjoy the international conference given at the time of his retirement.
Retirement!
‘What are you going to do?’ people asked him.
For me, it was a new and very special experience.
He was actually at home!
I saw him; I could talk to him.
He was home to lunch.
I laughed when I heard the old cliché about ‘having him under my feet.’
It was marvellbridegroom'sous!
We did the shopping together; we went out for walks if we felt like it.
There was a holiday feeling about every day: we would wake up in the morning  and say, ‘What shall we do today?’
We had a really marvellous holiday in October — three whole weeks, much longer than we'd ever been able to have while Michael was working.
Indeed, I thought: life begins at sixty!
Very soon after Michael's retirement he was asked to chair a review for government.
So much for retirement, I thought!
He estimated it would take three days a week for nine months or so, but it turned out to be very much a full time job.
Not only was he working on it all day at home, but he had to travel about the country collecting information.
Life went on at home much as it had done for years.
Michael was working at home or away; Shanti, who had just left school, was job-hunting.
Our little grandson Mark, now two years old, came once a week to stay the night with us to delight us with his charming presence.
Church commitments, Shanti's friends and our own, our family coming and going, gave us plenty of interest.
Then Shanti and Chris announced their engagement.
Chris had occasional casual work, but most of the time he was unemployed.
We felt very sorry for both young people, for they were genuinely trying to find work and were getting very dispirited.
It seemed crazy to let such a young couple get married, for Shanti was only seventeen and Chris eighteen, but it did seem more sensible for them to be unemployed, married and happy than unemployed, unmarried and unhappy!
So we began to make preparations for the wedding.
There is a flat at the top of our house where our younger son and his wife had lived until Mark was a year old, so there was accommodation for them: they needn't be homeless even if they were penniless!
Shanti and Chris were married in March 1954.
It was one of those rare occasions — a really perfect day!
I cannot think of anything that happened that day which I would have wished otherwise.
We all awoke to sunshine: a cloudless sky, pale winter sunshine, a cold day but bright.
The house seemed full of joy.
Our older son had come over from San Francisco with his wife and the three children, so they were all here.
Our older daughter was here too, and as the morning progressed, the three bridesmaids all arrived, three friends from schooldays.
There was much running of baths, rushing about with garments, laughter on the stairs and in the bedrooms; telephoning of florist for more button-holes; small  boys trying to help and being urged to be careful.
Then at last bride and three bridesmaids were all ready.
I went to church with the bridesmaids and left my daughter alone in the house with her father.
Most of the family were already in church, and aunts and uncles and cousins; parents and relations.
The church was breath-takingly beautiful with spring flowers.
I knew my sons had been saying that of course Mum would cry — it was a dead cert!
As I waited in the porch with the bridesmaids, I saw Shanti get out of the car, take her father's arm, and walk towards us.
‘I am going to cry,’ I thought, and I went quickly to my seat in the church before I had time to do so.
The service was beautiful.
The choir sang an anthem as the register was being signed.
Then it was all over, and photographs were being taken and confetti thrown.
Just what happens at every conventional wedding, but for me every minute of that day was magic.
Everyone was so happy.
The reception was all that we had hoped and planned; the young best man gave the best best man's speech I have ever heard!
Then in the evening there was an informal party in the house, and again the whole house felt alive with joy.
I think this very special day did much to help us to bear what was to come.
Michael had had pain in his back for years, and had been receiving treatment for it.
Only a few weeks after the gloriously happy wedding day, we learned that Michael had cancer in his spine, and that immediate surgery was necessary.
The next few months were hard to bear.
First, Michael had an operation to stabilise his spine.
This meant that for six weeks he was on a special bed that could be turned so that he spent some hours on his back and some on his front, never getting off the bed at all.
It must have been a terrible ordeal.
On the morning of the operation day, the surgeon told me he thought Michael had only a few months to live.
For three days this terrible possibility hung over me like an appalling nightmare, but then the agony was lifted — the prognosis was brighter.
Michael was taken by ambulance from the place where the surgery was done to the Christie cancer hospital.
This is an amazing place of hope and encouragement.
The whole attitude to illness is so positive.
The treatment itself was distressing and made him feel very ill, but the care and kindness of the medical staff and of the radiologists made his time bearable for both of us.
Then for several weeks, Michael was an outpatient.
Every morning I drove him to the hospital, waited for his X-ray treatment, drove him home again and helped him to bed.
Sometimes he was too sick to eat anything all day, but other days he would sleep for a  while and then get up for a meal.
One day when we were at the hospital, Michael was undressing behind screens preparing for his treatment and I was helping him; and we heard the radiographer say, ‘If you hear a lot of laughter coming from behind those screens, Doctor, it's only the Homes.
They always do that!’
It hadn't struck us till then that we had laughed particularly, but I remembered my old Headmistress at that moment!
It was a beautiful summer — warm and sunny.
Michael spent hours sitting in the garden, or rather lying on a folding bed.
We were very happy, for we were so grateful that we still had each other.
Our family were constant visitors, of course, and many friends — the same, dear kind people who had so readily transported me to the hospital for the nightly visiting.
I shall never forget the kindness of the many people who took it in turns to give me a lift, so that I didn't have to drive there and back.
I noticed a strange and wonderful thing about that summer.
In some inexplicable way, all the senses seemed to be heightened.
It was a time of great anxiety and distress, and yet everything that was beautiful and worth while seemed more precious than ever before.
I remember that the very day that the surgeon told me that he thought the cancer was incurable, I saw the swifts returning to their annual nesting-place.
Somehow it was a poignant reminder that the eternal things do not change.
As the spring ripened into summer, and the blossoming trees were succeeded by all the garden flowers, there was so much beauty to enjoy.
Bird-song and bumble-bees added their sounds to the laughter of children playing in nearby gardens.
In the autumn, we managed a holiday together in Devon and Cornwall.
I had to drive, of course, and I think this must have been a bit of a trial for Michael, for like most men, he'd rather drive than be driven — especially by his wife!
We had a very happy, relaxed time, and came home feeling much better for the rest and change.
After this, Michael was able to resume his work on the government review, and we looked forward to his retirement when his review was completed.
January 1955 began bright, very cold and sunny.
Our newest granddaughter Rachel was christened on the first Sunday of the new year, and that was a wonderful happy day, with a party in her parents’ home.
Michael was busy with his review, frequently going up to London, and I was busy with family affairs.
Shanti and Chris discovered in February that they were expecting a baby, There was tremendous excitement and we all began to look forward to this addition to the family.
Michael, of course, had to make periodic visits to the Christie hospital, but he kept very well and in excellent spirits.
In April, Shanti lost the baby.
She was very disappointed, but faced up bravely to the situation.
In fact, when Chris, Sara, Michael and I visited her in hospital, it was she who cheered us up and made us laugh!
I think that year we were making up for the limitations of the one before.
We resumed our regular visits to the theatre, and went occasionally to the opera or the ballet.
We managed several short holidays and had numerous friends and relatives to stay.
One particularly memorable weekend in July, Shanti's first mother and her husband and two sons all came to stay, and we had a happy time with all our family here, except for our son in San Francisco and his wife and family.
In August, we rented a house in Wales, and Shanti and Chris, our son Barney and his wife Veronika, and their children Mark and Rachel all joined us for a seaside holiday.
In spite of very indifferent weather, we had a very happy time.
In November, the review was finished.
Now, I began to think, retirement is going to be a reality!
We were planning a visit to Hong Kong for several months, as Michael was to be a visiting professor in the University there.
For me, this was really a fantastic prospect, for we were to live in a college where we were to have our own bedroom, bathroom and sitting-room, and all meals provided.
I was going to be lazier than I had ever been in my life!
Christmas was the climax of a mainly gloriously happy year.
Greg, Pippa, Emily, Tom and Bill all came over from America, and stayed with us for eight days.
With our daughter Sara here too, we  were ten of us in the house, with Barney and his family and his in-laws joining us for several parties.
There was so much laughter, so much excitement, so much love.
Most of us went to church on Christmas Eve and on Christmas Day, and I felt I had so much for which to be profoundly thankful.
Greg, Pippa, Sara and Shanti cooked Christmas dinner.
It was a new and very special experience to be treated as a granny, excluded from the kitchen, given a sherry before the meal and told not to help with the serving up.
And not allowed to wash up either!
No wonder I feel that sixty is a good age to be!
That was a wonderful Christmas.
It is so rarely when all the fledglings have left the nest, to have them all together again.
There was no time to feel regretful when Greg and his family left, for we were to fly to Hong Kong on January 14th.
Preparations for departure filled our thoughts and days: arrangements for Shanti to look after our correspondence for us and deal with our finances; saying goodbye to friends; making a list of unanswered letters to write while I was away; contingency plans for situations likely and unlikely.
So the day came — wet, of course, being Manchester!
Barney took us to the airport, and when we arrived next day in Hong Kong, it was warm and sunny.
Our welcome was warm, too.
A charming Chinese member of staff greeted us and took us from the airport to Robert Black College which was to be our home for four months.
The college has a number of resident post-graduate students who are there for periods varying from a year to three years.
The other residents are mainly visiting academics, often very senior members of their own universities, from many countries, any academic discipline, and are staying in the college usually for a short time.
We met many fascinating people.
It was particularly delightful to be with the young people, sharing their dreams and concerns and talking with them about the future.
Hong Kong itself is a fascinating place: incredibly crowded, vital, energetic, noisy.
There must be a greater concentration of shops and banks than anywhere else on earth!
The girls in the office would say in surprise, ‘You ought to be shopping!’ if I said I had been bird-watching or merely reading in the sunshine.
I used to go to the Botanical Gardens and sit in the sun, or wander round the aviaries admiring the birds of magnificent plumage.
Sometimes I would take the ferry to Cheng Chau Island, where life is still peaceful, unhurried, very Chinese.
There is no transport on the island, and to walk in perfect quiet along the little narrow roads, discovering wayside temples and little shrines; meet a  crowd of smiling, noisy children coming out of school; or to go back to the quayside where fish, vegetables, cheap jewellery, sunglasses, cooked food, hot snacks were all being sold in the open air; all this was a blissful change from the hectic atmosphere of the city.
Michael loved the islands too.
We went together to Lantau, and travelled on a really hair-raising bus journey to a Buddhist monastery in the mountains.
This was a place of great beauty and peace.
We enjoyed exploring all the islands, and loved the ferry journeys thereto.
The Chinese are great at enjoying themselves!
Many people travel from the islands to the city to work, and vice versa.
The regular commuters get out their cards the minute they get on the ferry and play with great gusto.
We always enjoyed watching the Mah Jong players too, in the cafés and restaurants, and seated at tables on the waterfront.
The smart shopping areas of Hong Kong are very luxurious and quite expensive, a splendid place for window-shopping.
When I wanted to buy something, however, I enjoyed exploring the narrow back streets.
One day, in one of these tiny streets, with shops on either side and with stalls of street vendors in front of them, the way was so crowded that I got to a place where it was impossible to move.
There was a press of bodies in every direction.
Then someone laughed, stepped sideways between two stalls, and the tides of humanity began to flow again.
Visiting Stanley village, we walked along a crowded street of shops and many street traders.
Suddenly, as if by magic, many of the barrows and their owners disappeared.
They just disappeared, as if they'd popped into trap doors and been spirited away.
Two police motor cyclists swept through the village street, turned round and went out again.
Almost instantly the vendors were back with their barrows!
We encountered so much kindness and tremendous hospitality.
We were entertained most generously both in people's homes and in some of the many splendid restaurants.
We marvelled at the beauty of the countless works of art displayed in museums, in shops and in people's homes, and were immensely grateful for this experience of a life and tradition so different from our own.
The Cathedral in Hong Kong was a significant part of our life in the colony.
We made many friends there, and valued very much the help and inspiration of the beautiful services held every Sunday.
After morning service, we would walk back to our bus stop through the Chater Gardens and enjoy the sight of hundreds of Chinese families relaxing together, eating picnics, taking photographs with fountains in the background, or watching goldfish in the pond; and the happiness of the very  many Filipinos making the most of a day of leisure.
We heard from home that Shanti and Chris had both found permanent employment, and were happy in their work, Shanti as a nursery-school assistant and Chris as a forester.
All this was cut short, for Michael was having increasing pain in his back, and we were advised to go home for him to have surgery.
It was a mercy we did, for X-rays revealed not only back trouble, but a massive abdominal aorta aneurysm.
So, quite soon after our return from Hong Kong, he was in hospital again.
The only absolutely certain thing in this life is death.
When we are young, the thought of death, whether our own or someone else's, is so appalling that we cannot face it.
I find it tragic when I hear of a couple where one knows the other is dying, but neither can bear to talk about it.
When Michael knew he had cancer, he said, ‘One of three things will happen; I shall get better, I shall have some remission, or I shall die, and whichever it is, we're not going to make a tragedy of it.’
Something we were determined to do was to make the most of every day that we had, and that we have continued to do.
When we first arrived home from Hong Kong, we did not know about the aorta problem, so two days after our homecoming Michael went to London for a further two days of meetings.
That weekend, we had a glorious ride and walk in Derbyshire, and our family joined us for a meal.
The following week we had another family party, and various outings with friends.
Then the aorta diagnosis was made.
Within two weeks, Michael was in hospital for the replacing of the enlarged vessel.
Everyone who has watched a loved one go through the experience of a major and dangerous operation will understand what the next few weeks were like.
The intensive care time was the most distressing, though my admiration for the nursing staff was boundless, and so was my gratitude to the surgeon who quite literally saved Michael's life.
Our son Greg came over for a few days to do some business in England and to see his father.
It was a great comfort to have him here, but in three days he went back to San Francisco.
The first few weeks after Michael came out of hospital were very difficult, for he was in much pain, could eat very little and could not sleep.
Gradually, things began to improve.
Many friends called to see him and this was a tremendous help to us both.
Hanging over him all the time, however, was the knowledge that he had to go back into hospital for further surgery on his spine.
What a busy time it is when someone is ill!
The phone rings all the time; people call; cups of tea and coffee seem to be needed by invalid and visitors at surprisingly frequent intervals!
People were very kind, however.
Our daughters cooked meals for us sometimes, and one dear friend suggested that she and her husband came to supper, bringing with them a meal for the four of us.
That was a lovely evening.
About six weeks after the operation, Michael began to feel more like himself.
He enjoyed the company of his grandchildren and we had several family gatherings.
He managed to go to a morning service in church again, the first for seven weeks.
He had missed his church very much indeed, but our Vicar and the Curate had been constant visitors, and we were both of us upheld by the knowledge of their prayers and of many friends at St Peter's.
About a week before Michael was due to go back into hospital, we managed a few days holiday in the Lake District.
1956 wasn't a good summer, but we were fortunate in having three sunny days out of four.
We couldn't do anything very energetic, but we enjoyed the change, the magnificent scenery, and I appreciated the rest.
For two weeks after the spine operation, Michael was again on a bed that could be turned, so that his spine was completely immobilised, and he spent four hours on his back and two on his front.
He was amazingly patient, considering how very unpleasant and uncomfortable it must have been.
Chris was a learner driver at this time, and he used to drive me to hospital; driving practice for him, but a great relief for me not to have to drive myself.
Shanti and Chris were very helpful in every way, and Shanti's ready laughter and general cheerfulness was a great comfort.
One week of Michael's month in hospital, Shanti and Chris were away on holiday, but Sara stayed with me all that week.
A few days before Michael came home, our daughter-in-law Pippa came to stay for a few days, bringing Emily, who was to go to a boarding-school in Yorkshire.
We were to be her guardians.
This was an exciting prospect, for to have a fifteen-year-old in the house again, then and for the holidays, seemed like a breath of fresh air!
All too soon Emily was off to school, and Pippa had flown home again.
Michael's homecoming was a joyous occasion.
He had to come home in the ambulance, and had a bed downstairs for the daytime, but managed to go upstairs to bed at night.
He was in a plaster jacket from shoulders to hips, and could only walk slowly with difficulty, but he was home and cheerful!
Further excitement was Barney and Ronnie's Moving Day: they moved with their two children from a house on the other side of the village to a house very near to us.
This is a great blessing, for now they are so near, Ronnie can pop in with the children on the way home from  school.
One day, the three-year-old Rachel enquired, ‘How is Grandad doing on?’
We treasured this charming phrase.
The summer ripened into autumn.
Michael began slowly to recover.
He had to make frequent visits to hospital, for plaster to be changed, for X-rays and check-ups, and as unfortunately further cancer cells had been found in his spine, he had to go periodically to the Christie Hospital again.
So we were busy, with hospital visits, lots of visitors, Emily's half term, another visit from Shanti's first mother and her family, and our own immediate family coming and going, I can honestly say, I have never been bored!
Families mean so much.
About fifteen years ago, we had a Nigerian girl living with us for a few months before her marriage, and she was married from our house.
In fact, Michael gave her away.
We had never met her before she came, yet she immediately called us Mummy and Daddy, and still writes to us in this way from Nigeria.
When she drew up her wedding guest list, she said the guests would be ‘just family’ from Manchester.
I was surprised, for I knew that she had no relatives in England at all.
It transpired that ‘family’ meant anyone from her own tribe.
What a wonderful thing it would be for us all if we could think of ‘family’ in this extended way!
There would not be so many lonely people in our land.
Michael was asked to give the introductory lecture at an engineering conference on the subject of his government review.
This was held in Harrogate.
I drove us there, and we stayed until the conference was over.
It was a tremendous morale-booster for Michael to do something of the sort again, but I am sure none of the delegates at the conference knew of the pain he was in, nor how much discomfort he concealed behind his ready laugh.
When we came home three days later, there were the usual visits to the two hospitals, more changing of plaster, more tablets to be taken….
We couldn't walk, as we used.
We couldn't go so easily to theatre, opera or ballet, for it was painful for Michael to remain long in one position.
But there were so many things we could do!
We could drive a short distance into the country for a pub lunch; we could play Scrabble.
It wasn't weather for sitting in the garden, but we are fortunate in having windows which look over our own small front garden, and because there is no hedge, beyond to the road.
Passers-by are frequent: children to and from school, neighbours shopping, horse riders, and frequently friends who waved to us through the windows.
Does it sound trivial?
I so often think of the phrase ‘becoming as little children.’
We found the company of small children particularly pleasing at that time.
There are three small boys who call on us from time to time, ‘just visiting’, as they put it.
The first time they came it was for ‘Bob-a-job’ week, but now they just come.
Wedding the next year.
We planned a party for our children, their spouses and our grandchildren; our brothers and sisters and their children and grandchildren.
Arrangements and invitations for the event, and preparations for Christmas kept us happy.
We visited Emily at her school in early December, and had another few days in Harrogate, having enjoyed the conference there.
A very dear friend from Hong Kong, a visiting Chinese University teacher, spent a weekend with us, and gave us news of friends we had met there.
Altogether, the end of the year, with a very happy family Christmas, made us look forward eagerly to the New Year.
1957 was to be the really Super Year!
Our Ruby Wedding in August was to be the highlight, of course, but we had plans for other delights.
The tercentenary of the church in Cambridge where we met was to be held in June that year, and we looked forward eagerly to that reunion, and to another reunion in May with friends in the Lake District.
As we hadn't had a real holiday the year before, we thought an early spring holiday this year would do us good.
We considered various possibilities, but as neither of us could drive far and neither of us could face airport hassle, we decided to go for a week to Wales.
I had been having trouble with arthritis for years, and nine years ago had a hip replacement.
This hip had been paining me at times again, but while we were in Wales it decided to play up properly.
I was in more pain than I think I have ever experienced.
One night in desperation I took one of Michael's strong pain-killers.
My sins found me out: the pain went, but I was so sick and ill that we had to come home.
I was very sick for twenty-four hours, and Michael was coping with everything.
That night, quite late, he was taken quite dramatically ill himself, and Chris rang for the emergency doctor.
What happened was like a farce in the theatre!
The doctor arrived very promptly and attempted to sound Michael's chest, but of course couldn't because of the plaster jacket.
He felt his pulse, and turning to me asked, ‘What illnesses has he had?’
When we both started to laugh, I imagine he thought we were a weird pair!
I began to enumerate, but after three operations had been mentioned the doctor said, ‘Oh yes, yes, yes!’ and wrote quickly on his pad.
I feared he might be writing, ‘Wife clearly fantasising!’
He gave me appropriate pills for Michael and departed rapidly.
Investigations on Michael's ‘turn’ and my hip were now underway.
For a short while, neither of us was allowed to drive, and that was the first time I've known Michael to be really downhearted.
We were too busy with hospital visits for despondency to last long, however, and the family and friends continued to visit.
For me, a highlight of this time was a weekend visit from a college friend, whom I've only seen once in the  forty-three years since we left college.
It was wonderful to find the rapport was the same as it had ever been.
It is hard to be inactive when fell-walking, in Michael's case, and swimming in mine have been among the greatest of pleasures.
We are both very fortunate in that my hip is now mended and Michael's back stronger.
We have been able to resume many former activities and look forward to going to France again, as we have done a number of times, and stay in a tiny village in the mountains of Provence.
We love the peace and quiet there; the beauty of the mountains, the charm of the little villages with their red-roofed houses, and the many excellent eating places.
We were both fit enough to enjoy a wonderful weekend when we celebrated our Ruby Wedding, with our children, their spouses, our grandchildren, our brothers and sisters, nieces and nephews and their children.
Our many visits to hospitals have shown us what appalling handicaps and sufferings some people endure.
I've often heard people say, ‘You can always see someone worse off than yourself, can't you?’ as if this were any comfort!
The total suffering of the world is appalling to contemplate: hunger, deprivation, incurable illness, famine, fire and flood.
Surely we should not be comforted by the thought that others are worse off!
Most certainly, though, we should appreciate how fortunate we are in having medical services, caring people around us, and living in a country where natural disasters are rare compared with many places on this earth.
To treat life as a joke would be a sin.
I cannot think, however, that we are meant to live as if life is earnest and real, and that we are not meant to enjoy ourselves.
The expression of faith found in The Westminster Confession tells us, ‘Man's chief end is to glorify God and to enjoy him for ever.’
‘Oh be joyful in the Lord!’ sang the Psalmist.
Those of us who are Christians should feel ourselves abundantly blessed.
We know that the end of this life is a gateway into another life, far more wonderful than anything we have yet experienced.
If we believe, as we are taught, that the Kingdom of God is within us, surely this must mean that many of life's experiences are a foretaste of the joys that are to come in heaven?
There is to much to enjoy.
We have a bird-table in the garden, and love to watch the variety of birds feeding there.
The squirrels too, who come to steal the birds' nuts are a constant source of entertainment.
Every day there is something new to see in the garden.
Through the winter, the tracery of bare twigs against the sky reminds us that when the  spring comes, life will burst out of them again.
The tiny fronds of tender green when beech buds first open are an annual delight.
For a few days, the beech tree is the most wonderful living thing in the garden.
All year, as each season reveals its particular joy, there is so much for which to be thankful.
What a deprivation it would be to be blind!
That is when music, the voices of children, the kind tones of those who love us, must be very important.
Music, for both of us, is a part of life we treasure, and Michael has found his records and tapes a constant source of happiness during the long hours of inactivity forced upon him.
When I was a child, there was a man who came to our chapel in an invalid chair.
I didn't understand his disability at the time, for he had a progressive muscular disease.
Like other children, I watched him propel his chair up the chapel path, where he would wait in the porch till the beginning of the first hymn, then come just inside the door for the service.
He always had a smile and a friendly word for everyone.
One day, a child said to him, ‘Aren't you lucky, coming to church in a chair!’
‘Yes,’ he replied, ‘aren't I lucky!’
I have never forgotten that brave man.
He, like Paul, must have said to himself, ‘I have learned in whatsoever state I find myself, therein to be content.’
The last time we went to Provence we went to a natural history exhibition in the village arranged by the anciens — the senior citizens.
The children of the village had collected the exhibits and the anciens were expounding their characteristics.
This reminded me of our own village, where in the summer holidays the regular players on the bowling-green, mostly older citizens, are teaching the children to play.
I think it is sad that in so many areas of life, we have allowed our society to be so fragmented.
Age groups seem to be over-emphasised.
After all, when we were children, teenagers hadn't been invented!
There are teenage clubs, pre-teens groups, Young Wives, OAPs, and so it goes on.
And yet, when an event for all ages is organised, it is often a great success.
I am thinking of our annual Parish Picnic, when everybody comes — babies in prams, children, young couples, older folk of all ages.
It is all very well for me to say cheerfully, ‘Life begins at sixty.’
I don't live in an old people's home.
How wonderful it would be if young people could be encouraged to visit the elderly, both in institutions and in their own homes!
My grandmother in Cornwall, as a very old lady, was visited regularly by many of the village children to whom she was just ‘Granny.’
They often brought her wild flowers because they knew she loved them.
‘This is a Homewatch area’ is a familiar sign in many a suburban or country road.
What a comment on our society, that we need to organise ourselves against vandalism and theft!
It is no wonder that young people with no job, no prospects, little money and probably feeling that no one cares, should turn to petty crime.
It is more difficult to understand the senseless vandalism that goes on in comparatively affluent areas.
I wonder if it is because the prevailing attitude to life in the Eighties in Britain seems to be to look after number one, to get on, to make money, and not to bother about anyone else?
I remember years ago, when I was teaching slow learners in a Child Guidance clinic, a little girl from a small village was reading a story in which reference was made to someone ‘cheeking the dinner lady.’
To  assess whether she was understanding what she read, I asked, ‘Does that happen at your school?’
She looked quite shocked and replied, ‘Oh no!
It's Mrs Thomas.’
I thought that was very significant: you may cheek a dinner lady, but you don't do so to someone you know and respect.
If we could get to know one another better, we might have better relationships generally.
I do think the artificial division of people into age groups has a damaging effect on society.
Such divisions are artificial, for the smallest social unit, the family, is made up of people of different ages.
It is quite natural for all human beings to seek the company of their peers, but surely this should not be to the exclusion of contact with people of all ages.
Television is often blamed for all kinds of social ills!
I am sure if The Box is just something you stick the kids down to watch while you get on with something else, harm can be done.
What has happened to ‘Watch with Mother’?
Presumably no one does any more, for the programme for small children no longer has that title.
Surely watching programmes together can be a beneficial social experience, but unlimited watching at all hours, unsupervised, cannot be a good thing for children.
No one would send a small child to the theatre to watch Macbeth or Othello alone, yet many children watch scenes of violence on the screen in their own home.
I am aware that much of what I am saying makes me sound like some ageing Pollyanna who just wants to pretend that all is sweetness and light.
Far from it!
The world can be a violent, cruel, sad, friendless place: indeed it is for many people.
All of us know that within ourselves there are evil impulses, surges of violent feelings, selfishness and resentment.
These cannot be eliminated without putting something in its place.
Much of today's entertainment, in the theatre and on television, is concerned with violence, crime, broken relationships and sexual deviation, with a generous helping of foul language for good measure!
People who deplore this trend are laughed at and regarded as old-fashioned.
Attitudes towards sexual deviation were similar in Ancient Rome to those adopted by today's avant-garde.
We hear a lot about returning to Victorian values.
If this means returning to hanging for theft; workhouses for the deserving poor and the streets for the undeserving; the exploitation of the poor by the wealthy; overcrowded, insanitary housing for the majority and opulence for the few; of course we would reject it.
But if it means a return to the importance of family life in people's reckoning, a respect for authority, and an appreciation of what is beautiful and god, surely we would all  welcome a return to the old values.
‘Whatsoever things are true, honest, just, pure, lovely, of good report; if there be any virtue and if there be any praise, think on these things.’
If we really followed this advice, the world would be transformed.
The longer I live, the more sure I become that the negative approach to any problem is wrong.
and that the positive attitude is the only useful one.
Just as you say to a small child, ‘Keep on the path,’ rather than‘Don't go on the road, or Please can you talk more quietly,’not ‘Don't shout!’so it is necessary to seek out what is good in any situation.
I once heard a couple making plans and counter-plans for a family outing; after much discussion one of them said, ‘As far as I can see, there are disadvantages in all those schemes.’
The other said, ‘Yes, dear — and advantages!’
Just the difference between optimism and pessimism, I suppose, but unintentionally quite a parable.
There are advantages in any situation, if you look for them.
One of the great bonuses of The Third Age is time — time to spare for other people, even if it is only to listen to what they have to say.
Time, as W. H. Davies would say, ‘to stand and stare’; time to read the books you've always promised yourself you'd read one day; time to think.
Sometimes, thinking of all the terrible problems in the world, particularly the horror of the possibility of nuclear war, one is overwhelmed by the sadness of it all, and reduced to tears of helplessness.
Then I remember that the greatest power of good that this world has ever known began with one man and his twelve followers.
What has all this got to do with being sixty?
Surely life teaches us something.
If it can teach us that love is the most powerful force in the world, we shall not have lived for nothing.
I treasure every sign of the Creator's love which is all around us.
I am thankful that there is so much beauty, so much joy, and — yes!— so much laughter in the world.
At any stage of life, to live every day to the full is a recipe for happiness.
Young children demonstrate this: their ability to concentrate entirely on what they are doing, admittedly for short periods of time, to the exclusion of everything else, gives them a particular capacity for enjoyment.
I do not believe that the pursuit of happiness is a possibility: happiness is not something that can be chased and captured.
It is a state of mind comparatively unrelated to circumstances.
Life without disappointments is impossible, but an old age burdened with regrets, resentments, and hopeless longings is a sorry business.
More  than anything else, loneliness in old age must be the hardest thing to bear.
So: all of us who are in The Third Age, let's look out for other people and their needs!
We can't dig people's gardens for them (or our own for that matter); we can't take the active part in life which we once did.
We can, however, be prepared to accept help gratefully.
A young relative writing to me recently expressed the feeling that she had always found it easier to give than to receive.
I suspect this is true for the majority of people: to accept help because of infirmity may seem an admission of defeat.
I am sure that one of the things that prevents us from accepting help is that we think other people won't do things the way we do them.
I was always very nervous when trying to help a very dear elderly aunt, because I never did things quite the ‘right’ way!
So I remind myself that it doesn't really matter about things being put back in exactly the same place in the cupboard, or precisely the same brand of tea being bought, or the carrots being cut to exactly the right dimensions.
One of my favourite books as a child was R. L. Stevenson's Child's Garden of  Verse  .
Now my grandchildren are enjoying it.
One couplet sums up what I am trying to say.
‘The world is so full of a number of things
I think we should all be as happy as kings.’
Not profound, not fashionable, but true.
Let's be positive!
Let's give other people a chance.
Speak first, don't wait to be spoken to.
Most people are nicer than you think they are on first acquaintance.
I sometimes amuse myself by trying, in the street or in a supermarket, to get a smile from some particularly hard face.
It often works, though once in London when I so far forgot myself as to try this ploy, I was rewarded by a grimace of fascinating sarcasm!
It is surprising, however, how often there is a response, and sometimes some conversation results.
People's babies are a great help: if you can get a baby smiling at you, its mother will often speak.
I would like to start a Homewatch Scheme which is concerned not with the preservation of property, but love and concern for the people who live there.
Because we are old, we need not be useless.
Companionship and friendship are positive things we can offer.
Sixty isn't old, anyway!
We all know active, vigorous people ten or even twenty years older.
We can none of us know what is going to happen  to us, but whatever happens, we shall continue to enjoy this beautiful world, to value our friends and our family, and to be thankful for all the blessings of this life, including the gift of laughter.