

Basic Steps in Social Research
SOME WRONG IDEAS ABOUT THE CONCEPT OF THEORY
The way in which the word ‘theory’ is used in everyday speech, and even at times by some social scientists, can lead the beginner researcher into some of the most unfortunate errors imaginable.
A prevalent, though completely erroneous, idea often held by students and laymen is that theory is synonymous with speculation.
The mistaken view is that theory refers to ideas which have never been tested.
If theories are ever put to the test and proved right, then the theories disappear and they are replaced by facts, or perhaps even laws.
This unfortunate way of thinking that theory is purely speculative leads to a division, not only between the concept of theory and fact, but also between what are called ‘theorists’ and what are sometimes called ‘empiricists’, or even simply field workers.
The truth of the matter is that theory is derived from findings which are put together, and the logical relations between findings together build up theory.
Looked at in this way theory then becomes the ordering of facts and findings in a meaningful way and this ordering and building up is of the very essence of scientific enquiry, since without ordering facts and without putting them into some systematic framework there can be no generalizations and no predictions.
But prediction is not  synonymous with theory.
Theory in fact is the building which is made from the hard-won bricks of research studies.
It is sometimes useful to think of the findings of science, that is to say the meaningful observations made and their linking together, as being contributions to a kitty which is the theory of the subject.
Looked at in this way one sees empirical observations, facts, research studies, and so on, as contributions to this kitty and the bigger the kitty, the greater the development of the subject itself.
When the findings have been put into the kitty then relationships between facts and relationships between research studies can be seen more clearly and these in turn will lead the knowledgeable research worker to spot the points where further enquiry needs to be made.
It is by no means uncommon for exploratory social research in an area where little work has been done to begin by looking at the characteristics of people involved.
Thus, in some of my own research into theatre audiences, at a time when virtually nothing was known about who goes to the theatre, some of the first surveys I carried out were concerned with eliciting data on people's age, education, social class, who they went with, how they heard about the play, and so on.
Such information was not highly ‘theoretical’ but it helped build up an objective picture of the people who went to the theatres I studied and gave me a useful corrective to people who made sweeping generalizations such as‘the theatre is for everyone.’
It may be for everyone who comes to buy a ticket, but those who do choose to go are a small minority of the population.
Once one has established a ‘profile’ of theatre-goers it is then an obvious next step to follow up the question ‘Who?’with the question ‘Why?’and the research then begins to fill in the gaps in our knowledge.
Knowledge of theatre-goers also stimulates one to consider other similar types of entertainment and culture.
Who goes to orchestral concerts, who goes to opera, to ballet, to the cinema?
Are the people different in their social characteristics and if so why?
Eventually, as the generalizations are  built up (and in this field of research there is still a long way to go) a ‘theory’ of social aspects of theatre can be built which will be based on social empirical foundations rather than shaky speculation or sweeping generalizations.
So theory is extremely useful in summarizing findings, linking them together, putting forward uniformities of social behaviour and then enabling the research worker to move a step further forward with new, relevant studies which will themselves contribute directly to the furtherance of theory.
This process of being stimulated by theory to carry out further research, and research contributing to the building-up of theory, is essentially what scientists call a ‘feedback mechanism’.
The process of scientific research is therefore a continuous one, and seen in this light sociology accumulates its findings and brings them together to build up its generalizations and, if possible, laws of social behaviour.
Pointing to gaps in our knowledge, which itself comes from adequate understanding of sociological theory, is one of the most important parts of social research and brings out clearly the importance of the research worker having a good background of theory.
This is not to say that some good pieces of research do not emerge from almost accidental findings of research workers.
The whole history of science is full of examples of scientists happening to notice something almost by accident and being stimulated to ask why this has happened.
Why, for example, did apples fall from trees?
Why did the kettle lid jump up and down?
In more recent years, the example of Fleming's discovery of penicillin is a good case of the almost accidental research which was of tremendous value.
In social research, perhaps the most famous example is that of Elton Mayo's study of American girls in a factory, where his observations of the importance of the creation of social groups led to the development of a whole school of thought in social psychology.
New facts found by accident may be the starting point for new theories and social observers are certainly not lacking in opportunities for chance stimulation in their  ordinary everyday life, since they themselves live among the phenomena which they study.
The difference of approach illustrated here between the apparently hard-working development from carefully formulated theory towards new ideas to be tested where there are gaps in the subject on the one hand and this last-mentioned almost accidental following-up of ideas that just seem to occur out of the blue, would, on the face of things, seem to make it difficult to use two such disparate methods of enquiry in one discipline.
But it is by no means difficult if one has a procedure for social research and this procedure we shall now consider by working from an empirical approach to enquiry.
SOME WRONG IDEAS ABOUT THE WORD ‘EMPIRICAL’
The Shorter Oxford Dictionary says that the word ‘empiric’ means ‘based on observation or experiment, not theory’.
In general, empiricism is based on direct experience only and ignores statements based on anything other than experience.
In its extreme form, therefore, empiricism limits itself to the results of direct observation and virtually denies the value of theory since this is generalization removed from first-hand observation.
However, there is an important difference between what might be called the doctrine of empiricism, and scientific theory, which must be empirical in the sense that statements can be deduced from theory which are about particular events and which can be checked by observation.
As Gellner has pointed out, ‘empiricism’, as a theory of scientific method and knowledge generally, can mean two quite different things.
On the one hand it can be used simply to say that whilst theory is essential and desirable it nevertheless depends for its validity on observation (of an empirical kind).
This view of ‘empiricism’ would be upheld by a substantial proportion of scientific workers.
On the other hand, ‘empiricism’ can be an extreme viewpoint which denies the possibility of  theorizing and can even hold that theory is undesirable.
Such a viewpoint is not generally subscribed to but can be felt to be, in certain instances, a useful counter-argument to flimsily-based ‘theorizing’ where the theory is really only speculation.
Empiricism which, as a system, rejects all a priori knowledge and which rests solely on experience and induction is quite different from empirical knowledge gained from experience.
Data and information gained from empirical observation and experience are necessary for explanations which can then be used for the building-up of theory.
The important thing is that the empirical data and the theorizing are connected, not separate, things.
Sociology, as a social science, is more than just a collection of empirical findings and is also more than just a set of speculative armchair ‘theories’.
The empirical basis of theory is fundamental to its reliability and its validity and, in the end, its credibility, as Shipman has pointed out.
But the word ‘empirical’ is frequently used in a disparaging way by some people.
Why should this be so?
Why does theorizing seem to be so much more prestigious than empirical research?
Let us look at the empirical approach in a concrete instance.
Most housewives and many motorists are empiricists.
The housewife who knows that when her electric iron ceases to work she must replace the fuse (let us say it is a cartridge fuse in a 13-amp plug) is an empiricist.
She observes that by taking out the old fuse and putting a new one in she has caused the iron to work again.
Similarly, the motorist who discovers that he should pull out the choke button a particular amount so as to get the car to start on a cold morning is also an empiricist.
He notes that too little choke does not work, yet too much choke does not help either.
Just why the particular setting should be effective does not worry the motorist particularly, since he is only concerned with one car, not motor engineering in general.
The practical empiricist is the person who knows where to slap the television set to cure it of flicker, the little dodge that stops the Yorkshire pudding from being flat, the combination of household ingredients  (a teaspoonful of salt, a teaspoonful of baking powder in a pint of boiling water in an aluminium container) which cleans the tarnish off silver.
People who have a ‘knack’ for things are often empiricists, as are people who do things that Granny did because they work.
The domestic empiricist is not concerned with the generalities or principles underlying the cooker or the car; he or she sees what has to be done to achieve a desired end and that is that.
At work there is a great deal of empiricism — sometimes it becomes almost a mystique, as in the steel-making process where the head melter was once supposed to be able to tell whether the melt was ‘done’ by spitting into it.
A good example of empiricism can be seen in the making of magnets.
I once saw a woman whose job it was to make small bar magnets from steel blanks about two inches long.
On her right hand she had a large pile of blanks.
In front of her she had a large electric coil, suitably insulated, and a button.
On her left she had a pile of magnets which she had produced by putting the blanks inside the coil and pressing the button.
Since the whole process took only a few seconds for each blank and the woman was working full-time it could not be denied that this woman knew, from her own sensory experience, a great deal about the making of magnets.
Probably few people in the country could have more direct experience than she had.
But her knowledge of magnet-making contained no scraps of theoretical magnetism.
She knew nothing about field forces or induction or anything of that sort.
She only knew how to make magnets.
Much practical work in agriculture is of an empirical type and the ‘practical’ farmer is often characterized by an empirical approach as contrasted with perhaps the more theoretically-based approach of his son who has attended agricultural college or university and who understands some of the theory underlying a more scientific approach to agriculture.
All sciences — physics, agriculture, medicine and even sociology — go beyond the mere solution of immediate  problems, whether these problems are of a ‘pure’ intellectual type, or an ‘applied’practical sort.
But it is commonplace for studies to begin with largely practical or unsophisticated problems.
From the empirical studies work then goes further and more precise definitions, control of observations and measurement of variables are introduced to add precision to the studies.
From these studies, preferably repeated time and time again, we then put results together and look for links between findings and for broader generalizations.
In effect, it is as if the woman making the bar magnets suddenly realized that there were more questions to be asked about her job; that pressing the button was not really much of an answer to the question ‘How do you make magnets?’
From the generalizations, theory is then built up, tentatively at first, and perhaps very low-level and crude, but always referable back to the original scientific observations.
In this way theory encompasses at once both the broad generalizations which lead the researcher on to further enquiries and the precise statements of interrelationships which help tidy up some of the loose ends of understanding.
In the continuous process thus engendered one sees how true theory stimulates ideas about what may be, in realms as yet unexplored.
The ideas which come from a good theoretical understanding form hypotheses, and this concept is our next subject of study.
HYPOTHESES
We have seen that when facts are assembled together and seen in relationship to each other generalizations can be made which help to develop theories.
The theory is then not merely speculation, but is a composition of interrelated facts from which new relationships may be deduced.
We do not yet know if these deductions are correct since they are as yet untested.
It is in putting forward new ideas, derived from theoretical bases, that the hypothesis has its function.
Usually hypotheses seek to refine theory, since the generalizations already made may be relatively low-level, crude ones, and the new hypothesis seeks to produce a more sophisticated statement of relationship.
Hypotheses, then, help us to refine theory by bringing more details into consideration in areas of research which may previously have only been explored in a rather sketchy way.
The Webbs defined the hypothesis as ‘any tentative supposition, by the aid of which we endeavour to explain facts by discovering their orderliness…
Without the guidance of hypotheses we should not know what to observe, what to look for, or what experiment to make in order to discover order in routine.’
Since the hypothesis is a tentative supposition, it can normally be stated by beginning with the word ‘that’.
For example, a hypothesis might be ‘that regular theatre-goers are middle-class in their family backgrounds’.
This way of putting the hypothesis is useful in that it does two things.
Firstly, it produces a flat statement of fact which can be put to the test, and, secondly, it states the case in an extreme, or ‘ideal’, form, eschewing such modifications as ‘most’, or ‘a majority’.
The second point will be dealt with by the research, which is likely to give an answer in percentage form anyway, so no harm is done in stating the hypothesis in the 100 per cent form.
Of course, not all social research, not even all sociological research, is based on openly stated hypotheses.
Much research which contributes useful information to sociology is carried out by non-sociologists, and perhaps the best example of this is the decennial census of population without which British sociology would be hard pressed for much data about our society.
The population census does not start from sociological theory and does not concern itself with the formulation of explicit hypotheses.
It is based on the agreed belief that a regular count of several basic demographic factors is vital for an understanding of the structure of our society, and at each census it is customary to ask certain specific questions which deal with current matters of special importance.
In the past some of the most famous research studies carried out in Britain by means of social surveys have not been concerned with testing hypotheses.
Neither Charles Booth nor Seebohm Rowntree were sociologists; they were just wealthy men with strong social consciences who were interested in the problems of poverty and were able enough to carry out quite sophisticated studies of this phenomenon in London and York at the end of the nineteenth century.
Booth and Rowntree were more concerned with getting the measure of poverty than with trying to devise a general theory about it.
Though Booth's study did produce categories of poverty which showed that many people who were in employment were still below the poverty line, and Rowntree's work was memorable, not only for the detailed way in which he examined the financial needs of households, but also for his concepts of ‘primary’ and ‘secondary’poverty and the ‘poverty cycle’.
The great Merseyside Survey of the 1930s carried out from Liverpool University was mainly concerned with unemployment and poverty and, like many local social surveys carried out up and down the United Kingdom, sought to measure the incidence of certain social problems with a view to providing sound  empirical data upon which local and central social policy could be based.
In general, though, the feedback to theory from many social enquiries has been almost incidental, since much research actually concerned with collecting first-hand information has been orientated to solving practical social problems, and much theoretical work has not been backed up by actual field investigations.
Such has been the division that to describe a sociologist as a theorist is almost to suggest that he does not engage in field studies.
This sad, artificial division between the theoretical and the empirical is quite unnecessary, but reflects the structure of the sociological profession itself, affected as it is by its history and its own peculiar form of development in Britain.
True sociology is never divorced from theory, yet it never builds its theory without facts, and the hypothesis, I contend, is the crucial link between the two.
Background knowledge derived from population censuses, market research surveys, government annual abstracts of statistics, historical records and so on, are all grist to the mill of the social researcher.
But when scientific method is employed to keep the work of sociology along the lines of a growing discipline then a close relationship between theory, hypothesis and facts must be maintained.
The problem of designing a complete research project is frequently encountered by university lecturers who have to supervise undergraduate dissertations which are supposed to have some element, no matter how small, of ‘research’ in them.
Students frequently come to their supervisors and tell them that they are ‘interested’ in old people, television, advertising, or some such huge idea.
There is nothing wrong with being interested in, say, television but that does not make them research social scientists.
On the other hand, the student may say that he or she is interested in Marx's concept of alienation or Weber's concept of bureaucracy.
Here one immediately has a sociological concept to work on — but to what purpose?
Does the student follow the old adage that to read and paraphrase one book is plagiarism but to use two is research?
Just what is the student going to investigate ?
The best undergraduate studies usually come from the students who can see the possible application of a theory or concept to a specific empirical example.
Thus I have seen an interesting application of group dynamics to the study of a Women's Institute, and a voluntary social agency studied as an example of a bureaucracy.
The importance of focusing on a manageable instance was well brought out in an American textbook on statistics written many years ago.
Its author, Margaret Hagood, wrote:
Students who are inexperienced in research frequently fail to narrow and focus their efforts to achievable units.
When thesis subjects as broad as juvenile delinquency in the South or differential fertility in the U.S.A. are chosen — subjects which transcend any bounds of accomplishment during graduate work and which are not definitely  formulated — they are likely to bring the young research person to a state of despair when he realizes that the masses of material he has assembled answer no questions, neither confirm nor refute any hypothesis, and yield nothing toward developing a scientific sociology.
The beginning social research worker can make most certain the value of his contribution if he narrows his research to very specific problems.
By these bits scientific knowledge grows, and by revealing these bits the student learns not only the importance and full meaning of knowledge itself, but also the valid methods of acquiring knowledge.
Thus he trains himself eventually to tackle larger problems and to gain insight into the underlying principles by which these limits may be synthesized.
These words of wisdom remind me of a student who came to see me many years ago after the long vacation during which she had begun her undergraduate dissertation (with another tutor who had left the university that summer, I must emphasize).
Her supposed research topic was ‘Inter-personal relationships and group structures in a student farm camp’.
The poor girl had gone off to her camp before she had formulated any hypotheses; she had no idea as to what theory or concepts her work was to throw new light on, and so, to be on the safe side, she had recorded everything she could think of over a period of about six weeks and her notebooks practically filled a medium-sized suitcase.
With this rubbish tip of information she then came to me to ask how she could write it up into a dissertation.
Although this was an extreme case, it is by no means unique and practically every university teacher who has supervised an undergraduate dissertation will recognize the problem of trying to write a dissertation backwards; that is to say, taking the data that have already been collected and then trying to find some hypothesis which they can be used to test.
It is very difficult to do this satisfactorily; the experienced reader can nearly always see where the joins have been made and, of course, for the student the exercise in beginning research has been carried out the wrong way round.
It is all rather like the trial in Alice in Wonderland — sentence first, verdict afterwards.
Let us accept that by no means all research stems from the  reading of published theoretical work or dissatisfaction with the use of concepts.
Much useful research can originate from the idea that just turns up, the hunch or the observation of something that happens in the street which triggers off a line of thought.
The study of society would be a chair-bound discipline indeed if its practitioners did not move about in society looking for ideas.
So sociologists can be stimulated by everyday occurrences which they, because of their training, can see from a special perspective and which they can put into a sociological frame of reference.
Whatever may be the instigating factor in a piece of research, whether it be a random observation or a sudden thought in the library, there is a common form of procedure which can be used for the research.
RESEARCH PROCEDURE
Although a common form of procedure for research is being recommended here it should not be thought for one moment that a hard and fast programme is being suggested to which every research enquiry should conform.
Social research is happily so varied in its subjects of study that a wide variety of techniques may be used for many research projects.
For ease of reference, the various steps are numbered, but the divisions between the steps should never be thought of as hard and fast.
In some research projects carried out mainly in the library, using only documentary sources, there will obviously be no recourse to the use of survey techniques for collecting data.
On the other hand, some social survey projects do not necessarily require a great deal of theoretical background reading and the emphasis in this case will be less on the library and more on fieldwork.
What follows, therefore, is an outline which is very general indeed and in no way a blueprint to be slavishly followed in every instance.
Step 1: the initial research idea
This is the very first idea which suggests the beginning of a new research project in the person concerned.
A person's previous research experience will obviously determine the level of research which is to be begun.
For a university undergraduate the research may be a dissertation, which is the student's first attempt at a piece of individual research.
But even here the student has some background of experience to draw upon since every essay written is, to some extent, a research project.
For the experienced researcher a new project may well be the extension of past research, taking problems further and trying to develop current knowledge to a higher level.
But whatever the starting point may be, the researcher must be stimulated to want to pursue the investigation in the first place.
Ideas which can be developed into research projects can come to people at all times of the day or night and under all sorts of circumstances.
These ideas are the ‘triggers’ which set off new lines of thought.
Personally, I find that I sometimes get new ideas while I am engaged in activities that have nothing to do with my research at all, such as gardening, painting in the house, or even shaving when I get up in the morning.
It seems that my mind is then not working at any high pressure intellectually and, somehow or other, it is receptive to completely new ideas.
Simply walking down the street can trigger off ideas about society.
Observing people's behaviour in department stores, in hospital waiting rooms, in the theatre, or on a camp site can all, in various ways, result in ideas about patterns of social behaviour.
Also, listening to people's conversations can be very enlightening and suggestive of ideas.
Recently, my wife was on a local bus with a lot of teenage girls coming home from school.
One girl asked another if she had had a lesson on computers that afternoon and when her friend replied in the affirmative her short comment was ‘Dead boring, isn't it?’
So much for the younger generation and their attitude to the new technology.
This little incident could well be the starting point for a very interesting research project.
On the other hand, social scientists can often be stimulated to develop research by a combination of not knowing enough about an area and being dissatisfied with the current state of knowledge.
When I was a young postgraduate research worker my doctoral thesis began from a discussion in a staff common room on the concept of ‘community’.
I was myself interested in this concept but found that the word was being used by my colleagues in all sorts of different ways.
From this initial dissatisfaction my own doctoral thesis developed.
It is obvious from the above that researchers are drawn to research in areas which interest and stimulate them.
This may seem a ridiculously simple statement to make, but awareness of our interests in research is very important.
In social research we should be trying to carry out objective research to find out the truth of the matter.
Therefore, we shall be attracted to areas of research which seem interesting to us.
If, for example, we have no personal interest in politics or religion, then we are unlikely to want to research in these areas.
Yet if we are very politically active and have strong political views there can be a danger in our working on aspects of political activity.
It is more than a matter, however, of just declaring our personal commitment to one viewpoint and then hoping that this will resolve all problems.
If we have hoisted our colours to the mast and deliberately ignored a lot of evidence our research, as well as our views, will be hopelessly biased.
So, for the social researcher there is some danger in being too keen on the subject one is researching, but one would hardly research an area that was not of interest.
My personal view is that one can be more perceptive in a project where one finds the whole field fascinating, but it is vitally important to try to find a neutral position.
Although I am myself very much in favour of people going to the theatre and reading books it is very useful for my research for me to play devil's advocate on these activities and to ask ‘Why should people go to the theatre?’ and ‘Why should  people read books?’
As leisure activities, both of these are minority interests in Britain — theatre-going especially so.
Therefore, much as I may myself enjoy theatre-going and much as I may cheer when I see a full theatre, I must contain my own enthusiasm if I am to be a cool observer.
Step 2: relating the initial idea to current knowledge
Not every idea  we have is going to end up as a full research project.
Some ideas will be too trivial, some would be impossible to carry out.
But whatever our idea may be we must put it into some perspective.
Thus, an idea on a social form of activity must be related to what is already known in sociology if our research is to make a genuine contribution to sociological knowledge.
The initial idea must be put into a theoretical context and we must find out what work has already been done in our area of interest.
Let us illustrate this particular step by an example from life.
A sociologist was present at a christening in an Anglican church one Sunday when two babies were being baptized.
One set of parents were regular church-goers and genuine believers; the other parents had probably never been to church since they were married — they were merely exercising their rights, within the established Church in Britain, to have their child baptized in the parish church.
The initial reaction is to wonder why two sets of parents should be undertaking an identical ritual and yet, obviously, have such different approaches to it.
The hypothesis is advanced that for one set of parents the baptism is a religious ritual, whereas for the other it is a social one.
From this initial thought the sociologist goes on to consider baptism as a ‘rite of passage’ and scans the library in both the sociology and the social anthropology sections for previous writings which will give more information about baptism in other cultures and also about the significance of rites of passage in both primitive and advanced societies.
He will undoubtedly find that the very term ‘baptism’ is a difficult one to use all the time, since it  really refers to the rite of immersing in or sprinkling with water as a sign of purification and, with Christian churches, admission to the Church.
The act of giving the child a name, which accompanies the baptism, is not explicitly brought out in either the term ‘baptism’ or the more commonly used ‘christening’, since the latter, obviously, means making a Christian of the infant.
So the sociologist seeks concepts among descriptions of initiation rites in non-Christian societies and in all this learns more about the general purposes and beliefs which surround the admission of a young child into the culture into which he or she has been born.
The sociologist then finds that this general picture (the theory) suggests certain ideas which may explain why non-Christians wish to have their babies undergo a ceremony in a religious belief to which they themselves do not subscribe.
And he will find all sorts of possible explanations for the choice of godparents who are friends of the non-Christian couple, equally non-religious and yet quite happy to vow that they will, in the name of the child, renounce the devil and all his works, the vain pomp and glory of the world, with all covetous desires of the same, and the carnal desires of the flesh, so that they will not follow, nor be led by them.
Having renounced all those on the infant's  behalf , the godparents will then swear that they steadfastly believe in the creed and the Commandments.
Made seriously, these are very grave undertakings, but no one present pretends for one minute that the second set of godparents are mouthing agreement to things they even understand, never mind believe.
The ceremony, as a religious ceremony, is a mockery, yet as a social ceremony, with the gathering of relatives and friends, the honour of being asked to be godparents, the tea-party afterwards and the christening presents given (silver objects in particular), the whole thing has a significant place in the lives of the people concerned.
It is the task of the sociologist to understand all this, to find out what has been done already in this field, to see what  light the general background of religious and familial studies can shed on this particular social act, and to formulate original ideas in a more explicitly sociological fashion.
If he does this then a sociological perspective has been brought to bear on the first idea and the researcher is ready to go on to the next step, which will be one of limiting his ideas to a feasible scheme of work.
It must be stressed, though, that were it is said above that the researcher will ‘scan the library’ for previous writings on the area of study, this means more than a casual walk past the shelves of books which seem to be vaguely related to the topic.
A genuine review of the literature on a topic should be a very systematic process and a good knowledge of bibliographical sources is vitally important for any research worker at this stage of a project.
I shall be dealing more fully with the use of the library in the next chapter, but I cannot stress too strongly how important it is for all researchers to be knowledgeable about bibliographical sources and, sadly, how few social science undergraduates are actually taught the necessary skills.
Step 3: defining the problem and developing hypotheses
The researcher engaged in the social study of baptism may well decide at an early stage of the study that in modern British society baptism is more of a social than a religious ceremony.
If he does this, then a hypothesis has been put  forward to be tested.
The researcher's own observations, albeit as yet rather unsystematic, seem to be supported to a degree by what he reads in the relevant literature and in other pieces of published research.
But at this stage the problem for research has not been defined at anything more than a very general level.
To state the problem (that is to say the intellectual problem we have set for ourselves) in a way which enables us to go about finding a solution is not easy.
Research can be carried out at all sorts of levels; we could restrict ourselves simply to reading everything we can find  and produce a piece of work which was wholly based on documentary sources and which did not involve us in attending any baptisms or asking anyone involved any questions.
On the other hand, we might so frame our problem that we felt it would be impossible to solve it unless we carried out detailed fieldwork.
By defining our problem more clearly we help ourselves in deciding what we are going to do about it.
The initial hypothesis suggested above about baptism being more a social than a religious ceremony is so general and broad that it obviously cannot be tested without being broken down into its constituent parts.
So, to get to grips with this problem we now have to break down our general hypothesis into a number of smaller ones which can be put to the test.
We may find that some of the ideas we want to test are very difficult ones; certainly, in using this particular example of baptism, we are not taking the easiest idea ever put forward.
In the breaking-down process we find a number of ideas suggesting themselves.
We suggest that baptism for non-believers enables a family reunion to take place.
We suggest that it enables the parents to pay a compliment to close friends by inviting them to be godparents.
We suggest that the choosing of the names for the child enables the parents to pay compliments to other relatives.
We suggest that the act of baptizing the child is viewed with superstition as much as religious belief; that it is ‘better’ for the child to be baptized in case anything happens to it.
We suggest that the first-born child tends to get a bigger party and more presents than subsequent children.
We suggest that working-class people make rather more of a ‘thing’ of the whole business than do middle-class people, irrespective of their religious beliefs.
And so on.
With all these suggestions we are putting forward minor hypotheses which we would like to test, because added together they will give us answers to our initial broad hypothesis about baptism.
It is worth noticing here that we have already begun to formulate the problem in  a more practical way: that we are carving out parts of the general problem which can be observed.
Step 4: the research design
The next problem comes when we recognize that the work done so far has produced a piece of research which could easily keep a dozen people occupied for the rest of their lives.
We have formulated an ideal piece of research which we could never hope to carry out with our own (almost certainly) limited money, time and personnel.
So, having broken down our hypothesis into smaller testable parts we have now to decide how far we can hope to get with our present research project.
One useful function of hypotheses is that they help to indicate what data are needed for their testing.
The form that the argument in our research will take will show us how to use our hypotheses.
Social research may well use books, journals, research reports, theses, documents, observations and surveys.
It is important to consider what sort of data we shall be using and how it is to be obtained before we become over-committed to the project.
In many cases the scope of a project has to be scaled down because of the restricted data available and/or the restricted resources of the research worker.
If we decide, in the case of the baptism study, that we must carry out fieldwork to collect data which is not to be found in already published sources we must consider how best to utilize what resources we have.
It is almost certain that we shall not be able to mount a nationwide sample survey with sub-samples taken from the Scottish Highlands down to the West Country.
We shall probably be conducting a local survey in the area where we ourselves live and work.
We may decide that our-own contribution at this stage would be most usefully limited to a comparison between middle-class and working-class groups, and so we decide to do a survey in two such localities.
We find it difficult to know how to obtain samples of families with recent  baptisms, so we enlist the help of some local clergy who are interested, and we find that it seems simpler to restrict ourselves to baptism within the Anglican Church, since other baptisms in nonconformist churches and chapels suggest that the parents are of some definite religious following.
Eventually we end up with samples of people who have had children baptized at two Anglican churches, one in a middle-class area, the other in a working-class area, over the past year.
We are ready to approach these people to ask them if they will fill in questionnaires or be interviewed to help us with our research.
At this point let us take stock of the limitations we have put on our research.
We have decided to study just one area, at one particular time.
That is, we have chosen two parishes in our particular town — and we cannot be sure how typical the parishes or the town are of the rest of the country.
This problem of the representativeness of our study can be overcome by repeating our study in other parts of the country.
Perhaps in the area where we live there is a historical tradition of baptisms being great occasions, which is not the case in, say, Eastbourne or Hammersmith.
In their famous study of kinship in Bethnal Green, Young and Willmott made this very point when they said, in their introduction,
The people with whom we had the intensive interviews and from whom we quote are not necessarily representative of the two districts in which they live.
The two marriage samples are not only very small, but some of the people in them were more friendly, more frank and more full than others and therefore bulk larger in our account…
If we cannot safely generalise even about the two districts we have come to know, still less, of course, can we generalise from East London to the rest of the country.
Unfortunately their ideas have not been tested out a great deal in other areas of London or the rest of the country, so we cannot be at all sure whether the findings they claim are appropriate for application to the whole of our society are in fact so.
But this is not to criticize Young and Willmott, since they did explicitly stipulate the limitations which should be placed on their work.
If we accept the internal validity of their study we should not take the findings beyond the limits they set down themselves.
So, in social surveys the limitations can be very severe, yet it would be foolish to try to avoid them.
By reducing the scope of the enquiry we make more certain the worth of what we are doing (always assuming, of course, that the study itself is well conducted), and by describing carefully what we do we make it possible for other researchers to duplicate our own study or conduct a similar one with slightly different variables.
The possibilities of repetition and development will depend greatly upon how carefully we conduct our own enquiry, and in particular in how we go about the next step, which is that of collecting our data.
Step 5: the collection of data
Social research encompasses such a wide range of enquiry that it is impossible to generalize about it.
Even the most abstract theoretical thesis uses data of some kind, even if it is largely what other people may have said on the topic.
There is a danger of thinking that ‘data’ must mean tables of statistics or lists of dates, but this is not so at all.
Certainly, many research studies utilize historical information and the use of statistics compiled by people other than the research worker is a commonplace in social research.
Data taken from the decennial census of population may well be sufficient for the purpose of a given research project on certain aspects of family structure or social class.
But other research studies may necessitate some collecting of original data by means of observation, simply because the answers to the questions being asked cannot be got except by the researcher going out and finding out.
The method employed may be a postal questionnaire sent out to hundreds, or even thousands, of possible respondents — in which case the ‘going out’ is being done rather at one step removed — but in this case the data are actually coming from a sample of people, even though no personal contact is made.
When interview surveys are carried out, however, the researcher must actually make contact, on a face-to-face basis, with the people being studied.
Not all field surveys necessitate formal interviewing; especially in community surveys there may just be one field worker living in the community.
But all are concerned with observation of one sort or another, and all need to produce findings which are objective, unbiased, consistent and unambiguous.
So far as possible, in the collection of all field data, the reader should be able to check the validity of reporting and should not have to trust the reporter too much.
The collection of data and the general observation stage (often referred to in general terms as ‘the field work’) can be an onerous step for the inexperienced researcher, particularly if the fieldwork is undertaken too soon, before ideas have been clarified or without adequate pilot studies being made to try out questionnaires or interview schedules.
In general, as we shall discuss later, data should be collected because they are relevant — not just because they are interesting.
If the criterion of relevance is adhered to the research worker knows why information is being collected because he knows what it will be used for.
This means that a great deal of preparation needs to be made before the fieldwork begins.
In the case of surveys there will always be some form of pilot survey before the researcher commits himself to the main fieldwork itself, and the more planning there is done beforehand, the less wasted time there will be in the fieldwork proper, and the easier will be the next stage, which is the analysis of the data collected.
Step 6: analysis of data
The methods of data collection which have been used will determine the methods of analysis.
A historical study may require documentary and statistical evidence to test out a  number of hypotheses.
One fascinating piece of information given in E. R. Wickham's historical study of the Church in nineteenth-century Sheffield shows the pattern of pew rentals in the parish church (now the Cathedral), and the point is made very forcibly that very few seats were available for the non-renting poor.
In historical studies the actual quotation from the appropriate Act of Parliament or the speech from Hansard or the letter from the collected correspondence may be the vital piece of information which needs to be placed in its right position to fill in a sort of jigsaw pattern which gives what can only be the one consistent answer.
But, in the contemporary study of an institution such as a factory or a college, it may be necessary to analyse hundreds of questionnaires or interview schedules, and this will only be done successfully and without trouble if the research worker knew in advance what was wanted and how the data could be analysed before it was collected.
The researcher who collects data on everything under the sun, just because it seems so easy at the time to ask a few more questions about this and that, usually rues the day when the analysis of all the answers has to be carried out.
Questions which had no real purpose in the first place are unlikely to be easy to analyse at the answer stage since the researcher is seeking for answers to his hypotheses which will show whether they are to be substantiated or not.
A particularly dangerous trap in analysis has developed with the increasing use of computers in data analysis.
When survey data are coded and punched for analysis by computer it is all too easy to ask the computer to carry out a range of cross-tabulations of one factor by another.
This is done very quickly, but the printed results can be quite overwhelming when the sheets are received.
For example, if one were carrying out a survey of library users over six days and the analysis for the working week produced, let us say, 20 print-out sheets, then to ask also for sub-analyses for each of the six days could result in a further 120 sheets.
Of course, one would program the print-out so as to collate tables to  save paper, but the tables of results would still have to be read and digested.
If one then thinks of cross-tabulations of the users by sex, age, marital status, social class and so on, the proliferation of possible data makes the mind boggle.
A good researcher knows in advance what he wants because it will be relevant to answering the problem he has set himself.
There may well be follow-up questions that arise from the main analysis which can be answered by further analyses, but the attitude of mind which lies behind massive speculative cross-tabulations betrays a lack of forethought.
The well-planned research will not present difficulties at the analysis stage, since the purpose of the answers will have been thought of in advance, and all the analysis really does is to fill in the details.
These details then lead the research worker on to the next step, which is that of drawing the threads together.
Step 7: statement of results
At this stage the initially stated hypotheses will be restated against the data which have been collected to test them, and the retention or discarding of the hypothesis will take place.
No sociological research is likely to produce absolutely clear cut answers; if it were to come out with all the results 100 per cent in support of some hypothesis it would rather suggest that the hypothesis was hardly worth bothering about in the first place.
In presenting a statement which attempts to generalize upon the research great care must be taken as to what is said.
Many results, especially from field surveys, may be primarily in the form of statistical tables in which percentages largely tell their own stories.
But the author (and readers) will want some written commentary to accompany the figures and here caution must be exercised not to claim more than the figures warrant.
Ninety-nine per cent is a majority, just as 51 per cent is, but the word ‘majority’ applied to both of them obscures a world of difference.
The writer of the research  report will want to draw together his results into a short statement of findings, which will probably be verbal rather than numerical at this stage, and where some sub-hypotheses have been substantiated and others negated the problem is not an easy one.
Nevertheless, a generalization is only acceptable to the reader when it can be traced back to the evidence collected.
The dubious research is that in which it is clear that the author has been disappointed not to have certain hypotheses upheld and is trying to talk (or rather write) his way round the evidence.
At this stage also it will almost certainly become apparent that a better job could have been done in the research if only more attention had been given to certain factors which had not been thought beforehand to have been of much importance.
It is a complacent researcher indeed who does not look back on the research findings and wish that some things had been done better.
The statement of results is the point at which these regrets can be voiced, since they can guide subsequent researchers in the field.
They will also be closely linked with the final step in the research, which is that of relating the findings to established theory.
Step 8: feedback to theory
Not every piece of social research has a very strongly theoretical aspect to it and many of the more ‘applied’ research projects have their greatest value in clarifying limited areas of behaviour where people had not been absolutely sure what the real position was.
But every piece of research carried out is a contribution to some area of knowledge and the contribution made need not necessarily be challenging the views of the founding fathers of a discipline.
When a research project is written up it will probably not be any grandiose offering (indeed it will probably be all the better for not being grandiose), but if the research has been carried out with scrupulous attention to detail and accuracy and the statement of results does not go beyond the limits  justified by the data then a useful craftsmanlike job of work will have been accomplished.
Most of science is built up on good solid craftsmanship and it is only rarely that the occasional blinding flash of world-shattering importance ever really occurs.
It is a symptom of sociology's low status as a scientific discipline that so many researchers still seem to be seeking for the philosophers' stone, or seeking status by attempting to theorize beyond their means.
Similes may be dangerous, but it can be suggested that the man who produces a well-made brick makes a better contribution to housing than does the man who builds a large mansion on insecure foundations.
(This little homily seems to have an almost biblical flavour to it.)
Nevertheless, a little humility does not ill become the social scientist, and a contribution to theory, no matter how small, which derives from careful enquiry, is more worthy of the accolade ‘scholarship’ than is the sweeping generalization based upon nothing more than armchair speculation.
SOURCES OF DATA
So far in this book we have emphasized the need for social research to be based on scientific method.
This cause has been championed not because of the prestige which the word ‘science’ carries with it, but because it is only through the better employment of scientific method that sociology can hope to develop as a true academic discipline, free from the biases introduced by ideologists or the wish to sway current social policy.
At this stage, then, the general position has been stated as to how research workers should approach their task.
The next steps will be concerned with getting down to the details of research itself, and emphasis will be placed on problems of field research.
The two main sources of social data come from the inner world of the library and the outside world of living people.
For ease of reference it is simpler to call these  two main sources ‘paper’ and ‘people’.
‘Paper’ sources provide the researcher with a wealth of information; it would be foolish to spend long hours mounting field surveys to collect information already obtainable from punished sources.
Under the heading ‘paper’ we shall consider the uses, and some of the dangers and limitations, of documentary sources such as historical records, diaries, biographies and autobiographies.
We shall also consider some of the bibliographical tools which can be used to help us gain access to published sources in the library.
When we turn later to look at ‘people’ as our source for data we shall consider various forms of observation (such as participant observation) but we shall be primarily concerned with the interview and the questionnaire as techniques for collection of data from this source.
Our next chapter, therefore, is concerned with paper sources.
Documentary Sources of Data
INTRODUCTION
For anthropological studies of primitive societies the field worker of the past often had no written sources of information to call upon at all.
Primitive societies were (and a few still are) pre-literate: written information did not exist.
While this obviously placed great limitations on the evidence available to social anthropologists it also spared them.the problems of trying to find out what help they could get from documentary sources.
As for the medical practitioner before the discovery of antibiotics, what did not exist did not have to be taken into account.
But most sociologists, and now many social anthropologists also, are dealing with complex literate societies in which the accumulation of documents of one sort or another has been going on for centuries.
The reader who has access to the copyright libraries — which in Britain are the British Library Reference Division (better known still as the British Museum Library), the national libraries of Scotland and Wales and the university libraries of Oxford, Cambridge and Trinity College Dublin — can gain access to practically everything published in the UK since these libraries receive ‘copyright’ copies of all books, journals and most pamphlets and research reports.
The British Library also has its own newspaper library with a vast holding both historically and in range, much of which is  now in micro form.
Local newspapers, of course, have their own libraries and records.
Academic libraries may be expected to contain collections of research papers but too often one has to go to public libraries to find valuable collections of records and documents of local interest.
With the increasing impact of information technology the problem today is sometimes that there seems to be too much information rather than too little.
For social research workers to derive the maximum amount of benefit from published data they need to bring some order into their understanding of it, and for this some classification of documentary sources is needed.
It is customary in research to distinguish between sources of documents by classifying them: the two terms used are ‘primary’ and ‘secondary’.
PRIMARY AND SECONDARY SOURCES
Primary sources provide data gathered at first hand; that is to say, they are original sets of data produced by the people who collected them.
They are contrasted with secondary sources, which are data got at second hand; i.e. sets of data culled from other people's original data.
The distinction between the two types is generally not too difficult to make if one knows enough about the sources of the data.
In statements of a numerical type, especially, it is always sensible practice to expect the source to be given with each figure.
If an author says that a third of the present holders of dukedoms in Britain have been divorced we want to know how he found this out.
If he compiled this piece of information himself we have the right to know how he did it.
Did he write to all the dukes and get a reply from them all?
Has he talked to them and recorded their verbal yes or no?
Or has he taken this statement from a book or article written by someone else?
If so, who was the other writer, and where can we find where he said it, and what references did he give for the statement?
Obviously no one is going to want to trace every little statement back to its original source every time: life would be unbearable if we were to do this.
But the whole principle is that it should be possible for the reader always to get back from the secondary to the primary source.
It is one of the great drawbacks of much ‘popular’ social writing in newspapers and magazines that statements are made, the validity of which cannot be accepted without more evidence.
One difficulty of primary sources is that a purist definition tends to suggest that the writer has personally collected the information.
But in much published work there is not just one writer.
In the case of many British statistics of populations one can hardly say that the Registrar-General himself is the writer.
He is certainly the administrative head of a large organization which is responsible for the statistics, but he does not collect data personally from even one household.
But population data are regarded as primary data because the Registrar-General's department, as a single entity, collects and analyses the information.
If we wish to query the validity of his data we must look at the methods employed in collecting data on various aspects of population which go into his publications.
We may not always be completely happy with the published data we find in the Registrar-General's reviews but we cannot accuse him of using secondary sources when his organization has, in fact, collected all the information at first hand from the people themselves.
Another interesting problem which can arise in the publication of primary data comes from the writing up by an author of fieldwork carried out by his or her assistants.
An unusual example of this occurred when I was myself collecting historical data about a small town during the course of a local social survey.
I was pleased to find that a number of pamphlets on the town had been published in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries by a keen amateur local historian.
These seemed to be excellent local background material and I was able to use quite a number of facts from the pamphlets, giving the appropriate reference in each case.
But as my  historical data grew I discovered, from other sources, statements which contradicted the statements of the local historian and in most cases when I checked carefully I found that he was inaccurate.
One would tend to put these down to human error — annoying and misleading — in most cases; what we might call sloppy work.
But in due course I discovered that the local historian had done very little actual firsthand gathering of data himself: he was a wealthy man and had employed a number of impecunious schoolteachers to be his ‘research assistants’.
Their pecuniary interests were probably greater than their antiquarian ones, and their errors were written up by the historian.
The interesting point in this case is that the writer himself did not acknowledge the work of his assistants in his papers, so the reader had no knowledge of the writer's separation from his data.
In some modern research studies one finds that a book may be written by a well-known author, with only one name appearing on the spine and perhaps the title page.
Then, perhaps in the preface, the author refers to some research assistants who have been responsible for collecting data for the study.
The work itself is a primary source, since the data have not been taken from other published sources — if they are presented in a survey actually supervised by the writer.
But in some instances research assistants may have been primarily concerned with digging out tables from published sources and presenting them to the writer to work on; in this case the data are certainly secondary and practically tertiary.
With so much team research these days it is inevitable that directors of projects must rely on their assistants to produce satisfactory data.
Then some one person must write up the results (even multi-author publications are not written by people playing duets on the typewriter!).
It would be niggling to say that where a writer has used assistants his data cease to be primary, but it would also be foolish to ignore the fact that the more people there are involved in a project, the more opportunities there are for errors to creep in.
Another point which may be considered under the heading  of primary and secondary sources is the practice, very popular at the present moment, of giving verbatim statements made by respondents in interviews.
This practice certainly dates back to Mayhew's survey of London life which contains innumerable passages of what purport to be the actual words of his subjects.
Thus Mayhew, who was a journalist and not a sociologist, writes of a coster lad as saying of his life,
On a Sunday I goes out selling, and all I earns I keeps.
As for going to church, why, I can't afford it,— besides to tell the truth, I don't like it well enough.
Plays, too, ain't my line much; I'd sooner go to a dance — it's more livelier.
The ‘penny gaffs’ is rather more in my style; the songs are out and out, and makes our gals laugh.
The smuttier the better, I thinks; bless you! the gals likes it as much as we do.
The quotations go on in this vein for pages on end for every conceivable sort of occupation.
In contemporary sociology, particularly in studies of working-class life, we are often given passages which are enclosed in quotation marks.
Rarely are we told how these passages, sometimes quite  lengthy ones, have been gathered.
If we were told that the interviewer used a tape-recorder, or that he was an expert shorthand writer, then we would know how these word-for-word quotations were made possible.
But if we are not told how it was all done once again we, the readers, have a right to doubt the reliability of the evidence.
CONTEMPORARY AND RETROSPECTIVE DOCUMENTS
The distinction made so far between primary and secondary sources can be rendered even more useful if we adopt a further division of documents between what John Madge, after Gottschalk, called ‘records’ and ‘reports’.
The distinction is that the record is primarily concerned with a transaction taking place now (e.g. Hansard, an Act of Parliament, a contract between two people, a company's balance sheet, the annual statistics for a government department), while the  report is usually written after an event has taken place (e.g. a newspaper report, an historical account, a practical work essay).
For our purposes the essential distinction is the time when the documents were written and so we will use the terms ‘contemporary’ and ‘retrospective’to describe those documents.
With the two contrasting sets, primary and secondary, and contemporary and retrospective, we can construct a two-by-two diagram to illustrate the classifications produced, and for this four-fold classification we can give examples.
Table 1 does not consist of water-tight compartments but should rather be regarded as displaying general categories which may run into each other, more as two sets of continua rather than as two polar ideal types.
Nevertheless, the four categories enable us to identify common features of some of the different types of documents which we shall now consider in detail.
Official records
These should, on the face of things, be the most reliable sources, so long as we can trust the writer.
In Britain, the verbatim parliamentary record of what is said in the Lords and the Commons is possibly the most trusted document one could find.
Any disagreements between members of the two Houses and the official records are carefully looked into and such is the integrity of the record that any attempt to alter it, except for errors, would undoubtedly result in a national scandal.
A Member of Parliament may deeply regret what he said in the heat of a debate; but he can never have the record changed on the plea of ‘I didn't mean to say that.’
He can only have it corrected if the official Hansard writers can be shown to have misreported what he said.
One would also tend to accept verbatim reports of judicial court proceedings, evidence given before special committees of enquiry, so long as one can genuinely believe that the people keeping the record were quite impartial and skilled in their work and that all they took down has been printed without editing.
But in these cases it is necessary to know what was really going on at the time.
Writing at the time of de-Stalinization in Russia, when the Twenty-second Congress of the Communist Party was in session, and Stalin's body was evicted from the Mausoleum, Isaac Deutscher used the words ‘The official,heavily edited and misleading reports of the Congress…’.
Of course, in Communist countries history is regularly rewritten and it is a Polish academic joke that ‘only the future is certain, the past is always changing.'
But even in democratic societies knowledge of the past changes as historical scholarship develops and it is often found that the official record of the time under study contains errors or  even deliberate falsification.
In the times of absolute monarchs it was a foolhardy scribe who always recorded the whole truth.
Newspapers
Newspaper reports, where a reporter was present at the scene, might be thought to be valuable, but unfortunately it has been shown only too often how little reliance can be placed on them.
It is important to recognize under what pressures newspaper correspondents work: many of them do not have shorthand and use their own personal notation system.
Their reporting of speeches is likely to be inaccurate in many ways, sometimes embarrassingly so.
Also, a reporter can only extract a tiny part from any whole event, and in many cases he extracts what will be eye-catching and provocative.
Newspapers love a good disaster, and a wedding where the bridegroom's trousers fell down at the altar would stand a far better chance of being reported than one that went without a hitch.
When man bites dog it is news, but the ordinary human recipient of a canine nip would be surprised to find the national press clustered round him.
It should also be remembered that newspaper people work very fast — the very latest news is always the most desirable, as is instanced by the occasional ‘scoop’ of the event which has not yet even happened.
Reports are cut by sub-editors to fit available space, and the particular political ‘angle’ of the newspaper is sharpened up.
In all, it is little short of a miracle that the subsequent report bears any relation to the actual occurrence at all— and sometimes it does not.
Harold Evans, once Editor of the Sunday Times , wrote that ‘enough news is arriving today at any large newspaper office to make four.
or five fat novels and fill the news columns many times over.’
He gave as an example the New York Times which, he said, received over two million words a day.
The raw copy which floods in from many sources is ‘tasted’, selected, sub-edited and, in a remarkably short  space of time, some of it appears on the printed page.
But Evans suggests that on some newspapers speed is valued more than polish and on a busy evening a deskman will find stories arriving faster than he can edit them.
It is not surprising, therefore, that at times newspapers publish news which is wrong.
This can result in them being sued for libel; in Britain it can also result in the people concerned complaining to the Press Council, which may publicly admonish a paper for bad reporting.
But speed can also result in tragic errors, as was the case in 1972 when Palestinian terrorists took nine Israelis hostage at the Olympic Games in Munich.
I happened, on 6 September 1972, to be travelling to London by a very early train and bought a copy of The Daily Telegraph which carried the headline ‘Hostages Freed in Gun Battle’ and went on to say that ‘late last night’there was a gun battle at a military airport in which one terrorist was killed and one policeman slightly wounded, ‘but the hostages were reported safe’.
When I arrived in London later in the morning a midday edition of the Evening Standard carried the headline: ‘The Carnage at Munich — 15 die in Ambush that Failed–.
This, sadly, was the truth of the matter.
The nine hostages were killed by the terrorists; six terrorists and one policeman were also killed.
A further example is contained in an edition of the Evening Standard in 1976 where a news item reported ‘at least 20 people were killed and many more feared dead or severely injured’ in a train crash in Holland.
Happily, this time, the late news on the back page contained a report from Dutch Railways in London to the effect that no passengers aboard the Rhine Express had been hurt.
Serious errors, such as the two examples given, are usually corrected very quickly, but many newspaper readers who have personal knowledge of a news item find inaccuracies in reporting which are of less importance and which do not get corrected.
Any social researcher using such reports would be transcribing inaccurate material.
But besides unintentional incorrect reporting in newspapers  there is also the problem of bias, much of which may emanate from the political stance taken by a newspaper in an uncensored society.
We need not concern ourselves with the views expressed in newspapers which are wholly controlled by the state in totalitarian societies.
However, Stanley Baldwin, who was once the target of a harsh newspaper campaign, said of his ‘press baron’ opponents —‘Their methods are direct falsehood, misrepresentation, half-truths, the alteration of the speaker's meaning by putting sentences apart from the context, suppression and editorial criticism of speeches which are not reported in the paper…
What the proprietorship of these papers is aiming at is power, but power without responsibility — the prerogative of the harlot through the ages.’
(Incidentally, this reference is a secondary one, taken from Thomson's England in the Twentieth Century , in which the actual source of Baldwin's speech is not given.)
With less serious matters the reports of social occasions can seem more like fiction that fact.
Some years ago there was a wonderful letter published in the (then)Manchester Guardian from a person who signed himself ‘Student of the Press’.
He had collected together eight different newspaper reports of a highly publicized wedding between a young woman, Ira von Furstenberg, and her (then) first husband.
As the bride was only sixteen and moved in ‘international circles’ in Italy, the press had a day-out on the wedding and ‘Student of the Press’noted how the British press ‘had shown its enterprise and sturdy individuality.
It refuses to conform to any agreed standard even when simple facts are in question.’
The various newspapers reported the bride as being anywhere between 30 and 70 minutes late: someone fell into the Grand Canal, but there were four different versions of who it was; estimates of photographers present in the church ranged from 50 to 250, and guests from 250 to 600.
Of course, this particular instance was treated as a Venetian holiday by the press, and no reader of the reports would probably have cared had the whole wedding party ended up in the canal.
Official statistics
In the West we tend to trust our official government statistics and then to distrust the use made of them by politicians.
But then it was a politician who coined the phrase, ‘lies, damned lies and statistics’, which rather blew the gaff in the first place.
The census of population, the monthly and annual digests of statistics and the annual statistical reports of the various ministries and other national bodies (such as the Prison Commissioners) and local authorities produce a great deal of extremely valuable data for the sociologist to work on.
We will not go into great detail on the dangers of using statistics here but merely point to some precautions which must still be taken even when using statistics which are generally regarded as reliable.
First, research workers must be absolutely sure they know what the statistics are about.
In criminal statistics, for example, the definition of a ‘crime’ is operationally made in a number of ways.
Obviously ‘crimes known to the police’ are greater than numbers of ‘people prosecuted’which in turn are greater than numbers of ‘persons found guilty’.
To use criminal statistics wisely necessitates some prior work in getting to know the difference between indictable and non-indictable offences and also some legal history so that one does not suddenly discover an enormous decrease in a crime such as stealing cars when the new offence of ‘take and drive away’ is introduced.
The various motoring offences can baffle the uninitiated, as I learned to my horror once when on a jury.
Although we were trying a man for being ‘drunk in charge’ two people in the jury room (after a long exposition from the recorder) were quite determined to find him not guilty of ‘dangerous driving’— an offence with which he had never been charged.
A popular essay topic for students is often the use of divorce statistics.
Here in particular one can find an increase which merely reflects new legislation affecting causes for divorce — for example, the Matrimonial Causes Act of 1937  which introduced desertion, cruelty and incurable insanity as further grounds for divorce, adultery having previously been the only one.
The extension of legal aid after the 1939–45 war was bound to affect the numbers of people able to avail themselves of this service.
To ignore, or be ignorant of, these factors is to misuse statistics badly — it is no criticism of the statistics themselves.
The use of index numbers and special ratios should always be undertaken with care since they may contain hidden dangers if one does not know how they are compiled and, very often, how they are ‘corrected’ for a variety of reasons.
It is facile to employ cost of living indices or indices of neo-natal mortality without knowing how the figures are calculated.
Not all widely used and quoted statistics come from governmental, or even quasi-governmental sources.
Often we prefer our figures to come from other sources if we feel these are more likely to be unbiased.
Thus, we would undoubtedly feel less happy if political polls were not carried out by independent agencies.
We accept figures for newspaper circulations because they come from the independent Audit Bureau of Circulation.
In looking at figures on television audiences we probably accept with little thought that certain programmes are frequently at the top of the list for audience rating, but we seldom ask how that audience has been measured.
In the book world list of bestsellers are often challenged, usually by publishers or authors who feel they should be in the list but have been missed out because the sample of bookshops used for the research was biased against their particular type of book.
At the heart of the problem of using statistics lies the method of compilation and also the meaning of the terms used.
When I carried out a survey of undergraduates and their use of books at Sheffield University I needed a sample of all undergraduates in the university during the academic year of the study.8 It was quite a revelation, talking to the Assistant Registrar in charge of records, to discover how difficult it  was to define a ‘student’ for my purposes.
More recently I have been concerned with a survey of visitors to the British Museum, of whom there are between two and three million a year.
Unfortunately, the Museum and the Reading Room of the British Library Reference Division share a common entrance, so any simple count of people walking through either of the two entrances to the building would certainly give a correct number of people entering the Museum, but it would not be correct for genuine visitors to the Museum.
When one reads a figure one must always ask what the figure represents.
Diaries, memoirs and autobiographies
There may be a number of reasons for keeping a personal diary.
In the case of the ‘ordinary’ person it may just be pleasant to record what has happened each day so that one can at some time in the future spend a nostalgic hour looking back on times past.
Probably very few diaries of this sort are kept these days.
In days past, when children did not have the delights of the mass media to occupy their time for them, diary keeping was regarded as a ‘good thing’ for the young, just as collecting things was regarded as keeping hands and minds occupied.
But today the diary is regarded much more as an appointments aide-mémoire , and for the ‘ordinary’ person the keeping of a detailed diary of daily events would probably be regarded as just a little eccentric and perhaps even self-centred.
Normal diaries are rare, abnormal diaries are more well-known, such as the Diary of Anne Frank and the Scroll of Agony , the diaries of a Warsaw Jew, Chaim Kaplan, who kept a diary from September 1939 until his death which was probably in 1943, the papers being found hidden in a paraffin tin after the war.
But even diaries of terror, such as have been published from the records of survivors or victims of totalitarian regimes, were rarely written simply for the author to look back on in years to come — for European Jews there was rarely much hope  of any future.
The truly personal diary, intended for purely personal perusal, is a rare thing.
Much more common is the personal diary intended for public consumption at a later date.
The publishing world would be badly hit if politicians did not bring forth their diaries from time to time, showing just how they reacted at the time to particular world events.
And in the years after the end of the 1939–45 war there was such a spate of generals' diaries that it at times seemed difficult to understand how these men had time for the job in hand, so busy were they with their diaries.
The distinction between diaries, memoirs and autobiographies is not easy to make since one form of record can shade into the other or even contain parts of another.
For our purposes, the distinction could be that a diary is written at the time of the event, memoirs are a writer's recollections of a particular period (perhaps aided by diaries) in which he was not necessarily the central character, while an autobiography is an attempt to give a systematic and chronological record of the author's life, with himself at the centre of the story.
This arbitrary distinction helps us to focus attention on the importance in such documents of the contemporary recording of events.
While a person engaged in a particular event can rarely see the whole set of circumstances in clear perspective he can record the minutiae of a situation which might well be lost when the position is looked back on at a later date.
Published diaries which record a day-to-day chronology of events may not be the most coherent of records, but they do not suffer from being over-edited, tidied up or altered to fit into hindsight.
With politicians and military leaders the keeping of a diary is not only the gathering of data for a future book but can also be a form of self-defence in preparation for any post-mortems which might be held in the future.
In a sense it is a personal keeping of the ‘minutes’ of what occurred at conferences or in battles which will remind the writer what happened at a precise time in the course of events.
Very few ‘raw’ diaries are published these days unless, as in the case of  wartime victims of concentration camps, they make the greatest impact by the very nature of their rawness and contemporaneity.
Memoirs based on diaries, or the autobiography itself, enable the writer to make use of the diaries for the basic pattern of events, but by adding hindsight to the diaries a much fuller and perhaps more plausible or self-justifying record can be written.
It is upon these sorts of documents that historians frequently draw, especially for the writing of very recent history (i.e. within the past hundred years or so) and it is commonplace to find the historian referring to ‘other views’ on a particular matter, as expressed by some political opponent in his memoirs.
Thomson's brief history of twentieth-century England gives a number of examples of this sort of thing.
On the issue of pre-1935 appeasement of Mussolini over Abyssinia he quotes from L. S. Amery's ‘diary’, which is referred to in a footnote as My Political Life , vol. 3 (1955) and also refers to two other accounts of the same events in Viscount Templewood's Nine Troubled Years , pt. 2 (1954), and Sir Anthony Eden's Facing the Dictators (1962).
It is interesting to note in these three references the great gap between the time of the events referred to in the history, 1935, and the books referred to, their publication dates being 1954, 1955 and 1962.
It is obvious that only personal documentation at the time could make it possible for these three politicians to write anything with accuracy from 20 years after the events had taken place.
One of the difficulties of using politicians' or military leaders' diaries is that they are always likely to be personal justifications of their own actions at the time, and of course they give the impression that the whole of history consists of political  intrigue or war.
For the sociologist who is not exclusively interested in politics or militarism some of these diaries, memoirs and autobiographies have relatively little to contribute.
What personal records there may be of more general ‘social life’ have the limitations that their authors are rarely ‘ordinary’people.
Recollections of high-born  people are far more common than those of the low-born.
The series of books by Osbert Sitwell on his life are quite fascinating, but by no stretch of the imagination can the Sitwells be equated with ‘ordinary’ people — indeed, it is their eccentricities which fascinate.
But the bulk of our population lives working-, or pretty humdrum, middle-class lives and the lack of documentation of these is often noticeable.
Perhaps one of the best autobiographies (although written in the third person) is Flora Thompson's Lark Rise to Candleford (1945), followed by her later (and not, in my opinion, as good)Still Glides the Stream (1948).
Her record of her rural childhood and young adult life in Britain at the turn of the century is a fund of sociological insights and is far more fascinating to read, and incomparably better written, than practically any genuinely sociological work of the time.
But Flora Thompson was simply a gentle recorder of her own not very exciting life: the beauty of her book lies in the skill of the writing and her ability to make everyday events of interest to her reader.
She was not writing of slum life so as to shock the reader, or even indulging in nostalgia so as to entertain.
The simplicity of her books is above any attempts to write down to anyone.
A more recent, and very successful, memoir of childhood days in Salford was Robert Roberts' The Classic Slum (1971).
This was written late in his life and with his own declared interest in socialism and sociology there is a tendency to see things rather more ‘socially’ than one might expect from a child of the local corner shop.
Nevertheless, Roberts describes a way of life before and after the First World War which is quite fascinating and now, obviously, long past.
His book is good reading, social history and full of sociological insights into a period which saw great social changes.
Perhaps the most deliberate use made of autobiographical sources is to be found in Thomas and Znaniecki's study of the Polish peasant in Europe and America, where use is made of a specially commissioned autobiography written by a young man, Wladek Wisznienski, at the request of the  authors.
This life history, which extends to 311 pages, deals mainly with the writer's early life in Poland and his travels before coming to America; in fact he only goes to America 17 pages from the end, at the age of 27.
But to refer to Wladek as ‘a typical representative of the culturally passive mass which constitutes in every civilised society the enormous majority of the population’ is to do less than justice to a tale which is at times very lively indeed and which was surely not written by any ‘passive’sort of person.
After all, how many educated young people of 27 could produce 300-page life histories, even today?
If we must be so very careful, then, in using what people write about themselves, would we do any better to turn to what other people have to write?
Are biographical works likely to be more reliable?
Biographies
First, let us consider the basic difference of approach to autobiography and biography.
In the previous section we have seen how public figures often write about themselves for a variety of reasons — one of which could just be straight-forward self-centredness.
But unless a person is willing to subsidize the publication of his own autobiography or memoirs, he must convince a publisher that the book will pay its way.
The autobiography of a nobody must have some sales appeal.
In the case of the biography the author is even less likely to be attracted to writing at second hand about a nobody, and what is more, he has a completely open field of all the somebodies that he chooses to tackle.
The biographer, therefore, is likely to work on people of some fame, whatever their spheres of activity may be, and so the biography is more likely to be about the famous (or notorious) person, the outstanding success or the eye-catching, unusual personality.
Controversial figures in public life, such as Winston Churchill, Richard Nixon, Indira Gandhi, Martin Luther King, T. S. Eliot and many others, will probably attract biographers for  years to come because it is felt that there are still new things to be said about them, new perspectives from which their work can be seen, and new interpretations of politics or the arts in which their contributions should be judged.
But even if we tend to look for the scholarly, non-involved biography of the great man or woman we cannot be sure that the work will be beyond criticism.
Scholars tend to form schools of thought, and it would be naive of the sociologist (especially the academic sociologist) to think that his history or English colleagues were blessedly free from personal bias in their views on people and their roles in the history of politics or the arts.
Many biographers fall into a category which might be described as scholarly but not academic in that they are written by professional writers for an educated general readership rather than for the narrower market of academic specialists in a particular subject.
In the case of some such biographies the biographer may be concerned with the defence of a dead person, which is sometimes the case with biographies written by loving sons or daughters.
In other instances the biographer may have been commissioned by the family of a person who has died to write a biography with their  authorization and co-operation.
This type of biography must be particularly carefully scrutinized since it may be lacking in much criticism of its subject.
My own first research experience using biographical data was when I was studying the history of housing management in Britain and, inevitably, I looked into the work and times of the great nineteenth-century housing management pioneer, Octavia Hill.
She was a fascinating person.
But from my own researches it became plain to me that she was very much a person of her times, as compared with Beatrice Webb who became so much a critic of her times.
Octavia Hill believed, with most other Victorians, that housing should pay its way to her, housing subsidies were unthinkable.
When asked by a government committee what people were to do who could not afford 5s. a week rent for a room, her answer was, ‘I  should have thought that when the cost of living rose the wages must necessarily rise, or something more efficient be done.
People must emigrate for instance.
I should leave prices to supply and demand.’
She also took the view that it was not necessary to have individual access to water and drains.
‘If you have water on every floor [of tenement buildings]that is sufficient for working people.
It is no hardship to have to carry a pail of water along a flat surface.’
These quotations are not in any way intended to disparage Octavia Hill and the work she did.
But the standard biography of her did, in my opinion, leave out too much of the rather conservative views she held and therefore gave the impression that Octavia Hill was a rather kindlier and gentler person than she really was.
The limitations of her views are just as important as her vision if the researcher is to gain a full perspective of her work and times.
Charity at 4 per cent interest was nothing to be ashamed of in the nineteenth century and it was much more commonplace for unsatisfactory tenants to be evicted than is the case today.
It is necessary to appreciate these facts if social policy is to be seen from a sociological perspective.
Another interesting point in biographical/historical work is the use made by later writers of their subjects' own diaries and records.
In a review of two books on the 1914–18 war, written many years ago, the historian and critic A. J. P. Taylor said, ‘There is one piece of advice which can be given to all generals, successful and otherwise: ‘Do not keep a diary’…
Though they are not much good on paper — if they were they would not be generals — they cannot resist the squat little volumes.
Down each evening go the indiscretions, the jealousies, the blunders and miscalculations.
Sooner or later the diaries are published, and another military reputation is destroyed.’
Taylor goes on to say that both Earl Haig and Sir Henry Wilson offer the same salutary warning against the publication of diaries.
Wilson rose to become Chief of the Imperial General Staff at the end of the war and he was made a viscount, but with the publication of  a book based on his diaries in 1927 ‘Wilson's reputation was blasted…
From that moment, he appeared as a political intriguer, and an intriguer on his personal account also.’
Taylor then says, ‘As to Haig, in Lord Beaverbrook's classic phrase: ‘With the publication of his Private Papers in 1952, he committed suicide twenty-five years after his death’.’
One last example may be given here to demonstrate the dangers of biographers copying each other 's errors.
In a delightful article on ‘The Art of Biography’, André Maurois once wrote,
Where can the facts be found?
Partly of course in printed works, but these must be used with infinite caution and constant checking.
Too many biographers copy one another.
I remember, when I was writing the biography of George Sand, I read in all her biographies that her grandmother had married a certain Comte de Horne, an illegitimate son of Louis XV; that the marriage had not been consummated and that the Comte de Horne had been killed in a duel.
I looked up the authentic sources; the Comte de Horne turned out not to be an illegitimate son of Louis XV; the marriage had been consummated and he had died of indigestion.
When I was writing an essay on Bernard Shaw, I read in one biography that he had attended a Wesleyan school and had always been at the bottom of his form.
Before printing the essay I thought it safer to send it to Shaw.
He returned it with this comment: ‘I have never been to a Wesleyan school nor been at the bottom of my form!'
Correspondence — private and public
Although these types of data are always mentioned as sources for sociological enquiry there is really only one major piece of research which used them, this being Thomas and Znaniecki's study of the Polish peasant.
Their study used letters between Poles in the USA and at home to attempt to analyse problems of the integration into American culture of people from a practically feudal home culture.
In all, 754 letters were purchased for between 10 and 20 cents each and the results were analysed in 50 sets under family names.
The letters were obtained by advertising in a Polish-American magazine published in the USA.
Thomas and Znaniecki's study was very carefully reviewed by Blumer in 1949 and he came out with a number of general criticisms of the research in which the authors used letters, a wide variety of documents and Wladek's autobiography as data to illustrate their theoretical propositions.
Our concern in this section is merely to consider what use could be made today of correspondence for sociological purposes.
The publication of correspondence between famous people has been used for many years for the purposes of scholastic enquiry.
From Bernard Shaw's correspondence with Mrs Patrick Campbell some light has been thrown on his personal life and general outlook.
Political correspondence can be a vital source for political history, but for specifically sociological purposes there are likely to be few types of correspondence these days which would be easily available and which would be of value for social research.
With the widespread use of the telephone for both business and pleasure letter-writing is in danger of becoming a lost skill and probably the only letters which are kept in the home are those between sweethearts or between members of a united family.
Although, in years to come, these might prove to be of social interest, many such letters refer only to domestic and personal trivia and, having personally recently discovered a letter written to me over 30 years ago by my wife just before we were married, I would not want this to be read by anyone else at all.
But even if letters are available for research (perhaps a secret cache is discovered in an old house), they still have their limitations.
Skill in letter-writing is by no means evenly distributed among the population and letter-writers cannot be said to be representative of the general population.
Also, in writing of events the writer is certain to have to abbreviate any descriptions very sharply.
To give a full description of even a simple evening out at the theatre could cover numerous pages, and it is unlikely that the writer has the time or wish to do this.
So, letters condense events enormously, and they  are also probably written from a particular angle with the recipient in mind.
One can imagine a university student writing two letters — one to his parents and the other to his best friend — in which he said what the rag dance last Saturday had been like.
It is very unlikely that the details would be the same for the two recipients.
Letters are often a hoped-for source of descriptions of events or of personal feelings about certain things; and one source of written information which, though not in letter form but not wholly dissimilar, can be useful for the researcher, is the description written by children or young people of events in which they have taken part, or about given social situations.
A very early and most interesting use of this technique was that of Jahoda who asked young people at school to write an essay about their first day at work and what they envisaged it would be like.
Some of the children's expectations were so heartbreakingly wrong that it was clear that much more needed to be done to inform young people about what work is really like.
In my own research into books and reading I have had classes of 15-year-olds write essays on the subject of how they would feel about working in a bookshop.
Many of the writers gave stereotypes of bookshops which were clearly years out of date and which they themselves knew were out of date.
It was evident that for many young people the ‘image’ of the bookshop was old fashioned, dusty, a place for scholarly introverted people, and so on .
Yet many of the children had been in bookshops and knew them not to be so.
Also, when describing the work in a bookshop few of them mentioned the fact that the bookseller had to decide what books to buy for his stock and few realized how much financial expertise was needed.
At the time of writing I am involved, as I mentioned, in some surveys of visitors to the British Museum and I am hoping that we shall be able to get some schools who had had organized visits to the museum, to obtain essays about the visit from the children involved.
If the essays describe the exciting journey, the postcard gallery, the sandwich lunch  and little else, the content analysis of such essays will be quite illuminating!
Historical documents
In a sense it is almost impossible to separate out a section on documents which can be called ‘historical’ since all documents are by nature historical.
But conventionally historical documents refer particularly to events of the past about which the main (and probably only) source of information is documentary, the participants now being dead.
Even this definition is by no means satisfactory, since there is plenty of history of the twentieth century, and people alive today who have memories dating from its beginning are contributing valuable data to the expanding field of oral history.
As Marwick has argued, ‘It is only through knowledge of its history that a society can have knowledge of itself’, and Carr has said that ‘The more sociological history becomes and the more historical sociology becomes, the better for both.’
Historical research is, of course, a continuous process of re-interpretation of the past.
Elton claims that the ‘scientific, ordered, systematic study of history only really began in the 19th century’ and he particularly mentions Namier and Maitland as two historians who ‘brought a scientific and intellectual approach to the study of history’.
Historians study social change and they focus on particular events for their data.
They do not try to prove causal relationships but they do try to understand how events bring about change from one state of affairs to another.
The social scientist tends to study events so as to draw conclusions of a more general and rather static kind.
He is often concerned with the structure of social relationships, the principles underlying organizations and the manifestation of social institutions in general as evidence at a particular time, rather than being concerned with the flow of events which attracts the historian.
A good example of social research which is based wholly  on historical sources is the work of Ashworth on the sociology of trench warfare on the Western front during the 1914–18 war.
He saw the trenches as an extreme social situation in which millions of men were involved in trying to kill each other while trying to save their own lives.
Ashworth's analysis uses interesting concepts drawn from sociology and psychology but his data cover everything from the official histories of the war, including divisional and battalion histories, right across to the diaries of ordinary soldiers, some of which were based on notes taken during the war but written up years later.
Not surprisingly, Ashworth found more published personal accounts written by officers than by ordinary privates and some memoirs were written by poets and writers to express their horror of war.
With the vast literature on this part of history that is available the social scientist has a difficult task of evaluating the information upon which he can draw.
Sources of documentary data
As must now be clear from the above descriptions of possible sources of documentary data, the social researcher has tremendous resources that he can call upon for use as primary data.
But also, he has available to him all the vast resources of libraries which can provide him with books, pamphlets, research reports, theses, journals, conference reports, and so on.
Many researchers fail to make the best possible use of libraries simply because they know so little about the bibliographical tools that are available to help them.
Let us begin by recognizing that the more advanced research workers are in their particular fields of research the more they are likely to want to use specialist research literature (such as journal articles and research reports) and the less, on the whole, they are likely to want to use general books.
Not only do books often tend to be rather broad in their approach to a subject, but they can also take a long time to be published after they are written and the information  may thus be out of date.
On the other hand, although some research journals can be slow in publishing articles they are usually published quarterly, with the object of providing up-to-date findings.
Research reports, which may be published in A4 format by the offset litho process, can often be available only weeks after a research project has been completed.
So, the research worker should know something about the main ways to obtain information from the library.
If we are the very beginning of a project and, perhaps as an undergraduate, know very little at all about our chosen topic, we may actually start with articles from encyclopaedias.
The Encyclopaedia  Britannica  contains many useful articles on a wide range of topics and the International Encyclopaedia of the Social Sciences is more specialized.
Unfortunately, encyclopaedias are very expensive to compile and publish so one cannot hope for a new edition every year and the information in them is thus often very dated.
The International Encyclopaedia of the Social Sciences was last published in 1968 so, while it is useful for general articles, its facts are now very out of date indeed.
Books themselves fall into a number of categories and the beginning researcher may start from a textbook, a book which reviews a field of research or a ‘reader’, which brings together excerpts on a certain topic.
Many such books contain useful bibliographies and advice on further reading.
To find out what books have been published on topics of interest one can use the British National Bibliography , which since 1950 has listed every new work published in Britain, accumulating from weekly to monthly and to annual publication.
The Cumulative Book Index is an American publication which claims to be a world list of books in the English language.
Other very useful sources for the social researcher are the London Bibliography of the Social Sciences which is, in fact, the published catalogue of the acquisitions and holdings of the library of the London School of Economics, a major social science library; and also the International Bibliography of the Social Sciences which has annual volumes  devoted to sociology, political science, economics and social and cultural anthropology.
Both these publications cover much more than just books and the International Bibliography is very good for foreign language journal literature.
There are many specialized bibliographies published on limited subject areas.
For example, I have found in my own reading research that a specialist bibliography entitled Readers and Library Users , by Martin Ward, has been very helpful in making me aware of research studies that I had not come across before.
Unfortunately, ad hoc bibliographies date quickly and are not always brought up to date after initial publication.
The Bibliographic Index is a good source for all sorts of bibliographies and includes many contained in books themselves.
Journal literature is very widespread indeed and any researcher may find himself having to read not only in an academic subject area but also in the professional or trade journals too.
Thus, when I was an urban sociologist I read in sociology and in the professional journals of town planners.
In my research into reading habits I regularly read the trade journal the Bookseller for publishing and bookselling news and the Library Association Record , published by the Library Association for its members, for news in that field.
Ulrich's International Periodicals Directory is usually to be found in large libraries and is the recognized international list of periodicals.
There are so many periodicals published that some researchers find the row upon row of them on library shelves very daunting.
Fortunately, the researcher does not have to go through the bound volumes one by one to see what they contain.
A journal called Current Contents :Social and Behavioural Sciences brings together the contents pages of the most recently published journals, but a range of indexing and abstracting journals can be used to find out about the contents of journals without having to go to the journals themselves.
Indexing journals (often simply called indexes) give the straightforward bibliographical details of articles in the range  of journals (which may be in hundreds) covered by the indexing service.
So the author, title of the article, name of journal, volume, number, date of publication and page numbers will all be cited.
Usually an index will be arranged so that the user can search for articles by both subject and author.
An abstracting journal (or abstract) differs from an indexing journal by adding to the indexing material a short summary, or abstract, of the article referred to.
This additional information can be very useful indeed in saving the researcher from looking up an article which sounds as if it would be useful from the title, but which, in fact, is not relevant to one's particular interest.
(In a similar way, an ‘annotated’ bibliography usually contains some notes on the contents of each item included.)
In social research Sociological Abstracts is the main abstracting journal for sociology, as Psychological Abstracts is for psychology.
Two very important indexing journals not always used as much as they might be by social researchers are the British Humanities Index and the Public Affairs Information Service Bulletin .
The former is published quarterly in the United Kingdom by the Library Association and its coverage includes not only most of the main social science journals but also serious weekly magazines, such as The Economist and New Society , and also The Times , the Guardian and other such popular publications; the latter is an American publication covering everything from books to articles and reports on all sorts of economic and social affairs published worldwide in the English language.
Newspapers are valuable sources of information, as has been noted, and it is a pity that The Times is the only British newspaper to have an index.
This goes back to 1906, though indexes of different kinds are available back to 1790.
A further source of information on current events is Keesing's Contemporary Archives , which is a weekly record of world events published in a loose-leaf format and available in most libraries.
It is also well indexed on a weekly basis.
A very special index, for which some practice is needed  before it works properly, is the Social Sciences Citation Index .
This American computer-produced service works from the principle that people with similar research interests who write articles cite the research of other people in their references.
The SSCI is in three parts.
The Citation Index looks at current publications to see what previously published articles are being cited by the present authors.
This is organized alphabetically by authors being cited.
Thus, if we know of an author who wrote a very good book or article a few years ago on our chosen topic we can look up his name to see if anyone has been citing that article recently.
If someone has, then they must also have some interest in our interest.
The Source Interest gives full details of the articles written by the people who have cited the people in the Citation Index .
This information includes full author, title, journal, date, etc., as well as the place of work of the citing author.
The third section of the SSCI is the Permuterm Subject Index in which keywords taken from journal article titles are paired and listed alphabetically.
Thus, an article on working mothers and their relations with their daughters would appear under the heading of ‘mothers’ and be paired with ‘working’, ‘relations’and ‘daughters’, and these words would appear again as starter keywords.
The Permuterm Index can be very useful in locating work on topics for research, though many references one finds are not necessarily relevant.
Social researchers need also to be aware of the valuable information available from less formal published sources and here the British Reports ,Translations and Theses is a self-explanatory title.
Also, the British Library's Index of Conference Proceedings Received , which uses keywords for its indexing, can be invaluable.
The Aslib Index to British University Theses, begun in 1950, includes all higher degrees in universities, polytechnics and with the CNAA, whilst Dissertation Abstracts International covers North American and some European theses.
The world of parliamentary publications in Britain is a  daunting one for the beginning researcher, but the range of information available from governmental and quasi-governmental sources is so vast that no researcher dare ignore it.
The annual catalogue of Her Majesty's Stationery Office covers both parliamentary and non-parliamentary publications and there are also monthly and even daily lists to keep the information fresh, as well as sectional lists on particular governmental areas.
Governmental statistics should be basic data for much social research and it is  fortunate that the Governmental Statistical Service publishes a free annual booklet called ‘Government Statistics: a Brief Guide to Sources’, which is available from the Central Statistical Office, Great George Street, London SWlP 3AQ.
The major source, however, is the Guide to Official Statistics , begun in 1976, which has a very detailed index.
All social researchers will benefit also from using Social Trends , which is published annually and is an excellent source book, interestingly produced, for a wide range of social topics.
From this brief résumé of the sources available to social researchers it should now be very clear that a vague wander through the bookshelves of the library is inefficient and time-wasting.
Librarians have produced some magnificent bibliographical tools for the use of social researchers; they should be used more.
CONCLUSIONS
Looking back over this chapter I am struck by the dreadful pitfalls which seem to beset every step which the sociologist might contemplate taking in documentary research.
Against the naive assumption that if it says so in the book (or the paper, or the report) it must be true, we appear to have cast doubt on every type of written document ever produced.
Documents are our (and other people's) history.
They record events past, and the present stands in a causal relationship to the past.
To ignore documents is to cut off sociology from  the whole process of social change, which is one of the fundamental concepts of the discipline itself.
But documents can be dangerous things if used without care and if, as sometimes happens, they are used for partial and selective purposes.
Every document has its contribution to make to research, but there may be other documents not used which could make their contribution too.
The better researchers are acquainted with the bibliographical tools which can widen their perspectives, the better researchers they are likely to become.
People as Sources of Data
INTRODUCTION
A great deal of very useful research can be carried out wholly from documentary sources of one kind or another, but often social researchers find themselves in a position where they want to investigate social behaviour on which there is very little published research or perhaps what research has been published is not relevant enough to their own particular areas of interest.
In my own studies of theatre audiences and of book reading habits in the United Kingdom I found, when I began, that there was very little published at all on who goes to the theatre and, while there was more information available on adult reading habits, much of it had its source in America and much of what was available in Britain referred to borrowing from libraries but excluded book buying.
For many reasons, then, the social investigator may have to carry out his own observations to collect new data for his researches.
Since Alexander Pope declared that ‘the proper study of mankind is man’ it would seem reasonable for social scientists to observe the behaviour of their fellow men and women.
Much social behaviour can be observed without too much difficulty and people quite often enjoy talking and telling other people about their interests, so the researcher can often interview people too.
To watch and to  listen are two important activities for the social investigator studying social behaviour as it really happens.
But the social researcher is watching and listening (let us call them together observing) for a purpose, and that purpose is one of scientific enquiry.
It is therefore necessary to use some sort of classification to sort out the various ways in which we might approach the problems of observation.
One way is to use two factors, rather in the way that we did for documents, and these two factors will be called ‘participation’ and ‘control’.
Both of them can be thought of as being exercised in varying degrees, so that observation of people can be carried out with varying degrees of participation and varying degrees of control.
Table 2 gives a general idea of the application of these two factors, and for illustrative convenience a two-by-two box has been constructed with four illustrative forms of observation in the boxes.
By the term ‘participation’ is meant the degree of actual involvement of the observer in the situation under observation.
Thus, when minimal participation takes place the observer keeps out of the group.being studied as much as possible.
In the ideal situation he is hidden completely from the observed, who are not aware of the researcher's presence at all.
By contrast, when maximum participation is used, the observer is with and among the subjects of observation, as in the case  of the interview situation where questions are asked and answers given.
By the term ‘control’ is meant the degree to which the observation is standardized in the interest of scientific accuracy.
Thus, an observation would be relatively uncontrolled if the observer had no way of manipulating a social situation for the purposes of the enquiry.
In the minimal situation of control, therefore, the observer would simply have to take things as they came.
He would not be able to manipulate the situation at all.
If observation is broken down into seeing and hearing this would mean that the observer watched or listened to (or both, of course) a social scene which was completely natural and unaffected by his presence.
When degrees of control are introduced then the situation does become manipulated by the observer.
The laboratory experiment is an obvious case of control, since a complete situation is created by and for the observer.
In the situation of verbal interaction the observer intrudes control by means of standardized questions, perhaps standardized pre-set responses and pre-arranged classification for noting answers on a recording schedule.
Taking the two dimensions together and applying them, as above, in a four-fold scheme, produces what I have called the ‘bird-watcher’ method, the laboratory observation, participant observation and the standardized interview.
These are merely convenient labels to attach to forms of observing people which in the actual live situation are unlikely to be found in a ‘pure’ form.
Nevertheless, they are useful enough here to employ as starting points for an examination of ways in which real people can be studied by the social investigator.
‘BIRD-WATCHING ‘: UNCONTROLLED NON-PARTICIPANT
This could be described as ‘pure’ observation in that the observer does not participate in any way in the social interaction under observation and also does absolutely nothing to  control the setting or the behaviour of the people observed.
It is sometimes referred to as ‘non-interventionist’ observation, though I find that a rather jargonish term and I think bird-watching is a good simple way of referring to observation which is very similar to that of the ornithologist who constructs a ‘hide’so as to be able to observe birds in their natural habitat without disturbing them in any way.
In social bird-watching it is very important that the people studied are not aware that they are being studied or that anyone is setting up a particular environment for them to behave in.
Bird-watching has been used by many researchers to study children's behaviour.
It can also be used to study people in their public leisure activities such as at football matches or in public houses.
I have myself used this technique in the preparatory stages of researches in theatres, bookshops and libraries.
The great advantage is that no external stimuli are applied to the subjects of the observation — all their actions and the situations they are in are absolutely normal.
The disadvantages are the limitations that are placed on the observer who can only gain a limited amount of information without intruding and thus altering the spontaneity of the behaviour.
For example, in one bookshop, just before Christmas, I saw two women examining books on football suitable for young people.
Both spoke to each other in whispers.
They clearly needed some help in deciding what book to buy, but they did not ask an assistant and eventually went out without purchasing.
There were several questions I would have liked to have put to them, but had I done so I would have altered the environment for them and made them hyper-conscious of their limitations.
While bird-watching is often used at an early stage in research to try to develop hypotheses and to make sure one does have some idea of how people behave before going any further, there is no reason why one should not develop more systematic recording schedules to standardize the observations and to develop more of a survey approach.
The observation schedule shown on pages 100 to 101 was used by students    during a day's observation of people in a bookshop and helped us to realize that the women shoppers were often much more purposive than the men in their bookshop behaviour.
Clearly, though, the use of observation schedules is putting more control on the behaviour of the observer, so we may now turn to a consideration of what happens when we go further along that axis.
LABORATORY OBSERVATION: CONTROLLED NON-PARTICIPANT
In its ideal form this is observation carried out in an environment which may or may not be a natural one, but even if it is natural a situation has been deliberately created and is observed unbeknownst to the actors.
One might say that the ‘candid camera’ technique used for some television programmes, where people have tricks played on them for the benefit of the viewers, is rather in this mode of observation, though it is to be hoped that social researchers would not encourage people to make fools of themselves in the way television producers do.
One technique which certainly creates a controlled environment is where laboratory or quasi-laboratory conditions are set up.
In some cases people are invited into a laboratory and may be given tasks to carry out which may or may not be quite what they seem to be.
There are numerous instances of volunteers being asked to do things (such as administering electric shocks to other people) which are really social situations deliberately created to test people's reactions to authority.
Youth clubs may be organized on authoritarian or democratic lines to see how the members enjoy different forms of leadership.
In simpler ways, libraries may deliberately remove certain reference works from their regular places on the shelves and then monitor reader reactions.
(Sadly, readers often seem not to notice at all.)
But any change in an organization or in a social setting can be used for controlled  non-participant observation.
The observer will need to be there observing, but possibly behind a hidden camera or watching through a one-way vision screen — he or she need not be in among the action.
In market research what are called focus groups are sometimes used for initial exploratory discussions on new brands or new packaging under quasi-laboratory conditions.
Perhaps eight people of various ages will be invited to an agency and will sit around in a comfortable room simply responding to very informal promptings from the discussion leader.
But also there may be agency clients watching the participants from another room through a one-way screen to see and hear what the people do.
In these circumstances it is more ethical to tell the participants about the screen.
Hidden watchers and secret cameras do seem rather like the trappings of a police state and social researchers should not feel that they have a right to manipulate people.
PARTICIPANT OBSERVATION: NON-CONTROLLED PARTICIPANT
The term ‘participant observation’ is commonly used to describe rather different sorts of research methods, and in the very diffuseness of methods used under this umbrella term there lies a danger.
Participant observation usually refers to a situation where the observer becomes as near as may be a member of the group being studied and participates in their normal activities.
The term was originally used by Hader and Lindeman to refer to work done in industrial consultation committees where some members of the committee were trained to observe in detail what happened at meetings and were then questioned afterwards by research workers — rather like an intelligence officer might question the crew of an aircraft after a raid.
But the term has also been used to refer to the work done by anthropologists who have lived with tribes they have studied.
Writing on this method of enquiry, John Madge said that  ‘when the heart of the observer is made to beat as the heart of any other member of the group under observation, rather than as that of a detached emissary from some distant laboratory, then he has earned the title of participant observer.’
Madge's argument for the use of participant observation was that the ordinary interview situation is such a highly artificial social situation that both questioner and informant are in false positions.
The interviewer is trying to be objective and scientific, yet has to establish and maintain ‘rapport’ if he is to get a good interview.
The informant is trying to co-operate in this artificial situation, yet is being told to act and talk ‘naturally’.
If informant and observer lack a common purpose, the inferences made by the interviewer could be quite wrong.
Far better to make sure that the inferences are correct, and this can be done by ensuring that the observer and the observed are thinking together, not in opposition.
Participant observation, then, is an attempt to put both observer and observed on the same side by making the former a member of the group so that he can experience what they experience and work within their frame of reference.
Idea the participant observer is virtually a spy, since to be accepted completely in a particular capacity within a group the observer should be thought of as actually being in nothing but that capacity.
It is on this point that participant observation in practice very often does not match up to the ideal form and some consideration should be given to the situation arising.
Perhaps the easiest way to consider the range of behaviour under the umbrella term ‘participant observation’ is to separate the words ‘observer’and ‘participant’and think of four possibilities — a complete observer, an observer as participant, a participant as an observer and a complete participant.
The ‘complete observer’ is really a bird-watcher by another name and as such has already been dealt with.
The ‘observer as participant’ is known by the group under study to be an observer but has been accepted, temporarily, by the group and allowed temporary membership to enable him to carry out the research.
Perhaps the classic case of this sort was William Foot Whyte's study Street Comer Society where he became a quasi-gang member but never lost his status of researcher.
Very often social anthropologists who study primitive tribes ‘live’ with them for a period of time using this role.
The people of the tribe or village agree to them participating in their lives to some extent but there is no pretence that the lady from America has actually become a Polynesian native.
In the famous Middletown studies made by Robert and Helen Lynd the Lynds lived for a time in Muncie, Indiana, but were always known to be researchers.
Clearly, a great advantage of this particular type of participant observation is that the researchers are in the group or community and can quite openly ask as many questions as they feel necessary.
The limitation is that the people under observation may well feel rather acutely that they are being observed and may react against the observers, act unnaturally and perhaps even lie.
The next step, that of being ‘participant as an observer’, requires observers to adopt roles which enable them to become a member of a group and yet to be able to ask questions without fully disclosing their roles as researchers.
This is a position which requires the researcher to adopt a false role, for example, pretending to be an author looking for atmosphere for a book or pretending to be a management trainee with a firm.
Both these roles would allow the researcher to seem inquisitive and to ask questions without the members of the group knowing the true nature of the work the researcher was doing.
A young research social scientist could well go into a factory and tell the people she worked with that she was a student on a placement for, say, three months, learning about the realities of factory work, when in fact she was a graduate research worker carrying out a carefully planned study of labour-management relationships.
The role enables the researcher to gain the confidence of the group that accepts her in her false role.
The extreme form of participant observation — what I have called the ‘complete participant’— is, in fact, typified by the spy, who is believed by members of the group to be a genuine member of that group and is not known to be an observer at all.
This extreme role can be used to try to understand extreme situations.
John Howard Griffin made himself up to look like a negro and passed himself off as one in the southern USA for his book Black Like Me .
Tony Wilkinson dressed up as a down-and-out in London and lived like a tramp for several weeks as part of a television enquiry into London's dossers, published in book form as Down and Out .
Both men took, grave risks in the roles they adopted and could well have been attacked had their disguises been broken by the people they lived with.
Interestingly neither of these two people were sociologists, though sociologists have carried out participant studies amongst homosexuals and criminal gangs.
The technique, however, is not new and Keating's Into Unknown England , 1866–1913 contains several fascinating accounts of similar participant studies by social observers of the nineteenth century in workhouses and cheap lodging houses.
The most serious problem about complete participation is a moral one rather than a practical one.
Whatever one may argue for the value of research findings which ensue from this technique (and certainly the publication of Down and Out must have come as a revelation to many people in present-day Britain) the question must be squarely faced as to whether the social researcher has a right to deceive and manipulate people for research purposes.
Tramps and dossers are not likely to organize a powerful protest lobby to Parliament to complain about intrusion into their private lives and criminals are even less likely to take legal action (though they will consider illegal retaliation).
This extreme role really depends upon the social researcher deciding whether the means are justified by the ends.
Personally, I did once use such a role, while an undergraduate, working in a factory on a vacation research project.
At the time I had few qualms and found the role-playing exciting; today I feel I was condescending to the people I deceived and I would not do it again.
THE INTERVIEW: CONTROLLED PARTICIPATION
In social research the term ‘interview’ is used to describe a wide range of differing things and it is best to begin with a simple definition which focuses on the essential meaning of the word.
The Shorter Oxford Dictionary defines ‘interview’ as ‘a meeting of persons face to face, especially for the purpose of formal conference on some point’.
The interview is basically a form of human interaction and may range from the most informal chat to the most carefully pre-coded and carefully systematized set of questions and answers laid out on an interview schedule.
All sociologists whose work takes them out of the library and brings them into contact with living beings are certain to use the interview in their work.
John Madge made a useful distinction between various sorts of people who may be the subject for the sociologist's interview.
The ‘potentate’ may have to be interviewed to obtain permission and goodwill to carry out a study in the institution he controls, such as a factory, office, school or youth club.
The ‘expert’ may have to be interviewed because she has special knowledge of a situation which it is vital for the researcher to have guidance on.
In these interview situations, as Madge carefully pointed out, there are special circumstances operating and special precautions to be taken by the interviewer.
It is not uncommon for potentates to be experts as well and, in my experience, it is very important for a researcher to establish goodwill with people who will he helping in a research project.
For example, when I began researching into social aspects of book reading I knew very little at all about publishing or bookselling and my experience of libraries was mainly limited to being a user of them.
It was important to  learn about, for example, bookselling from experienced booksellers who then, accepting the genuineness of my interest and the possible value of my research, were generous in helping me with it and allowing me to carry out surveys in bookshops.
In a research project I carried out into academic publishing a great deal of the work required me to interview very experienced and knowledgeable publishers and to ask questions which, inevitably, touched on financial matters.
In practically every case the publishers were prepared to supply me with information which was not generally made public.
In some cases I had to accept that information given to me to help me understand problems of academic publishing was to remain confidential, but once credibility had been established the publishers were very helpful.
It is sometimes difficult for research workers from an academic background to convince businessmen and other such people of the value of their research.
To a publisher or bookseller working hard to make a living in a very chancy occupation time spent answering questions from a researcher who has never  himself worked in a commercial business may seem to be time wasted.
It is incumbent upon the researcher to explain clearly at the very onset why the research is being done, what sort of results are hoped for and what feedback there is likely to be which may help the potentate and/or expert who has helped with the project.
Research studies which may seem quite practical to university people may seem very far removed from reality to practitioners, and research workers who are prepared to learn from the practitioners can often modify their research plans and greatly improve them.
This is not to say that the researcher simply becomes the handmaid of the practitioner; it is merely that the researcher who is not prepared to learn from the practitioner is arrogant and lacking in insight.
Of course, experts do tend to have their personal biases and the researchers must be cautious about what they accept as information from the people they interview.
If everyone in, say, librarianship, was agreed on the best way to organize  library services there would be little need for research, for conferences or for journals and books on librarianship.
Experts can be fallible and usually the best practitioners are the people who, with experience, come to appreciate how little they know.
They are the ones who are usually prepared to co-operate with, and to help, research workers: people who are so expert that they know all the answers have no perception of the value of research.
The interview, then, is a most valuable tool for the researcher worker and to be able to deal competently with potentates and experts is of the greatest importance.
But many interviews carried out in social research are of samples of what we might call ‘ordinary’ people — people who have characteristics, opinions and knowledge of a much more general nature.
Here one could instance people who go to the theatre as opposed to theatre administrators, people who read books rather than people in publishing, selling or lending.
We can obtain information from people such as these by asking questions.
This can be done by asking them to complete  questionnaires for us or talk to us.
At this stage we are concerned with the personal touch; self-completed questionnaires will be dealt with later.
By interviewing people we can obviously obtain a great deal of information in a relatively short time.
What is the main point of the interview?
Perhaps the best way to approach the interview is to consider first what stage the research has reached.
If we are at an early stage of the work, still looking around for ideas and still perhaps ‘hypothesis-seeking’, it is likely that we shall want to talk to people to try to get help, stimulation, new viewpoints, and so on.
It seems rather grandiose to label a talk with a colleague in the same office or department as an ‘interview’, but in some ways it could be considered to be one, especially if our colleague is an expert in the field in which we ourselves have become interested.
But usually we think of the early idea-seeking interview as being with a non-expert, an ‘ordinary’ person who does not have any particular  consultant status.
The position can be illustrated simply by thinking of a study that is to take place of the social workings of a youth club to test out some hypothesis about the manifest and latent functions of this association.
Obviously we would have to be prepared to see the potentates who control the club to obtain permission to work in it.
We would almost certainly have talks with the club leader, the expert, for his knowledge and views.
But the ‘ordinary’ people in this case would be the members of the club itself, and we would probably be thinking of testing our hypotheses by interviewing a sample of the club members.
The main point here, then, is that the expert is interviewed as an individual with special knowledge.
The ordinary people are interviewed because they are representatives of the group which we are studying, and as such their characteristics, opinions, and so on are only of interest because they can be added together to present the general picture of the group itself.
To interview only one club member and then say that he could be taken as representative of the whole club membership — perhaps several hundred in number — could not be substantiated.
But on the other side, it is not necessary to interview everyone in the club if the proper statistical sampling rules are obeyed and if proper tests of significance are applied to results obtained.
The sample survey is a fully recognized method of enquiry in common everyday use by sociologists, economists, psychologists, public opinion pollsters, market researchers and many other bodies.
The sort of interviews to be used will depend largely on the theoretical orientation of the survey being made.
The market research survey to find out what brand of toothpaste housewives prefer is not likely to be based on very much sociological theory.
A survey of the mental image of the sausage among housewives (this example is not made up) may use psychological techniques but is unlikely to be tied up with much basic psychological theory.
Consumer surveys rarely go beyond the practical aims of the people who commission (and pay for) them.
However, many market research studies  are carried out on large samples which would be beyond the reach of academic researchers and it is not unusual to find commercial surveys which contain quite valuable social information.
The government itself, of course, through its own various research organizations, and especially in Britain the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys, carries out a great deal of valuable social research based on interviewing.
In our consideration of the interview for scientific enquiry we must always remind ourselves that the survey is merely a particular tool for collecting information which is deemed relevant for the testing of a hypothesis which stems from theory.
The sociologically based interview has thus rather more to it than merely being a test of the reaction to Brand X. Here a difficulty does arise though, and it is best to face up to it right away.
Many people carry out interviews and write them up from a social point of view.
Newspaper reporters do this all the time and what is often these days called ‘investigative journalism’ may use teams of interviewers who together write up full-page reports on chosen topics.
Books, too, use the results of interviews to give ‘human interest’.
Often the interviews are very readable material indeed.
But they are not sociology.
The newspaper reporters, the commercial writers and the popularizers may have great social insight and great interviewing skills, but their work is very likely to be strongly value-laden and biased and they are not working for the development of sociological theory.
With this in mind one can see, then, that for the purposes of sociological enquiry the form of the interview must always be ultimately referable to its value in the advancement of sociological theory.
It is not necessary always to think of the interview as only of the highly standardized sample type.
It may well be that a particular piece of research needs to focus on selected people for information, and the information gained from them will be fitted together into a coherent and consistent pattern with virtually no percentages and significance tests at all.
This sort of interviewing could well be characteristic of a  community survey where the researcher went from person to person linking up kinship networks, occupational groups, recreational groups, religious bodies, and so on.
The people interviewed would not be experts, but would simply be key participants with useful knowledge, whose interviews would yield far more useful information than a random survey of the community.
In particular, if a historical perspective enters into the survey it may well be quite invaluable to interview old people for their memories of the community as it was so many years ago.
In recent years the development of oral history has resulted in many interviews with older people being tape-recorded for the development of sound archives.
One example of this work is the taped interviews carried out for the Imperial War Museum in London of the remaining survivors of the 1914–18 war.
Local historians and rural sociologists too are making greater use of this oral approach.
If what has just been said gives an impression that interviews can be almost infinite in their variety, perhaps this is not a bad thing.
Certainly, the standardized interview as used in a carefully conducted sample survey is important, but there are many other instances outside the sample survey in which the interview is an important research tool.
So let us consider what might be called the continuum of control in the interview situation; the one end of the continuum where there is the minimal amount of control can be called the situation of the ‘informal interview’ and the other end, where there is maximum control, may be called the ‘formal interview’.
This way of describing interviews can be used to consider what the control is exercised over, and where the types of interviews can most usefully be employed.
INFORMAL INTERVIEWS
The most informal interview will be one where the interviewer, having once started the interview off on the theme  in which he is interested, allows the informant to dictate the subsequent situation.
The interviewer is likely to start with some ideas to stimulate the informant to talk but beyond this he or she simply listens.
Since an interview is essentially a stimulus-response situation this means that there is very little standardization of either the stimuli or the recording of the responses.
For instance, if the interviewer is carrying out an interview with an old inhabitant of a village to try to find out what the community life was like 50 years ago he will probably have a set of categories for enquiry.
Work, leisure, social stratification, social control, patterns of family life, the Church, and so on will be likely headings used to stimulate the respondent to talk about the past.
Obviously these categories could be introduced very simply into the interview and the informant would just relate the memories which came back to him or her.
A technique such as this was used by Blythe in his well-known village study of Akenfield .
The problem of how to record all the informant said would be best dealt with by means of a tape recorder so that the complete verbatim record could be kept and referred to when needed later.
Otherwise, if the interviewer does not have shorthand, some form of select*e recording (probably using a great deal of individual abbreviations) is needed.
I have myself used this technique on a number of occasions in both urban and book research.
One set of interviews, with the literary editors of national newspapers, was carried out using half a dozen ‘topic headings’ simply to ensure that at each interview I covered the ground I had decided beforehand was important for my purpose.
In the interviews themselves the topics sometimes came up in different sequences according to the way that the particular interview developed.
This did not matter, since it was the topics that counted, not the order of them or the way they were introduced.
I did not use a tape recorder for these interviews, though one might have been helpful in some ways, though perhaps inhibiting to my informants in other ways.
I had blank sections under my topic headings on paper in which I wrote very brief notes  at the time and these were expanded more fully immediately after the interviews while my memory was still fresh.
It must be admitted, though, that this very informal technique does require quite a lot of work to be done both before and especially after the interview and the researcher is always in danger of forgetting to put a point forward or not being able to understand his or her own notes afterwards.
Given these ‘administrative’ problems of the informal interview, what advantages and disadvantages does it have?
One obvious advantage is that, as a social situation, the informal interview is very natural; the conversation flows much more like two people with a common interest having a talk together.
There is not the amount of direct questioning that could give an interview the air of a lawyer/witness relationship.
Informants have a great deal more liberty to range as they wish and to develop their ideas, and this ‘freedom to roam’ can be extremely useful in getting to the bottom of complex social situations and events.
Rather than just giving a ‘yes’ or ‘no’to a carefully put question from the interviewer the informant can control much more the direction of the discussion and can therefore decide what is or is not relevant to a particular situation.
This enables the interviewer to burrow much further into the complexities of some situations and may well introduce him to relevant factors which had not been thought of before at all.
When these new factors are brought out by the informant the interviewer can then follow them up in more detail by a simple prompt, such as‘Tell me more about what happened when the old vicar died and this new man came who fell out with the schoolmaster.’
Given such prompts, some informants may then go on for hours with their recollections and reminiscences.
At its most extreme limits of informality the interview could be carried out with the interviewer taking no notes or tape recording at all.
In this form the interview would be as near as possible to a personal discussion between two people with a common interest.
It is sometimes suggested that the absence of note-taking can be a help to the informant, in that it frees him from the inhibiting effects of a recorder and a notebook.
But, on the other hand, the informant who sees the interviewer making no record of what is said is just as likely to wonder why notes are not being taken.
If what he has to say is worth hearing, why isn't the interviewer recording what he says?
There is no evidence that research is at all hampered by note-taking, and many interviews of a very personal kind are carried out using tape recorders or notebooks.
Undoubtedly, then, the informal interview can produce fascinating results, and the interviewer can gain real depth of insight into what may be very complex social situations.
The disadvantages, however, stem from the limitations of this form of interview as a scientific tool.
In the informal interview it is apparent that a great deal depends on the skill of the interviewer, and perhaps two interviewers might get different responses from the same person in interviews purporting to cover the same topics.
People can relatively easily be stimulated to talk about things in a particular way.
For example, if a person is being asked about her educational background one interviewer could encourage her to talk about the criticisms she could offer of it, while another interviewer could concentrate on the benefits she received from it.
On matters where there are social inhibitions about declaring one's most personal views or experiences, such as in sexual matters, family relationships, social class, religion and perhaps politics, it is obvious that informal interviewing could result in very selective discussions taking place from which the researcher would simply produce the sort of information which suited his own bias.
It would not be difficult to conduct an informal interview with almost anyone, asking them for criticisms of the national health service, the police or the railways, all three of which confer great benefit on the population, for which they do not always receive much credit.
The informal interview, then, is open to question in a number of ways.
If others came along and interviewed the  same people on the same topics, would they get the same responses?
Has the interviewer used the framework of informality to ‘load’ the interviews in a particular way?
How can we be sure that the topics were put to a number of people in the same way; that is, were they all responding to the same stimuli?
How much of what the informants said was discarded by the interviewer because he did not find it useful — and by what criteria did he decide what was useful and what was not?
One particularly searching way of appraising informal interviews is to ask ourselves how much we accept what the interviewer tells us simply because it fits in with our own preconceptions or biases.
If we find that, on the basis of informal interview, the writer is telling us that all working-class men love their employers dearly, or that working-class girls at grammar schools have no divided loyalties, do we accept these claims or dismiss them?
The problem is obviously one of deciding how to appraise the evidence presented to us, and the difficulty of the informal interview is that it is so hard to appraise.
In many cases we are virtually being asked to accept the evidence because the writer is putting it to us in a very skilful, persuasive way.
But the good research worker is not wooed by skilled writing, by particular ideologies or by any other obvious bias, no matter how tempting they may be.
Good social researchers are sceptical (in a healthy way) and take nothing on trust.
They must be convinced by the evidence.
How, then, can the informal interview be used in sociology in an acceptable way?
Two particular functions seem to suit the informal interview.
First, it is an invaluable exploratory technique.
In the early stages of an enquiry sociologists need to find out as much as possible about the situation or group which they intend to study.
If they formulate detailed hypotheses and produce elaborate questionnaires or interview schedules without first carrying out informal interviews they may well go off in a completely fruitless direction and have only themselves to blame when they end up with several hundred completed forms, none of which have asked the  right questions about the right key factors.
Researchers are usually outsiders to the situations they study.
Straight observation, participant observation and informal interviews can all help them to gain a better insight into the chosen field of enquiry.
To neglect these techniques is to neglect the possibilities of a deeper, truer understanding of a situation.
To rush in and quantify a situation which one does not understand is wasteful of the time of both researchers and informants.
The informal interview cannot generally be used to test hypotheses very accurately, but it can be used most fruitfully to clarify them and to elaborate them.
The second role of the informal interview can be in an enquiry where the researcher is engaged in exploratory work, often of an academic type.
Here one is dealing with social situations which are relatively unexplored and where sample surveys may be quite inappropriate.
One piece of research which I contemplated some years ago, but did not actually carry out, was a comparison between people who do go to the theatre and those who do not.
Sample surveys had shown that most people who go to the theatre tend to be middle-class and well-educated, but since so few people altogether actually go to the serious theatre there must be many middle-class, well-educated people who are not theatre-goers.
How, then, do the two sorts of people differ from each other?
Do they have different sorts of values and ideas?
Do they have different social and cultural interests in other areas of life?
The list of possible differences is quite fascinating.
One could put all these postulated differences down on paper and, taking samples of the two groups, go off and interview them with all sorts of yes/no questions.
But this, I suggest, would be crude and unfruitful.
Had I gone on with this research at the depth which I had in view I would undoubtedly have used a far more informal interview and, having chosen possible points of difference, I would have introduced these in the interviews and let the informants develop the themes themselves.
Undoubtedly, some of my own ideas would have been useless and other ideas would have suggested themselves  during the interviews.
To convince the reader of my findings in any subsequent report on the study I would have had to show that the points made by my informants did produce a coherent and logical pattern.
This is not an easy concept to put over, but the analogy of the case presented in the criminal court may be used to illustrate it.
The jurymen are asked to hear the evidence and on the basis of the evidence to decide whether or not they think the prosecution have proved, beyond reasonable doubt, that Mr X was drunk in charge, or whatever the crime may be.
In the case of the evidence produced by informal interviews we, the readers, are rather in the position of hearing a case put by only one counsel and not the other.
The researcher who ‘attacks’ a social situation would be the prosecution, the researcher who ‘defends’would obviously be the defence counsel.
We, as jurymen, must listen to one set of evidence only and be prepared to do our own mental cross-examination.
Like all analogies, this one can mislead as well as help, but if we do feel that a reasonable case is being presented to us, and that the internal evidence of the research fits together coherently and comes to a result which is ‘beyond reasonable doubt’ then we may be prepared to accept this piece of research, based though it is on informal interviews.
But two other things can happen.
We may find that the writer was completely biased in his views and that he falsified his evidence, in which case he is a perjurer and we should hold him in contempt.
Second, we may find that other research refutes the findings of the first study.
In this case we must reconstitute ourselves into a court of appeal and go through all the evidence afresh.
The problems of the informal interview, then, are considerable, and they may make us feel that the formal type of interview is much less beset with difficulties and open to the criticism of lack of scientific method.
To see whether this is really so we will, in the next chapter, consider the problems which arise in the use of the formal interview.
The Sample Survey with Formal Interviews
INTRODUCTION
The term ‘formal interview’ is used here to designate a type of interview in which there is an appreciable amount of control exercised over both the presentation of the questions (stimuli) and the recording of the answers (responses).
In this method of interviewing it is likely that the hypotheses will have been clarified so that specific questions are ready for testing, and an interview schedule is to be used so that the stimulus-response situation of the interview can be standardized for a number of interviewers.
The answers received will be analysed in tabular form for statistical presentation and so categories of response must be considered at a relatively early stage.
In all, the questions will be governed much more by problems of standardization and quantification.
In doing this it is likely that much of the richness of the uncontrolled interview will be lost, but the aims of the formal interview are not richness, rather they are uniformity of question from a team of fieldworkers, and rapid quantification of answers for analysis and testing.
The two types of interview are by no means in opposition; they are different tools for different tasks.
The human element which is so much a part of the informal approach must be standardized if a team is to operate as a unit.
The individual interview situations will cease to be case studies and will become units of a sample.
It should be noted before going any further that for a sample survey to be of any value at all the sampling procedure must be open to scrutiny and stand up to criticism.
We shall, therefore, now briefly consider some of the basic issues involved in sampling for social surveys before considering the interview schedules used in them.
SAMPLING
If we want to collect information about some aspect or aspects of a large group (whether the group is made up of people or things) the obvious approach would appear to be a survey of all of them.
But in many real-life situations it is not possible to collect information about every case — or the whole ‘population’, as we call it.
For example, a manufacturer of upholstery fabric may want to know how well his cloth wears, so he gives a certain piece of the cloth a standardized ‘rubbing’ test to see how many rubs it can stand before wearing through.
If the  manufacturer did this test on every yard of cloth he made he would be left with only worn-out cloth for sale.
A wholesale buyer of women's underwear for a large store could not hope to inspect every single item she intends buying; what she usually does is to inspect a sample of goods and to base her decision on this.
Conversely, the stallholder in the fruit and vegetable market who puts all his best tomatoes at the front of the pile and then fills the customer's bag with soft squelchy ones from the back is deliberately showing the purchaser a false sample.
 Practically every day in one way or another we carry out some form of sampling for ourselves in our ordinary daily round.
We may find ourselves disagreeing with other people on the basis of sampling; one man may claim that a shirt he bought from a well-known manufacturer wore out in no time at all, whereas his friend says he always buys this make because they wear so well.
Probably the first person got an unfortunate sample.
We may generalize from very limited  samples: for example we may say, echoing the words of Michael Flanders' and Donald Swann's lovely song of patriotic prejudice that the Irishman ‘sleeps in his boots and lies in his teeth’, that the Welshman is ‘dishonest, little and dark — more like monkey than man’ or that the Scotsman is ‘mean, bony, blotchy and covered with hair’.
But such generalizations as these, while perhaps being applicable to a few individuals of each country, can reasonably be said to be prejudiced statements based on inadequate sampling.
Today, the importance of good sampling becomes more important as more and more surveys are carried out on sample bases.
Sampling saves time, labour and, therefore, money and by reducing the numbers of cases involved it allows for a concentration of effort on high quality information about the smaller number of cases involved.
But it must be recognized at the outset that as soon as sampling is carried out the statements made about the cases involved become probability statements.
Sampling must mean abandoning certainty for probability, but this is not any great problem if sampling is correctly carried out, since the margins of probable error can be calculated in many instances.
AVOIDING BIAS BY RANDOM SAMPLING
Bias is a problem in all aspects of social research and no more important a case of bias problems can be found than in sampling.
Most samples are based on the concept of ‘random sampling’, so it is important to understand what is meant by the word ‘random’.
Yule and Kendall say that ‘the selection of an individual from a population is random when each member of the population has the same chance of being chosen.’
This is a useful definition because it stresses the basic point of everyone (or everything) having the same chance.
One can see from this that random sampling is not at all the same as what we might call ‘personal choice’.
If I were to ask a school-teacher to choose for me a sample  which she considered to be a fair cross-section of her pupils so that I could interview them for a survey, there would almost certainly be a personal bias in the sample given to me.
I might well never find out where it was, but it would certainly contain some pupils whom the teacher had chosen because she thought they were bright and co-operative and others would almost certainly have been excluded because of their uncooperativeness or lower intelligence.
Selection of this sort raises all kinds of problems of the sample being consciously or unconsciously affected by the selector's personal biases.
A further problem of bias comes when the total group (or ‘sample frame’) from which the sample is taken is inadequate.
A simple example may be used here.
Suppose one wants to take a sample of full-time students of a university.
Whatever actual technique we use for taking the sample the key thing is that everyone should be ‘on the list’ in the first place.
If a faculty, or department, or a certain special group of students is missed out then the sample itself has not been drawn from the correct population.
This could happen, for instance, if one were using faculty lists of students as the sample frame and there were certain students in special departments who were not in any faculty.
Students away from the university, say on a sandwich course or having a year abroad, might or might not be included in lists one used.
Suppose, though, that we wanted a sample of a rather more difficult group.
It is very difficult to sample young people in the general population, since there is no list of them anywhere.
For adults over the age of 18 the electoral roll is the normal sample frame, but even this is far from perfect since it is compiled only once each year and many people fail to fill in the necessary forms while others may change address shortly after registering.
For young people under 18 the problem is tremendous, since to compile a list of such people would require a complete canvas of an area simply asking at every house for details of the under-18s.
In Schofield's pioneering study of the sexual behaviour of  young people he was primarily interested in those between 15 and 19 years of age and he faced this very problem.
In one area he was fortunate enough to gain access to doctors' lists, which contain the names of most of the population since nearly everyone of every age is registered with a general practitioner.
But this list was denied  him in other areas and he then used school lists, projecting forward for the people who had left school; but this had many errors and losses, with people moving home.
In another area he did actually get a market research firm's fieldworkers to go round all the houses asking for young men and women in the age group, and while this appeared to give a reasonably accurate sample frame it was also very expensive.
Market research companies will, of course, undertake to survey special groups of almost any kind, but the costs of finding, for example , people who have recently bought double-glazing or read romantic novels can be very high.
This point leads on to a further problem in sampling — which is non-response.
Sampling from out-of-date lists results in large numbers of people who cannot be found.
Questionnaires sent by post are not returned and interviews are refused.
All these factors reduce the response rate, no matter how good the original sample may have been, so that what may have been a reasonable one-in-five sample to begin with ends up as nearer one-in-ten actually obtained, because of losses.
Here the great problem is to try to decide if the non-respondents differ in any way from the respondents and of course in most cases they obviously do in not being interested in the subject of the survey itself.
In all these ways, then, sampling has its problems and bias must be guarded against at every step.
Some ways of sampling will now be considered.
Steps in sampling
Let us begin by considering how we might obtain a random sample; that is, one in which each member of the population  has the same chance of being chosen.
Probably we have in our mind's eye something in the nature of a raffle as being a form of random sampling, and we are right in thinking of this as one method.
The raffle or lottery is a form of random sample — in its simplest form the identical little numbered tickets are shaken up in a hat and drawn out one by one by someone with their eyes closed.
In the case of the ‘draw’ for the Football Association Cup numbered balls are drawn from a bag and each number indicates a club.
At a more sophisticated level the British premium bond machine ERNIE (electronic random number indicator equipment) is a raffle on a large scale.
The ERNIE machine is a modern computerized form of sampling by ‘random numbers’ which has been used for many years in research.
In the original method the total units were given numbers from 1 upwards and the sample taken by means of tables of random numbers which could be bought.
For instance, suppose we want to take a random sample of ten students from a class of 50.
We could, as in a lottery, put each name on a piece of card, all cards being identical, put them into a hat, shake well and take out ten cards.
By using random numbers we could do the job almost the other way round, by using a list of numbers already randomized for us.
This way we would give each student on our list a two-digit number, from 01 to 50, and then run through a page of random numbers, using them in two-digit sets, until we had got ten within the range of 01 to 50.
In the table below we would, working downwards, get the numbers 29, 41, 23, 5, 27, 7, 25, 35, 3, and 8. 2952 9792 7979 7002 8126 4167 2762 7203 5911 6111 2370 6107 3563 5356 3170 0560 9025 6008 1089 1300 (The above twenty sets of four digits are taken from L. H. C. Tippett's Random Sampling Numbers which gives a further 10.380 sets.)
It can be seen that a long list of students (or any other units) could be used for a random sample by this means simply by numbering from beginning to end, and this could be done with an automatic increasing numbering stamp.
The rule is simply that one uses as many digits as are in the final number (three digits if in hundreds, four if in thousands, and so on) and then uses the random numbers in appropriate sets.
Since books of random numbers contain thousands of sets of figures and one can work up, down, or across, since all is random, there is no problem of running short of numbers.
It may seem that the above methods are too time-consuming when one could just as well take every nth name from the list for one's sample.
In the case of the ten out of 50 students, why not just think of a number from one to ten and then take every tenth name from there on?
This is what Moser calls ‘quasi-random’ sampling in that it is almost but not quite random.
The main reason why it is not completely random is that one cannot be sure in every list that the n th name does not have some significance.
It could be, for instance, that every tenth house in a street coincides with a building plan which has larger houses at intervals and these are over-sampled.
It might be that in a list of names every tenth name is the leader of a section of ten people; to sample by every tenth would then result in either a sample of nothing but leaders or a sample with no leaders at all.
The point is that regular-interval sampling makes every case dependent upon the first choice and so each individual unit does not have the same chance of being sampled.
It may also be noted that if this method is employed then the first number chosen should be by random means rather than just ‘saying a number between 1 and 10’ since it is well known that choices between these limits do not come out anything like randomly — the number 7 being particularly popular.
So far we have considered three ways of sampling directly from a given population, but it may be thought that this direct method has dangers attached.
After all, if we want a representative sample of university students we may already  know how they are distributed between departments or faculties and random methods, being based on chance, might now and then produce samples heavily biased towards one faculty.
Our supposed sample of university students might, just by chance, turn out to be nearly all from the faculty of law, which may be only a very small faculty.
To safeguard against this sort of distortion, yet without basically interfering with our random system, we can build in a sort of screening device which is called stratification.
Stratification
With many populations we are already aware that the units fall into sub-groups of which we would wish to take account in any sampling.
For example, in our group of students we would almost certainly know what sex they were, and we may feel that our sample of 1 in 5 should reflect this fact.
Put in the very simplest way then, suppose the group was 30 males and 20 females, our stratified sample would be 6 males and 4 females.
We would take 6 men at random from the 30 men, and 4 women at random from the 20 women.
Stratification safeguards the representativeness of the sample by ensuring that the known groups in the population are represented fairly in the sample.
This is not a departure from random methods since these are used within the strata; it is simply a job done beforehand as a precaution against freak random results if the distribution of the special factors in the population is accurately known beforehand.
It can be seen that comparisons between the sub-groups are made much easier if they have been sampled in this way; there is no problem of having to cope with a preponderance of one group and a dearth of another if stratification has taken place beforehand.
Multi-stage sampling
There is a further way of sampling, using a certain amount of ordering of the units before sampling takes place.
Multi-  stage sampling can be used when the population is made up of a number of sub-units.
Perhaps a military rather than an educational example is the simplest to use here.
One may think of an army brigade as being composed of battalions, battalions made up of companies and companies made up of platoons.
If one wanted to take a sample of soldiers in a particular brigade simple random sampling could mean finding a large number of individual soldiers randomly across their various units.
Multi-stage sampling helps to concentrate the work on a limited number of groups by sampling groups first before the individuals are reached.
Thus, one could take a random sample of the battalions first and then on through the companies and platoons until the actual individual soldiers were sampled only from a limited number of platoons instead of from the whole brigade.
It is important to note that a presupposition of this sort of sampling is that each stage is composed of similar sub-units so that sampling at each stage will not result in unrepresentative samples.
This presupposes a homogeneity of units which cannot always be supported in fact, but the individual investigator must take decisions on this problem in each case as it arises.
Cluster sampling
A further way of reducing the spread of sampling is to use what is called cluster sampling, a device by which sub-units are grouped together and work concentrated on them.
A simple example in the case of the university student population would be to take the faculties of the university (let us say there are then, just for example) and take a sample of two of them.
These two faculties, randomly chosen, would then be used for the sample with perhaps all the students, or a high proportion of them, being the sample.
One can see at once the problem here is whether the faculties of, say, medicine and engineering are a good cross-section of the university.
For some purposes they might be, for others  (particularly in their general lack of women students) they could be quite misleading.
But cluster sampling does have value when distance may provide real obstacles to conducting enquiries.
So a survey of an area such as a city might raise genuine problems of getting about to see people, and cluster sampling might sample a number of polling districts and concentrate the interviews in them to the complete exclusion of all the other polling districts.
The great danger of cluster sampling is that one must be able to take the clusters together as a total unit if they are to be used for anything more than just cluster comparisons.
It is very difficult at times to say whether the clusters do really add up to a representation of the whole.
One can see that cluster sampling of a city's schools might result in a complete set of working-class schools with no middle-class ones at all; or even completely middle-with no working-class.
If there is prior knowledge of such problems selection along stratification lines is probably preferable.
Quota sampling
This type of sampling has given rise to quite a lot of criticism when used for political poll surveys.
As can be imagined, trying to obtain reasonable samples of the general population for relatively short interviews on such topics as voting behaviour or food preferences can result in a lot of interviewers having to call at a lot of houses over all towns and cities in the country.
How much simpler to station an interviewer at a busy part of a town and have her interview people who are passing by.
But obviously we know that interviewers simply given the task of producing say 20 interviews might choose only women of a fairly young age-group and we know this is not representative of the population.
So we can actually lay down certain guidelines, rather like stratified samples, telling the interviewers that so many interviews should be with men and so many with women, so many in certain age-groups and perhaps so many in certain pre-determined socio-economic  groups.
Since the sex, age and social class distributions for the general population are known it is not difficult to parcel out the interviewers' tasks according to these criteria.
So each interviewer goes out hunting for informants who fit into the right boxes — or quotas.
These quota controls, as they are called, can be independent or interrelated.
In the former case the interviewer may have to find 10 men and 10 women, and these 20 must be composed of 6 under 30, 7 between 30 and 55 and 7 over 55.
But sex and age controls do not operate together on any one interview.
So long as the 20 completed interviews fit these two controls all is well.
But if the controls are interrelated then the 20 cases will be divided into 10 men and 10 women and for each sex the age groups will be specified.
In this way the interviewer knows she must include, say, three women over 55.
If a further control, such as social class, is added then interrelated controls can make the specifications very limited — the interviewer having to find two women aged 30 to 55, of lower middle-class — towards the quota of 20. obviously, independent controls make life easier for interviewers, and interrelated controls make for more definitely representative samples.
Quota sampling has the  attraction of being easier, quicker and cheaper than actual house-to-house calls but there are distinct limitations which reduce its value.
One snag is that some statistical tests, especially calculations of sample error, cannot be made on quota sampling because they are not based on random sampling.
Further problems are particularly human ones which result in interviewers ‘bending’ information so as to fill quotas.
Interviewers cannot be sure of people's age or social class before an interview is begun and so one can see the temptation of putting a woman down as under 35 if that is just what you need at the end of a hard day when the woman turns out in fact to be 38.
A further problem of the street quota system is that people on the busiest streets are not always a good sample of the general population.
Bus drivers and conductors resting between journeys are an  obvious target for quota samples and are commonly overrepresented as an occupation in such samples.
Panels
Rather than having to go out to find people and ask them to be interviewed or to complete questionnaires, it may seem very attractive to have them safely on a panel where they can be used when needed.
Where information, particularly of a detailed nature, is to be collected over a period of time the panel has clear attractions.
Both market research and government survey units use consumer panels of housewives for budget enquiries, finding out what the housewife spends on what over a given period by means of a diary of spending.
Usually panel members of this sort are paid a certain sum of money for their trouble, but not enough to affect their standard of living and relevant purchases.
The panel system is also used by audience research for their reactions to radio and television programmes.
People are recruited for listening and viewing panels in the various regions and are stratified according to certain known characteristics such as sex, age and social class.
The panel members then receive regular questionnaires asking for their opinions of selected programmes over the past week.
These panels are likely to suffer from what has been called ‘duty’ listening or viewing in which a person feels he or she ought to, say, watch a television programme because there is a questionnaire for it, even though it is not a programme that person would ordinarily view at all.
Here one problem of panels becomes clear: with all the best intentions, panel members may be considered to be specially interested in volunteering for, or accepting an invitation to join, a certain panel, and after a time the panel member can become rather too self-conscious and sophisticated.
So it is necessary to change panel membership to stop conditioning from becoming too strong and this can add greatly to the cost of operating the panel.
Nevertheless, with all their drawbacks, panels are interesting ways of  collecting information and it is rather surprising that they have not been used more in academic research where ideas rather than pin-point accuracy of measurement may be the desired goal.
Focus groups
These groups are known by a variety of names, but the central idea is to bring together a small number of people who have certain interests or characteristics in common and to interview them as a group.
Thus, for example, if one wanted to study the reactions of women readers of romantic novels to a change in the cover design of a series of books, a group of, say, eight women of varying ages and social classes could be got together either in a house or in a discussion room at a research agency and a trained discussion leader would ask questions of them about their reading interests and, generally speaking, what they expect romantic novels to look like.
The participants clearly are selected , they cannot be random, and they must have some knowledge of the topic to be discussed.
With a really good discussion leader the various members will all be drawn into the exchange of views and members can thus stimulate each other in a way that does not happen in individual interviews.
However, it must be remembered that these groups work best at the initial stages of research when concepts still have to be clarified; they can never replace a properly constituted sample.
The danger is that sometimes people who observe focus groups or read the reports on their discussions fall into the trap of saying that ‘the majority’ of members favoured a certain viewpoint, when this simply means five out of eight selected individuals.
A focus group would be a most interesting way of beginning work on the previously noted research into why some people do and why some people do not go to the theatre, but the results of such discussion would be hypothesis-provoking only, not in any way hypothesis-testing.
Sampling in general What has been said above about sampling can only hope to be the very lightest of scratches on the surface of what is a vast subject in itself.
All that is intended here is that the would-be surveyor and sampler has some indication of the possibilities open in sampling methods and also a warning of the problems which sampling entails.
There are a number of good books on sampling, some of them now particularly aimed at the social scientist, but even the best of books can only deal with problems in fairly general terms.
Every survey which involves sampling has its own problems and the social researcher who can call on a statistician for advice should never fail to do so.
There is nothing which can be guaranteed to alienate the affections of a statistician more than the surveyor who goes for advice after he has made a mess of sampling and needs someone to get him out of the mess.
THE INTERVIEW SCHEDULE
We now turn to consider what is involved in using the formal interview schedule for a properly constituted sample survey.
After initial observations, perhaps participant observation, perhaps the use of focus groups and so on, the researcher worker may well end up carrying out a full social survey of a systematic kind.
If the sampling procedure is all right, representative people from the sample will each be given standardized stimuli (questions) and their responses (answers) will be recorded in a pre-arranged manner.
This means that the interview schedule itself has the function of a standardizing instrument.
If the responses are to be analysed without a great deal of trouble it is probable that the likely answers have been thought of beforehand and that certain likely response categories are already incorporated in the schedule itself.
Since the many responses will be presented in a statistical way (that is in tabular form) the well-designed schedule  will be drafted with an eye to the presentation of the results in a clear and simple fashion.
Very often one sees schedules which have never been taken beyond the question-asking stage and one wonders what terrible time and effort must be expended on forcing all sorts of answers into categories later on, especially when electronic means of analysis, such as computers, are to be used.
The interview schedule, then, is essentially an intermediate stage in research, and it fulfils a variety of functions.
It enables a team of interviewers to give the same informants in the same predetermined order, and to record their responses in a standardized way.
This also means that the interviewers are relieved of the problem of having to remember what questions are to be asked and, even more, the interviewer is relieved of having to enter the responses after the interview has ended, as in the case when no notes are taken, or only sketchy abbreviations of replies are made during the interview.
The well drafted schedule only requires checking afterwards, it does not require another couple of hours' work trying to remember what people said or what one's own peculiar hieroglyphics made during the interview were meant to convey.
In many cases the most probable answers can be set down in advance and this helps enormously towards analysis.
One good way of judging a well-planned interview schedule of the formal type is to ask ‘Could this schedule be handed over to someone else for analysis without them having to go back to the interviewer to ask what certain answers mean?’
If the answer is ‘no’ then there must be ambiguities or inaccuracies in the recording of responses.
In large-scale national surveys, as carried out regularly by market research firms and government agencies, interviews may be carried out over the whole country and the people who have the task of making the analysis of several hundred or thousand schedules cannot possibly be for ever phoning through to the interviewers to ask what some cryptic little scribble opposite question number 15 is supposed to mean.
Of course, not all the information written on Interview  schedules will be by means of completely pre-determined answer categories.
In some cases what are called open-ended questions will be asked and a verbatim reply may be recorded (if possible).
But in many cases of recording factual information, opinions, attitudes and even physical characteristics (such as domestic facilities within a house), work done by the schedule designer before the questions are asked, or the observations made, can be repaid a dozen times over by the ease with which subsequent analysis can then be carried out.
From what has been said so far it is obvious that good interview schedules are important tools for the fieldworker.
Many scientists spend weeks, or even months, in the construction of their own particular research apparatus.
If the sociologist regards the interview schedule (and, as we shall discuss later, the questionnaire) in this way then he will not rush blithely into the field with a schedule which is the product of just a few hours' odd jottings on rough paper.
The design of schedules
In a book which was actually about statistics, A. L. Bowley once established four rules to guide designers of schedules and questionnaires.3 They are given below as a starting point for our discussions.
Bowley suggested that one should:
1
Ask for the minimum of information required.
2
Make sure that questions can be answered.
3
Make sure that questions will be answered truthfully.
4
Make sure that questions will be answered and not refused.
Point 1 made by Bowley is a more general and fundamental one than the other three and deserves special comment; it might be called the principle of parsimony.
In many cases information can be gained from sources other than interviews.
For example, in a closed institution, such as a factory, a school or a prison, the records will give a great deal of  information about people who may be included in a survey.
Why waste everyone's time asking questions which need not be asked when the information is already there?
But also, the principle of parsimony should be used to keep the research down to essentials.
There are always any number of questions which could be asked in a survey because they seem ‘interesting’; but interest is not enough.
A question, to be included, should be relevant to the problem being studied.
If it is not relevant then it does not matter how ‘interesting’ it may be.
This means that the schedule designer must always be asking himself why questions are being included in his schedule.
If he can only argue to himself that they seem’ interesting' it is highly likely that he does not really know why he is putting them in, or what he will do with the answers when he gets them.
Like Mr Micawber, he is hoping that ‘something will turn up’, and this is not the best way to run social surveys.
Unfortunately in some ways, computers are capable of analysing and cross-tabulating vast amounts of data very quickly and this apparent ease of analysis seems to lead some people to extend their data collection.
What must be remembered though is that whatever is asked and answered in a survey has to be inputted in some way and once it has been processed the output has to be read by someone.
It is not therefore surprising that computing laboratories in universities put limits on the amount of output that users can expect in a given period of time.
Self-indulgence, simply because facilities are there to be used, is a poor substitute for prior thought and it is amazing how much paper a few cross-tabulations can use up.
Bowley's other three points can be taken together since they cover various facets of the same main point — the questions themselves.
To ask questions to which people cannot give answers is a waste of time for everyone — but one does, from time to time, come across schedules which include questions which require such feats of memory or such difficult calculations that no reasonable person can be expected to give an answer.
To ask an ordinary person how  many times they have visited the cinema during the past year is probably unfair for all except a small number who can quickly say ‘never’ or else ‘regularly once a week without fail’.
For other people it is probably impossible.
To receive truthful answers from respondents is an expectation upon which all interviews are based.
But truthfulness cannot be assumed in every instance.
The very fact of suggesting things to people tends to result in inaccuracies.
One market research survey into the purchase of a particular brand of ready-mix pudding named the article and asked housewives how often they bought it.
The results totalled four times the actual sales over the period.
In other cases we must be careful that questions will not result in refusals to answer.
If this does happen the interviewer will have a rather embarrassing situation to overcome before going any further.
Actual refusals to answer questions are always, in practice, fewer than might be expected.
Surveys have been carried out quite successfully on such highly personal subjects as sexual behaviour and venereal diseases.
Of course, some people will refuse to co-operate at all , but once an interview is under way most people will be prepared to answer questions so long as they seem genuine and relevant.
But a survey on, let us say, political questions, which suddenly came up with questions about husband-wife relations, would almost certainly result in the questions being queried at the very least.
It might be that the survey was aimed at testing a hypothesis that happily-married couples tend to vote more conservatively, while unhappily married couples vote more radically, but if this was not apparent to the informant the questions on marital relations would probably seem irrelevant and impertinent.
All in all, then, the interview schedule must aim to ask a minimum of questions which can and will be answered.
To do this it is best to work towards the final schedule in a systematic way.
Firstly, the basic hypotheses to be tested must be quite clear and these will immediately suggest the topics to be covered.
These need not be anything more than the rough headings under which the detailed questions will fall.
Once  the topics are agreed, questions will be asked which will fill in the finer points of the hypotheses.
It is almost certain that classificatory data on informants (e.g. sex, age, marital status, social class) will be relevant to subsequent analyses.
The questions can be listed in rough under the headings (some people put each question on a card to begin with) and then they can be moved about so as to produce what seems to be a good ‘flow’ for the interview.
When this first draft has been done the researcher has something which can be worked on.
If one knows why one is asking questions one will be able to see how one will produce the answers to the questions from the survey replies.
Dummy blank tables can thus be drawn up before a single interview has even been carried out.
The criterion of relevance is here quite crucial.
Given that this work has been done, the draft schedule can then be examined in the closest detail — and probably torn to shreds.
Points of detail on schedule design
The questions that one asks in a survey must be derived from the object of the research itself: the schedule is only a tool for obtaining information.
So there is no real point in framing questions before the broader areas of enquiry (the topics) have been decided on.
Once the topics have been decided upon the questions will have a framework to fit into.
For example, in a survey I carried out on the membership of the National Trust — one of the largest voluntary associations in Britain with over a million and a quarter members — it was decided that topics should include such things as how people came to join, how they felt about the payment of subscriptions, how much they read of the literature the Trust sent them, what their main interests in conservation were, how active a part they wanted to play in the work of the Trust, and so on .
Once the topics had been set out in an order which would make sense to the recipients (in this case of a postal questionnaire) then the questions could be worked out.
When one is asking questions, however, one must never forget that the answers come from the respondents, so one must always be thinking about those respondents.
Will they answer?
Can they answer?
Will they understand the point of this question?
It is a very common feature in the first questions drafted by students in schedule designing to ask questions which patently have not been thought about from the respondents' point of view.
The schedule designer must for every be putting himself or herself into the respondents' shoes and trying to imagine what it would be like to be asked this question by a stranger who just turned up a few minutes ago out of the blue.
It is natural for a person who has been working towards a survey for several months to overlook the fact that the respondent has never heard of this wonderful enquiry and may be utterly baffled by it; but in this lies a great danger of asking poor questions, insufficiently considered from the respondents' viewpoint.
Many examples can be given of the pitfalls of question designing.
One may use the term ‘marital status’ for analysis purposes, but to ask someone, ‘What is your marital status?’ might result in some peculiar answers.
Precision is often needed if respondents are not to be confused; to ask a person about his or her ‘family’ could mean to a single man his parents and siblings, but to a married man his wife and children.
In a survey of student activities one almost insuperable problem was to try to find out how many hours a week various sorts of students spent on ‘practical work’.
This term meant so many different things to different people that the results were almost impossible to classify.
Technical words and jargon words are always potential dangers, but ambiguities in questions are probably even more dangerous.
There is a story of a market research interviewer who was questioning a person about ready-sliced cheese.
The informant was asked when she last ate a cheese slice and then the question was put ‘And what did you have it on?’
Back came the answer, ‘The settee’.
We will discuss problems such as these in chapter 8 by  using an actual schedule which incorporates examples of mistakes, but before doing this we must also consider the problems which arise from lack of understanding of the question.
In a survey on shopping which I made a few years ago one of my student interviewers was questioning an old lady about the grocer's shop she used.
The survey was a comparison between self-service and counter-service grocers and the student was puzzled that the old lady claimed to shop at a counter-service yet all her answers suggested that she used a self-service shop.
In the end the student asked the lady if she really did mean that her grocer was a counter-service shop and the old lady replied, ‘Oh yes, it's counter-service all right.
All the things are out on counters and you go round helping yourself.’
Fortunately this was in a pilot survey and the warning was heeded in the survey proper.
One difficulty about questioning is that of leading the respondent towards a particular response.
If people are asked ‘Would you like…’, there is a good chance that they will say ‘yes’.
Although the question may seem clumsier for it, it is absolutely necessary to give a genuine choice, and even though it may sound stilted to ask, ‘Do you approve or disapprove of…’, at least this presents a fair choice.
For examples of carefully worded questions in public opinion polls it is worth looking at the newspapers to see how very carefully the professional market research firms word their questions when they are asking ordinary people for their current political views.
The phraseology may at times seem a little stilted but this is necessary to avoid misleading people.
A further regular pitfall in framing questions is the double question.
This is very often to be spotted by the word ‘and’ linking two separate items.
For example the question ‘Would you like to become a doctor and work in a hospital?’ is a double question because the respondent might like to become a doctor, but not work in a hospital.
This is an obvious example, but more subtle ones crop up frequently and they indicate that the designer has thought only of asking the question, not of trying to answer it.
A great deal of faulty question phrasing stems from survey workers being over-involved in their own ideas.
Often the survey is to be conducted after months of work on a theme, and by this time the researcher has become immersed in the work and tends to forget that other people do not have the same interest or knowledge.
For reasons such as this it is important to ensure that the ‘final edition’ of the interview schedule has been adequately gone over and tried out before it is used in the full-scale field survey.
I suggest  that there are a number of steps which should be gone through towards this end.
Testing of interview schedules
The important fact about a field survey is that it is a once-and-for-all operation which cannot be repeated.
It is no use realizing at the analysis stage that question 3 is ambiguous and all the respondents should be asked it again in a different way.
I doubt if any survey has ever been carried out without the researcher having some regrets at the analysis stage about some questions which could have been phrased better, but the good researcher makes sure in advance that these regrets are as few as possible.
I suggest that the regrets can be kept to a minimum by using the following steps:
1
pre-pilot open interviews;
2
roughing-out questions and layout;
3
internal testing;
4
pilot survey;
5
survey proper.
These five steps are a counsel of perfection, but most surveys can include them to some degree.
The pre-pilot open interviews will be conducted with a small sub-sample of the population concerned and will, in the earliest stages, be as much hypothesis-seeking as anything else.
But this stage is vitally important for the researcher to get the feel of the  situation.
In many instances of social research the research workers are going to survey a group of people who are quite different from themselves.
They may be working among old people, or schoolchildren, or even convicts.
To start framing questions without first having talked to some of the people concerned about one's ideas would be ludicrous.
Having carried out such interviews (and no set limit to them can be laid down) researchers may then make a start on their topic headings and detailed questions.
It is virtually certain that they will require details of the personal characteristics of the informants, in many cases such facts as sex, age, marital status, social class, educational level, and so on.
These details are often called ‘classificatory data’ since they are frequently used for the classification of other questions.
For example, distinctions often need to be made between the opinions of men and women, single people and married people, young people and old people.
Classificatory data provide one side of the subsequent table for analysis purposes.
Even at an early stage in the enquiry it may well be possible to decide what actual classifications will be used for these data.
Male and female classification is simple.
‘Single’, ‘married’, ‘widowed’ and ‘any other’will probably suffice for marital status unless the survey is particularly concerned with divorced or legally separated people.
Social class may well be based on the occupation of the male head of the household according to a pre-determined scale, such as, in Britain, that of the Registrar general, or the Market Research Society.
There may be problems of deciding the social class of married women, but these will have to be settled at some time.
Educational level will probably be analysed by the last educational institution attended full-time in some hierarchical fashion, or by the actual educational attainments of the informant.
Age may be classified according to any set of categories deemed useful for the purpose in hand.
Obviously, five-year categories will be more discriminating, but they may be unnecessarily small grades.
A ten-year age-group is more  likely to be useful, but the actual category limits should be carefully thought about.
It may be attractive to use 20–29 as a category, but if there is any importance in the study attached to distinguishing between adults and minors obviously 18 must be a cut-off point.
There might be more advantage in making the categories run mid-way across the ten-year groups, giving 25–34 as a group if it is felt that some significant changes take place in people's lives in their mid-thirties, or at other points in the mid-sections of the decades.
This classification certainly helps by creating a category beginning at 65, the usual age of retirement for men.
Obviously all age-groups are arbitrary; the point being made here is that the actual divisions used should be chosen for their usefulness in classifying people for the purposes of the research being undertaken, and this decision should be considered at an early stage.
The topics themselves will probably be reasonably apparent after the pre-pilot interview stage and two decisions need to be made at the layout stage.
First, what order should the topics be in, and second, what questions should be asked under each topic heading?
Let us suppose that the survey is concerned with leisure activities and is a comparison between social classes.
Obviously the classificatory data will give special attention to the factor of social class and also to such important variables as age, sex, marital status, and so on.
The topic headings might then discriminate between leisure activities within the home — individual and collective; leisure activities outside the home — organized and unorganized; and use of commercial leisure facilities.
These five possible areas of leisure activities are only illustrative for the particular methodological problem here being discussed; they are not in fact derived from any research, but they will suffice to show that the researcher should now be thinking in what order they might be placed so as to g*e a sensible progression in an interview.
It might well be that the researcher decided to start inside the home with individual activities, and lead on to collective ones.
Then he or she might move to outside the  home, taking unorganized ones before organized ones, and then conclude with commercial leisure.
The point here is that the order of topics would then, we hope, seem sensible to the informant .
It is very important indeed that the informant be considered at the earliest possible stage since he or she will be doing the work of supplying answers to the questions and a good ‘flow’ in the interview will help greatly in establishing and maintaining interest and rapport.
The questions themselves can then be fitted in under the topic headings decided upon.
Some people like to use a card for each question at this stage so that it is simple to move questions about as it seems desirable to order and re-order them in the best sequence.
At this stage the actual response categories may not have been considered in detail, but if the questions themselves justify inclusion some thought should have been given to the response categories envisaged for analysis since it is the answers which will be analysed.
Nevertheless, the questions themselves, at this stage, will be the main focus, and also at this stage we might allow more questions to be included than are likely to be used at the final stage.
When they are all put together under topic headings the full interview schedule will then tell us how long the interview is likely to take and if it is much too long some pruning can be undertaken at once.
The writing stage, when topics and questions are actually put down, can be quite a salutary experience.
What seemed to be a simple matter when merely held as a mental question, verbally unframed and with no thought given to response, appears as a simply impossible problem when it has actually to be put down on paper.
We may, for example, think to ourselves that it would be very useful to ask a housewife if she works outside the house at all , and this sounds easy enough in our heads.
But as soon as we have to commit this question to paper we discover (or we certainly should discover) that this is a difficult question to ask with absolute clarity.
There seems to be no end to the possible replies we could receive and the job of categorizing them seems a nightmare.
At this stage we are only roughing-out our interview schedule, but the more attention we can give to detail now the more we are likely to be saving ourselves trouble later on.
Decisions to postpone the actual wording or analysis categories can often be rationalized as being safeguards against too rigid a mental outlook on what may be a very exploratory field of research.
But there are numerous instances which come to my mind of research in which all the problems of analysis were left until the survey had been done and then anything up to, or even over, a year was needed to sort out the tangled mass of answers to vague questions.
Much of this sort of work is unnecessary if forethought is used at the planning stage.
When a draft schedule has been produced the next stage is what I have referred to previously as ‘internal testing’.
This means trying the schedule out,not on a sample of people for whom it is intended in its final version, but on people who may well be one's colleagues at work; that is, people who are likely to know something about survey work itself and schedule design.
The point of this stage is that it is cheap and easy, and does not necessitate going outside the building.
But the results can be absolutely invaluable if one's colleagues look over the draft and, with no holds barred, pick on every doubtful point.
I recall some years ago that a young postgraduate student who was designing a schedule containing a lot of attitude questions had his schedule internally tested at this stage by a number of people and practically every question he had put was a double one.
Had he gone out with the schedule the results would have been chaotic, yet he himself had not seen these double questions until they were pointed out to him at the internal testing stage.
Probably the most valuable thing about this stage is that the schedule compiler gets a sort of ‘consumers’ view' for the first time.
A commonplace fault among schedule designers, as mentioned earlier, is not thinking enough about what it is like to be on the receiving end of the questions.
If one is brave enough to try the draft out on critical, expert  colleagues, one can be reasonably sure that what emerges at the end will be free of double questions, ambiguities, leading questions, and so on, and the helpful colleagues, in pretending to be informants, will also probably have thought up some difficult-to-classify answers too.
All in all, this is a valuable stage which researchers who do not accept criticism very easily will probably wish to avoid, but if they do consciously and deliberately avoid it, they have only themselves to blame for not taking advantage of a most useful and quite inexpensive step in schedule preparation.
After the mauling received from his dear colleagues, the designer eventually produces what he hopes will be a document which meets the internal criticisms.
It next goes to a small sample of the real consumers for testing.
This is the ‘dress rehearsal’ or pilot stage.
Views on the function of the pilot stage vary among research workers, but I view the pilot stage as being the last one before the actual survey itself and therefore the stage where, as far as possible, the interview schedule is as near to its final form in both questions and answer categories as it can be.
I see little value in the interview schedule going into the field to a small sub-sample of respondents if the designer knows in advance that there is a lot of work still to be done.
If this work is apparent it seems only sensible to do it and then try out as good a schedule as one can produce on the real people.
After all, the survey will have to be done at some stage and it is only going to be helpful to carry out a pilot if it tells the designer something he did not know.
There is little to be gained in trying out something which one already knows to be inadequate.
In my view the importance of the pilot stage is that it confronts the perhaps over-sophisticated schedule with down-to-earth respondents.
By this I mean that both the designer and colleagues may be too expert, too sophisticated, too used to jargon, too well-educated and able to verbalize.
And, in addition, they will all understand the purpose of the survey.
The respondents, in a normal population, will contain much larger numbers of unsophisticated, poorly educated, inarticulate and non-jargon-using people whose task it will be to try to answer questions, some of which may be quite baffling to them.
The pilot survey should be the crucial stage at which the surveyor is forced to come down from the ivory tower and communicate with the respondents.
It is at the pilot stage that ‘stuffiness’ in the wording of questions becomes very apparent.
Questions may look all right on paper simply because we accept a more formal style in writing than we do in speech, but they may sound absolutely frightful when put into speech.
A simple example will suffice: many people when writing use the word ‘commence’ rather than‘begin’.
In a written question it would be possible to ask, ‘In what year did you commence secondary education?’
Just try saying that sentence out loud and see how pompous and unnatural it sounds.
A further small point: we may have been taught at school to avoid ending written sentences with a preposition, but the above sentence, apart from replacing ‘commence’ by ‘begin’,sounds more natural if we do in fact end it with the preposition.
Try saying out loud, ‘what year did you begin your secondary education in?’
This, surely, is much more like what we really would say in a normal conversation.
One further point about the pilot stage is its value in helping in problems of analysis.
The response categories are just as important as the questions at this stage, and even a relatively small number of real life responses can help in re-drafting response categories.
We may find that a particular reply which we had expected to be only given very occasionally looks as if it might well be much more prevalent than we had expected.
We might, for example, find that in a particular residential area there are unexpectedly large numbers of households with ‘lodgers’ and so we might want to add this as a specific category in the household composition; or we might find that on an attitude question views are rather more extreme than we had anticipated and so a new response category could be usefully put in to save us noting responses under ‘Others, specify…’in many cases.
When the lessons from the pilot survey have been fully learned alterations can be made where necessary, but if the work done prior to the pilot has been adequate the alterations consequent upon it should not be great.
Indeed, it could be regarded as a measure of the previous work how little needs doing after the pilot.
But when all has been considered the next and final step is the survey itself.
This involves a number of considerations and these will be dealt with under separate headings.
Perhaps the most general point to be made about the survey proper is that it should be regarded as an end-point to be reached after careful preparation.
Whatever mistakes are made in the survey will be irrevocable.
A poor response rate cannot be botched over.
A badly-phrased question cannot be re-worded after the survey is complete.
Everything that can be done in preparation for the survey should therefore be done; there is precious little that can be done afterwards without distorting the accuracy of the survey.
Alterations made afterwards have a tendency to show; those which do not show may be examples of dishonesty by the surveyor.
Surveys vary enormously in their nature according to the purpose of the enquiry and the sample of informants  approached .
The problems encountered in a survey of the occupants of old people's homes will obviously be different from those encountered in trying to interview a representative sample of ordinary adolescents.
We are not here concerned with the problems involved in obtaining samples; our focus is on the survey once the sample has been decided on and drawn.
For the sake of convenience in discussing problems of surveying we will use the ordinary house-to-house survey as the general case for discussion.
CONTACTING INFORMANTS
One of the basic problems in surveying is to obtain a good response from one's informants.
When we discuss the use of  self-completed questionnaires this will be a special point of detail, but it can be a major problem in interview surveys also.
In a survey of a ‘closed’ institution such as a prison or a firm the informants may be instructed to co-operate with interviewers because of agreement about the survey by the people in authority, but in many instances of samples from the general population no such authority exists and surveyors must try to obtain co-operation as best they can by interesting the informants in the survey and gaining their completely free co-operation.
What is surprising is how very generously this co-operation is given in many cases.
Market research firms, government research agencies, academic research units and many other organizations which carry out survey interviews depend for their success on the voluntary help given to them by members of the general public.
A great deal of interviewing is done by approaching people in the street or by knocking on people's doors.
It is fairly rare these days to find adults who have never been interviewed in any survey.
Not very long ago I found myself being interviewed in a university survey on residential mobility in which some of my own students were fieldworkers.
I have also been interviewed on trains and on a cross-channel ferry about my travel habits.
In recent years interviews by telephone have become popular with some  commercial research firms, but to some respondents this approach must seem rather intrusive and slightly dubious in that there is no way of properly checking the credentials of the telephone caller.
Clearly, the telephone interview is attractively cheap, but in my opinion it is also a technique which could well irritate the respondents approached.
Personal approach
Let us consider what the interviewer is trying to do when seeking an interview and what the reaction of the informant may be.
The interviewer is seeking to interview a sample of housewives on an estate about, let us say, the work-day  pattern of wives who work only within the home.
The sample has been based on a random choice of houses.
The interviewer wants (a) to find out if the informant is a full-time housewife and (b) if so, how she spends her working day.
If the woman says ‘yes’ to (a) the interviewer wants to ask her a whole list of questions about her life.
On the other hand, the housewife, engaged in her working day, hears a knock on the door and finds a complete stranger there with a clip-board to which is attached a rather large sheet (or sheets) of paper covered with duplicated sentences and ominous boxes.
Let us try to consider, from both sides, what is needed to move from this initial confrontation to a successfully completed interview.
The interviewer (let us say it is a man for ease of being able to say ‘he’ and ‘she’in this case, even though most interviewers are women) will expect to open the conversation and he has the task of explaining to the housewife, simply and briefly:
1
where he is from (the sponsoring body);
2
what he is doing (the purpose of the survey);
3
why the housewife was chosen in the sample;
4
why she should grant the interview.
Looking at it from the housewife's point of view her phrasing of these questions would be:
1
Who are you and where are you from?
2
What do you want?
3
Why choose me to help you?
4
Why should I help you anyway?
If dealt with in this order the opening gambit would be (1)‘I am an interviewer from the North Midlands Institute for Social Research and (2) we are carrying out a survey of the working-day of housewives.
(3) Your house has come up in a random sample of houses in this area and, if you are a full-time housewife, we would like you to tell us about your  working day since (4) we believe that a survey of this subject would be of great value in helping all housewives.
In the above passage points (1) and (2) are easier to explain than points (3) and (4).
Point (3), on sampling, is a technical matter which is very difficult to explain properly and it might well be beyond the abilities of many housewives to understand without more explanation what random sampling means.
But fortunately most people who are asked to help in surveys are prepared to accept that they are appropriate people to answer questions on the survey for which they are approached, and particularly where people feel that they are being asked to give ‘expert’ information this can be seen as rather a compliment: ‘If you want to know about how a housewife organizes her day I can tell you everything you need to know.’
But while people in the sample can give the information, the question still has to be answered as to why they should bother.
In most cases the reasonable answer will be along the lines that those people who give information for the survey will be contributing to an overall study, the results of which will be useful for a better understanding by everyone of the general problem and will also particularly help specialists who might be interested in (in this case) the housewife's day.
These specialists might be architects, furniture manufacturers, social workers, magazine publishers, domestic equipment manufacturers, shopkeepers — all the people who are affected by the housewife's day.
The fictitious example being used here is not the easiest one to explain to an informant, but many much more difficult ones have been explained and interviews obtained.
Approach by letter
One possible way of getting round the problem of the ‘doorstep’ explanation is to write a letter to people in the sample to let them know in advance of the survey and the coming call by an interviewer.
One advantage of a letter is that all the points (1) to (4) can be dealt with in advance and so the  interviewer is expected and time is saved in not having to go through all the verbal explanations.
In some cases, especially among people of higher status, the letter is regarded as a more polite way of asking for the interview and it helps differentiate the interviewer, when he or she calls, from marauding salesmen.
Against the use of a letter it must be noted that it is not easy to write a short but very clear letter explaining everything the informant may want to know, and if the recipient decides that she or he does not want to co-operate then she/he is warned in advance of the interviewer's call.
If she is determined not to be interviewed she could even write back and say quite clearly ‘keep away’, in which case no earnest explanation by the interviewer is possible.
 There is also the danger with sending a letter that people may misread it — or just look at it and not read it properly.
I have myself been welcomed as a local council surveyor come to look at houses in a slum area, and I had an assistant who was once received as a person who was trying to recruit voluntary social workers.
These instances arose because the recipients just did not read the letters sent to them.
However, sending a letter to a large sample of people can be quite a costly business, not only in stationery and postage, but also in finding out the recipients' correct names and addresses, if one is to avoid the very impersonal and rather off-putting form of address, ‘The Occupant’.
For these reasons alone many surveyors decide not to send letters in advance and rely on the interviewers' skills in being able to explain to people on their doorsteps what the survey is about and why they should help with it.
THE INTERVIEW AND THE INTERVIEWER
The qualities required of interviewers will vary greatly according to the complexities of interview schedules used and also the degree of informality permitted in the interviews.
In  academic, exploratory research where the results are not to be analysed and presented in statistical fashion a research worker may feel that he or she cannot have an assistant to help with interviews since the whole approach is very subjective and non-statistical.
But where results can be presented in tabular form it does seem reasonable to expect that there is sufficient uniformity of approach to have allowed for more than one interviewer, and, of course, for subsequent repetition of the interviews, so as to replicate the enquiry.
Wherever there appears to be a ‘mystique’ about the interviewing — suggestions that these results were possible because of some mystical skills possessed by the interviewer — then one is likely to be moving from social science towards journalism, or special pleading at the very least.
Interviewing is certainly a skilled job when carried out properly, but it is not a mystical union between interviewer and respondent.
Obviously some people make better interviewers than others, but with training no normal person who is reasonably able to carry on a conversation should find it impossible to undertake interviews.
Hundreds of ordinary men and women are highly competent interviewers, and a glance at some of the very complex interview schedules used by market research firms and the government research agencies show that they are capable of carrying out very intricate interviews which would probably be beyond the capabilities of many untrained academics!
The ideal schedule is one which can be used by a team of interviewers and yield the same stimuli to informants with their responses being recorded in the same way.
The survey interview therefore requires expertise, not ‘flair’, on the interviewer's part.
This does not mean that the interviewer becomes a cold clinical robot, but it does mean that he or she uses a particular instrument in the way that it is designed to be used — for objective study.
The interviewer who changes questions, who adds bits to questions, who generally messes about with the schedule, is not being clever, he/she is being a bad fieldworker.
All interviewers should be carefully briefed on the schedule they are about to use, and wherever possible a ‘guide to interviewers’ should accompany, or be incorporated with, the schedule.
Where interviewers are centrally grouped they can be called together for a briefing session, when any queries can be raised and dealt with on the spot, but where large organizations have interviewers scattered about the country this may be a counsel of perfection, although peripatetic fieldwork supervisors do invaluable work in this as well as other areas.
Interviewers must seek out, contact and interview their allotted sub-samples, and once they have been given their tasks they must work relatively independently.
In the case of street interviews, where they may be working on ‘quota’ samples (so many people of certain sex, age and class categories chosen by the interviewer to fit into the required quota), the discretion allowed may be considerable.
The temptation to ‘fiddle’ quotas or interviews is always present, and for an interviewer who is not getting interviews this temptation must at times be great.
Nevertheless, the whole basis of survey work is one of trust and relatively few interviewers abuse this trust.
It is important that fieldwork should be properly supervised and that is why all professional research agencies get their field supervisors to make check calls on people who have been included in a sample and why fieldworkers should always have someone to turn to if they have any doubts or are in any difficulties.
In my own survey of visitors to the British Museum in which teams of five interviewers worked for four separate weeks interviewing at the museum entrances I made sure that I was present for at least the first day of each survey and was available by phone during the rest of the time.
The first day of each survey was crucial in sorting out minor problems for the interviewers which only came to be recognized once the fieldwork was under way.
After interviews have been conducted, interviewers must check their schedules for errors of recording, omissions, or any other faults, and good supervision will again ensure that this is done.
The ultimate aim of interviewers is to produce a well-completed schedule for every interview assigned to them.
The ability to win over an informant who is undecided whether or not to grant the interview is important, as is the ability to put people at their ease and reassure them that the interview is not going to be some sort of viva voce examination.
These are the human skills of the interviewer which will obtain good interviews without over-assisting the informants.
At the end of an interview the informant will be thanked for co-operating and left feeling satisfied after what was an interesting and worthwhile discussion.
But apart from having the quality of tact, the interviewer will also have the quality of accuracy, since the results of the interviews, on the schedules, will go to other people — office staff — whose task will be the analysis.
Before considering the problems of analysis we will next make a parallel study of the problems involved in the use of self-completed questionnaires.
When this has been done the common problems of analysis can be dealt with.