

MIDLAND INVESTMENTS
Guaranteed Capital Bond
Stock Market Growth or Your Money Back
OFFER CLOSES 29 MAY 1992
All the attractions of stock market growth.
None of the risks.
You will know just how much money can be made on the stock market.
You will also be fully aware of what can be lost.
But now there's a stock market investment where you simply can't lose.
The Midland Guaranteed Capital Bond is a unit linked single premium life assurance policy that gives your money access to the growth potential of the stock market over the next five years, free of basic rate tax and all Capital Gains Tax.
And in the unlikely event that the level of the FT-SE 100 Index should actually fall during that period, we guarantee to return the original amount of your investment provided the Bond is held for 5 years.
In short, we promise you growth…or your money back!
GROWTH POTENTIAL
The growth of the Midland Guaranteed Capital Bond is directly linked to the FT-SE 100 Index.
After 5 years, your investment plus any bonuses less 5% will be increased by the growth of the FT-SE 100 Index.
FOOTNOTE: The graph shows the performance of the FT-SE 100 Index over the period 1 January 1979 to 1 January 1992 the UK Retail Price Index and the return from a higher rate Building Society account with net income reinvested.
Source: Micropal and Datastream.
(Datastream have recalculated the index back from February 1984 when the index started, to 1979 based on its original constituents.)
Past performance is no guarantee of future performance.
The performance of the FT-SE 100 is published every stock market trading day and measures the overall performance of the top 100 British Companies.
FIVE YEAR GROWTH OPPORTUNITY
Although past performance is no guarantee of future performance, the average increase in the FT-SE 100 Index, a higher rate building society investment with net income reinvested and inflation in five year periods (commencing 1 January) from 1.1.79 to 1.1.92 is given below:
MONEY BACK GUARANTEE
Even if you are a more cautious investor, you can now benefit from the growth potential of the stock market without risk.
We will guarantee the return of your capital in full after 5 years should the level of the FT-SE 100 actually fall.
HOW THE BOND WORKS FOR YOU
If you are aged between 18–80, you may invest any amount between £5,000 to £100,000 in the Bond, in multiples of £100.
(Larger amounts are accepted at the discretion of Midland Life, please ask for details).
The Bond will commence on 17 June 1992 although applications must be received by 29 May 1992.
Once the Bond has commenced you will receive a policy document as proof of your investment and as your guarantee.
After 5 years you will receive:
the amount of your investment plus bonuses less 5% increased by the growth of the FT-SE 100 Index*.
OR
your money back!
*This amount will be determined by the level of the FT-SE 100 Index prevailing at or about 11.00 am on the maturity date of the Bond.
Should you decide to cash in your bond before the five years are up, the guaranteed return will not apply and the amount you receive will largely depend on market conditions at that time.
It may be lower than the original investment.
Full technical details of the Bond including the effect on your benefits of a change in taxation can be found in the accompanying leaflet ‘Product Information’.
BONUSES FOR EARLY INVESTORS
For early investors, we will make bonus allocations to your Bond equal to 0.2% of your investment for each complete week we hold your money until the commencement date of the Bond.
(This is equivalent to an annual interest rate of around 11% net).
LIMITED OFFER — ACT NOW
This offer opens on 22 April 1992 and closes 29 May 1992.
We must receive your application on or before that date.
You should, therefore, act now to take advantage of a unique investment opportunity.
All you need to do is complete the application form and return it with a cheque for the amount you wish to invest (minimum £5,000).
If you have funds available that you would like to have working harder for you there can be few other more secure high potential opportunities than this.
Remember — you can't lose!
The full amount of your initial investment plus bonuses is guaranteed to be returned to you on completion of the five year term — and of course you could see a healthy return on your investment due to stock market growth during this time.
CHECK THE FACTS
We recommend that you read the accompanying Product Information leaflet.
It includes details of how the Bond works, your right to cancel, taxation matters, death benefits and more.
TAX
The information in this leaflet is based on our understanding of current law and Inland Revenue practice.
Legislation and practice are of course subject to change.
CANCELLATION RIGHTS
Within 7 days of the commencement date of your Bond, Midland Life will send you a Cancellation Notice.
Should you wish to cancel the Bond, you then have 14 days to do so by returning the Notice to Midland Life.
If the value of the original investment falls by the time your Cancellation Notice is received by Midland Life the lower sum will be paid to you.
Midland Life reserve the right to withdraw the Bond at any time before the commencement date if this offer is fully subscribed or if market conditions become unfavourable in which case you will get your money back with interest.
THIS FLAP CONTAINS PRODUCT INFORMATION WHICH YOU ARE ADVISED TO READ
Guaranteed Capital Bond
FIVE YEAR GROWTH OPPORTUNITY
Midland Guaranteed Bond is an investment which offers the benefit of growth potential linked to the stock market as measured by the FT-SE 100 Index OR the return of your money in full after 5 years.
For full details see the Midland Guaranteed Capital Bond brochure dated February 1992.
The chart below shows the average percentage increase in the FT-SE 100 Index over 5 years periods (commencing 1 January) from 1 January 1979 to 1 January 1992 in comparison to a higher rate Building Society investment and the rate of inflation over the same periods.
How you can benefit from stock market growth
The graph shows the performance of the FT-SE 100 Index over the period of 1 January 1979 to 1 January 1992 and the growth potential of investments linked to the Stock Market.
Also shown is the UK Retail Price Index and the return from a Building Society higher rate account with net income reinvested.
MIDLAND Guaranteed Capital Bond
Product Information
INTRODUCTION
The Midland Guaranteed Capital Bond is a unit-linked single premium life assurance policy designed to run for five years.
Under this Bond 95% of your premium plus 95% of any bonus allocations (see below) increased by the growth in the FT-SE 100 Index is returned after five years (but see the section on the ‘Effect on your benefits of a change in taxation’).
The minimum maturity value after five years will be 100% of your premium plus bonus allocations.
The calculation of the maturity value of your Bond will be based on the average levels of the FT-SE 100 Index at or about 11.00 am and at or about 3.00 pm London Time on the commencement date of your Bond and on the level of the FT-SE 100 Index prevailing at or about 11.00 am London Time on the maturity date of your Bond.
YOUR PREMIUM
You choose the amount you wish to invest from £5,000 to £100,000.
Investment in excess of £100,000 is at the discretion of Midland Life.
COMMENCEMENT OF THE BOND
The Guaranteed Capital Bond commences on 17 June 1992.
Your premium will be held by Midland Life in the Policyholder's Life Fund until the Bond commences.
Midland Life reserve the right to withdraw the offer at any time before the commencement of your Bond.
If you have paid money to Midland Life before the commencement date and the offer is then withdrawn your money will be returned with interest.
The rate of interest will be determined by Midland Life and will be paid for the period from the date of receipt of your money by Midland Life to the date it is returned to you.
BONUS ALLOCATIONS
For the period your money is held by Midland Life pending commencement, bonus allocations will be made to your Bond.
MULTIPLE BONDS
Your Bond will automatically be sub-divided into a cluster of five separate identical policies.
DEATH BENEFIT
If you should die during the term of the Bond the death benefit will be the greater of the encashment value allocated to your Bond at the time of death and your original investment.
The profit chargeable for income tax purposes is calculated in the same way as if the Bond has been fully encashed at the date of death.
EARLY ENCASHMENT
Although the Guaranteed Capital Bond is designed for a five year term, early encashment is allowed before the end of the fixed term.
Early encashment values are not guaranteed and may result in the amount received being less than the original investment (please refer to the table below).
The value of your investment will depend upon prevailing market conditions including but not exclusively the level of the FT-SE 100 Index at that time.
The table below gives an indication of possible early encashment values per £1,000 of single premium invested and are calculated in accordance with the rules prescribed by the Securities and Investments Board (SIB).
These are for illustrative purposes only and cannot be guaranteed by Midland Life.
TAXATION
You will have no personal liability to Capital Gains Tax.
Basic Rate Taxpayers will have no personal liability to Income Tax.
For Higher Rate Taxpayers, when the Bond matures or is surrendered the profit for tax purposes is calculated as the final proceeds less the original investment.
Your liability will equate to the difference between the Higher Rate and the Basic Rate of Tax.
Any profit arising on surrender or maturity will be taken into account to determine the amount, if any, of age related allowance to which you are entitled.
The policy offers an option to reinvest all of the maturity proceeds under the Guaranteed Capital Bond into either another Guaranteed Capital Bond (subject to availability) or another contract issued by Midland Life Limited.
This option will effectively defer any additional income tax payment for higher rate taxpayers until death, partial encashment, full surrender or maturity of the contract.
Further details explaining the tax treatment of the Bond for higher rate income taxpayers or those claiming age related allowances are available from Midland Life Limited 
Your liability to tax and that of Midland Life in respect of the Guaranteed Capital Bond may be subject to change in the future.
In particular, the benefits are only guaranteed if the rate of tax on policyholders funds applicable to Life Insurance Companies remains at 25%.
EFFECT ON YOUR BENEFITS OF A CHANGE IN TAXATION
The proceeds of the Guaranteed Capital Bond will reflect the rate of tax on policyholders' funds applicable to Life Insurance Companies on the maturity of the Bond.
If the rate remains at the current rate of 25% (which is currently equal to the basic rate of Income Tax) the benefit will be as outlined in the Introduction.
However, if the rate of tax on policyholders' funds at maturity is different from 25% then the benefits payable will be reviewed.
They will be increased if the rate goes down and reduced if the rate goes up.
If the anticipated maturity proceeds after five years are £15,000 for an initial premium (including any bonus allocations) of £10,000, then the following amounts will be paid to you:
*Free of all personal taxes for a basic rate income taxpayer.
These figures are in no way a projection of the likely maturity benefits.
The guarantee that you will at least receive an amount equal to your original investment at the end of five years will be unaffected by any change in the rate of tax on policyholders' funds applicable to Life Insurance Companies.
THE EFFECTS OF INFLATION
The buying power of the benefits you get will depend on the rate of inflation over the period of the contract.
By way of illustration the following table shows what £1,000 will be worth in today's money at the end of the years shown if the yearly rate of inflation over the period is as shown:
IMPORTANT NOTES
The Information in these product particulars is based on Midland Bank's understanding of current law and Inland Revenue practice at the time of printing.
Future changes in legislation, tax levels and practice could affect the details contained in these product particulars.
If Midland Life is required to make any payment under the Policyholders' Protection Act 1975 (or any enactment amending or replacing the same or of a similar nature) or if there is any change in the law or Inland Revenue practice affecting a Guaranteed Capital Bond the benefits provided by such a Bond may be varied by Midland Life in such manner as the Midland Life Actuary considers appropriate.
Midland Life Limited is regulated in the conduct of investment business by the Securities and Investments Board (SIB).
Midland Bank plc is the selling representative of Midland Life Limited.
Midland Life Limited is a member of the Association of British Insurers and the Insurance Ombudsman Bureau.
Midland Bank plc is a member of Investment Management Regulatory Organisations Ltd (IMRO).
STATUS OF COMPANY REPRESENTATIVE
You may enter into this contract in response to an off-the-page advertisement or on the recommendation of an adviser.
Where you have received advice on this contract, the person who advised you (or the firm he works for) is the representative of and is paid by Midland Life Limited.
FURTHER INFORMATION
Full details of the standard Terms and Conditions of the Guaranteed Capital Bond can be found in the policy documents.
Copies of these and your application form are available on request from Midland Life Limited 
If you require any more information about the Bond please ask at your local Midland Branch.
Have You Spoken To Your Local Financial Consultant?
Ask yourself these questions:
Have you planned for the longest holiday of your life — your retirement?
Could your family cope financially if you died unexpectedly?
Are you getting the most from your savings and investments?
If you fall ill and cannot work, would you still be paid after three months, six months…a year?
Are you sure you aren't paying too much tax?
Did you answer ‘yes’
Making certain you and your family are financially secure now and in the future is so important.
That's why it is essential that you answered ‘yes’ to these questions.
And these are just some of the questions you need to ask yourself if you want to be sure of financial security!
Even if you are confident that your present arrangements are adequate can you be sure that nothing has been overlooked?
Maybe your financial position has changed recently and plans you made some time ago need reviewing.
How can Midland help?
One of our Consultants is based in your local Midland branch to provide advice and guidance across Midland's wide range of financial areas including:
Retirement planning
Life assurance for you and your family
Investments and savings
Any consultation is free and you are under no obligation to act on our advice.
Why Midland?
How many adverts have you seen recently selling life assurance and pensions, for example?
With so many companies competing for your attention it can be difficult deciding which is the one for you.
But how many of these companies forget about you once you've signed on the dotted line.
At Midland, we pride ourselves on establishing long term relationships with our customers.
That means:
Giving clear and sensible advice
Providing a full service
Offering regular financial reviews
Being available when you need us
Your Next Move
If you wish to discuss your financial needs just ask for your consultant next time you call in at the branch.
Alternatively telephone your consultant or complete and return the attached slip.
Your consultant will be happy to contact you and arrange an appointment at a time to suit you.
Remember, even if you do not need financial advice now, your consultant will be available when you do.
How To Complain To Midland
IF, AT ANY TIME, YOU ARE UNHAPPY WITH THE SERVICE YOU HAVE RECEIVED, PLEASE LET US KNOW AND WE WILL INVESTIGATE YOUR COMPLAINT.
Procedure for Complaints
You should refer your complaint to the Manager at the branch or office where the problem has arisen.
Your complaint will either be answered within two working days or an acknowledgement will be sent within that time telling you how long our investigations are likely to take.
If the Manager cannot resolve the matter to your satisfaction, you should write to:
Your letter will be acknowledged within two working days.
Alternatively you can telephone our Customer Relations Department on 0742 528788.
In both cases your complaint will be investigated further.
If you are still not satisfied with our response you can take your complaint to the Banking Ombudsman.
You should write to:
Midland is a member of the Ombudsman scheme and we have agreed to accept his decision, although you still have the right to take legal action if you wish to do so.
The Ombudsman scheme does not apply to customers of banks in the Channel Islands or Isle of Man.
How to Cope with Debt
BY DIANA WRIGHT
CREDIT
WIDE CHOICE
THE COST
RECOGNISING THE DANGER
BE PREPARED
SEEKING HELP
PUTTING MATTERS RIGHT
BIBLIOGRAPHY
For details of other leaflets in this range, please ask at any of our branches.
Introduction
Whereas our grandparents and, perhaps, even our parents frowned upon buying anything unless they had saved all the money required, today we expect to own the luxuries of life now and are prepared to bridge the gap between our savings and the price with a loan.
Borrowing is looked upon as a natural part of everyday life so long as it is kept within bounds.
Problems arise only when we overstretch ourselves.
This booklet has been produced to help you identify potential dangers and correct them as soon as possible.
CREDIT
It's strange that two quite different words can mean the same thing.
‘I've got unlimited credit’ sounds a proud boast; ‘I've got the ability to take on unlimited debts’is far more ominous.
Credit in itself is not, of course, a bad thing; most of us get paid weekly or monthly, while many of the things we buy — from our house downwards — simply cost too much for us to meet the expenditure in one go.
So we look to organisations who will lend the money to us, on condition that we undertake to repay the loan from our income over a specified period of time.
As long as we do so, we're ‘credit users’: it is only when we fail that we become ‘debtors’.
WIDE CHOICE
These days there is a plethora of organisations willing and generally able to lend us money.
Building societies and banks, hire purchase companies and finance houses, credit and store card organisations all vie with one another to make money available.
They are willing to do so because they expect to be paid back, and because they expect to profit from the transaction through the interest they charge on the loan — it would be a strange world if they didn't!
If lenders are not reasonably sure the loan will be paid back, they will understandably charge a higher rate of interest.
THE COST
It is important to realise that credit comes in many shapes and forms — and at different costs.
The latter depends on two factors.
Firstly, there is the general level of interest rates at the time the loan is made, which related to the current base rate.
Then there is the lender's assessment of the risk it is taking.
The safer the loan appears to be, the lower, in general, the interest rate.
It should also be said that marketing considerations can come into the calculations.
For instance car manufacturers may offer exceedingly cheap credit, not because they believe their borrowers are uniquely low risk, but because they may want to sell more cars.
However, in such cases it is worth remembering that the product may be available more cheaply elsewhere and may thus reduce the credit needed!
Alternatively, store credit cards may offer more expensive credit — but buying a really cheap offer in a sale may justify use of more costly loans at the time.
When considering forms of credit, the different types that are available and the terms over which they are offered should be carefully evaluated as to how much you can afford.
One of the most important factors is the interest rate itself, which could give cause for confusion, were it not for something called ‘APR’— annual percentage rate — which is the figure you should concentrate on.
The APR takes into account any setting up costs of the loan, and is the best yardstick to use when comparing the costs of the different forms of credit.
The fundamental considerations in taking a decision on loans are laid out in another Midland Bank booklet called ‘How to Borrow Money’ by Margaret Dibben.
RECOGNISING THE DANGER
As a nation, we're all in hock to the tune of over £24 billion — and that's excluding mortgages on property.
We've all grown accustomed to using credit.
There can be a danger point, however, when the use of credit gets out of control, and unfortunately, with all the variety of credit available, it is sometimes too easy to avoid recognising the danger until it is acute.
If the amount outstanding on your credit or store cards seem always to creep up rather than down; if you put off paying the electricity bills because you have other commitments to meet; if you are seriously thinking of accepting the offer of a ‘consolidation’ loan which is secured on your house to mop up all your existing credit agreements and transform them into a once a month payment, then you could be on or near the danger line.
Many people who get seriously into debt do so through no fault of their own.
They may be made redundant or their marriage may break up; even the loss of regular overtime can have a disastrous effect on someone living to the limits of his or her income.
BE PREPARED
The first step in the battle to keep control of borrowing is to recognise that you might be in danger.
It can be very instructive to prepare a Financial Statement, setting out (with total honesty) your total weekly or monthly income, and your expenditure throughout the year.
As Mr. Micawber said ‘If a man had twenty pounds a year for his income, and spent nineteen pounds nineteen shillings and sixpence, he would be happy, but if he spent twenty pounds one, he would be miserable’.
On a temporary and controlled basis, some excess expenditure can be justifiable — but when excess expenditure increases regularly, the danger signs flash up.
The second step is to sort out your priorities and let your lenders know of any problem as early as possible.
Just because you receive more official letters about a particular payment does not mean that it should be first on the list to be paid off, if it means ignoring other important debts such as a mortgage, gas and electricity, or perhaps the taxman.
SEEKING HELP
There are ways of ‘suspending’ some debts — you can, for instance, arrange to pay only the interest on your mortgage for a while.
The earlier you discuss a potential or actual problem with the lender, the more chance there is of being able to arrange matters satisfactorily.
In the final analysis, they may recommend specific courses of action including destroying all your credit cards and even your cheque book, if they believe this to be necessary.
In some areas of the country there are special Money Advice Centres which can help people in debt, particularly those who have saddled themselves with multiple debts.
Such specialist centres are fairly thin on the ground, but Citizens Advice Bureaux can help, and some local authorities have their own consumer advisers.
PUTTING MATTERS RIGHT
The four basic steps on the road back to financial health are:
To maximise your income — which may mean, for example, exploring the possibility of a part time job, or checking you are getting all the state benefits to which you are entitled.
To deal with priority debts — rent and mortgage arrears, heating and lighting.
To sort out the non-priority debts, possibly entering into negotiation with the lenders.
To realise assets in order to pay off debts.
This must be done with open eyes.
Can you afford the car you bought with a loan?
Would your problems be solved if you had a smaller house?
Such questions should be approached honestly and in full awareness that terminating loan arrangements can cost money in the short term due to cancellation or other charges.
It's natural to keep your troubles quiet — especially from the people who've lent you money.
But unless you are absolutely certain that you will be able to get back on top of things within a very short period of  time, don't do it.
All lenders would far prefer to know what is happening.
You will not be the first debtor they've had to deal with, and their experience and understanding could help you take the first step on the road to recovery.
Written by Diana Wright, Personal Finance Editor, Sunday Times.
Meridian
High interest savings linked to a current account
MERIDIAN — combines an excellent return on your savings with all the advantages of a current account
TOP RATE, INSTANT ACCESS SAVINGS ACCOUNT
INTEREST ON LINKED CURRENT ACCOUNT
AUTOMATIC SWEEP FROM CURRENT TO SAVINGS ACCOUNT
HIGHER SAVINGS = HIGHER RATES
Meridian Savings
The best of both worlds.
Instant access and top interest rates that rise as your balance grows.
To ensure you receive the best return on your money at all times, we have linked Meridian Savings to a Meridian Current Account and have made it easy and convenient for money to be transferred between the two.
How?
You can:
Tell us how much you want left in your Current Account each month and we will automatically sweep the rest to Meridian Savings.
Use your AutoCheque Card at any of our Self-Service machines to transfer up to £10,000 to or from Meridian Savings.
Telephone your branch and ask them to make an immediate transfer between accounts.
Set up a standing order.
Interest on Meridian Savings can be added to your savings or credited to your Current Account.
Ask at any Midland branch for current rates.
Meridian Current Account
Cheque book.
High interest rates that increase in line with your balance.
£250 AutoCheque Card:
pay for goods and services without cash or cheques wherever you see the Switch symbol.
instant cash withdrawals up to £1,000 from all Midland, NatWest, TSB, Clydesdale and Northern Bank Self-Service cash machines, the largest network in the UK.
guarantees payment for your higher value purchases.
Credit Line — the option of an agreed overdraft limit of up to £5,000 (up to £10,000 if you hold a Midland Gold Card) at preferential interest rates.
Standing orders and direct debits — the easy way to pay gas, electricity and other bills and expenses.
A monthly statement showing details of all transactions on your account together with the balance on Meridian Savings.
There are no charges to pay (except for interest if you overdraw) provided on your Current Account:
you maintain an average monthly balance credit balance of over £1,000, or
you maintain an average monthly overdraft of over £1,000, or
you have an average monthly balance of over £1,000 (debit or credit).
Otherwise a £10 fee will be payable for that month.
Your Next Move
To apply for Meridian simply complete the attached application form and return it to your local Midland branch.
For further information on other Midland services please tick the appropriate box(es) below.
IMPORTANT NOTES
YOUR HOME IS AT RISK IF YOU DO NOT KEEP UP REPAYMENTS ON A MORTGAGE OR OTHER LOAN SECURED ON IT.
Midland Bank credit facilities are subject to status.
Written quotations are available from any Midland branch, or from the address given below.
Midland Bank plc is a member of IMRO.
MIDLAND PENSIONS
Plan Now For A Financially Comfortable Retirement
HOW MUCH WILL IT COST?
HOW MUCH WILL I GET?
COSTS AS LITTLE AS £25 PER MONTH
TAXMAN CONTRIBUTES TOO!
Introduction
We all look forward to a comfortable future when we retire — with the time and money to enjoy a full life with family and friends.
But what are the chances of having the financial security to make the most of retirement?
Not as rosy as you might think if you have to rely on just the state pension, or fail to review existing pension arrangements.
That's why you should start your own pension plan now.
The Benefits of a Midland Pension
Flexible
You can select monthly, annual or lump sum contributions.
Portable
In most cases you can take your pension plan with you if you change jobs.
Tax Savings
If you are an employee, the taxman adds another £25 to every £75 you contribute to your Personal Pension or Free Standing Additional Voluntary Contribution scheme.
If you pay higher rate income tax you can claim additional income tax relief on top.
The self employed may claim income tax relief as an allowance in their income tax assessment.
Incentives to Contract Out
You may also be entitled to Government incentive payments if you contract out of the State Earnings Related Pension Scheme (SERPS) with a Midland Personal Pension.
Income for Life
Your pension fund will be used to purchase a pension income for the whole of your retirement.
With a Midland Personal Pension you have the option to take a lump sum free of Income and Capital Gains Taxes when you retire.
The Cost
Contributions to Midland Life Pensions start from just £25 per month, £300 per annum, or £2,000 as a lump sum up to the maximum Inland Revenue limits.
Before you take out a Midland Pension we will provide you with a detailed illustration of how much you could receive.
Your Next Move
If you wish to discuss your pension needs call in at your local Midland branch or complete the coupon in this leaflet and we will provide you with a personal illustration of the benefits available to you.
A copy of our advisory leaflet ‘A Simple Guide to Pensions’ is available in any Midland branch.
IMPORTANT NOTES
The information contained in this leaflet is based on our understanding of current legislation and Inland Revenue practice.
Legislation and practice may of course change.
Product particulars relating to Midland Pensions including details of charges will be provided with your illustration.
Midland Pensions are provided by Midland Life Limited, a Midland Group Company, which is regulated in the conduct of investment business by the Securities and Investments Board.
Midland Life Limited is a member of the Association of British Insurers and the Insurance Ombudsman Scheme.
Midland Pensions are unit linked plans and since the value of units can go down as well as up it is possible that the value may fall below that of the original investment.
Midland Bank plc, which is a member of IMRO is the selling representative of Midland Life Limited.
ACT NOW!
WITH A MIDLAND PENSION
ENJOY YOURSELF IN RETIREMENT
AIM TOWARDS THAT RELAXING GAME OF GOLF
MIDLAND Saver Plus
MIDLAND SAVINGS
Extra Interest and 24 Hour Access
HIGHER SAVINGS = HIGHER RATES
INSTANT ACCESS WITH SAVER PLUS CARD
NO MINIMUM BALANCE
Introduction
Saver Plus — the ideal combination if you are looking to make the most of your surplus cash but may need to call on it at a moment's notice.
Side by Side with Your Current Account
It makes sense to take advantage of Saver Plus rates by ensuring that any spare cash in your Current Account is regularly swept to your Saver Plus.
This can be arranged easily by standing order, automatic transfer or by telephone.
You can also use your Saver Plus Card at any of our nationwide network of Self-Service cash machines to sweep money from your Current Account, provided both accounts are held at the same branch.
Interest Rates Rise as Your Balance Grows
As the balance on your Saver Plus increases so does the rate of interest you receive.
There are a number of rate bands and the relevant rate of interest is paid on all your savings — not just the amount that takes you into a higher band.
Current rates are available at all Midland branches.
Easy Withdrawals
Any time you want to spend some of your savings, just use your Saver Plus Card at our cash machines to withdraw up to £500 a day (providing there is sufficient money in Saver Plus) or transfer the amount you want back to your Current Account.
Instant access, 24 hours a day!
The money in Saver Plus is earning interest right up to the day you take it out.
If you need to withdraw more than £500 you can do so over the counter at your Midland branch.
For the majority of personal customers interest is paid net of basic rate tax liability.
This means that unless you are a higher rate tax payer there is nothing else to pay.
Special arrangements may apply for customers living and working abroad.
Please ask for details.
Keeping Tabs
You can find out the balances on your Saver Plus and Current Account simply by using your Saver Plus Card at our Self-Service machines.
We will send you a statement every April and October showing how much you have in Saver Plus.
You can also request a Saver Plus statement at the Self-Service machines.
Your Next Move
Simply complete the attached application form and then take, or post, it to your local branch, together with your initial deposit.
Please remember that if the account is to be in joint names, then both parties must sign the form.
MIDLAND TESSA
MIDLAND SAVINGS
A Simple Tax Free Savings Account
Tax Exempt Special Savings Account
Available from 2 January 1991
Apply now and make the most of your savings from the word ‘go’.
Simply complete and return the application form at the end of the TESSA leaflet and we will make sure your TESSA is opened on 2 January 1991.
This forms an integral part of the TESSA leaflet.
INVEST UP TO £9,000 OVER 5 YEARS
INTEREST PAID FREE OF INCOME TAX
HIGH RATE OF INTEREST
LUMP SUM SAVINGS OPTION FROM £100
REGULAR OR MONTHLY SAVINGS FROM £10
Introduction
Once in a while the Budget comes up with something that appeals to most people.
That was certainly the case in 1990 when the Chancellor announced the introduction of TESSAs — Tax Exempt Special Savings Accounts.
Here was an opportunity many had been waiting for.
A simple savings account that lets each person choose their own level of saving and which pays an attractive rate of interest free of all income tax.
At Midland we want each of our customers to be able to take advantage of this new scheme so we have introduced our own flexible TESSA just for you.
Start with £3,000…
£9,000 is the maximum you can invest in your TESSA, but the great thing is you don't have to have access to that amount of money all at once because you spread your savings over 5 years.
In year 1 you may put in a maximum of £3,000 and up to £1,800 in each succeeding year — up to a total of £9,000 over 5 years.
…
Or Just £10 Per Month
If you cannot afford to invest the maximum allowed each year or would rather make regular monthly savings than invest in lump sums, you can put by as little as £10 per month.
In fact, you can choose any level of regular or monthly savings so long as they don't exceed the maximum savings allowed.
(See Terms and Conditions).
Making the Right Choice
It is up to you to select how much you want to invest in your TESSA each year or each month, without putting any undue strain on your finances.
But do remember that every pound in your TESSA will be earning interest free of income tax.
So, it makes sense to transfer money you may hold in a building society account or other savings account where you may be paying tax on the interest.
The Pay Off
No-one can predict with any degree of certainty how interest rates will rise and fall over a 5 year period.
The only thing you can be sure of with a Midland TESSA is that the rate of interest we pay will always be competitive.
And, because interest is paid free of basic rate income tax every pound in your account at the end of 5 years will be yours.
The interest from your TESSA will be credited to the account once a year on the anniversary of the account being opened.
Your Next Move
If you are aged 18 or over and wish to open a Midland TESSA please complete the attached application form and return it to your local Midland branch.
Remember to indicate whether you wish to save by lump sum, regular or monthly savings.
Terms and Conditions
1.
A TESSA is only available in accordance with the Finance Act 1990 and any regulations made thereunder.
Should the requirements change at any time, your TESSA may thereupon become subject to the new requirements.
2.
A TESSA is only available to personal customers in relation to their personal funds.
The account may not be held on behalf of a person other than the account-holder.
3.
A TESSA is not allowed for business purposes or available through Midland branches on the Channel Islands or Isle of Man.
4.
A TESSA must be maintained in a sole name only.
Joint accounts are prohibited.
You may not open or maintain a TESSA while you are under 18 or while you already maintain another TESSA whether with the same or any other Institution or Society.
A Midland TESSA may be transferred at any time to any Midland branch or other Financial Institution.
5.
Your TESSA will receive interest at the appropriate TESSA rate which may be varied.
The TESSA rate will be displayed in our branches.
Interest is paid annually upon each anniversary of the first deposit to your TESSA and calculated on a daily basis on cleared balances (including any interest credited but not withdrawn).
6.
Your TESSA will mature upon the fifth anniversary of the receipt of the first deposit of funds to the TESSA (or upon your earlier death) or if that falls on a non working business day the next working day.
Upon maturity the TESSA proceeds will be paid in accordance with your instructions or in accordance with the applicable laws of succession.
7.
Any rights in respect of your TESSA may not be assigned and those rights may not be used as security for a loan.
8.
In the event of your death before the date of maturity your TESSA will be treated as if it had matured at the date of death and gross interest will be paid up to and including that date.
It will then be transferred into an interest bearing account in the names of your personal representatives.
Such interest arising after the date of death will be subject to deduction of Basic Rate Income Tax in the normal way.
9.
Deposits can be made by regular savings or by lump sum deposits subject to a maximum of £9,000 over the five year period but you may not deposit more than £3,000 in the first year or £1,800 in any succeeding year.
10.
The minimum initial lump sum deposit to a Midland TESSA is £100.
The minimum regular instalment is £10.
11.
If you wish to close your TESSA within the 5 year term Midland require 14 days notice of closure.
If 14 days notice is not given there will be a charge of 25p per £100 (or part thereof) withdrawn.
In the event of early closure of your TESSA all interest is treated as interest for the year of closure and is subject to Basic Rate Income Tax applicable in that year.
If you are a Higher Rate Taxpayer in this year further tax will be payable by you.
12.
No withdrawal of deposits may be made prior to maturity, save by closure of your TESSA, in which event Midland will transfer the funds to another interest bearing account and be obliged to deduct from your TESSA and to pay direct to the Inland Revenue, an amount equal to Basic Rate Income Tax  prevailing at the date of closure on all interest accrued on your TESSA whether it has been withdrawn or not.
Interest can continue to be received gross if you certify prior to closure that your total income for the year, including that arising on closure is less than your tax allowance for the year and you are therefore a non-taxpayer.
13.
Interest credited to your TESSA may be withdrawn in cash (minimum withdrawal £5) or upon advice from you, credited to another account.
However, it will have been reduced by an amount equal to Basic Rate Income Tax at the time the interest was credited to your account and this amount will be retained in your TESSA and will receive interest at the appropriate TESSA rate.
14.
Your Midland TESSA will be closed immediately if you do not comply with the statutory requirements for a TESSA, and the consequence will be the same as for early withdrawal of your deposit.
15.
If you wish interest to be paid to another account you should advise your branch and an amount equal to Basic Rate Income Tax will be retained in your TESSA and will receive interest at the appropriate TESSA rate.
16.
Midland may at its discretion change these Terms and Conditions, give notice of variation in such a manner as it considers appropriate and may vary its charges and interest rates by general notice in branches.
If you continue to maintain a TESSA with Midland after such notice of change you will be taken to have accepted the change.
Midland Bank plc is a member of Investment Management Regulatory Organisation Limited.