

Section One: Context and origins
The wider context: Are curricula manageable?
Nicholas Beattie, Reader, University of Liverpool
Her Majesty's Inspectorate recently published a study of the Danish folkeskole , one of a series highlighting various aspects of foreign education systems believed to be relevant to British practice.
This one focuses particularly on ‘the development and implementation of curriculum and assessment policies at national, municipal and school levels and on the degree of professional, parental, pupil and community involvement in decision-making about education’.
‘Interesting parallels and differences emerge from the analysis’, states the preface, ‘and may be of value to those involved in implementing the various elements of the Education Reform Act’.
Encouraged by these words, persons attempting to ‘manage the curriculum’ within the framework of the Education Reform Act will turn to the body of the text.
Headteachers will soon discover that, among their Danish counterparts, ‘some see themselves as curriculum leaders, others do not’.
Danish schools work to centrally determined guidelines.
Locally elected municipalities may modify those guidelines, but ‘The vast majority of the municipalities adopt the Ministry guidelines for all or almost all subjects’.
Could this be a sign that the Ministry's power is all-pervasive?
Not so apparently:
These aims and guidelines were not usually used as working documents  in the schools.
Their influence was far more diffuse and elusive; as one teacher put it, ‘we keep them in the backs of our minds’.
Nor does the low profile of central documentation seem to be balanced by particularly energetic assessment procedures at school level:
[Teachers']reluctance to categorise children, especially at younger ages, was reflected, in the schools visited, by the low priority given to marking written work, the paucity of written records and the lack of diagnostic testing of ordinary pupils to aid the development of reading and number programmes to meet individual needs.
It is perhaps not surprising that when older pupils come to sit their leaving examinations, they generally view the prospect of the examinations without much apprehension; this may be because most decisions about their future are taken on the recommendation of their teachers rather than directly on the basis of examination results.
What exactly are ‘those involved in implementing the various elements of the Education Reform Act’ supposed to make of all this?
The ‘diffuseness’ and ‘elusiveness’of central control, the relaxed and constructive atmosphere, the absence of stress and conflict described by HMIs — all these appear to contradict the expectations and experience of the average ‘curriculum manager’in England and Wales to the point where he or she must ask: ‘Can I learn anything at all either from Denmark or from an international perspective?’
Is the HMIs' hope that their study ‘may be of value’ purely pious?
Or is the main value of observing a centralised curriculum in action reassurance ?
Was Denmark chosen specifically to soothe British fears?
There are, after all, several senses in which a brief look at the Danish system may bring comfort to a beleaguered ‘curriculum manager’ in Britain in the early 1990s.
Firstly, the system works, and apparently in a generally smooth and humane way.
So do most systems, most of the time.
If the angle of vision is the classroom, then the basic transaction between teacher and taught produces an inescapable similarity.
Introducing an interesting collection of studies of classrooms in different countries, Frankish comments; ‘Different as the classrooms described in this issue may appear, it is still surprising that they are so alike’.
Administrative and ideological superstructures assume more ‘manageable’ proportions if they can be seen as subordinate to a more or less universal classroom reality.
Osborn notes, for example, of the American classroom:
…while it is a fact that presently desks are usually moveable, thereby permitting various kinds of grouping arrangements, this flexibility is not often required by what actually goes on in the classroom.
This  points to a significant disharmony between the rhetoric of schooling and the practice.
While the United States is not altogether unique in this regard, it should be noted that the rhetoric of the classroom tends to be ‘progressive and liberal’ while the practice tends to remain ‘traditional and conservative’.
Classroom infrastructure tends to appear similar in different societies; what is most various is the bureaucratic superstructure, which attempts to translate rhetoric into regulations and routine procedures for monitoring and controlling what goes on in the classrooms.
Yet at this ‘superstructural’ level too differences may be eroded by classroom realities.
As Osborn notes in relation to the USA, ‘Individual schools, most often elementary, and determined teachers in the privacy of their own classrooms manage to violate numerous regulations and traditions’.
In the highly centralised French system, Puren has recently documented how clear, repeated and detailed instructions on modern language teaching methods have been consistently flouted by teachers over the space of a century.
The centrality of such human adjustments and the variability between classrooms even in systems which are ostensibly highly uniform provide a salutary reminder that ‘curriculum management’ cannot realistically be too ambitious.
Problems which loom very large to ‘managers’ may seem much less important to the ‘managed’.
There is another sense in which reading about Denmark, or any other Western Europe system, may be reassuring to British teachers.
The National Curriculum in particular brings us into line with our EC partners.
‘Many Europeans’, writes McLean ‘see the 1988 Act as a move towards harmonisation’.
For the first time a British government has established a mechanism enabling it to determine the content and purposes of education along broadly similar lines to other Western European democracies.
While this instrument is in a way value-neutral and may be used for ends of which different commentators may approve or disapprove, it may turn out to be — is indeed intended to be — a powerful force for overdue change, increased coherence and strengthened accountability.
The examples of Denmark or of the other members of the Community may in some respects be encouraging, in others not; but certainly to look into classrooms beyond the Channel, however superficially, is to be reminded that written curricula and centralised administrations do not have to be unwieldy, dictatorial or reactionary.
They may indeed be believed by those who operate them to be essentially progressive in character.
A third type of comfort to be drawn from an apparently stable system like Denmark's lies in the reminder of how many of the current fears of British ‘curriculum managers’ are, precisely, ‘current’: the transitory outcome of attempting too much too fast, rather than an intrinsic feature of centrally-defined curricula.
The ERA represents a major shift of national direction on several fronts: it necessarily runs counter in the short term to structures, procedures and habits of mind which are deeply ingrained.
France and Italy have had respectively about two centuries and one to erect and modify their national systems.
Politicians, administrators, teachers and parents in those countries know how information moves round the system from centre to periphery and vice versa, and who is responsible for what.
Their associations and less formal networks are adjusted to centralisation because that is what they have grown up with.
We, by contrast, are at present at the most painful phase of a radical readjustment.
Competing bureaucracies carve up a unitary field (DES, NCC, SEAC).
Information is still hard to track down and reaches the classroom level in a fragmented and patchy way.
Much of the pain centres upon the LEA; a structure which was pivotal and which is rapidly and rather messily ceasing to be so.
But we may expect in the long run to become as comfortable in the new clothes as we were in the old.
Teachers will wonder how they got on without detailed ‘programmes of study’, ‘Standard Assessment Tasks’, etc, and ‘curriculum managers’, like Danish heads, will perhaps be able to take a more relaxed line on managing the curriculum: ‘Some see themselves as curriculum leaders, others do not’.
Those who do not can afford to take that line, presumably, because over time the system has built up a stock of people and procedures which allow it to evolve almost under its own momentum.
One finds reassurance in foreign examples if one looks for it: but ought we not to be looking more for stimulus?
And for that, we shall need to look rather deeper.
For example, in assessing the apparent good order of the Danish folkeskole we shall need to consider how much of it flows in fact from deep-rooted cultural factors — and how little those factors are replicated in our own society.
A first look at foreign practice may reassure by dispelling myths: a second look may be less encouraging.
Let us turn again to the HMI's comments on Denmark.
After describing an examination which is taken at the end of schooling (compulsory schooling ends at 16, but just over half stay at school till 17) and which to British eyes seems remarkably casual, the HMI team observes:
As with the curriculum generally, there is a readiness on the part of parents, school boards and municipal officials to trust the professionalism of teachers to ensure that the system is consistent and just, in and between schools and municipalities.
This is of course directly contrary to the past experience of most British ‘curriculum managers’, certainly at secondary level.
Any  British secondary school head, deputy head or head of department will be acutely conscious that his or her work will ultimately be judged and validated by examination grades.
Those grades will be arrived at by a complex and outwardly objective system external to the school.
He or she may — and probably will — possess a more subtle view of ‘professionalism’ than the capacity to deliver examination results, but at the same time it is well known that many parents and politicians see those results as the crucial way by which schools account for their success or failure.
If this has been true of the past, it is even more true of the present and seems likely to be truer still of the future.
What has always been true of secondary schools is now becoming true of primary schools also, and one of the main vehicles for that change is the Education Reform Act.
In Britain, teacher professionalism is not trusted.
Whatever the public disclaimers of those in authority, many of the mechanisms set up by the ERA seem to teachers to be specifically designed to reduce themselves as professional people to the status of paid servants, to leave them as little margin for discretion as possible and therefore to reduce ‘curriculum management’ to technical trivia: the drawing up of timetables and the efficient disbursement of limited resources.
The question must inevitably arise: ‘If Denmark is so different, how has this come about?’
This is, of course, a question which the HMI team, in a brief 17 pages of text and after a seven-day visit, can hardly address; and to do them justice they do not attempt to do so.
Nonetheless there are sufficient indications in their study to suggest some interesting and disturbing questions for the United Kingdom — questions which may also help ‘curriculum managers’ to move beyond their short-term concerns and identify the genuine long-term difficulties of their situation.
Perhaps these questions can be usefully grouped under three heads: society, pedagogy and assessment.
Society
Relative to British society, Denmark is small and homogeneous.
In such circumstances, it is clearly easier to establish more or less uniform procedures on a more or less informal basis, and to disseminate to the general public the sort of information which will generate trust.
Britain, on the other hand — even England — is large, disparate and quarrelsome.
It contains many different kinds of groupings (social, political, religious, ethnic) and economic inequalities are pronounced and growing.
The pressure to secure a greater measure of uniformity by explicit and formal statement is considerable as is a growing tendency to secure change, or  block it, by litigation.
In education, the period between the remarkably inexplicit 1944 Education Act (based on the social consensus of wartime) through the closer definitions of circular 10/65 and subsequent legislation in the 1970s and 80s, to the book-length ERA and its accompanying barrage of programmes of study etc, presents, among other things, an historical progression from implicit to explicit.
That progression is not just a matter of fashion: it reflects quite profound movements in society and its values.
Pedagogy
The HMI study indicates,en passant , certain features of the Danish folkeskole which seem likely to have strengthened public trust in the professional authority of teachers.
The Folkeskole is a unified ten-year school (ages 7–17): ‘Just over half the 1,900 or so folkeskoler have 10 forms’.
Even in split schools (mainly in rural areas) there are presumably close links between levels, and a high degree of curriculum continuity.
This is linked to class sizes which by British standards are small (averaging about 18) and highly stable.
They are basically undifferentiated and frequently led by the same class teacher over a 10-year period:
Most Danish pupils remain in the same class group for all subjects for all nine or 10 years of their primary and lower secondary education….
A very important feature of the folkeskole is the emphasis placed on the role of the class teacher, who is the major link between the school, pupils and parents.
Children often have the same class teacher (usually the teacher of Danish or mathematics) throughout their nine or 10 years in school, and as a result teacher-pupil relationships are close and relaxed.
As well as reducing the control problems which beset British secondary schools, and overcoming some of the difficulties of ‘secondary transfer’, this mode of organisation must also strengthen the relationship between parents and schools.
In short, it must extend into the secondary age-range the trust still felt by many parents for the professional judgement of primary teachers.
HMIs very properly pass no judgement on whether mixed-ability grouping combined with ‘close and relaxed’ teacher-pupil relationships produce higher or lower standards of achievement by age 16 or 17.
Nonetheless, these circumstances point inexorably to the difficulty of emulating the Danes.
In the foreseeable future we are unlikely to achieve an average class size of 18, or a stable class group over the primary/secondary range, or a single class teacher linking both primary and secondary phases, or a more relaxed attitude towards assessment.
Much of the virtue of the Danish example lies in the culture of the school and the relationship between school and society.
In Britain that culture and that  relationship are very different, and there seems no quick and simple way in which Britain can borrow techniques or copy successes.
Assessment
Many of these problems are concentrated upon the area of assessment.
To state the dilemma baldly: if you trust teachers as professionals, you will be able to take a correspondingly relaxed view of testing and thus mitigate some of the more interventionist or authoritarian aspects of a defined central curriculum.
If you do not so trust them, then correspondingly elaborate testing procedures are required to monitor their impact and effectiveness.
This in turn may tend to downgrade the less easily assessable aspects of the educational process.
In the context of Western Europe, Britain is exceptional in two respects.
Historically, she has laid much greater stress than her continental neighbours on sophisticated external examinations at the end of compulsory schooling.
In England and Wales particularly, the GCSE now dominates the secondary curriculum from 14 to 16 (‘Keystage 4’) and, many would argue, before that as well.
The National Curriculum simply confirms and consolidates this fact.
This preoccupation with formal assessment is linked to the unique importance of a highly specialist 18+ examination (A level in England: the Scottish system is less extreme) which is also an instrument of selection for higher education.
As a result of the ERA, this tradition has now been supplemented and extended by the statutory introduction of formal assessments at ages 7, 11, 14 and 16.
The increased prominence of assessment at all stages of compulsory education is the feature which now most clearly distinguishes the British central curriculum from its continental neighbours.
It is perhaps also the feature which from a ‘curriculum manager's’ viewpoint most restricts his or her professional discretion — all the more so because it is an extension of the existing educational culture: an innovation which to many people seems commonsensical, operating as it were‘with the grain’of the system.
If I wished to be cruel about the discussion this far, I would suggest that it has the evasive character of much comparative writing.
The chapter has established, in the words of the HMI study of Denmark, ‘interesting parallels and differences’.
It has then made two points:(1) that other people manage curricula within centralised systems, which is encouraging; but (2) that other people have cultural backgrounds which make it easier for them to manage curricula within centralised systems, which is discouraging.
Curriculum managers reading this discussion may rightly feel that this magisterial balance has rather little to offer to their own pressing  concerns.
If we are to profit from an international perspective on curriculum management, we have surely to deepen our questions.
To move beyond the Cook's tour stage, this chapter must address at least three central questions: What is managing a curriculum?
What is particular about the circumstances under which this curriculum has to be managed?
Where can management effort be most effectively applied?
What is managing a curriculum?
Like the HMIs, I have more or less avoided this question so far, mainly by talking about ‘curriculum managers’.
There is, however, a very real difficulty here, and one which curriculum managers in the United Kingdom may not have thought about: that as a concept, ‘managing the curriculum’ is highly culture-specific.
This may be demonstrated by attempting to translate it into French or German.
Gestion du programme ?
Lehrplan-verwaltung ?
What activities could such phrases refer to?
The French programme, for example, is a list of aims and activities published with authority -the authority, ultimately, of the state.
The teacher, too, as a fonctionnaire or civil servant, also has authority, which as well as the requirement to deliver to pupils something more or less resembling the words in the programme, includes also the authority to interpret, modify, supplement and extend.
This teacher normally has no colleague in school with anything like the dominant, even entrepreneurial attributes of ‘a good head of department’ in a British secondary school; in addition his or her headteacher is in principle primus inter pares , with an essentially administrative role: attending to the smooth running of the various councils and committees which since 1968 have clustered round the French school, negotiating with the Ministry usually through its inspectorate, to obtain an adequate supply of teachers, etc.
Such a person manages the curriculum in an important but strictly limited way by affecting the conditions within which it is delivered.
By personal charisma and/or alliance with other fonctionnaires with a more direct professional stake in curriculum content and delivery (especially, inspectors), he or she may also and exceptionally become a ‘curriculum leader’ in the British sense, but that is achieved at the cost of encroaching upon the formal responsibility of other professionals.
Thus when the HMI team says of Danish heads that ‘some see themselves as curriculum leaders, others do not’, they are in reality applying a British idea to a situation which it does not altogether fit.
Danish schools whose heads do not see themselves as curriculum leaders are not necessarily sunk in apathy or  mechanically carrying out the dictates of a central programme.
Managing a curriculum has at least three interlocking components:(a) a formal statement (more or less detailed or precise);(b) those who deliver (teachers), and who enjoy more or less autonomy, responsibility, public confidence, etc;(c) a hierarchy which monitors and supervises delivery, carries varying degrees of ‘clout’vis-à-vis teachers, and operates at varying degrees of distance from the classroom.
An international perspective should remind British curriculum managers that, because of their present historical circumstances, they are preoccupied with (a) to the exclusion of (b) and (c).
It should also remind them that present relationships of power and authority were evolved to reflect a diffused distribution of decision-making and an imprecise definition of curriculum.
In such a framework, individuals were often encouraged to take substantial initiatives and carry subordinates with them.
If (a) becomes more detailed and precise, then presumably the system as a whole should place more emphasis on each teacher's equal professional responsibility, and less on exceptional charismatic individuals and inspirational management techniques.
This is, of course, exactly what some of the rhetoric says.
If teachers remain sceptical it is in part because many actors at all levels (including the Secretary of State himself) still think simply in terms of adding (a) to (b) and (c) without modifying the relations between them.
They tend also to overlook the fact that changes in these factors are gradual -a matter of small steps rather than sudden leaps or dramatic disjunctions.
The establishment of a National Curriculum has certainly been a major historical movement, but it is not the case that nothing was defined prior to 1988 and now everything is defined.
That is equally evident in other countries, whether formally centralised or not.
It suggests, surely that the job of curriculum management is not simply a matter of trying to insert new ideas into old systems as rapidly and painlessly as possible, but has a number of levels or dimensions, for example:
(a)
day-to-day management (eg distributing resources, personnel, organising timetables, etc in ways which enable teachers to ‘deliver curriculum’ more effectively).
(b)
communication: easing the flow of information from centre to periphery and back.
(c)
managing structures of relationship so that teacher responsibility is enhanced and top-down direction minimised.
(d)
planning: long-term shifts of content and style.
Tasks (a) and (b) are relatively straightforward: for them, examples from other societies may be less useful, more in the nature of ‘tips and wrinkles’ than of deeper insights.
Tasks (c) and (d) are, however, complex and daunting, and easy to neglect in the light of the more clamorous needs of (a) and (b).
To say anything sensible about (d) and (c), substantial long-term studies of changes over time as well as in different places are called for.
What is particular about the circumstances under which the curriculum changes of the ERA have to be managed?
A curriculum is such a complex device, and requires the combined contributions, sustained over time, of so many different groups and individuals, that radical curriculum change has often been associated with political upheaval or even war.
One thinks, for example, of the Russian Revolution, or the Cultural Revolution in China, or the combined impact upon the Tanzanian curriculum of independence from colonial rule and an undisputed leader with a strong and idealistic interest in education.
Political upheaval and war are not necessarily associated with curriculum change; and even when they are, change seems habitually to be followed by a reversion to the status quo ante , a tendency to equate change with relabelling, a reassertion of institutional inertia.
Hawes, for example, has tellingly demonstrated how the failures of curriculum change in Africa are deeply rooted in structures, resources and attitudes.
By contrast, the norm for curriculum change is for it to occur piecemeal and gradually over long periods.
Curriculum history (still quite thin on the ground) may stress prominent innovators or pioneering national laws or documents, but many classroom practitioners are usually hardly aware that their practice is being slowly, almost subliminally modified by a variety of external pressures.
Current British circumstances are unusual in that the reforms aimed at are highly ambitious, yet lack obvious external impetus of the sort which would clear the way to radical change.
It really is rather unusual for a more or less stable democracy to undertake changes of this scope in peacetime.
Whatever the reasons for this anomaly, the outcome for curriculum managers is highly contradictory.
They must attempt to innovate over a very broad front using people and structures which are still firmly in place from the ancien régime .
In some ways the parallel is more with Spain after the death of Franco, than with Russia after the death of the Tsar.
Allied to this fundamental oddity is another, built into the provisions of the ERA: a basic confusion between centralism and localism.
The National Curriculum sections of the ERA, essentially  centralising and directive in character, sit uneasily with a variety of other arrangements which undermine the Local Education Authority as intermediary between centre (DES) and periphery (school): ‘opting out’, City Technology Colleges (CTCs), open enrolment, local management of schools (LMS).
Built into the very heart of the new system is a tension between, on the one hand a central requirement (which is also a local or individual entitlement), and on the other a fragmented delivery system supposedly made dynamic by competition for pupils, parental support, finance and staff.
In an international perspective, what is proposed looks curiously hybrid.
It is certainly not a typical European centralised system along the lines of France, Italy or Sweden; nor is it a carefully defined mixed economy like West Germany, where curriculum is centralised, but under the aegis of regional parliaments; nor is it a highly localised system with a multiplicity of small school districts, as in parts of the United States.
The post-ERA system has in fact elements of all three patterns.
At the time of writing, it is not at all clear how the resultant tensions will in practice be resolved.
The impact of LMS has yet to be felt, and attention is still fixated on the flow of central documentation and regulation: curriculum managers' prime concerns remain those of translating words into classroom reality.
Before very long, however, the entitlement aspects of ERA will surely lead to conflict and litigation, as parents discover that laboratories and equipment are insufficient to deliver ‘science’ to their children, or that a guaranteed first foreign language cannot be taught because there are insufficient qualified staff.
Britain has a whole new culture of public education to work out: new expectations, customs, relationships and attitudes more profound than the new vocabulary which is at present being learnt.
In particular, teachers will somehow have to be ‘managed’ to participate in change, not just as foot soldiers obedient to curriculum manager ‘officers’, but as genuine participant professionals.
The penalty for not involving them in decisions and discussions beyond their classroom walls is considerable.
In the light of the circumstances of change and the inherent contradictions of the legislation, the inertial deadweight of the system must surely be extremely powerful.
That could be a recipe for stagnation and frustration; but it could also be another way of emphasising the potential importance of curriculum managers intelligent enough to give scope to individuals and to exploit the coming confusions.
Where can management effort be most effectively applied?
At present(autumn 1989) the British education system resembles an ant-hill to which a boot has just administered an energetic kick.
In a frenzy, the ants (teachers, ‘management’) rush hither and thither.
More than anything, they need perspective, a sense of overall direction, or purpose beyond mere busyness.
One way of obtaining that perspective is by looking at the experience of foreign systems.
HMIs have clearly sensed that in launching their series of studies, even if their highly focused character may convey the subliminal message that they are interested more in mechanisms and techniques than in broader perspectives.
What I have attempted to argue in this chapter is that to consider our own experience against an international background reminds us of three linked points:
(a)
We are all part of an existing culture of education: the ERA aims at a substantial change in that culture.
(b)
That change will take a long time, and be accompanied by increasing turbulence.
(c)
The turbulence will be all the greater because of the confusions of the underlying thinking as it has emerged from the political process.
If this interpretation is correct, curriculum managers who wish to manage the curriculum in the sense of modifying it so that it is better adapted to the needs of real children and a real society, will be best advised not simply to resist and criticise, but rather to use the power that many people at all levels of the system actually have.
As McLean points out, under Mrs Thatcher, ‘Legislative proposals tend to reflect undiluted political programmes rather than a compromise between competing interests.
Compromise tends to occur at the level of implementation’.
No curriculum, new or old, can be implemented or changed without the best efforts of very large numbers of professional people.
This process is already evident in the composition of the first programmes of study (science and  English ).
The Secretary of State was able to influence the drafting of the terms of reference and the composition of the working parties; yet the working parties necessarily contained a majority of professionals and in due course reported in ways which again the Secretary of State could only partially modify.
Thus the programmes of study represent not tablets of the law handed down by Kenneth Baker, but compromises.
This process will inevitably continue down the  system to the point where the words are actually translated into teaching acts.
This process will continue whether or not teachers have a broader grasp of their place in the whole process.
What an international perspective can add is a sense of the contradictions or points of stress in the new structures: the attempt to shift the whole system by floods of detailed description and prescription and the consequent overloading of channels of communication; the preoccupation with assessment to the point where it may overwhelm the teaching; the ambivalent character of statutory syllabuses as being at once central regulation and individual entitlement; the potentially disruptive and anomalous role of governing bodies which may act simply as local guardians of centrally determined norms, but may also be educated to accept more subtle and flexible views of what schools can and should do, and may develop the political clout to do something about it.
All these contradictions represent opportunities for curriculum managers, who are themselves products of an ancien régime which laid greater stress on the teacher as professional leader and entrepreneur than in most other countries.
The task is now to create a new ‘culture of education’ in which curriculum is better supported and understood by the community.
What that culture will look like is difficult to predict, but it will certainly not be the same as its Danish equivalent, given the very real historical and cultural differences between our two societies.
Nor in my view will it look much like Kenneth Baker's essentially hierarchical or military vision of a chain of command from centre to periphery, because curricula are not ultimately manageable in that way.
The new culture will certainly require the forging of new alliances between education professionals and other groups, a redefinition of teacher roles and professional autonomy, a greater willingness to communicate and negotiate.
The ERA has not closed the debate; rather, it has started a new one.
Until we can understand in what ways it is both new and contradictory, our ‘curriculum management’ will remain crisis management.
The national scene Christopher Tipple, director of Education, Northumberland CC
There was not much to object to in the bones of the debate.
It is much harder to argue for an unclear and complicated arrangement for arriving at what is taught in schools than for the logic of a national curriculum.
Once, therefore, a national curriculum for England and Wales appeared on the agenda, the general reaction was to wonder why it had never been seriously considered before.
After all, almost everybody else had one.
In theoretical terms, too, it is hard to object because, of course, everybody has their own detailed definition of what it might contain.
So the almost universal reaction to the proposal was ‘yes…but’.
The proposals for testing and assessment were more cautiously received.
The ‘buts’ were stronger and more numerous.
Again, however, there was little to object to in the broad fundamental.
No one would argue that, in principle and in practice, testing should not take place and information be made available to all those who need to know about it.
Again all good schools already monitored their pupils' progress, so how could one object?
It is the flesh, not the bones that are potentially a very serious problem.
As sound principles come to be reflected in legal phrases and in parliamentary orders, and as good intentions begin to generate a huge superstructure of bureaucracy, there are many causes for concern.
Given the detail in which it has been decided the curriculum will be determined and assessed, these problems are inevitable.
To expect a national recipe fully to reflect the various needs and circumstances of an advanced industrial nation of over 55 million people and 25,000 schools is not realistic.
This chapter, then, looks at the flesh, at the national machinery  for curriculum determination and control in its present state of evolution.
Dominating it, of course, is the Secretary of State.
Not an individual but, as Sir Keith Joseph used wisely to refer to it, ‘the holder of my office’.
Immense and quite detailed power now attaches to that office and, to a greater or lesser degree, depending on the actual holder, on the Civil Service and particularly the Department of Education and Science.
Indeed their centralising hand is increasingly obvious as more and more of the state machinery appears to public view through what one senior member of the DES himself described as a ‘snowstorm of circulars and an avalanche of administrative memoranda’.
Let us look at what is being erected.
The foundation is, naturally, the Act itself.
It entitles every pupil in maintained schools to a curriculum which is balanced and broadly based and which, as the Act says:
(a)
promotes the spiritual, moral, cultural, mental and physical development of pupils at the school and of society and
(b)
prepares such pupils for the opportunities, responsibilities and experiences of adult life.
The impact of all this is well summarised in the DES booklet The National Curriculum, from Policy to Practice .
This makes it clear that each pupil is entitled, as a result of the law, to a broad and balanced curriculum which is relevant to his or her particular needs.
It is made clear that this does not simply mean that each school must offer such a curriculum; each individual pupil must take it up.
The booklet goes on to make two further fundamental points about the curriculum.
Firstly the curriculum ‘must promote development in all the main areas of learning and experience which are widely accepted as important’.
‘Widely accepted’ of course means accepted by the Secretary of State, after an appropriate process of consultation and through a process of parliamentary approval, about which more below.
Secondly ‘the curriculum must also serve to develop the pupil as an individual, as a member of society and as a future adult member of the community with a range of personal and social opportunities and responsibilities’.
Wholly admirable, but perhaps not best expressed in terms of individual academic subjects, nor in a highly complex machinery of published testing and assessment.
The philosophy then, is unexceptionable; it is the superstructure designed to achieve it where problems begin.
This is not just because giving practical expression to such broad objectives in any meaningful way is inherently very difficult, it is also because the superstructure has to meet demands for close and detached accountability: to parents, to governors, to local education authorities and, of course, to the Secretary of State.
The holder of that office must have some way of measuring whether such a huge and expensive change has been  successful.
The operation of market forces through open enrolment, CTCs and opting out must have something to bite on.
But these requirements do not sit easily with the generous philosophy of the DES booklet.
They are political requirements, not educational ones.
National Curriculum Council
The first pillar of the new curriculum establishment in England is the National Curriculum Council (NCC).
There is also a Curriculum Council for Wales.
Each of these bodies is, by statute, comprised of not less than 10 and not more than 15 members appointed by the Secretary of State.
The Secretary of State also appoints the chairman and deputy chairman of each body.
In practice the membership comprises a range of interests including a Chief Education Officer, adviser, two headteachers and representatives of higher education.
Its terms of reference are:
(a)
to keep all aspects of the curriculum for maintained schools under review
(b)
to advise the Secretary of State on such matters concerned with the curriculum for maintained schools as he may refer to it or as it may see fit
(c)
to advise the Secretary of State on, and if so requested by him, assist him to carry out, programmes of research and development for purposes connected with the curriculum for schools
(d)
to publish and disseminate information relating to the curriculum for schools
(e)
to carry out such ancillary activities as the Secretary of State may direct.
Although they are widely drawn, they have not included the task of producing the attainment targets and programme of study for the foundation subjects.
This has been undertaken, to date, for mathematics, science, English, and design and technology by non-statutory working parties also nominated by the Secretary of State.
Other subjects followed.
In terms of the law, the Secretary of State is empowered to lay down all aspects of the curriculum, except for the time devoted to each subject and the style in which it shall be taught.
Presumably it was both practical and political reasons that led him to the subject working party strategy.
To have devised the material ‘in house’ using DES and HMI would have been and would have been seen to be unhealthily parochial; to have used the National Curriculum Council would have involved too great a delay.
Moreover the NCC has its own secretariat whilst subject working parties had, perforce, the DES providing this crucial function.
The size of these working partis has been small, usually between seven and 12, again recruited from the ranks of headteachers, chief education officers, advisers and representatives of higher education.
Like the NCC itself they also had an industrialist, a feature which our continental neighbours find curious and which is not generally reflected in their own curriculum working parties.
Not even in Japan, where curriculum revision is very much the province of the civil servants, namely the Monbusho or Ministry of Education, and where vocational elements are deliberately left to the post-18 phase of education, is this the case.
These first working parties have had to work very quickly, often moving into uncharted waters as they sought, for example, to make meaningful distinctions between attainment levels 7 and 8 in one aspect of their subject.
Speed has been essential because the Secretary of State's timetable is formidable (see below).
Their reports have been published and have hitherto formed the basis of the Secretary of State's proposals for the National Curriculum.
The National Curriculum Council has consulted all interested parties and published a summary of the results of the process together with its recommendations to the Secretary of State.
Should the Secretary of State decide not to give effect to any of the recommendations he has received from the Council, he is required to publish a statement explaining his reasons.
The Secretary of State's final proposals are then embodied in orders in Parliament.
The draft orders are again the subject of consultation, following which parliamentary approval turns them into legal binding requirements.
It is perhaps too early to make judgements about the meaningfulness of this sequence of events.
It promises an openness which is a welcome antidote to the heavy centralisation embodied in the whole process.
As a result of this openness it is known that the Secretary of State chose to modify the Mathematics Working Party's recommendations, particularly in the area of ‘applied mathematics’, that consultation revealed that most of those consulted preferred the stance that the working party had adopted, that the Curriculum Council nevertheless made recommendations which accorded with the Secretary of State's view and that their recommendations were, not surprisingly, accepted.
This openness also showed that in relation to science the consultative process revealed massive support for the working party's view on the time to be devoted to science and on the position of balanced science but that the Council, with some reluctance, made recommendations in accordance with the Secretary of State's different view.
Again, not surprisingly, these were accepted.
In relation to English, however, the Council showed more sympathy for the working party's views in its recommendations to the Secretary of State.
The Secretary of State therefore made some changes which he described as clarifying and amplifying the Council's recommendations.
So far then, it is clear that the Secretary of State is going to Set his way.
This is particularly so when it is remembered that the working parties are serviced by the DES, whose influence on a group of disparate experts meeting only intermittently and working under great pressure, is very considerable indeed.
The DES also has high powered assessors on the National Curriculum Council itself.
Although, then, the Council has a number of other potentially very useful roles described below, in this key process of getting the main building blocks of the National Curriculum into place.
it has not so far provided any really noticeable challenge to the Secretary of State's views.
Given its structure and the circumstances of the time, no one should be surprised.
The Council does, however, have other tasks.
The Secretary of State has asked it to advise specifically on the whole curriculum context within which work on individual foundation subjects should be carried forward.
In particular it is looking at cross-curricular issues, including areas such as the role of careers guidance, health education and other aspects of personal and social education, environmental education and economic awareness and it is considering how these may best be reflected in the curriculum.
The Council has to try and ensure that the subject ‘bits’ of the curriculum form a coherent whole and somehow deliver the broad and balanced curriculum enshrined in the noble opening passages of the Act.
A number of working groups have been set up by the Council to look at these matters, but the truth is that the whole curriculum approach is rendered horrendously difficult by the subject structure and by the inevitable fact that the various subject working party reports are coming on stream over a period of at least four to five years.
Certainly an observer of the National Curriculum scene in France or West Germany would have to admit that achieving successful cross-curricular approaches is extremely difficult and has not been adequately solved, even with their long experience.
The Council will also have to keep the curriculum under review and promote change where this is felt to be necessary.
This is not an immediate problem in the hectic process of establishing the great new structure.
But it is going to be necessary because, by the time the later subjects come on stream, there will certainly be a need to look at the first ones again, such as maths and science.
There is provision in the Education Act, under special circumstances, for the suspension of all or part of the National Curriculum, so as to allow developmental work to take place.
Once, however, the National Curriculum entitlement is in place it does  not seem likely that parents will welcome any ‘experiment’.
Moreover, continental experience of a national curriculum suggests that once it is in place, achieving change is extremely difficult.
It becomes part of the establishment.
The diffuse, even messy arrangements that characterised the old order did at least encourage change.
The new central machinery will not make it easy.
The Council will also be producing in-service materials for teachers to help them cope with the changes and, provided this is prepared and delivered in close collaboration with local education authorities, as is the stated intention, this should be very helpful provided the Council avoids being prescriptive about teaching style.
A cruel analysis of the last 30 years in education might say that the succession of Schools Council, then the Schools Curriculum Development Committee and then the NCC neatly summarises the way that education has been perceived over this period.
The Schools Council, with much union and local authority participation would, in this analysis, typify the era of expansion, experimentation and proliferation.
Education development for the benefit of the providers, not the consumers.
The Schools Curriculum Development Committee, with its modest budget and little union input would, on this model, typify the era of cost cutting in education, of restraint on the professionals without compensating input from elsewhere.
Finally, the NCC would represent the arrival of strong central direction, filling the vacuum never really filled by the SCDC; with much greater powers than any of its predecessors but very much on the Secretary of State's terms.
It is ironic that this should have happened under a Government so strongly committed to decentralisation, privatisation and the reduction of the role of the state.
It has, however, brought to the surface a dormant temptation evident in even the most illustrious of Mrs Thatcher's predecessors.
R A Butler tells a most revealing story in The Art of the Possible .
He (Churchill) saw me after his afternoon nap and was purring like a tiger.
He began, ‘You have been in the House fifteen years and it's time you were promoted…and I now want you to go to the Board of Education.
I think that you can leave your mark there.
You will be independent.
Besides’, he continued, with rising fervour, ‘you will be in the war.
You will move poor children from here to there’ and he lifted up and evacuated imaginary children from one side of his blotting pad to the other.
‘This will be very difficult’.
He went on ‘I am too old now to think you can improve people's natures.
Everyone has to learn to defend himself.
I should not object if you could introduce a note of patriotism in the schools’, And then, with a grin…
‘Tell the children that Wolfe won Quebec’.
I said that I would like to influence what was taught in schools but that this was always frowned upon.
Here he looked very earnest and commented, ‘of course not by  instruction or order but by suggestion’.
I then said that I had always looked forward to going to the Board of Education.
I were given the chance.
Schools Examination and Assessment Council
The second great pillar of the new curriculum arrangements is, of course, the Schools Examination and Assessment Council (SEAC).
With much wider powers than its predecessor, the Secondary Examinations Council (SEC), SEAC is also heir to the recommendations of another of the Secretary of State's ad hoc working parties, the Task Group on Assessment and Testing (TGAT) which was set up at the same time as the first curriculum working groups and, like them, worked under enormous pressure to produce proposals for the assessment of the National Curriculum.
Since the seeds of much of SEAC's work lie in TGAT, it is worth pausing over what this body tried to do.
The size and difficulty of the task facing the 10 members of the Group between September and December 1987 could hardly be exaggerated.
It is worth quoting their terms of reference in full.
1
To advise the Secretary of State on the practical considerations which should govern all assessment including testing of attainment at age (approximately) 7, 11, 14 and 16 within a national curriculum, including the marking scale or scales and kinds of assessment including testing to be used, the need to differentiate so that the assessment can promote learning across a range of abilities, the relative roles of informative and of diagnostic assessment, the uses to which the results of assessment should be put, the moderation requirements needed to secure credibility of assessments, and the publication and other services needed to support the system — with a view to securing assessment and testing arrangements which are simple to administer, understandable by all in and outside the education service, cost effective and supportive of learning in schools.
2
In making recommendations, to take into account the need not to increase calls on teachers' and pupils' time for activities which do not directly promote learning, and to limit costs.
3
To advise on the possible staging of the introduction of assessment, including testing to reflect the need for the process to be manageable and for teachers to be adequately trained.
Few, if any, committees can have faced a tougher assignment.
Faced with the impossible task of finding something that was cheap, simple and fair, the Group opted, to their credit, for a system that would be as fair as possible in all the circumstances, letting the other criteria take care of themselves.
They argued that the basis of the national assessment system should be essentially formative, that is designed to contribute to learning and not simply  summative, by which is meant the simple recording of acquired knowledge or skill.
They also emphasised that all assessment information about an individual should be treated as confidential, and confined to those with a clear ‘need to know’.
They suggested that pupil results should be presented as an attainment profile and that for each subject there should be a very small number of ‘profile components’ which reflected the variety of knowledge skills and understanding to which a study of the subject gave rise.
They went on to urge that the national system should employ tests susceptible to a wide range of mode of presentation, operation and response.
These are to be called Standard Assessment Tasks (SATs).
The SATs, it was argued, should be integrated into the curriculum as far as possible using a wide variety of practical tasks and observations.
Moreover the national system should be based on a combination of SATs and moderated teacher ratings.
The Group saw group moderation by teachers as a vital element, as being a process with significant benefit to teachers in itself as well as providing a crucial counterbalance to crudely over-simplified test results.
Subjects were divided into 10 levels of attainment with the average seven-year-old at about level 2, the average 11-year-old at level 4, the average 14-year-old at level 5/6 and the average 16-year-old at level 6/7.
However, it was made clear that the assessments were not to be age-related.
At any given age a child might be on quite different levels for difference subjects.
It was in this way that the Group sought to avoid the creation of a 7+, 11+ and 14+ type of selection examination.
Only on the question of how assessment results should be presented in the light of socio-economic circumstances did the report lack credibility.
Resisting the idea that results should somehow be ‘doctored’ to reflect such circumstances, the Group fell back on the suggestion that LEAs or governors might be expected to issue statements that would put the results of particular schools in the right context.
Quite how the governors were to explain to parents that their school's results were poor because of their own poor economic circumstances was not explained.
This is, of course, a very difficult area and the Group did not produce a credible response to the problem, because there isn't one, once the crucial decision to publish results at all these ages has been taken.
The Secretary of State accepted the TGAT report as a basis for progress and commissioned further reports from the Group including one on the problems of practical implementation which  gave a glimpse of the elaborate machinery that would be necessary.
SEAC is a body similar in size and composition to the NCC.
It, too has very wide powers:
(a)
to keep all aspects of examinations and assessment under review
(b)
to advise the Secretary of State on such matters concerned with examinations and assessment as he may refer to it or as it may see fit
(c)
to advise the Secretary of State on, and if so requested by him, assist him to carry out, programmes of research and development for purposes conflicted with examinations and assessment
(d)
to publish and disseminate…information relating to examinations and assessment
(e)
to make arrangements with appropriate bodies for the moderation of assessments made in pursuance of assessment arrangements
(f)
to advise the Secretary of State on the exercise of his powers under Section 5(1) of this Act
(g)
to carry out such ancillary activities as the Secretary of State may direct.
The reference to Section 5(1) is to the power which the Act gives the Secretary of State to approve all qualifications granted by outside bodies and arising from courses of study pursued by pupils of compulsory school age in maintained schools.
The Secretary of State has appointed SEAC to undertake this approval process on his behalf.
As with so many other aspects of the practical implementation of the Act, there is here the real potential for overkill.
Clearly it is felt that the Secretary of State has to approve external qualifications taken by pupils in maintained schools.
Given his detailed control of programmes of study and attainment targets it is difficult to envisage credible examinations that would not reflect these.
However, no loophole must be left, so SEAC is busy drawing up large schedules of such qualifications which catch all sorts of subject competitions as well as mainstream examinations.
It is quite likely that the bureaucratic procedure involved in securing the Secretary of State's approval, via SEAC, to these competitions means they may well wither away.
That is, assuming there will be room for them once the full panoply of testing and assessment is in place.
As the heir of TGAT, SEAC is now considering appropriate assessment arrangements and has commissioned a number of consortia to produce SATs.
As the heir of SEC it is monitoring and controlling the GCSE.
Both NCC and SEAC will be advising the Secretary of State about what information on the curriculum and results of assessment should be required to be made available to parents, or to be published more widely.
SEAC will also advise on the form in which teachers' assessments should be recorded, how results should be reported and on the recommendations in the report of the Records  of Achievement National Steering Committee, published in January 1989.
The outcome of all this national activity is a formidable timetable in schools, many of which will, over the next few years, also have to face local financial management and the introduction, on a national basis, of teacher appraisal.
It is summarised in Table 2.1.
And so the juggernaut rolls on.
Inevitably this level of prescription will produce a huge demand for information.
The creation, refinement, processing and publishing of this information will produce an industry in itself.
Siberian forests will be felled and computer fortunes made.
Whether children will get a better education as a result of it all is by no means clear.
There is also a grave danger that the essence of education will be forgotten.
As a definition for the essence of education I would settle for ‘the mastery of the processes by which knowledge can be acquired and a maturity and sympathy gained from exposure to the mainstreams of intellectual thought’.
This is not a definition coined by an educationalist.
They are is the qualities which Robert Reid, Chief Executive of Shell UK was looking for in new recruits, as he told the North of England Education Conference in the Isle of Man in 1989.
Yet, as ever increasing statistical data piles up, these objectives are too easily forgotten.
George Canning got it exactly right almost 200 years ago when he addressed the House of Commons:
Away with the cant of ‘measure not men’, the idle supposition that it is the harness and not the horses that draw the chariot along.
It the comparison must be made, if the distinction must be taken, men are everything, measures comparatively nothing.
The builders of the new machinery, principally the DES, do so with the good intention of putting the law into practice.
But good intentions make notoriously treacherous paving stones.
And there must be a serious question mark against the massive powers acquired by the holder of the office of Secretary of State, which may be thought less than healthy in a democracy normally dependent on a system of checks and balances.
Questions must be levelled too, at a system that requires not only legally prescribed attainment targets and legally prescribed programmes of study, but also standardised national testing.
Most other countries have one or two of these ingredients, but not all three.
It has been described as the belt, braces and garotte approach.
Yet it would be wrong to end this chapter on a defeatist note.
After all, we approach this new machinery from a quite different tradition to our continental neighbours and therefore stand a much better chance of humanising it.
Weaknesses in the old order will   be remedied.
Greater precision of objective and firmer guidance is generally being welcomed by teachers and parents alike.
The trick will be to distil these desirable attributes from the new arrangements and to discard the harmful elements; once they have been shown to be so.
The next few years may be, in some respects, painful, but history suggests that the excesses will be eroded.
The pendulum which seems to have swung very far in one direction will either swing back or over in a circle and the extreme position will not be maintained.
Perhaps we should concentrate on the potential opportunities and rewards involved in the process of getting there, rather than the doubtful pleasures of its lull achievement.
There is more than an even chance that the end will, in the end, be changed by a wise deployment of the means.
And it's a journey that's been travelled before, even in Ancient Greece:
When you start on your journey to Ithaca,
then pray that the road is long,
full of adventure, full of knowledge.
Do not fear the Lestrygonians
and the Cyclopes and the angry Poseidon.
You will never meet such as these on your path,
if your thoughts remain lofty, if a fine
emotion touches your body and your spirit.
You will never meet the Lestrygonians,
the Cyclopes and the fierce Poseidon,
if you do not carry them within your soul,
if your soul does not raise them up before you.
Then pray that the road is long.
That the summer mornings are many,
that you will enter ports seen for the first time
with such pleasure, with such joy!
Stop at Phoenician markets,
and purchase fine merchandise,
mother-of-pearl and corals, amber and ebony,
and pleasurable perfumes of all kinds,
buy as many pleasurable perfumes as you can;
visit hosts of Egyptian cities,
to learn and learn from those who have knowledge…
Ithaca has given you the beautiful voyage.
Without her you would never have taken the road.’
C P Cavafy, ‘Ithaca’,Complete Poems , Hogarth Press, London
What does it mean to the youngster?
Tim Brighouse, Professor of Education, Keele University
There has been much discussion over the last decade about an ‘entitlement’ curriculum.
The idea of entitlement probably represents an attempt, during a much longer debate about the need for a ‘national’ curriculum, to bring into focus the child's individual needs and rights: it is needed to counterbalance any propensity towards the state's collective needs — totalitarianism if you will — which a move towards a nationally prescribed curriculum might bring with it.
Of course debate about the National Curriculum has been around a lot longer, but its popularisation and public debate is a relatively recent phenomenon.
It was a ‘secret garden’ at least to David Eccles who when Secretary of State for the second time, in 1962, was determined (against the better judgement of many of its guardians) to strip it of its secrecy.
Eccles' vehicle for clearing the garden's secrecy was the Schools Council — not a very efficient or fast-moving garden Rotavator.
When James Callaghan accelerated the debate in 1976, the quality of discussion was indeed raised, in what turned out to be the Schools Council's declining years, under the combined influence of the Chair, John Tomlinson, and the Secretary, John Mann.
Indeed, the midwifery, if not the conception, of the notion of ‘entitlement’ when applied to the curriculum probably should be credited to those two.
There were, however, other professional and institutional voices  apart from the Schools Council.
Sometimes, presumably in order to try to influence the climate, there was even a little skirmishing at the highest level, about the timing of various publications.
The Practical Curriculum , for example, a useful, practical discussion document for schools from the Schools Council, had to be held up so that it should not upstage an HMI view of the curriculum.
Such frissons of jealousy, petulance and energy-consuming rivalry in presentation are still not unknown in the School Council's genetically different grandchild, the National Curriculum Council, and in its relationship with the DES.
Indeed HMI's influence in the debate has been cumulative, insistent and strong: it began with a briefing paper from Sheila Browne, the Senior Chief HMI, at the time of the Callaghan Ruskin speech, which on a political front launched a debate on education which seemed to run and run, until it was brought to an unexpected denouement and an abrupt closure with the Education Reform Act of 1988.
Probably HMI's greatest influence was Aspects of Secondary Education (1978), which first commented so authoritatively and adversely on the short-changing of youngsters through the unfettered and badly guided option system at the end of the third year of secondary education.
HMI pointed out that the arrangements for choice meant that by the mid-point of the third year, some youngsters had decided to discontinue study of a particular subject — at a point only three-fifths of the way through what was presumably a coherently planned five-year course.
They also observed that for some of those youngsters subsequently the change of direction brought only short-lived renaissance of interest and motivation before the same boredom and lack of achievement returned.
From that analysis there emerged a call for a ‘broad’, ‘balanced’, ‘coherent’‘relevant’ and ‘differentiated’curriculum, in which there should be a good match of learning experience and materials of a particular subject to the child's abilities.
HMI lost no opportunity in ramming the message home, whether in individual school reports, in the ‘Education Observed’ and in the ‘Curriculum Matters’series, or in their annual reports on the ‘effects of public expenditure policies on educational provision’.
The words ‘broad’, ‘balanced,, ‘coherent’, and ‘match’ occur with a reverberating insistence — a kind of ‘two-legs good, four-legs bad’propaganda, which in the end brooked no answer.
The discipline and meticulous care in HMI writing owed a great deal to the changes introduced during Sheila Browne's tenure as Senior Chief Inspector.
It is by no means an unmixed blessing, for while politicians cannot ignore HMI, their own common, insistent and  unquestioning advocacy of certain practices and policies, tends to bind the hands of future HMI  commentaries and to marginalise any substantial, alternative critiques.
So it is proving to be with the National Curriculum.
The influence of the notion of entitlement when applied to the curriculum is, as we have seen, attractive.
Indeed it is so beguiling that it can lead to an accommodation between the educational right and the educational left.
The former welcomes the unexpected certainty that at last‘we shall all know what they are all learning in school’, while the latter sees entitlement as finally pinning down the right of every child, be their circumstances never so mean or deprived, to access to science, maths, modern languages, and so on .
The frequent argument of the left is that a greater clarity on the National Curriculum would provide a lever with which to prise out more resources for the schools.
After all, so the argument runs, once there is a legislative requirement, the need for further resource to implement it brooks no further argument.
Many LEAs which have considered ‘curriculum protection’ arguments, during a decade of falling rolls, will bear witness to that thesis, but they will also honestly point out that in the face of budgetary imperatives, the purity of the curriculum protection policies has been compromised, and even whole schemes deferred or abandoned.
So of course it is proving already with the National Curriculum.
For example let us consider, not the secondary school, with the off quoted prospective examples of teacher shortages in science, modern languages and maths which will render nugatory the pious hopes of implementing the National Curriculum in many secondary schools, but the apparently much simpler case of the primary schools.
Once again there is a looming shortage, both of experienced leadership to implement the National Curriculum in primary schools, as there is an unprecedented turnover of headteachers, but also a prospective shortage of teachers themselves, especially in the early years.
Moreover to implement the change there is no sign of introducing the extra resources which most commentators see as necessary.
Norman Thomas, former Senior Chief HMI (Primary) and author of the ILEA review put the case elegantly, recently:
Primary does not mean simple 
The 1944 Education Act signalled the end of elementary education for children over 11.
The 1988 Education Reform Act ought to mark the end of elementary education for the under-11s.
Elementary education was characterised by the belief that schools needed no more teachers than there were classes.
For many years, secondary schools have had about 40 per cent more teachers (including heads) than classes.
Primary schools have had less than half that margin.
The danger is that this disparity will be enshrined in the formulas for distributing funds that local authorities are adopting as required by the 1988 Act.
It is time to bring the staff of primary and secondary schools into line to recognise that there is no argument for giving 15-year-olds more teachers than seven-year-olds.
Otherwise, the National Curriculum, which promises much, will be a charade.
It is true that primary schools are providing a better educational service (with the possible exceptions of spelling and mental arithmetic) than they were when I began teaching in 1948.
The range of work has increased beyond anyone's dreams.
The quantity and variety of reading and writing, the mathematical ideas and vocabulary, the competence shown by many children in instrumental music, physical education, art and light crafts would have amazed my first class of children, and their teachers too.
A struggling beginning has been made in science, a very modest start in technology and computers.
The National Curriculum is rightly demanding much more.
But the service is not yet good enough by a mile.
The system is based on the view, dating from the days of elementary schools, that education is simple.
More or less any adult can provide the whole curriculum single-handed after being trained to control a class and given an occasional top-up day of in-service training.
Primary education is actually more complex than secondary education.
The latter can often be parcelled up into specialist teaching packets.
For their younger pupils, some secondary schools combine two or three subjects in ‘humanities’ or ‘integrated science’, putting the emphasis on understanding and application of skills.
They do not therefore say that they need fewer teachers.
They recognise that teachers from different subject areas must work alongside each other if the work is to have the necessary sharpness.
This is just as vital in primary schools.
In each of the National Curriculum foundation subjects, there are primary school teachers with more than ordinary  knowledge : out of 160,000 teachers, some 20,000 have qualifications in science, 16,000 in maths, 40,000 in English.
There are not enough — but it is absurd that, under present arrangements, they and others with specialisms have almost no chance of using them directly with other teachers or with children.
The large majority of primary school teachers are officially allocated just over 40 minutes a week away from the classes.
What good is that to the poor soul who is supposed to take the lead in science teaching, when there are seven colleagues requiring help, two or three with neither 0- nor A-level in science, and none with post-initial training of any substance?
Or, for that matter, what good is it to the teacher who has to keep up with the ins and outs of teaching reading and who needs to diagnose the difficulties of Jason, Amil and Della and then advise a colleague on how to help them?
There are times, too, when the class teacher should see the school nurse, the social worker, the educational psychologist and, above all, the parent who cannot wait.
And, of course, all teachers need to prepare their lessons.
For primary schools, the National Curriculum can only be a success if authorities use the opportunity of the new funding formulas to increase their staffing.
Then, at last, elementary education will dies.
Nor is Norman Thomas alone.
Edward Simpson, former Deputy Permanent Secretary at the DES, and ironically in charge of planning for almost a decade, has argued cogently the same case for more resources for primary schools as a result of the introduction of Local Management of Schools.
If the unholy alliance in favour of the National Curriculum is likely to come apart at the seams over the issue of resource, so also, given the very different aspirations of those who support its introduction, there is likely to be a parting of the ways over principles.
‘Pupils should be entitled to the same opportunities wherever they go to school’.
That sentence from the Red Consultative Document provides the clue to the major misunderstanding which so often links those with very different views.
Sometimes those who espouse notions of equal opportunity in education confuse that expression of intent with providing the same for everyone, which of course is a denial of equal opportunity.
Individual children require different treatment.
Moreover, even the definition ‘equal opportunity’ without qualification is insufficient: it could be equal opportunity to fail or succeed according to their innate capacity and backgrounds.
Such advocates would say, ‘It's a hard old world…. the law of the adult world’— from the right, of course.
So those who espouse equal opportunity need to elaborate its purpose.
For most such an elaboration would be, ‘To grow up confident, contributing, competent adult citizens, capable of living harmoniously within our society’.
From this elaboration will flow our obligation to help those without favourable backgrounds to have such a chance.
Given the possibility for agreement, albeit confused and for different reasons, from both left and right, legislation to enforce a National Curriculum should have come as no surprise to the educational world.
For the few unreconstructed opponents of any sort of National Curriculum, still less one which is legislated, there have been two principal objections.
The first lay in the effect it might have on teaching and learning and the second in too great a concentration of power in the hands of the government of the day and especially with one person, the Secretary of State.
It is of course possible to attempt to meet the second objection through the construction of checks and balances, principally through the National Curriculum Council and the Schools Examination and Assessment Council.
The fact that the appointments to such councils are in the hands of the Secretary of State advised by civil servants, makes one question those bodies' ability to be very independent.
One would have had greater confidence if the selection were from a longer list nominated by other bodies unconnected with the government of the day.
It would even have been possible for the  Secretary of State to have a reserve power to insist on ever more names from which to choose.
One's reason for doubt lies not merely in the way selection is made: it is simply that those selected have to be very independent indeed to withstand or divert the direction pushed by permanent staff, all of whom seem already to be behaving with unwonted circumspection.
Nevertheless it is the other objection, namely the effect on children's learning and teachers' teaching which is the most serious.
From the child's viewpoint arguments over management are largely irrelevant.
The nearest attempt to a child's entitlement expressed by adults on their behalf lies in the United Nations Charter.
It has a peculiarly romantic ring about it and refers to ‘special protection, opportunities and facilities to enable them to develop in a healthy and normal manner in freedom and dignity’, to ‘special treatment, education and care’ and ‘love and understanding and an atmosphere of affection and security’.
In much the same vein, one LEA considered recently a draft of a newsletter to parents outlining the implication of those rights so far as a child's education in their early years was concerned.
A sample of the document runs as follows:
Each child is entitled: to be loved and to feel loved, to feel secure, to be well nourished, to be protected, to be recognised and respected, to be praised, to experience responsibility for oneself and for others, to have opportunities to explore and be imaginative, time to explore their own feelings, space to develop emotionally, physically, spiritually, intellectually and socially according to their individual talents.
Each child needs: to be listened to and understood, to be recognised and believed, time to laugh and have fun, time to explore and develop their own feelings, the opportunity to make choices and decisions, time to understand and respect others' cultures: should have the best of what Health and Education can provide.
Such approaches probably owe a great deal to consideration of research by the National Children's Bureau under Dr Mia Pringle and a consideration of children's needs as well as their rights.
They are very different from the underpinning of the National Curriculum's framework which, if similarly old-fashioned, is not so romantic.
Indeed the National Curriculum is expressed in terms of subjects — the same list, technology apart, and in the same order as that contained in the secondary regulations of 1904.
Such a curriculum had served well, and did so for many years afterwards, that small percentage (less than 10$) who enjoyed grammar school education and were marked out to be the leaders of the nation.
Nevertheless to consider the National Curriculum as a list of subjects runs the danger of expressing it in a way which over-emphasises information and a narrow range of skills at the expense of the development of a full range of socially useful skills, attitudes and ideas, which is usually the concern of interested parents and can even be seen in a child's view of the purpose of education.
More seriously, a definition of the curriculum in subject terms alone, militates against the guarantee of ‘breadth, balance and coherence’ which the preceding debate demanded.
For in secondary schools, so often organised in this way, a child's experience may not be as ‘coherent’‘broad’ and ‘balanced’as the curriculum planners imagine.
To illustrate this one has only to look at the account of a pupil pursuit in a school which had thought through clearly its broad curriculum and made plans accordingly.
Notes of a visit to Abbeydale School 
The day started at 8.50 with a tutorial period taken by Mrs Joiner.
Susie was my guide.
She came from Bagnol and had started her day at 8 o'clock: she would arrive home at 4.0 to 4.15 after her bus journey.
Her father and mother, who holiday in France, have organised a job, as a cook, for her when she leaves at sixteen.
She is a ‘low ability’ child in the second year who attended St Mary's School where she remembered the Head playing a guitar.
She prefers secondary school because ‘there is more on’.
‘You meet more people and teachers’.
‘You move about during the day’.
‘I can learn an instrument here’.
‘(can join a club’.
‘We do more different things’.
School had been tiring at first on transfer but she had soon got used to it: originally she had belonged to a number of clubs in the early day (Thursday) when all such activities take place, but now preferred to go home early.
In conversation this appeared to be the pattern of most youngsters and presumably is coinciding with early adolescence.
The day consisted of eight periods of thirty-five minutes each — and one of thirty minutes namely the first, the tutorial period.
Mostly lessons were arranged in double periods.
Each day starts with the tutor period: children gained points, minus or plus, which were displayed (mostly pluses) which could lead to detentions or favourable report comments.
Soon the tannoy system announced all the lower school messages: Mrs Joiner and I were deafened and it was sufficiently painful for me to feel relief when it stopped.
(John Banton confirmed at lunch that the system is only used once a day and I was in a room where he suspects that the volume control may have been defective, He made a note to look into it.)
Otherwise the period was used for pupil chatter apart from the normal chores of reporting absences and dinner money.
There were twenty-six pupils in the group.
Mrs Joiner was very pleasant to the children in her tone and announced success in work for Amnesty International.
The content of the tannoy message and the tutorial period showed the balance towards positive rather than negative messages to children -indeed there was something almost pythonesque about the one negative comment on the tannoy message when it was said ‘You know what we do to transistor radios’.
Susie laughed at that.
There was no assembly but there would be on other days for my group.
Children talked, read horoscopes, collected dinner money and  completed homework.
They talked of clothes and friends.
of music and what they would do at the weekend…
Boys and girls naturally grouped themselves separately.
Lesson 1 OMLAC (French)
Mrs Joiner took what was a bottom set (14 pupils) for French.
We had Eclair and the instructions were in English apart from the opening remarks about opening doors and so on.
Some of the Eclair exercises were faulty in the sense that the tape support was superfluous to the children who had done it already.
By 10.35 am (it was a double lesson) the children were pleased to be on the move.
The French Head of Department said later — as did others — the periods were too long for their subject.
Certainly with lower ability children doing oral work and class work that was true, Whether it would be so if there had been practical tasks associated with the French language is another question.
Mrs Joiner's relationship with the children was very pleasant and she remained remarkably encouraging when they were a little restless.
Susie idly jotted names of friends in her rough book when she was lost.
I honestly do not believe; hat the children I saw will take French in year four, nor that any of them will remember much, if anything, when they are twenty or more.
They have learnt the skills of listening and answering questions.
Incidentally the lesson would have been better if there had been more tape recorders in the school and if the tape had been ready at the right moment.
The time of the children was spent entirely on tape listening (15 minutes) question and answer (25 minutes) and working on their own tor the balance.
Homework was changed in mid-stream but was definitely expected and would be completed.
The teacher spoke to every child during the lesson and when one looked like being missed other children cheerfully pointed out the omission.
There was no occasion on which there was any negative or sarcastic comment to any child.
After ten or fifteen minutes break with Susie when she chatted about her social life, I went to the second lesson.
Lesson 2 Science (double period, Mrs Morden)
Friendly babble of noise.
The children clearly liked her.
Very well prepared and laid out.
She went round groups and helped.
The children in groups of two, three or four, tackled an experiment of mixing hydrochloric acid and sodium hydroxide and then testing for the result and boiling the outcome to see what was left.
It was well tackled by eager students.
They discovered the outcome and recorded it very well.
Mrs Morden spent all the time talking to the groups and helping where needed.
Questions were open and she often made interesting an unexpected connections which clearly stimulated and reassured the children.
Susie liked Science ‘because you do things — and it's a break from normal lessons’.
‘Working with Tracey is much easier than a group because you would have to stand around in the group and not get a chance of doing things.
Besides I see Tracey at the weekends so  we can talk about that’, The bit she did not like was writing it up.
She was a bit careless at adding drops — a kind of baker's dozen approach -but she knew the answer would be salt and she identified the right one.
She even knew that the indicator caused the  discoloration .
She cheered up after writing the experiment because she had obviously done it rather well.
The homework was interesting and demanded more investigation and some discussion with parents: she -the teacher — provided some useful clues for those who could not find names in an encyclopaedia.
Lesson 3 English (double period, Mrs Whittle)
Another very interesting lesson with lots of discussion including group work as a class.
Open and closed questions with a period of miming thrown in.
The actual work was related to scientific observation, enquiry, recording as well as learning how to behave in a group.
The subject matter was home economics and meal preparation.
All the children enjoyed the lesson.
I attach an example of one child's written work 04 a previous lesson which shows something of her view of education and the teacher's comments.
The teacher's comments to children were always friendly, powerful and positive.
As Susie said, 'l like English even though I am not good at it'.
In this she was realistic.
The reason she liked it was the variety and pace of work and the rapport with the teacher.
Fifteen minutes was spent in discussion and ten minutes miming, ten minutes in group activity and twenty-five minutes writing.
The lesson concluded with the request that the youngsters should go home and make the ‘beans on toast for themselves’ and ask their mothers if they had described the process accurately.
Lesson 4 Humanities (Mr Smith — class size 26)
The children settled well into an area which was carpeted.
For the first time too, tables were in a random arrangement rather than in rows.
The lesson was very strictly controlled although it began with lots of open questioning which stimulated the class to decide where Rome should be founded and some of the reasons for its being in that position.
They were then very pleased to read in the book that it had been done for the very same reasons.
They then spent the rest of the lesson — the first part had taken twenty minutes — in writing an account of why Rome was settled where it was and comparing it with the legends that they knew concerning Rome.
Susie smiled when I thanked her for putting up with me.
I confessed to tiredness and asked if she was tired too.
‘I was at first.
You get used to it…and you can always see your friends if it gets too much’.
Example of a child's work — Abbeydale School
What I would do if school were at home
Eight o'clock — my mother wants me to lay the table and get breakfast ready.
Nine o'clock — we go down to the park and look at the trees and animals which is very interesting.
Ten o'clock — we come in from the park and then write up what we saw and do a project on it.
Eleven o'clock — I get a book to read and then write about it.
Sometimes I find the book very interesting which is good because when it comes to writing about it I find it easy.
Twelve o'clock — I then have lunch with my parents and talk about things which have happened in the morning.
One o'clock — after lunch my mother shows me how to make a cake so that I can have it for tea.
Two o'clock — I then sit down in front of the television with a pen and piece of paper and watch the schools programme which I like because you can have a rest from writing and reading.
Three o'clock — I just finish off everything that I did not have time to do.
Then the rest of the day is my own.
The account mainly speaks for itself.
Certainly there is little coherence in her timetabled day: indeed perversely its very staccato pattern is a feature Susie quite enjoys.
Nor did she see coherence over a longer period partly because her own world was a social one dominated by friends, clothes, music and beckoning adulthood.
Susie had come from a village ten miles from the Oxfordshire market town in which the school was placed: her previous village primary school had had two teachers; her experience in that school at a younger more protected age seemed to her less interesting and more childish.
She recognised, as youngsters will, the need for different approaches at different ages.
A cursory perusal of my file of pupils' pursuits in both primary and secondary schools shows similar experiences and reflections.
Interestingly there is inevitably more coherence in the primary child's day because one or two adults experience the same things — indeed they are the conductors of the total experience which is planned for a day in detail within the week and the year.
Those who, with some justification, criticise the lack of continuity within some primary schools, should consider it in comparison with the secondary school when viewed from the child's viewpoint.
The coherence, the progression, one can argue, lies in the eye of the curriculum planner rather than that of the individually different children who experience it haphazardly, often guided into a general context by the pastoral strength of their form tutor who may not always see the whole picture themselves.
All the experience suggests that their minds are absent on social issues, as Susie confessed hers were during at least part of each day.
This is the model on which the National Curriculum is to be created and by degrees imposed on the primary schools.
Sir Peter Newsam was fond of quoting a paper of Sir Alec Clegg, to teachers who were inclined to get over-complicated about the curriculum.
He repeated it with some commentary in an issue of the Times Educational Supplement .
Alec Clegg once wrote a fable.
It began: 'About 100 years ago there was a small boy called Fred and he lived on an island with his father and mother and nearby lived his uncle and aunt.
His father kept pigeons and bees and a garden of flowers and vegetables.
His uncle was a forester and planted acre after acre of trees in rows.
The boy did not go to school; there wasn't a school on the island, but his mother taught him to read and write and encouraged him to draw and paint pictures, she also recited poetry to him and sang to him when he was little….’
As the fable continues, it tells of family visits to York and Malham and of how the child grew up in understanding of many things.
Came the Fall:
‘Then one day a learned educationist visited the island and met the boy and was astonished at his understanding of many things and at the knowledge which he had developed round these things, and the educationist said to himself how wonderful it would be if every child in the land had the learning which this boy had built around the simple experiences which he had had with the bees, pigeons, flowers, vegetables, forestry and visits to York and Malham.
And the learned educationist reasoned thus:
‘It is impossible for every child to lead the life that this boy has led and to develop the knowledge which this boy's way of life has given him.
But what we can do is give the children all the knowledge that this boy has without the experiences.
‘First of all we will look at his numerical and mathematical ability which he has gained from reckoning areas from odd shaped bits of land and working out the number of trees they will take, and from his mother's shopping expeditions, and we will reduce these to simple symbolic formulas and tables and make children learn a lot of them very quickly.
‘Then we will take the boy's speech and writing which is so good and subject it to careful analysis and if we teach the other boys whose writing and speech is not so good how to subject what they say and write to this kind of analysis they will realise how badly they speak and write and will promptly set about trying to improve the way they speak and write….’
The fable sends the learned educationist home to divide Fred's knowledge into parcels which he hands out to various expert textbook writers.
Inexorably the fable continues:
‘And so it came about that all over the land children were assembled in groups of 40 and made to learn the facts set out in the books written by Messrs Hall & Stevens, Warner & Martin, Durrell & Palmer, and Potter and Ridout.
‘And the learned educationist began to entertain a horrible suspicion that the reverse process didn't work.
In other words, whereas Fred grew in understanding because he started with experience and read to feed the interest which derived from it, those who started with the  reading failed to develop understanding because the interest was not there.
‘But the learned educationist thrust these horrible suspicions aside and said to himself that the facts derived from books are making no impart because they are not properly learned.
It is all these inefficient teachers who cannot impart facts that are causing the trouble.
What we want is something wherewith to prod the teachers so that they impart more facts more efficiently.
‘So he said he will have external examiners who will set tests to the children to find out whether they have learned the facts.
Those who have had facts imparted to them effectively will pass the tests and those who have not will fail to pass the tests, and when the  lists are read out on Speech Day the incompetence of the bad fact-imparters will be revealed to the world and this will act as a goad and make them impart their facts better in future….’
‘However, in due course a few, a very few indeed, intelligent teachers came to take a cool look at what was happening and they realised that for the vast majority of children the majority of our educational processes add about as much to the mental stature of our children as a diet of sawdust would add to their physical stature….,
Since the fable was written in 1965, ending on a note of hope, the whole prodding apparatus has been formidably increased; so too have the mounds of curricular sawdust.
Clever people, with no apparent understanding of how children learn or good teachers teach, have been busy seeing to that.
In particular, examination fever is leading to ever more fatuous and expensive efforts to measure the immeasurable.
In the 1970s, Sir Alec set us laughing at some of the items in the Educational Assessment Program in the state of Michigan:
‘By the end of the pre-kindergarten experience 90 per cent of all children will demonstrate their recognition of at least three of the five basic emotions: fear, anger, sadness, joy and love (in self and others) as measured by a future Michigan Education Assessment Program (MEAP) battery of tests.
The story reminded me of a report I once received from an Advisor about a youngster who was out of school.
It was dated 8 June 1982 and read as follows:
I have paid a lengthy visit to John Kingdom and his parents at Westhouney.
John is fourteen next term and would normally leave school in a couple of years time.
I am happy that he is receiving education suitable to age, ability and aptitude at home, in fact, between ourselves, it is probably more appropriate and worthwhile than that which he is likely to be receiving at school — not through any fault in the local schools but because schools cannot always provide ideal circumstances for all learning and certainly cannot provide the context in which John is operating.
John is looking after a sizeable vegetable garden single handed and has plans to extend considerably on to other land owned by the family.
He has numerous animals to care for, he is playing the organ in the next door church and the piano at home.
He also does some composing.
He reads a lot, both for pleasure and factual books about farming and natural studies.
He is following a correspondence course in gardening for adults with comparative ease.
His written work is average, he entered for 0-level English this year and obtained a C grade.
He has a tutor, a retired teacher who visits the house for mathematics and is following a traditional and largely irrelevant course in it (such as he might be following at school) and he is learning quite sufficient about mathematics in context apart from that (shades of Cockcroft!)
His mother takes him to Farendon twice a week for tutoring in English and Roman history which he is keen on.
He is studying elementary Latin for pleasure with a local friend.
There are teenage cousins in the local schools and obviously there is plenty of contact and company and they seem close as a family.
He hopes to have a farm of his own as soon as possible.
Two uncles own a farm in Weston, North Oxfordshire and Mrs Kingdom tells me that the family have the necessary finance to offer him a job.
Mr Kingdom is a gardener at a local school, so he and John have a common interest and work a lot together.
John learned to drive a tractor recently and can already ride a motor bike and drive a car on private la? d.
He attended a primary school some miles away and tried secondary schools but without a great deal of success.
In a sense John is really too busy to go to school.
In my view there is no need to worry about exams.
John will get what certificates he wants if and when he wants to I expect: I am only glad that there are so many more opportunities for adults who want to study later in life.
I have told them that I am satisfied that John is having a suitably full and varied programme with plenty of work experience.
We all intend to continue the same sort of programme for the next couple of years and I have said I would like to call in next term and on a periodic basis until our responsibility ceases.
They seemed to welcome it.
Need I say more?
In a sense the Advisor did not need to say more, for both her report and the fable of Fred begin to capture the mood of growing up.
Newsam who wrote the piece before the National Curriculum and its assessment procedures were planned ended the piece by remarking with irony ‘As with any good joke, a child can understand the fable.
The puzzle that has to be solved is why many adults cannot’.
Many secondary teachers know that among their most fulfilling experiences with children are the ‘residential’, whether abroad, on a field trip or to an Outdoor Education Centre, and the extracurricular events, such as sport, music, theatre visits and drama.
Among the reasons for this is the subtle change in relationship which occurs, enabling the teacher to be seen more often alongside the pupil, a person of humour and unexpected worldly interests, taking part in the everyday activities of life, sharing the triumphs and disasters of such occasions and bonded by unexpected  confidences.
For months after such experiences, the exchanges, both in glance and spoken aside, between teacher and student are redolent with ‘in-jokes’, half-remembered stories that grow with the telling.
Of course there are many factors in the comparative success of these occasions and in the weeks or days when the timetable is ‘suspended’ in favour of interest-led activity, but among them certainly the opportunity to really ‘know’the child, and vice versa, is a powerful ingredient.
This factor is naturally much less pronounced in the primary school where the teacher in any case knows the child in much greater depth by virtue of living and working alongside the youngster on a daily, weekly and sometimes more than yearly basis.
Indeed in the primary phase the arrangements for children's learning are founded more securely on a theoretical basis of child development designed to match their different developmental needs at different ages.
It can be argued that children need to be part of a mixed age school community from time to time, for that is the pattern of life.
Additionally they need individually different attention, not simply because each child is unique but because the different stages require different interpretations.
For example the toddler needs the rhythm and songs of the parents to develop their early language skills, whereas the seven-to eight-year-old finds the joy of escape into the fantasy world of children's fiction, of uninhibited and expressive art, of the beginnings of sharp observation, detailed investigation, hypothesis and study.
They even talk aloud to themselves and to adults, who will never betray what they hear of the Walter Mitty dreams of their future lives.
The teenager, especially in those uncomfortable years of compulsion before sixteen, both demands and rejects individual interest and attention.
Walter Mitty still inhabits the mind, but so do the shadows of more menacing muses, as they experience the growing pains to adulthood.
The educators at home and at school are on their guard, wary of, yet understanding their secrecies and confidences, and in particular the need for such youngsters to take risks as they strike out towards independent adulthood.
In those years it is the sudden traumatic experience which may be the spark to engage fierce enthusiasms in their educational development.
Hence the importance of the residential and extracurricular activity — above all occasions and activities in which the teenager can know that someone is unobtrusively and undemandingly interested in them.
Of course, as every teacher knows, there are many exceptions — the children who test their skill as diagnosticians and facilitators and push to the limit their cheerful, generous, forgiving brisk optimism about the pupil.
I refer to the children closer and closer to the margins of predictable  deviation — the hyperactive youngster with emotional problems, which brings autism to the edge of the teacher's diagnosis; the child, otherwise quick-witted, who has massively disabling short-term memory and a confusion in decoding letters: what some would call dyslexia; the child whose spatial intelligence is exceptionally and marvellously out of line with the celebratory rites of the school community, who fails in conventional school work.
At every turn the successful teacher strives to capitalise on the child's exceptionality, to turn difficulty into opportunity.
To all this complexity the skilled teacher brings a fine judgement tempered by a generosity of expectation, in the determined hope of ‘unlocking the child's mind and the shut chambers of the heart’.
To the teacher with a deep knowledge of how children at a particular age and stage develop, the first recipe for success is to vary their style of teaching from time to time, both to suit the circumstances, but also to vary the tempo and engage the child's interest.
Such a teacher has two approaches to subject knowledge — the curriculum and culture into whose mysteries the child is to be initiated.
On the one hand the successful teacher has an infectious enthusiasm for parts of the information, ideas and skills which continue to underpin their original and continuing role as an artist, an historian, a scientist or whatever.
It is from this stance that there has been much recent emphasis on subject depth in the training of teachers, and a virtual embargo on teaching for those with degrees in subjects ‘not on the school timetable’.
On the other hand too, the successful teacher can sometimes be someone with a very slight grasp of subject, because then they understand more closely the problems of many children.
‘The successful scholar is normally the person who has the least difficulty in identifying the route from A to B…yet are these always the best people to put in charge of those with the greatest difficulty?’.
One personal recollection confirms this point aptly.
On my first administrative promotion in Buckinghamshire I encountered Geoff Link, for me a new colleague, but also a former teacher.
I greeted him with the age-old aphorism: ‘Those who can, do; those who can't, teach; and those who can't teach become administrators — in your case I know whether that is true’.
Geoff looked cheerfully but doubtfully tense, a certain pallor betraying h; s discomfort as he awaited my verdict on his teaching performance all those years ago in the sleepy three form entry grammar school, in an east coast town.
‘Oh you were terrific,’ I said.
‘You taught me maths in 3B.
I know how good you were because I was at that stage in maths where I felt rudderless and becalmed, drifting helplessly as it were, as my peer group — the rest of the fleet — sailed serenely on towards the horizon.
Should I give up the unequal struggle and wait until  I reached the age of 16?
Then you strode in, as the new maths teacher, and you would set the problems on the board and stride around the class getting us all to co-operate in sharing the problems.
Each of us was encouraged to try out solutions on the board and you would ask other class members what they thought and whether they had anything to contribute as an alternative.
I learned so much and soon caught up with the fleet’.
As I warmed to my eulogy of his skills,.
Geoff Link's smile was not quite right, it had a certain relief, of course, but it held the promise of something more.
His rejoinder explained it all.
‘That's interesting, because I was a history teacher.
Yours was the only group I ever taught maths — a stop-gap teacher for a year.
As for the problems, I often didn't know the answers myself’.
Now to extrapolate from this example to a general argument that familiarity of a subject is a disadvantage would clearly be absurd.
Nevertheless, the example points up the paradox of the advantage to the teacher of having to experience new learning alongside and in co-operation with the children, and yet at the same time having to be an expert in the subject.
Geoff Link had a firm grasp of classroom techniques and a deep knowledge of children, so he could cope with a small part of his week in exploration of a subject matter with which he had only a tenuous acquaintance.
From a child's viewpoint, his style and his forgiving of mistakes, his ability to explore the origin of false assumption and deduction (doubtless springing from his own learning process), was a powerful illuminator of the path of learning.
Above all, from the child's viewpoint, the teacher needs to be an interesting person, one with whom they can readily identify.
In the reception class it can be seen in the first moments of a school day.
First one child sidles up to the teacher with some trinket to show in order to allow the warm, cheerful voice of teacher questioning and encouraging to wash over the beginning of their school day; then another, more venturesome, rushes into the teacher's arms, with breathless news to convey; and finally a third arrives preoccupied with the task in hand and refers inadvertently to teacher as ‘mum’.
At an older age it is perhaps better encapsulated by the following:
I met a teacher recently, one of our best, the sort of charismatic individual with a ready smile, a mind full of anarchic ideas, a love of literature and an effortless but much practised classroom skill which bounces back from the interested eyes 0& his students.
No bored resignation for his turbulent teenagers.
He teaches history, so the timetable says.
His pupils will tell you differently — well not tell you exactly but demonstrate it in their changed lifestyle, which even their parents notice.
They read books now and sometimes a few 0& them write poetry.
Others love to argue and challenge incessantly the established wisdom of  television, the press and the older generation.
They know about the development of science and its effect on their environment: one of them is a radio ham, another an electronics freak.
In twenty years' time they will remember their history teacher: his mannerisms, his irony and self-deprecating asides, his friendly interest in each of them.
They will remember the school play and the theatre trips he organised: they will remember his interest in sport and music: they will recall how they shared their worries and not so ridiculous hopes with him'.
On a wet Wednesday in March 1987, as part of a short survey -not scientifically conducted, but as part of a personal investigation into the cause of alienation among secondary age children — I found myself with a group of seven girls and one boy, between the ages of twelve and fifteen, at the Didcot Health Centre at four o'clock in the afternoon.
A couple of hours later, when the awkwardnesses had receded and giggling and fidgeting had given way to my acceptance as part of the furniture, they were engaged in an enthusiastic frank exchange about the qualities of teachers whom they had liked, whose lessons they had enjoyed and for whom they were prepared to concede the comment: ‘Mr So and So was decent — yeah, well decent, weren't he Sue?’
The consensus that emerged about the teachers who had mattered to them was neither that they were strict nor that they were liberal, but simply that they were interested in them as people.
What was fascinating to me at the time, was their naming of teachers whom I also recognised, from familiarity with the five or six schools in that particular area of south Oxfordshire: I could immediately apply a cross-bearing as it were of confirmation that what indeed singled out these teachers was a vividness of personality, a cheerful infectious enthusiasm and an unusual energy and commitment.
The introduction of the National Curriculum from the child's point of view is to be judged against the effect it will have on the world which children and teachers occupy.
It will be an ‘entitlement’ to children only if the teachers'  interpretation of it and their teaching style, as it is affected by its requirements, will make them more rather than less likely to be the teachers with the sorts of qualities which are likely to engage their learners, interests.
In short it seems unlikely, especially with younger children whose grasp on autonomy in learning and responsibility and social action needs much support, that the National Curriculum framework alone will achieve anything.
It is its impact on teachers and their style that is at the heart of the matter.
Will it be a useful reference route map and a compass?
Or will it be so difficult to interpret, so rigid in its framework that there is no room for the teacher to try interesting diversions and take the opportunity for exploration of unmapped territory — even of contributing to the design of the map itself?
The immediate prospects are not promising for the child, at least in so far as primary schools are concerned.
The curriculum description, as we have seen, has a compartmentalism (English, maths, etc) which in its extension through science, technology and the other foundation subjects, is quite incompatible with the daily experience of the teacher of thirty mixed age children in many small schools.
Even in the larger schools the curriculum leaders with full teaching commitments will find it difficult to find a way of imparting to their other colleagues a sufficient degree of self-confidence about their particular curriculum responsibility which will avoid the deadening grind of ‘something we have to do’— a phrase so reminiscent of teachers of external examination syllabuses in every generation.
It is in the field of assessment that the new arrangements are likely to pose the most difficulties for teachers and distract them from their first task of finding their way into ‘the very queer and tortuous passages of children's minds’.
There are, for example, so far in maths, science, English and technology alone, no less than 14,910 potential separate considerations of statements of attainment for a group of thirty children from level one to level five.
When one hears and sees the grids and axes within which the teachers are being encouraged to monitor the progress of each child, it ought to be sufficient to give any sane person pause for thought!
Put another way, each teacher is required to monitor and record for each child, within the primary sector, progress under the attainment targets in maths, science, English and technology alone, no less than 497 separate differentiated statements of attainment for each child.
It seems unlikely that such discrete and precise measurement is something which can be effortlessly and efficiently stored away in the teacher's mind in the everyday bustle of school life for subsequent ‘after-school’ recording.
Equally it seems nonsense to anticipate the recording of that volume and complexity of assessment for each child during lesson time.
The early experience suggests that for the enthusiast of language, for example, the latter approach and even the former is possible: equally too the science enthusiast in primary schools protests at the ease with which they can familiarise themselves with the process.
This, however, is to evade the acid test, as I have already implied, which is the ability even of these talented enthusiasts to perform with similar confidence and panache in the designated area of the curriculum with which they are less familiar.
This of course is what will be required of all teachers, and what they will need to coach their colleagues to do in their own particular specialism.
When recently I asked an enthusiastic practitioner to test the technique in maths, although they were themselves enthusiastic about language, I received confirmation of insecurity, of a self-confessed distraction from the task of teaching in favour of essentially a technician-type reliance on the scheme, and a domination of the teacher by the process of recording progress.
So, simply in its volume the assessment system itself represents a burden for primary school teachers.
For secondary schools with their singular subject specialisms, it is less of a problem — merely an extension of some of the approaches of GCSE to the assessment for the fir; t three years of secondary work within keystage 3.
The warning here, however, is of the difficulty encountered by some enthusiasts for graded assessment tests in persuading other colleagues in their discipline of the practicality and value of the detailed record-keeping of various ‘grade related criteria’ within the subject area itself.
Nor has there been experience yet of the voluminous records for individual children when the same approach is extended from science through maths, English, technology, geography, history and modern languages.
The form tutor, even with the best information technology support system, is about to assume the considerable duties of maintaining the total child record.
The same form tutor will also be a subject teacher.
(As so often happens in secondary schools, the same individual may be enthusiastic in the one capacity for activity which he or she adamantly inveighs against in the other capacity.
Shades of disputes about children being released for field trips or school visits).
To these logistical difficulties of recording each child's progress is added the initially difficult task for primary and secondary schools, of mapping their own curriculum against the National Curriculum, the detail of which is emerging only piecemeal.
The DES has required (Circular 14/89) a bureaucratic return which embodies an assumption that teachers can plan curriculum time to the hour, even the minute, and that such a detailed record has some worthwhile purpose.
In fact it is a classic example of losing sight of the wood for the trees, and in fact it distracts from the process of detailed curriculum design and review which thinking schools embrace as part of the atmosphere of intellectual curiosity which is their hallmark.
At the moment, at secondary level any school's review of a National Curriculum plan has two main imponderables -namely how to organise keystage 4 from fourteen to sixteen in a way which accommodates choice and avoids boredom and alienation amongst those with the least attainment in the compulsory core and foundation subjects in the first three keystages.
Secondly the ‘curriculum auditors’ are examining the cross curricular themes so threatened by the separate subject curriculum design approach to the implementation of the National Curriculum.
There is an interesting difference here between the approach in England and Wales from that in Northern Ireland where  a cross-curricular front has been started before embarking on marching orders for the separate subjects.
In England and Wales, cross-curricular analysis started earlier than in Northern Ireland, for example with ‘Language Across the Curriculum’ after the Bullock Report and in the 11–16 Red Book analysis pioneered by some of the HMI.
Nevertheless its roots have evidently been shallower than in Northern Ireland, where the absence of comprehensive schools perhaps made it the more necessary.
On both sides of the Irish Sea it has made all practitioners keenly aware of the deep oubliettes of the timetable, in short of the incoherence even of the apparently most broad and balanced curriculum.
It is an incoherence, as we have seen earlier, not only in design but especially of receipt by the pupil.
Both these points — the cross curricular theme and the overcrowding in keystage 4 — underline the point that, so far as design is concerned, the exercise of planning the National Curriculum has been flawed from the outset.
Nobody decided the length of the journey in what is almost an infinite mapping process.
The explosion of knowledge, skills and ideas, which has occurred in the last half century makes any mapping to some extent arbitrary.
Hence the belated and misguided call from Kenneth Baker for longer school days — again betraying a rather narrow view of the use of time — which has been one of the unremarked and growing features of secondary curriculum development of the last twenty years.
Indeed at secondary level the timetable of the week seems to blind one to considerations of the length of a course: the number of periods in a week or six days is debated, rather than the length of a period or the number of hours in a course.
If there is an overcrowding of the scope of the curriculum, however, it is more than matched, as we have seen in the primary illustrations, by the prospective assessment system.
The national assessment system will serve several purposes.
It will be:
Formative , in providing information which teachers can use in deciding how a pupil's learning should be taken forward and in giving the pupils themselves clear and understandable targets and feedback about their achievement.
It will also provide teachers and others with the means of identifying the need for further diagnostic assessments for particular pupils where appropriate to help their educational development;
Summative , in providing overall evidence of the achievements of a pupil and of what he or she knows, understands and can do;
Evaluative , in that comparative aggregated information about pupils' achievements can be used as an indicator of where  there needs to be further effort, resources, changes in the curriculum, etc;
Informative , in helping communication with parents about how their children are doing; and with governing bodies, LEAs in a wider community about the achievements of a school;
Helpful for professional development , in that the process of carrying out systematic assessment,— recording attainment and moderating the outcomes and discussion with other teachers will provide a valuable basis for teachers to evaluate their own work and to gain access to new thinking.
It is a bold aim, especially if all the purposes are to be kept in balance.
One suspects that the other purposes of the 1988 Education Act, in particular the need to emphasise parental choice and to bring the brisk benefits of the winds of market forces to the education system, will mean that the summative, evaluative and informative purposes might squeeze out emphasis on the other two.
Testing of children has always legitimately had separate purposes: diagnostic — to enable the teacher to calibrate their own assessment of a child's difficulty and judge the next best line for development; setting of tests to establish mastery of a particular piece of learning when of concept, skill or information; and standardised to set one's own information against some comparators.
It is a personal activity at best, an aid to the individual teacher, the individual child and the parents.
To this normal activity of teachers, however, the 1988 Education Act has added the competitive market aspects we have noted, the combination of which threatens to disturb and distort the normal observation and assessment techniques of the successful teacher.
The sheer volume of the many assessments externally required by the Act and now under design by SEAC runs the danger of forcing the less confident teachers — indeed all of them in the first instance, as they ascend the steep learning curve — into ‘rote teaching’, a much more dangerous activity than rote learning because it tends to shut down that sense of intellectual curiosity without which children are not really being taught.
In America within some states there are many school districts with decades of experience of such externally imposed and grade-related tests to enable teachers to make predictions and check by observation and testing the outcome.
What that experience demonstrates is that the teacher very rarely uses the voluminous information, which is nevertheless conscientiously stored and retained.
The volume may be judged by an anecdote of a teacher in Massachusetts, a comparatively liberal state, which has come only lately to such activity and to a degree which would be surpassed  by many other states.
In a visit in the spring of 1987, I met a teacher who confided that the externally-imposed testing system pre-empted the use of 30% of her total professional time, and that her own independent judgements (which she saw as more valuable and inseparable from her natural teaching style) occupied a further 20–25% of the time.
The official ‘tests’ were seen as important from the point of view of accountability, but not of teaching.
Indeed it is that aspect of the new arrangements which distorts the previous use of assessment by teachers, parents and children.
The requirements of such a system may lead to a number of outcomes, some of which are unlikely to be beneficial to the child.
The first is that enormous amounts of professional time and effort will be absorbed in explaining apparent differences between classes and schools.
Another will be that teachers cheat in order that their children perform well in the test.
Such cheating may take the form of coaching or practice, but it may also take the subtle form of the chemistry teacher who asked the GCE student, ‘are you sure that is what you want?’ when she was asking for some particular potion to complete an experiment in a practical examination, or the American teacher on the same 1987 visit who pointed to a particular answer in a workbook and asked the student to ‘check that out’.
Such actions may be indicative of a climate of fear, or of caution, or of simply teaching to the test.
It is hard to see how they benefit the child.
It may be argued that the new designs of the assessments will avoid such obvious pitfalls.
Nevertheless the SATS, however elegant the design, will of course be liable to the same dangers.
The cause after all lies not in the nature of the test but in the context of its use, and if the pay of the teachers (or more likely the viability of the school) depends on the results, there will be a temptation to massage the outcome.
Moreover, the inevitability of pecking orders for children and institutions presupposed by such a market index of comparative performance will render less propitious the circumstances for learning, for those children who, through no fault of their own, are in a school which is perceived by the articulate watchers of the school results index to be failing.
For failure will beget failure.
There is one more point which demands notice in the design of assessment — namely its untried novelty.
That quality, at least initially when combined with other innovation being imposed on the school system, is likely to lead to a distraction of the teachers' time from the sort of effortless teaching strategies, hard won over decades, as they are drawn into the steep learning curve of the unfamiliar new language of the National Curriculum and its assessment.
For a while, every teacher becomes a probationer:.
indeed visiting headteachers said to the young teachers from  university, polytechnic and college courses in September 1989, ‘You tell us about it — inevitably you have had more time to learn about it than we have.’
Clearly there will soon come a point where every practising teacher will become familiar with the ‘newspeak’ of attainment targets, statements of attainment, levels, keystages, programmes of study, standard assessment tasks, and profile components, with none of which any of us was familiar two short years ago.
The point is made: there is a disadvantage to children immediately in the learning by teachers of so much that is at least newly described, if not new in reality.
The child, of course, needs confident and competent teachers above all else.
If the weight of the assessment detail were to lead to an understandable desire for simplification, there is another awful danger awaiting the child.
Will this simplification, especially as the assessment system is to be discussed in terms of levels, lead to the child being labelled and known prematurely as a ‘level one child’ or a ‘level two child’and so on?
If that were to be the case it could be a return to the profoundly damaging effects that the daily streaming, even in primary and elementary schools, produced in an earlier age.
We have never quite shaken off its effects.
Its persistence is evident in Gentleman Jim , one of Raymond Briggs' classic cartoon books written in 1980.
It depicts the sad tale of a lavatory attendant, Jim, who reads newspapers to seek a new career.
At every turn he is confronted with the need for 0-levels, A-levels, etc and reflects and wonders ‘what the levels can be all about?’
He guesses that it is something to do with education and reflects wryly that ‘all we got was a bible and a thick ear’.
The story becomes an enactment of his fantasies, with predictable tragi-comic side-effects, such as the failure to apply for planning permission when establishing some new profitable activities in his garden, or committing driving offences, even some petty crimes.
When he is sentenced to gaol he pleads in mitigation that he ‘might have been a better citizen if I'd had the levels’, to a Judge who didn't understand what he was saying, and of course the last page sees him studying for ‘the levels’ in prison.
It is remarkable that the language of Briggs' book, a sad commentary on the preoccupation up to now with examinations in England and Wales, should be so accurate in its awful warning of the new system.
Clearly neither Paul Black himself nor his committee could have read the book: otherwise they would surely have paused for thought before designing a system with such awful possibilities.
If there were a wish to record ‘the levels’ on a precise and continuous basis, differences between children will be considerable and the change the greater for youngsters who might, in a less  overtly labelled system, be confident late developers.
Worse still, of course, is the prospect of recording progress within ‘the Record of Achievement’ which all schools, at least at the secondary level, are likely to have by the early 1990s as a result of government policy and local initiative.
The Records of Achievement, however, are a move from an earlier, more romantic and generous age.
The following source represents the beginning of the movement:
An Oxford Certificate (The end of the 16+ trap)
1.
For twenty years the 16+ has been to educationalists what the Irish Question has been to politicians for somewhat longer: it has consumed enormous energy, made and destroyed reputations, absorbed and dissipated creativity and made most men and women with common sense as well as intelligence adopt the stance of peripheral critics.
2.
There are two reasons why common sense and intelligence now demand one more effort in Oxfordshire:
(i)
the very existence of any examination at 16+ (whether GCE, CSE or a unified examination or examination system) as opposed to a series of assessments at the right stage of development for the individual pupil is questionable because firstly sixteen has already ceased to be the date for leaving education for the majority of pupils, secondly employers look increasingly to school recommendations, college course experience, and examination expectations rather than evidence of ‘O’ Level/CSE achievements , and thirdly the Universities and Higher Education look for and stipulate ‘A’Level achievements rather than‘O’Level evidence.
(en ii) the possibility of removing the 16+ as a series of examinations to be taken after a one/two year course for 14–16 year olds at the age of sixteen would remove a constraint which has a distorting effect on the pattern of the curriculum of schools.
That is to say it would remove the overemphasis on a simultaneous and over-rich diet of information gathering and testing.
3.
So the aim should be to create an Oxford Certificate/Portfolio/ Diploma for all students, moving into the world of work or higher education.
It would be taken with them at any age and would contain:
(i)
cumulative certificates of achievement awarded by GCE examination boards at Ordinary and Advanced Level, certificates awarded by City and Guilds, BEC, TEC, etc.
(ii)
results of graded objective tests and profiles of skills and information for all pupils, devised by a partnership of Oxfordshire teachers, industrialists, the University, the Southern Regional CSE Board and the Oxford Delegacy in at least Science, Mathematics, English, a modern language and aesthetics.
Validation by the Boards, marking by the schools, moderation by the partnership.
(iii)
self-chosen evidence of pupils' thought and action in written, visual and taped form designed to be a self-selected commentary on the pupils' character.
(iv)
such other evidence to be decided by the partners in (ii) above (eg work experience, community service) is.
What followed is well chronicled elsewhere.
In practice, Oxfordshire, Somerset, Leicestershire and Coventry set out on an ambitious exercise simultaneously with the development of the Northern Record of Achievement and the London Record of Achievement.
The three groups co-operated loosely so that none could be isolated and stopped.
Government policy statements grew out of their involvement in the movement and the intention of it subtly changed.
The document is especially interesting in retrospect because it can be seen to be a fairly crude thought about the need to escape the deadening effects of 16+ examining.
(Earlier publicly recorded testing was eschewed as too damaging to youngsters' morale.)
It envisages graded tests with levels between the ages of 14 and 16.
In practice, the enormous investment in design that followed — £250,000 a year in the Oxford Certificate scheme for four years — revealed the potential impracticality of the graded test part of the design between the ages of 14 and 16.
While in isolation and in the hands of enthusiasts, each subject had merit (although there was great concern about premature labelling), in total it was unmanageable.
It may be significant that Paul Black was involved heavily at the London end in the design of such schemes, but again not from the total viewpoint which in any case would probably be regarded as one of the weaknesses of the London development where there was less overview than obtained in Oxford.
The merit of the Record of Achievement movement lay not in the graded test profile therefore, which proved impractical.
It lay in the changed stance between teacher and learner and in the modification of techniques and strategies of the former, and increased motivation and precision of objectives in the latter — in short in the formative rather than summative stance of assessment and learning.
The child at whatever age needs stimulation and assessment, competition against self and against others in a carefully constructed and sensitively handled framework.
What the Record of Achievement has provided is a context for positive discussion and a location for each child to record success.
The Secretary of State has in mind using the Records of Achievement as the repository of pupil achievements in the tests  and assessments at age 7, 11, 14 and 16 — at least so far as the sole mandatory requirements are concerned.
The implicit dangers of this are too obvious to need much elaboration.
Put simply, the Record of Achievement could become a Record of Failure, at least for the child who makes a slow start to achievement within the prescribed National Curriculum.
The challenge to the teacher is how to avoid that happening: it will test the ingenuity of the most imaginative, but of all the challenges, it is surely the most important.
Section Two: Implications for primary and secondary schooling
A View from a secondary school Michael Duffy, Headteacher, King Edward VI School, Morpeth
The ‘Polo Syndrome’
When the National Curriculum was first unveiled, in the shape of Mr Baker's celebrated ‘Little Red Book’, I wrote a piece which began: ‘If this were genuinely a consultative document, I should reply to its chief begetter that 20 per cent of it is potentially helpful, 20 per cent unexceptionable, and 60 per cent either foolish or dangerous or both’.
Within that first fraction of potential benefit, I classified the endorsement of ‘science’ in place of the separate sciences that have for so long unbalanced or distorted the secondary curriculum; the opportunity to rethink the nature and role of technology; and the challenge to begin planning, for all secondary students, a foundation course in a foreign language.
About much of the rest, I was hostile or pessimistic.
The curriculum that was sketched out seemed ludicrously inadequate.
It was a production-line model, stereotyped by an obsession with quality control — as though education were just another product on the market, and teachers merely the operatives who delivered it.
The great danger of the proposals, I said, was not that they would fail to improve our schools, but that they would make them worse.
‘What we need, if we are to achieve better schools, is better teachers: teachers with a sense of vocation, a sense of responsibility and a sense of esteem; teachers who feel, in the fashionable jargon of management, that they ‘own the job'’.
Without such teachers, the best possible curriculum is no more than one lesson after another.’
Two years later, a great deal has changed, but some of the danger still persists.
It is still true that the political drive towards the National Curriculum is towards uniformity, so that the consumer — still seen as the parent,.
not the student — can more easily discern the quality.
There is still, therefore, a tension between the idea of the National Curriculum as an entitlement for all students, and the idea of education as a product in the market place, where the thickness of your wallet counts.
There is still a strong political pressure towards the Gradgrind model of curriculum design, as though education were just a game of ‘Trivial Pursuit’.
There is still real concern about the nature of the assessment process, though now it has to do more with its extreme complexity than with the simplistic naïveté of the earlier proposals, and with the fundamental differences of approach that are emerging between the examiners and the curriculum planners.
There is still, too, about the whole exercise, something of the ‘Polo Syndrome’: a sense that, for all the subject reports, and statutory orders, and non-statutory guidance, there is nothing at the centre: no clear vision of the values that should lie at the heart of a national system of education.
And there is still huge concern about the resources available.
Partly, this is a matter of teacher supply: in certain areas of the country it is not just the National Curriculum that is at risk — it is any curriculum.
Partly, it is about the funding of change.
The government has allocated, for the introduction of the National Curriculum into 24,000 schools, the sum of £30 million.
In the context of the £33 million earmarked for 20 City Technology Colleges, that figure makes interesting reading.
Which of these changes, one wonders, is the more important for our national education?
It is clear, nevertheless, that there is room for optimism.
The grosser absurdities of the consultative document have disappeared, and it is now apparent that the cross-curricular elements (those aspects of learning that will not slot into the conventional ‘subject’ boxes yet are still too important to be left to chance) are going (somehow) to be retained.
The subject working parties have proved more independent of mind and judgement than critics had expected: less like Rosencrantz and Guildenstern (‘You were sent for: and there is a kind of confession in your looks which your modesties have not craft enough to colour’); more, perhaps, like Polonius, given to worthy but occasionally tedious advice.
Professor Black's TGAT report, for all its expensive complexity, has saved us from the test-led teaching that seemed at one time inevitable.
Most important of all, it is now possible to discern in the structure that is emerging from the subject reports and the National Curriculum  Council some windows of opportunity for good teachers and thinking schools.
Windows of opportunity
The statutory framework of the National Curriculum is contained in sections 1 to 25 of the 1988 Act.
Here, in primary legislation, the essentials are prescribed: the three core subjects of mathematics, English and science; the seven foundation subjects (history, geography, technology, music, art, physical education and -in secondary schools — a modern foreign language); the ‘basic, subject, religious education; the mechanisms of programmes of study, attainment targets and keystage assessment by means of which the objectives of breadth, balance and quality were to be achieved.
It was widely felt, while the Bill was passing into law, that the programmes of study were going to be inflexibly prescriptive.
In the event, wiser counsels prevailed; the proposals that had emerged by the summer of 1989 from the subject working parties and the National Curriculum Council were far from being the national syllabuses that had at first seemed likely.
For all their detail, they still require subject departments and faculties to plan and develop their own approaches.
They put the emphasis where the emphasis ought to be: not on ‘the syllabus’(which in the upper secondary years has often deadened and stereotyped the teaching process) but on the scheme of work.
The syllabus, after all, is no more than a sketch of the terrain; the scheme of work is a strategic plan which identifies objectives and tactics, and which allows for review and reinforcement.
The need to think in these terms, and to build in systematic and continuous assessment of progress, is an unexpected by-product of the legislation, and probably a bonus.
So is the need to make provision for progression.
Progression has been one of the keystones of the TVEI extension, and there are few secondary schools which are not committed to the concept that a student's learning should grow out of, and build upon, what has been learned before.
In practice, however, progression has been difficult to achieve, and the rites of passage that have been such a feature of our educational organisation — at 11 plus, at the options stage at 14, and again at 16 — have compounded the problem.
Quite rightly, we have put considerable stress in recent years on ‘liaison’ with contributory schools — not always with conspicuous success.
We have not stressed so frequently the importance of liaison with our own colleagues, arguing (with sometimes dubious validity) that because it ‘happens all the time’ it does not need to be explicitly provided.
Now, however, the  assessment provisions of the 1988 Act (turned by TGAT into a model for curriculum construction) actually demand that it takes place.
By definition, many nine-year-olds in junior schools will be achieving at the level of many thirteen-year-olds in secondary schools.
By definition, many thirteen-year-olds in secondary schools will be achieving at the level of many sixteen-year-olds.
In theory, we have always known that.
In practice, it has been extraordinarily difficult to recognise — and it fits uncomfortably, of course, into the framework of the legislation.
Nevertheless, schools are going to have to come to terms with it — and nothing but good can come of that.
By the same token, we can at last begin to see an effective mechanism for identifying special learning needs, at either end of the educational spectrum.
Hitherto, our provision here has been at best haphazard, and at worst deplorable.
It has depended (in spite of the excellent intentions of the Warnock Report) on the ability of individual schools to identify, without specific criteria, children who are ‘under-performing’, and to make (largely without professional advice) appropriate provision for them.
Too often, such provision tended to focus exclusively on slow learners, and took the form of ‘remedial’ provision which tended not to remedy and which sometimes created, in the return to the ‘normal’curriculum, extra problems for the child.
We do not as yet have full details of the standard assessment tasks which will be used at the ages of seven and eleven and subsequently; if they do not provide a means of screening for learning difficulty, and identifying the nature of the difficulty, a significant opportunity will have been missed.
One of the most valuable outcomes of this  initially prescriptive and limiting legislation is the opportunity to take a whole school view of curriculum planning and delivery.
Again, we have paid lip-service to this for a long time, but it has not been an easy ideal to achieve.
Too many factors out of our control have militated against it.
The traditional subject structure of the curriculum tended to lock curriculum planning into a matrix of departmental responsibilities, and departmental responsibilities were locked, in their turn, into the salary structure, and were reflected in staffroom perceptions about status and value.
There was a certain strength in this; for good teachers, that sense of professional independence was challenging and exhilarating, and there was a sort of pride in the assertion of ownership.
For less good teachers, ‘my subject, my classroom, my class’ could too easily become ‘my territory, my problems’.
Whole curricular thinking was inhibited by the need to preserve the first; the breaking down of professional isolation by the need to conceal the latter.
Under the National Curriculum, there is no room for either.
In part, this is because of the shortcomings of that highly specific subject framework.
The barrage of criticism that greeted the consultative paper persuaded both Ministers and mandarins of something that schools and parents had known experientially all along; that the problem of curriculum planning is not deciding what to put in, but what to leave out.
Faced with the outcry of the excluded subjects and the discreet protests of Her Majesty's Inspectorate, the DES retreated.
The National Curriculum is certainly not a complete curriculum, it stated: the whole curriculum must include for all pupils (and in some cases at all stages) areas of learning which, though not separately identified, are nonetheless ‘clearly required’.
For most schools, there is nothing new about this thinking: TVEI has already made them familiar with the concepts of cross-curricular dimensions (such as equal opportunities, independent learning) skills and competences (such as literacy, oracy, numeracy, computer literacy, and the less obvious visual literacy) and themes (such as health education, careers education and guidance, environmental and economic education and — increasingly — citizenship).
What is new, however, as the National Curriculum comes into effect, is the impossibility of providing for these areas of learning within discrete subject entitlements.
This, of course, is what schools have tended to do in the past; they have created new ‘options’ on the over-crowded curriculum shelves.
Now, the government has shifted the focus of curriculum planning from availability (the options system) to entitlement, and has unwittingly ensured (by filling most of the time available with the statutory curriculum) that the dimensions, skills and themes of this entitlement can be met most easily inside the foundation subjects, and not outside them.
The second reason for this impetus to cross-curricularity lies in the not unexpected discovery of the subject working parties that ‘subjects’ are not the most appropriate descriptors of the learning process.
Each working party has surveyed its territory, so to speak, and found significant areas where the boundaries are unclear.
In science, for example, the earth science component (attainment targets 9 and 16, with aspects of attainment targets 5, 6, 7 and 8) includes much that has in the past been described as geography, while the materials component (ATs 6–8) includes a great deal that has conventionally been regarded as technology.
as if to underline the shifting boundaries of our assumptions, the working group on design and technology has challenged its ‘subject’ status, preferring to describe it as a ‘capability’that will be developed not only through design technology, business studies, information technology and home economics, but through most other subjects as well.
All of this is both sensible and encouraging.
It is a belated recognition that good learning is as much about knowing how and why as about knowing what — as much about process as about product.
It is clearly absurd to try to restrict the teaching of measurement to mathematics, and the teaching of good, clear writing to English.
It is equally absurd, once the working parties have consulted on content and won substantial professional support for their proposals, for subject departments to claim that content as their own.
There is simply too much of it.
Schools will have to learn to look across the whole curriculum, to identify where and by what means an individual attainment target can best be taught and assessed.
Otherwise, both they and their students will be seriously overloaded.
That imperative itself is an opportunity, and an important one.
It is the opportunity to reconsider two of the taken-for-granted assumptions that hitherto have shaped so much of our curriculum planning.
The first is the assumption that the basis of our timetabling is the year group; that, however we group pupils for teaching purposes, those pupils will all be of an age.
It is true that the initial rhetoric of the statutory curriculum, with its emphasis on keystages and age-related testing, appeared to confirm the traditional belief that pupils have of necessity to be taken through their learning like an army in the field, moving in step through the year group fronts.
The logic of TGAT, however, and its ten levels of attainment, suggests that alternative strategies are open to us if we care to use them; and this is borne out by the small print of Circular 5/89, which stresses that the keystages themselves are to be understood with reference to the pupils' average ages, so that a pupil may ‘be taught with another age group for one or more subject areas where appropriate…while remaining with his or her peer group for other subjects.’
Particularly in the upper reaches of the secondary school, this could be a useful means to flexibility.
The other great assumption, of course, is that the framework for timetabling has to be the 40 period week.
It is probably time that this was reconsidered; in secondary schools it has led to absurdities like the daily dose, the thirty-five minute lesson, and the conviction that, though all subjects are theoretically equal (hence the standard four period per week allocation) some (English and maths) are more equal than others, and need a longer allocation.
It is difficult to see the National Curriculum requirements fitting into this sort of timetabling pattern.
Given the substantial experience that many schools have built up of alternative timetabling structures — through the provision of BTEC courses, for instance, or CPVE, or through modular and cyclical courses under TVEI — it is hard to believe that schools will not take the  opportunity of reviewing present practice to reflect more closely what we know about effective learning.
The Chairman of the National Curriculum Council apparently agrees.
The National Curriculum,’ he has said, ‘is leaving us free to question custom and precedent and to be imaginative in finding new solutions.
The NCC will not allow the ghost of precedent and the status quo to prevent changes which are shown to be necessary.’
Or, more succinctly: ‘The 40 period week is dead.’
Imperatives for change
It might be objected that these are not opportunities at all, except in the sense that a life-raft is an opportunity to sailors shipwrecked by their captain's folly.
The government has waved the magic wand of legislation over longstanding curriculum problems: overload, differentiation, progression, examination domination.
But it has passed the actual resolution of those problems back to the schools, and has charged schools and LEAs together with the task of reviewing how the curriculum as a whole can best secure the aims of the Act.
The italicised words take us back to the ‘Polo Syndrome’, and remind us that the fundamental difficulty of all curriculum planning — how to get a quart into a pint pot — still remains to be addressed.
Making sense of the National Curriculum, at the moment of its introduction, is rather like making sense of a jigsaw with no picture on the box and half of the pieces missing.
New pieces continue to arrive, as subject working parties report and orders are made: but there is a strong sense that the master picture is being made up as we go along.
The same is true of the all-important assessment arrangements, where secondary schools must wait to see how the tensions between TGAT and the GCSE boards (and between Standard Assessment Tasks and school-based assessment) will finally be resolved.
All of this creates genuine difficulties for schools, not lessened by the fact that curriculum and timetable changes (and all the other changes that the Act demands) have to be resourced within the limitations of a formula-funded school budget and an LEA budget effectively determined (because of the way the community tax will work) by central government.
So the difficulties are real.
Nonetheless, they have to be negotiated; and the schools that do this best are likely to be the ones that anticipate most realistically and plan most effectively.
Anticipating the detail of the National Curriculum and assessment arrangements is unlikely to be helpful, as Circular 5/89 revealingly points out.
Work here, we are told, should proceed ‘on the basis of the information currently available, with modifications being  made as necessary, as further details emerge.’
Anticipating the inevitable, though, is a different matter.
There has been no shortage of pointers; the NCC and DES have been bombarding schools with advice, and there is a danger of overkill.
The trend, however, is clear:
1.
Schools will need a mechanism for whole-curriculum planning.
In most secondary schools, TVEI has laid the necessary foundations; but TVEI criteria are (sensibly) less specific than the statutory requirements of the National Curriculum, and planning for the latter will need to be sharper.
2.
They will need, too, a mechanism for turning planning into policy, and for identifying and allocating the resources needed to put policy into effect.
Curriculum planning will become strategic planning.
It will involve prioritising and costing, consultation within the school and with governors and parents, and the taking and implementing of hard and often unpalatable decisions.
The framework will be important.
3.
It will be essential to establish whole-school assessment and recording procedures.
Hitherto, few secondary schools have been able to do this consistently.
The emphasis on terminal public examination tended, before the arrival of GCSE, to turn internal assessment into something of an interim process.
External assessment against defined attainment targets at 7, 11, 14 and 16 (and, inevitably, internal assessment between those ages) will demand a systematised approach.
The challenge for secondary schools in particular will be to ensure that the system reflects the learning, and does not dictate it.
It will be important to incorporate into it from the beginning an agreed policy for the recording of achievement, along the lines of the national steering group report.
There is some indication that the Government would like to put this on to the back burner, in order to concentrate the minds of schools on reportable results and market performance.
Broad-brush recording of achievement, however, is essential if the formative potential of effective assessment is to be realised.
Schools will need to recruit support for this aspect of their reporting procedures, as a counterbalance to the more limited (and more educationally-damaging) reporting that might otherwise ensue.
4.
Effective guidance will be crucial.
Students will need to be piloted through the maze of attainment targets, and in the fourth and fifth years particularly they will need advice on which core and foundation subjects to follow to GCSE and which to follow for what the Act coyly describes as ‘a reasonable time’.
If, as  ministerial pronouncements have indicated, additional subjects will also (somehow) be available,(such as a second foreign language) the need for guidance will be greater still.
In any case, the traditional distinction between the ‘pastoral’ and ‘academic’roles of the school may become increasingly unhelpful.
Guidance is primarily about maximising learning capacity, and many of the conventional ‘pastoral’ assumptions — about the role of the daily form period, for example— will need to be reviewed.
5.
It follows that schools will need to re-think their allocation and use of teacher time.
On any reading of the proposals for key stage 4 (and on any rational curriculum planning model) different courses will require different time allocations.
In all courses, teacher-time — the most expensive, and increasingly the scarcest, resource we have — will be in short supply.
Many secondary schools will look to a rationalisation of the timetable on a three-block model, providing in a 25-hour week something like: 11 hours for the core subjects, 10 hours for the foundation subjects, on a modular basis, and 4 hours for guidance, RE, physical education, and extension learning.
6.
All schools will have to learn how to review their performance.
Ministers speak of the ‘delivery’ of the National Curriculum as though it were a manufactured product, just needing to be packaged in the schools.
The reality is very different.
Teaching is about making learning happen, and that is a profoundly complex process.
Schools are going to have to think hard about that process.
They are going to have to learn how to monitor it: how to concentrate their professional expertise on what happens in the classroom, in the interaction of teacher and taught, and how to improve it.
Appraisal will be fundamental to this process.
There is a growing fund of goodwill in schools towards this end, reflected in the report to the Government of the national steering group in July 1989.
It is to be hoped that the Secretary of State, when he sets up the national appraisal arrangements to which he is committed, will build on this goodwill.
7.
In all of this there is a huge (and widely recognised) need for training.
There will be no shortage of training opportunities: INSET has become one of the growth industries of the new service economy.
But schools, which will have to pay for their training needs from delegated budgets, will have to prioritise those needs and devise means of ensuring that they are properly met.
They will also need to remember that development — and particularly the development of attitudinal change — is more important than the acquisition of skills.
Staff development will be a major task.
8
.
The last imperative, however, is the most important.
All of these needs, additional to the demands which confront individual teachers in their subject and departmental roles, have to met at a time when the morale of teachers is dangerously low, and the supply of teachers in some subjects and localities is breaking down.
Many, if not most, good teachers are suffering from fatigue and innovation stress; almost all teachers in state schools are profoundly resentful at the way that they and their schools have been made the scapegoats for the ills of society.
Now, in every staffroom, the talk is overload, and of diminished esteem and status.
This is the context in which schools, and secondary schools in particular, have to respond to the demand for change.
It is going to be a difficult task.
Managing the response
Motivation, leadership, team-building
In the first instance it is headteachers and their deputies who will have the task of meeting this challenge, and making reformation work.
This has become part of the rhetoric of reform.
‘Management’(which is relatively cheap) is seen as the key to change: so education support grants are made available for management training, management consultants proliferate, and the Secretary of State sets up a high-powered task force to investigate the management training and development needs of heads and senior staff.
That is all as it should be: but there are some dangers in conventional wisdom.
Put too much stress on ‘management’, and you are risking creating a sterile managerialism, which reduces management to ‘the right to manage’.
There are powerful undercurrents in the 1988 Education Act which pull in this direction.
So it is important to remember that schools are not factories — however frequently we are told that they have to ‘deliver’ the curriculum, and however deliberately we are exposed to the pressures of competition and market forces.
Education is not a production line, teachers are not operatives, and assessment is more than quality control.
Good heads and deputies know that the management of their school begins with their colleagues' management of their classrooms.
All teachers are managers, for they have to manage the learning process.
That is where the simplistic industrial analogy breaks down.
It is therefore important, when we look at the problem of making the National Curriculum work to the benefit of the children in our schools, to recognise that effective management is as much  a matter of attitude as of technique.
The really crucial skills, to the headteacher charged with the responsibility of taking a school into this new territory, will be those of motivation, leadership and team-building.
The management style that such a head must at all costs avoid is the style of the legislation itself.
Spurious consultation, a patronising attitude to teachers, and a tendency to regard all criticism as captious and ill-formed, are — while not unknown among headteachers — unlikely to win the hearts and minds of those who actually have to make things happen.
Participation
Management is about making things happen.
There is a substantial body of evidence to indicate that the most effective schools — the schools that are high-achieving, highly regarded and adaptable — are those which have found ways of involving teachers in decisions, and hence in the ownership of them.
It is not easy to do this: the tensions between control and autonomy, accountability and delegation, or action and consultation, are real and unavoidable.
Nonetheless, many heads resolve them too conservatively.
Even the now-conventional senior management team can be counterproductive, for it can be seen by those outside it as remote, exclusive and authoritarian.
The management of the National Curriculum is going to demand participation.
By virtue both of the imperatives already identified, and their financial overtones, every decision taken will have budget implications, the onus of which can no longer be passed to the policies of the LEA, safely remote from the staff-room.
A decision, for example, to make separate provision for slow-learning students will mean less provision for all the rest.
A decision to make a marginal increase in the school's contact ratio, in order, say, to purchase administrative and clerical assistance in the recording of assessments (probably a sensible response to the demands of the new curriculum) will affect the conditions of service of every teacher.
There is no doubt at all that heads have the power, in managerial terms, to make such decisions; but it would be a foolish head who put them to the governors without first winning staff support.
Schools will need mechanisms for doing this; and the level of professional understanding of the issues and the imperatives underlying them can only improve thereby.
In terms of both sharing the problem, and sharing the solution, there is likely to be a case for the establishment, in secondary schools at any rate, of consultative committees — with governor and parent representation -on curriculum and resources.
The management structure
That is not to say that day-to-day management can be accomplished by committee.
That is both wasteful, and ineffective.
But schools often under-use the talents and energies of their teachers, or fail to develop them in any consistent and systematic way.
That is true, I suspect, at every level: a recent survey of the responsibilities of secondary deputies shows a disturbing tendency to use them as administrators, and not as managers at all.
The impact of the National Curriculum and all the changes it brings with it gives heads a pressing reason — just as Mr Baker's off-the-peg allocation of incentive allowances gives them an opportunity — to review the structures and responsibilities of management in their schools.
The new ‘E’ allowance posts are likely to be particularly important.
In so far as they have a derivation, it is from the post of Senior Teacher established at the time of the Houghton Review -but seniority,per se , is not a management function.
Curriculum co-ordination, however, certainly is.
So is the co-ordination and management of the school's policies on assessment and achievement recording; or the management of information technology in the curriculum and in administration; or the coordination and management of staff training and development.
All these responsibilities are implied in the National Curriculum proposals, and it is important to schools at any rate (the DES Teacher Supply Branch seems to have different ideas) that the salary and allowance structure should be used as a means of identifying and defining the whole-school curriculum imperatives with which they are faced.
On this basis, ‘D’ allowances would identify team leaders, charged with major responsibility in particular sectors of curriculum and guidance, and ‘C’allowances would reflect subject responsibility, within the framework of school and LEA policy, at foundation subject level.
‘B’ and ‘A’allowances would be available for specific responsibilities within teams, often temporary, and always with implications for professional development.
Deputies would be free to deal with day-to-day management on an institutional level, and with long-term management in areas such as staffing and staff review, budget and resource control, and community liaison and provision.
Vision and values
And what of the head?
Traditionally, the head has played the central role; the tip of the pyramid, the centre of the web.
In a literal sense, the management of the school has depended on him or her.
That sort of centrality, and the dependence that it can entail, may be unhelpful in the secondary school of 1990 and beyond.
A powerful head can sometimes disempower the teaching staff, and create among them a sort of passivity that is close to inertia.
In any case, no head is powerful enough to carry effectively the sort of responsibility that the management of the National Curriculum, in the context of the rest of the Act, will bring.
So heads are going to have to reassess their role.
I think there will be three areas, each crucial to the successful introduction and adaptation of the National Curriculum, that only heads can manage.
The first is external, and is concerned with managing the boundaries of the school.
This has always been part of the role, but it has not often been done well.
The ability of the school to enlist — and respond to — parental involvement, will be crucial.
So will its ability to generate support, including financial support, from community and commercial organisations, so, most of all, will be its relationship with its governing body.
The wise head will make this a priority call upon his or her time.
The second is internal.
The commitment of teachers is the most valuable resource that a school can have.
It is also the most vulnerable.
In 1989, at the moment that the National Curriculum begins to take effect, that commitment is evaporating.
The morale of teachers generally is desperately low.
That has something to do with the stress of constant innovation, and rather more with the fact that they and their work have been systematically devalued by a government determined to bring schools under political control.
Whatever the reason, however, the result is clear.
Heads now have the task of leading tired and disenchanted teachers through the greatest innovation of all.
Maintaining teacher morale will be crucial.
Paradoxically, the management implications of the changes may prove to be, as this chapter has suggested, a means of restoring professional self-esteem.
Praise will be important, too, however; and a sense of humour will help.
And the third?
That comes back to centrality — the centrality, at the heart of education, of a sense of values.
A school that loses sight of its values runs the risk that it ceases to be a school at all, and becomes instead just a learning centre, the sort of educational service station that the sub-text of the 1988 Act seems to envisage.
Perhaps the most important task of all, for the head leading a school into the still uncertain territory of Mr Baker's Brave New World, is to make sure that the school fills that vacuum at the centre of the legislation.
The ability to do that — to create and articulate and constantly reinforce an awareness of the values that drive the learning process and bond together the learning community — is the ability to turn a curriculum into education.
That takes more than management expertise: it takes a sort of vision, too.
A view from a primary school David Winkley, Headteacher, Grove Primary School, Handsworth
The National Curriculum represents a major intellectual challenge for teachers in the coming years.
How schools set about developing the statutory orders in the context of whole — curriculum policies represents a significant challenge for leadership and, not the least in primary schools, the strategies adopted by headteachers.
Key decisions, for example, are required from the first as to whether the best approach is:
to develop thinking alongside colleagues in other schools
to bring all staff together for discussions
to develop small working groups
to have one or two teachers undertake the development of working papers, guidelines, materials
for heads to take on tasks themselves
to bring in outsiders (consultants or advisors) to develop the work.
Such questions are strategic ones, of a kind which have not often been successfully accomplished in the past.
Decisions about the nature of planning will of course vary greatly from school to school, but it's important for the head to remember that we accomplish most when the staff and children are working together .
There is no strong co-operative tradition anywhere in  our educational system, and the National Curriculum above all offers an opportunity for groups of teachers, parents and schools to think together about the nature and delivery of curriculum.
The head needs then to be very conscious of the use of time.
It might be argued that the National Curriculum is more of a challenge to thinking about time than about anything else.
It is, after all, about sequence, pattern, linear movement and periodic assessment.
All along it has been concerned with schedules and deadlines.
Consciousness of time is clearly in the forefront of the government's concerns, both for teachers and pupils.
And key questions emerge here:
how do we deliver a linear curriculum without undermining the cyclical nature of the learning experience?
By this I mean how do we prevent the curriculum experience of the children being continually teacher-directed forward, moving without time for reflection, reinforcement, space to breathe?
How do we prevent learning becoming the educational equivalent of driving up a motorway?
how do we get it all in?
The curriculum requirements are extensive and there will be expectations that children ‘get through it all’.
This presents an immediate challenge.
Teachers will need to think of new ways to plan timetables.
The overall design of the National Curriculum is not planned.
It is for schools to work out balanced programmes for themselves, and the pressure is on to find ways of convincingly managing ever-increasing demands.
Certainly if the school can come to terms with the planning of time, it is likely to be well on the way to implementing the programme.
To do this the head needs to lead the staff to address four issues in practical, original ways: ‘continuity’, ‘balance’, ‘subject specialism or integration’, and ‘assessment’.
Continuity
The National Curriculum does not require schools to stop teaching the ‘old way’ on Friday and begin anew on Monday.
There needs to be continuity not only internally in the relationship between the elements of the curriculum, but between existing and new practices.
We begin therefore by considering our current practice, and then looking at how the National Curriculum fits in.
What are we already achieving?
What adjustments will need to be made?
What do we already do well that the National Curriculum planners have neglected — remembering that if we think we do something well we need to be able to look closely, give reasons, describe in detail.
There are obviously many questions to ask in matching current practice with the new programmes.
At the simplest level we can ask whether we ‘cover’ the content.
Many schools find, on investigation, that much of the maths or English currently in the curriculum (for example) fits fairly into the programmes of study.
Equally, many schools have problems in putting hand on heart and admitting they cover the science or history or design and technology courses; and new problems will lie ahead as further subject programmes evolve.
On close investigation, we often find a surprising number of elements in different subject courses that interrelate.
The school may find components of science in existing health (say) or English or music programmes.
The question for many primary schools may be not so much one of content-coverage, as of ordering and sequencing events so that they are appropriately arranged across the child's school year.
The programmes of the future need closer preparation in detail in order to ensure both sequencing and comprehensiveness of delivery.
The problem in part is (or ought to be) one of generalising successful practice, shaping it up so that it encompasses the whole school and motivates all the teachers, not just those who are keen, or authoritatively skilled, in transacting bits and pieces.
Balancing the pieces
I always find ‘balance’ a curiously bloodless word, extraordinarily difficult to hold on to in practice in the heat of the classroom.
Nonetheless, a feeling for continuity will need to address the sticky issue of curriculum balance — balance between elements in each individual class, and balance between curriculum arrangements across the school as a whole.
It is not difficult to find examples of the kinds of problems arising in practice:
Mrs X encompasses science at the moment entirely in her interdisciplinary topic work.
There's a strong and well delivered geographical link (she uses the excellent Central Television series ‘Going Places’ as a starting point for her second-year juniors), but she doesn't allow her topics to develop systematically into related areas of the curriculum.
Her art is a bit ad hoc (lots of free painting, little three-dimensional work).
Only a few of the science attainment targets are covered.
There is no systematic attention to history.
And there's not  a lot of co-ordination between what she's currently doing and what the children did last year, or what they will do with another teacher next.
Mr Y teaches maths entirely from textbooks and hasn't addressed the potential of maths & or sustained practical work.
He hasn't explored the potential relationship of maths with design, some science and language components.
He clearly hasn't achieved the right balance between ‘mental skills’ and exploratory delivery of those skills into meaningful situations.
Miss Z works through sustained projects on an integrated day programme, allowing a lot of ‘choice’ between activities.
These projects are of considerable interest and lead to a lot of activity work but much of the work is done in groups, and the issues of the individual skills and abilities of children aren't addressed much at all.
There is little focus in this arrangement on the teaching of appropriate skills in systematic ways.
As a matter of fact she finds it quite hard to teach more than one group at a time, and many children spend part of the day on low-supervision activities or ‘busy-work’, which doesn't really move their thinking on.
Moreover some individuals-don't actually contribute a lot to the groups and only seem to be working.
The real thinking and activity is being done by only a proportion of the children.
These are the kinds of issues which an analysis of curriculum balance needs to address, and the head will need to be clear that the heart of the matter is the question of the deployment of time in ways which allow adequate attention to all parts of a curriculum.
Here, above, we have teachers who in their different ways are having partial, and perhaps important successes, without offering their pupils a complete diet.
It is very evident that ‘balance’ is a complex matter in practice.
Some teachers interpret balance as a signal to piece together the school week into boxed timetables that have the solidarity of tablets of stone.
Others take ‘child-centred’— a sniper's victim of a concept if ever there was one — to mean that there should be no necessary variety in the diet.
The National Curriculum has the virtue of concentrating the mind on the requirement of variety, but we must recognise that adequate provision of variety is in practice very difficult to achieve, calling for intense and careful planning.
It is worth noting that the ever-increasing complexity of curriculum in contemporary schooling — and the growing problems of delivery teachers have to face — is now becoming a major international concern, especially in the countries of the Council of Europe.
Subject specialism or integration?
Choice
One of the crucial decisions, now, is whether to teach a subject discretely, or to integrate.
Choice will have implications both for the timetable and for teaching styles.
Our first thought might be that the easy way out is to develop a subject-orientated curriculum.
The pressure is, perhaps, to think unilaterally of transacting one subject after another in routines of set timetabled periods.
One infant school I know has opted for selecting three core subject specialists and moving the children around part of the day to work with their specialist teacher.
And for some schools, this may be an interesting option, though if carried to extremes, it has serious limitations.
In fact the closer the content of the programmes of study are analysed, the more apparent potential relationships between different subject disciplines become.
So the second thought might be: why not integrate fully?
There's a great deal of language, for example, which can be transacted in science and maths.
Many aspects of science could be drawn into a variety of project/topic work arrangements, and some of the maths and science items could also be delivered in tandem.
There are, however, constraints on creating a fully-integrated curriculum.
The two main ones are:
(i)
subjects, whilst cross referencing, also have their own internal logic.
There are discrete as well as generalisable elements, both in content and in the network of knowledge and skills underpinning the subject matrix;
(ii)
the principles of sequencing.
It is possible to sequence learning in interdisciplinary contexts, but for some kinds of content-sequence it is undoubtedly much easier to keep a steady eye on the subject.
It would be interesting and potentially lively to engage in maths or history or music in the midst of a project on ‘Warwick Castle’(say), or ‘Myself’, or ‘Transport’, but projects tend to contain inherent biases to one subject area or another.
Moreover, subject areas contain discrete skills and make particular content demands.
It is extremely difficult to maintain a full interdisciplinary focus whilst at the same time maintaining equitable balance between subjects, and also planning the internal subject inputs in a meaningful patterned way.
There's always the danger of the learner's experience looking more like a patchwork quilt than an ordered and informative sequence of events that builds knowledge on knowledge, experience on experience.
All this presents a problem, even before we consider issues of differing attainments.
The evidence is, in fact, that currently most schools teach some curriculum areas discretely, particularly maths, music, and PE, whilst delivering others in a ‘project format’, particularly in the humanities.
There is also some evidence that ‘projects’, whilst aspiring to be interdisciplinary, often consist of subject-orientated segments, usually with a strong bias to one subject.
Above all it is important for the staff planning groups to decide what ‘interdisciplinary’ work or topic work will actually mean for the learner in practice, and choice will depend in part on the school's view of the ‘whole picture’spread across quite long periods of time, with the teachers planning carefully how they intend to create a balanced curriculum over weeks and months.
Patterns of timing
It is useful, as a guide, for the staff to decide how much time it intends overall to devote to different subject areas, and what the pattern of delivery will look like for the learner.
One of the key questions is how much time can be spent on any particular curriculum area.
And this is not merely a bureaucratic exercise.
It is important in thinking about time, for teachers to have some sense of the moment-to-moment experiences of the children.
I once followed a pupil around for a whole day, and was impressed by the peculiar mixture she experienced of dislocated bits and pieces, and longer sessions where there were ‘spaces’ for her to enjoy and explore learning or — occasionally — to waste time in.
There are different ways of dealing with the timing of ‘learning experiences’.
Patterns of timing can be planned across weeks, months, or longer.
One of the strengths of an analysis of timing is being able to distinguish between curriculum elements that are likely to require frequent input (eg items in mathematics) and items that might be effectively delivered at least in part in an interdisciplinary ‘project’ format,(eg perhaps history or geography or RE).
Example: the timing of music
Let us imagine that a school is planning a music curriculum programme.
The first question to ask is how much time does it want to spend on music overall?
The school might, for example, recommend that musical activity takes place on a weekly basis.
There are certainly virtues in regularity, but the ‘weekly session’ procedure is not necessarily the best way to proceed.
Studies of children who learn music successfully suggest that whilst routines are important, there is also a case for ‘focused periods’ during which music might occupy longer and more sustained periods of attention — as part of a project, for example, or in preparation for a performance.
Quality teaching often leads to striking  conclusions that call for what might be best described as an ‘intensification of activity’ at crucial periods.
This can present problems for teachers.
How do they find ways of maintaining routines and sequences whilst also retaining flexibility to develop these intensifying periods or activity which can be the hallmark of achievement?
And if subjects or parts of subjects are to be taught discretely, they must dovetail with other aspects of the curriculum, avoiding a piecemeal and bitty example.
If the children learn a music activity (eg exploring performance in tuned percussion, or singing) it may be important to link the activity and the performance with other arts activities, or even to explore its relationship with (say) science or maths or language.
There are clearly — even just for music — a variety of options, and the school must eventually come down for one pattern of timing rather than another.
The head, in promoting the discussion and holding the ‘overview’ of developments across the school as a whole, will be aware that there are many different possible patterns, ranging from a simple ‘lesson-a-week’pattern to a more complex planned programme which might (for example) integrate music into a thematic project or topic, and allow for an ‘intensification period’at the end of term (say for the children to build up to a performance).
Here are three examples of different planned programmes spread over twelve weeks, based on the assumption that (i) the school has agreed to allocate a basic six hours per term to music and (ii) the school spends a proportion of its time on an integrated project.
Projects in this imaginary school change each half term (Figure 6.1).
Example A is a simple sequence of subject-based lessons.
Example B builds a three-hour music component into an integrated project each half term.
Example C combines a sequence of four planned 30-minute music lessons with two longer music inputs in the integrated project.
Project 1 contains 1½ hours' music.
Project 2 contains 2½ hours' music.
The content of the different lengths of music inputs would be planned in sequence — more time being given to music activity as the music programme evolves.
The 2½ hours in the second half of the term (plus one hour of subject-based lessons) would lead to a ‘musical event’— a finished performance.
It seems very likely that the most effective curriculum design is likely to show evidence of use of all three models, for different purposes.
This will be adapted for children of different ages.
Young children probably work best to a more ‘integrated model’; older children may get something from some more sustained subject   focus.
But even within an integrated model there will be clear ‘subject elements’ built into the theme.
And in ‘subject specialist’ delivery there will be sensitivity to the fact that subjects are never watertight and there are considerable attractions in bringing interdisciplinary elements even into subject teaching.
Heads will need to exercise skills in working through the stages of this analysis and encouraging teachers to sharpen their awareness of timing, without discouraging timetabling flexibility.
The last thing we want is teaching by numbers, reducing learning to a series of mechanistic measured units.
On the other hand, a mastery of timing is one of the keys to successful teaching and learning — and always has been.
We have now some thought-out sense of a general plan of campaign based on decisions about whether (and how much) we stick to subjects, and to what extent we integrate.
We've also developed some sense of patterns of timing — a sense of what a typical week and a typical term might look like for the learner.
And we've agreed the key point that the teacher and the learner must have the opportunity to ‘bring things together’ in meaningful and productive ways.
Transacting the plans
The further question arises now of how the teacher brings together (say) history and art (or mathematics, or music, or science) in practical ways which really help the learner to achieve a genuine sense of coherence across the subjects.
We need to address Eric Bolton's blistering criticism about interdisciplinary work in primary schools:
more often than not it lacks continuity and progression or any serious attempt to ensure that adequate time and attention are given to the elements said to comprise the topic.
I have never been convinced that HMI realise the extreme difficulties of managing interdisciplinary work in sustained ways in primary classes.
It seems to me interesting and useful here to engage in a more detailed breakdown of the curriculum, and to look more closely at the ‘components’ or ‘activities’that, when added together, make up the ‘curriculum course’or topic.
Example
One school decided to implement a half-term topic on the Victorians for term three.
This is a history topic or module which specifically drew in:
elements of art and drama
some science work, looking at the evolution of electricity, and at the discoveries of James Watt and the impact of steam
language work of various kinds, involving the drawing together of evidence, descriptions of artefacts, writing stories, recording observations based on trips to museums and local environment
some maths, based on looking at simple statistics
some geography, focused on mapping
some work on health, looking at epidemiological questions of disease and its prevention, with discussion of vaccination.
When they came to plan the project in detail, the teachers (planning together in this school in year groups) worked together to construct a series of carefully designed ‘activities’— a total of six in all.
Key to this stage of planning is the acceptance (once again) that there must be some time limits given to each ‘activity’, or the whole project will become lopsided and won't be completed in time.
Important also is the planning at this stage of resources needed, and of staffing deployment.
For one of the activities there will be a change-round of teachers who will be engaging in a semi-specialist role.
Five activities will be delivered, mostly by the class teacher, then.
One will be with a specialist teacher.
The general point is that primary schools might be more imaginative and flexible in their deployment of staff: there is no law that says that there should be one teacher to one class for all of the time, and that this is the best possible arrangement in all circumstances.
Each activity is broadly timed, and space is allowed for each activity to be taken further by the children, so that they can develop ideas for themselves, and pursue the possibilities of the activity both at school and at home.
An ‘activity’ might last any length of time from one and a half hours to (say) a sustained activity lasting, over a period, as much as ten hours.
The total of the six activities will be comfortably encompassed in six weeks, with an approximate total of 72 hours in all.
Each activity has a main subject focus, though (i) it is held together by the history theme of the project, and (ii) it will not be exclusively mono-subject based.
The health activity, for example, will look closely at health issues and progress since the Victorian age — but it will involve writing, talking, and some art work with graphic illustration.
Each activity looks specifically at the delivery of a number of national curriculum elements in the different subject areas, though the activity is planned to make sure that it is not too didactic, and not too heavily content-orientated.
Throughout the activities, the children will be expected to develop both general skills in (say) researching material, working in groups, managing their own learning, and specific skills in understanding history — this being primarily a history-focused topic.
Wider aspects of the ‘activity’ are also considered very carefully.
When we look closely at ‘activities’ we realise what a range of choices we have at our disposal.
The ‘activity’ needs to consider such critical questions as:
How precisely does the main focus (eg art) interlink with the secondary focuses (eg here, history)?
Is the activity closely determined by teacher selected content?
Or does the child have a role to play?
Does the child have choice?
And space to work at his/her own level of interest?
Does the activity require co-operative group work of one kind or another?
Does the activity take into account a range of attainments?
How are cross-curriculum themes such as equal opportunities and multicultural issues built in?
What outcomes are expected?
Written, dramatic, group folders, individual work, etc?
How is the child's performance on the activity assessed?
How is the activity itself recorded and evaluated?
There is, of course, a number of other questions to be asked.
The important thing is that the teachers have a clear sense of the relation between the content chosen (from whatever subject areas) and the way in which the whole activity is delivered.
All the six activities (in this case) can then be carefully balanced, one against another to achieve an overall picture of the topic.
If one activity needs to be very closely content-focused (maybe, for example, at the opening of the topic where the children are put clearly in the picture as to what the topic is to be about), another needs to be constructed to allow pupil exploratory work.
If one is inclined to the didactic another might be the reverse.
If one encourages independent individual learning, the next might be a group activity.
The important thing is that the whole programme is planned in a way that brings out learning in depth, allowing for sustained involvement with the children, and has clear developing purposes.
I would argue that this careful planning of activities is already the current practice of many teachers.
There is evidence to show that effective practice uses a variety of approaches to teaching style appropriate to the particular task in hand.
No single activity, of course, will be able to address all the issues.
Human affairs, and especially matters involving learning, are on the whole a lot neater and easier to understand on paper than they are in reality.
Indeed there is a naive assumption underlying the national curriculum that there is ‘out there’ a cohort of super teachers who can ensure an undiminished progress of perfectly intricately balanced tasks all day long, according to lists of criteria.
The criteria, however, and the precision of planning do, I think help.
Some of the reference points are critical.
If they were taken seriously we would have all children going through our schools with no experience of group work, of confident oral discussion, of knowing how to make choices, of being asked to produce demanding individual work of high quality and developing key research and technical skills.
A very strong impression, even now, is of a lack of diversity in the planning and delivery of activities in ways that may not be in the best interests of the children.
It is particularly useful to look at overall patterns which emerge from a sequence of activities and (maybe) to discover obvious gaps in the child's experience.
And the head — above all — needs to take responsibility for the whole programme.
We can, of course, go further still in trying to analyse the transactions of learning.
We can, if we want to, move into the somewhat esoteric but extremely interesting area of micro-analysis of teaching.
We can show that within an ‘activity’ there will be  numerous various smaller engagements between teacher and children.
An activity could be analysed into quite short sections, each of which might be described (using traditional language) as a ‘lesson’, or for the learner, ‘task’.
A successful activity will consist of a series of varied lessons and tasks.
And it is the moment-to-moment tasks children engage in, that will be the focus for much of the observational assessment we shall need to look at next.
Assessment and evaluation
There is already an ever-increasing variety of suggestions and recommendations emerging as to how best to assess and record this whole process of transaction of subjects, topics and activities.
As with the general delivery of curriculum, there is unlikely to be one single effective model.
But certainly we need to try to develop (i) a recording system for the transaction of curriculum activities and (ii) ways of recording and assessing the child's progress.
A recording system for classroom transaction
Example
One school is currently developing an activity recording system.
The idea is to note the activity (which is planned by the classteacher alongside other teachers) very briefly, to describe whether it was for a whole class, a group, or perhaps an individual.
The attainment targets, if any, are recorded.
And there is a column for timing and for a brief evaluative comment.
What's good about this is that it doesn't take too much time.
Five minutes ought to be an outside target for recording (Figure 6.2).
This brief recording is not, of course, the only record the teacher keeps.
Activities are planned in groups, and a more detailed description of them is put together in the planning process.
So, for example for our six activities above there would be a description put together for each activity in planning meetings.
This would be kept as a record.
It would also be evaluated by the staff group, and the information passed on to colleagues who may be taking up similar activities the following year.
Recording and assessing the child's progress
Already many schools are working on various ways of recording attainment targets for individual children.
There obviously needs to be a simple, convenient way of assessing children in the process of one or more activities.
And at the end of the day these will   need summation in a single document.
Again the key factor is time.
It has been clear from the beginning that there are problems here for teachers having to assess a whole range of attainment targets across the curriculum.
There is a real danger that the language of the assessment process is too vague.
Teachers need to retain intellectual honesty.
If the recording process lacks substance, is grossly time-consuming, or meaningless, then there must be major modifications.
But they must first study a variety of assessment procedures, try them out, and research the outcomes rigorously.
The children themselves must not be forgotten in the headlong race to reach attainment targets.
Many schools are now looking at the whole issue of profiling and records of achievement.
There needs to be some procedure for describing the child's wider development, as a person, as a learner.
We have a lot to learn here, both about the most effective and workable formats for such a document, about the way in which we can most usefully and perceptively make comments and in ways which (again) fit practically into time demands.
The most effective profile is likely:
to make reference to broad achievements across the attainment targets 
to describe the child's personal emotional and behavioural development
to describe abilities at general achievements in the process of learning
to offer a contribution from children and parents
to give examples of the children's own work as cumulative examples of achievements
to avoid the sterility of checklists, wherever possible, but not to involve acres of writing from the teachers
to be cumulative during the year, and not a one-off produced under pressure (say) at the end of the year
to be useful for teachers and parents and children to read as an informative and convincing story of the child's progress over the years
to be, in some measure, celebratory, showing the best of the child and a clear view of his/her growing development
Here then we have an ambition to complement the National Curriculum with information about the child as a learner and his/ her development as a person.
It reminds us that the National Curriculum is not the whole educational experience of a child.
Some reflections
We now have a general strategic plan, which represents the outline of this analysis (Figure 6.3).
All this, of course, could well be seen as an excessively constraining interpretation, smacking of a kind of behaviourist structure analysis common to well-developed traditions of curriculum development in the USA.
Certainly the programme potentially creates a way for the teacher to describe practice in a new kind of detail.
It will (at best) clarify the intentions behind the choice of tasks and activities, and will give a sharper sense of timing and may offer more variety for the children.
The National Curriculum can certainly be used imaginatively to explore improved learning.
The role of the head in leading the school's interpretation will be critical.
If teachers can be encouraged to clarify their thinking and make learning more varied and fun for the children — sharpening and deepening thinking, then this will be because the head has taken the staff along an analytical path that actually raises the level of efficiency and excitement in the classroom.
It is equally possible for the National Curriculum to be used as an instrument for managerial convenience and prejudice.
Quality of activities could be short circuited by a pressure to ‘get through’ programmes of content.
Instead of developing careful analytical thinking, the staff   could be instructed to introduce closed didactic procedures that are heavily information-driven.
There is no learning without content, and the National Curriculum helps formulate thinking about content choice, something the post-Plowden primary tradition has fought shy of.
But content-driven curriculum is conversely always in danger of reducing the quality of transactions between teacher and child by becoming a handing-out of packages.
This can happen:
by activities being so prescribed that they allow no space for learners to take them further 
by activities being insufficiently well linked, becoming just a series of subject-driven inputs with no natural relationship
by taking away the responsibility for teachers to develop modules and activities
by assuming that the quality of learning relates to a tightly-structured programme of assessable achievement.
Learners do not all develop at the same speed in the same way.
Learning achievement is, at least in part, unpredictable — and we must recognise its very close relation to (i) patience and persistence,(ii) insight and maturity, and (iii) personal motivation.
by distracting the teachers from issues of the quality of delivery to administrative, bureaucratic issues, with priority given to meetings, form-filling and planning of a kind that fails to impact on the quality of the classroom.
We must remain wary.
There is the possibility that behaviourist principles will define the programmes of work and assessment targets even more closely.
We could emerge with the hugely overdeveloped curriculum of (say) the State of Missouri, which the format of the UK National Curriculum already so closely resembles.
It is critical at this stage, though, that the head conveys positive messages and takes up the opportunities on offer.
The National Curriculum does not obviate the need for the head to develop a climate in the school which has its own sense of values and independence of mind.
The old problems and challenges of leadership remain.
The leader needs to encourage participation, to build on staff strengths, to help evolve a vision amongst staff -s remains the primary challenge of leadership, and the vision requires the building of quality in a participatory enterprise?.
This is often extraordinarily hard to achieve, but remains at the heart of a successful schools.
The National Curriculum offers an opportunity for a school to engage in critical thinking about practice.
The debate must focus on the key issue of what good practice means in this school.
And the focus needs to be, above all, on what happens in the classroom.
The head needs to give priority to the close analysis of practice, exploring the different kinds of learning going on in classrooms, reflecting it back to staff, assessing, estimating, reflecting and asking others to do the same.
The action-research model is useful here, setting up procedures and observation procedures for deciding what makes for quality in learning experiences, and how best to observe, analyse and describe.
The key questions are:
What is actually happening in this classroom?
What is this child actually learning?
What does the learner make of it all?
Where is it all leading?
All this has implications for the head's style of management.
There is no substitute for a planned management style.
How then do we best plan our approach?
Certainly heads need to move (and read) fast in shaping, changing, directing, writing.
There is the need for Napoleonic efficiency with time.
The pressure is on to agitate the system, to put bite into it, to become more managerial.
But there is a danger in the head mirroring this energising, anxiety-making delivery.
LMS, appraisal systems and governing body involvements compound the demands of heads to remove themselves from the classrooms, and to dictate instructions down the line.
Implicit throughout is that close intelligent analysis of practice, leading — potentially-in all kinds of ways to new insight, is the key to progress.
It means more time in classrooms.
It means less rigid structures in planning.
It means more on-the-job dialogue with staff.
It means more imaginative deployment of staff.
It means preparedness to experiment with new and possibly riskier arrangements.
It means greater consciousness of the quality of pupil experience.
It means tougher evaluation and assessment.
It means increasingly precise understanding of high-quality delivery.
It means higher quality corporate interaction of staff with staff, staff with head, and all adults with children.
The head has a clear dilemma: it is possible to lead staff in developing a curriculum in quite different directions.
To survive successfully the head will need a clear sense of priorities, and the self-confidence and intellectual astuteness to maintain a chosen path.
The staff will appreciate a head's professional confidence and patience in these turbulent times, who addresses dilemmas without panic, develops procedures with care and good humour, and who maintains a radical determination to use the National Curriculum to do the best possible, on the evidence, for the children in our care.
Fitting the National Curriculum to one's own principles Mark Hewlett, Principal, Quorn Rawlins Community College
Two weeks after the publication of proposals for the National Curriculum in September 1987, the Times Educational Supplement invited 13 curriculum pundits to give their views.
Prognoses were gloomy.
Under the heading ‘Defective Vision’, subtitled ‘Ill-informed or plain dishonest’, Peter Cornall argued that ‘the focal depth is too shallow.
Has anyone asked what will be the fundamental concerns of people in the 21st century?’
He quoted Bruner: ‘A curriculum ought to be built around great issues, principles and values that a society deems worthy of the continued concern of its members.’
More specifically, Cornall noted; ‘cross-curricular themes may be all right but they cannot adequately be taught through foundation subjects.
Economic, environmental, political and social education must not be ignored.’
‘Fundamentally flawed’ was the heading for Denis Lawton's article:
The document ignores the debate on curriculum which has been taking place for 20 years.
The draft is subject-based in its thinking.
There is nothing wrong with subjects provided they are treated as means not ends and as long as everyone is clear about what is to be achieved through them.
But no justification is put forward for the selection of  subjects.
Important areas of human experience are almost completely neglected.
Little mention has been given to moral education, social and personal development, political understanding and economic awareness (much beloved of Keith Joseph).
Simply to hope that such things will be taught through other subjects is not satisfactory for a planning document even at the discussion stage.
The heading for my own contribution, ‘Can we complain?’, seemed to strike a note of resignation, not inappropriately I suppose: after all we in schools are paid to get on with it regardless.
But I was referring to a broader issue:
If politicians came to the conclusion that education was too important to be left to the educators, bear in mind the massive input of public resources, education's failure to demonstrate significant improvement of standards, poor marketing, uncertain professional leadership and the fact that every year youngsters leave school ignorant of much they might reasonably be expected to know and lacking skills that could have been acquired in 11 years of schooling.
Simply complaining won't do.
Referring to testing I observed that, ‘a reflex anti-testing reaction would be dismissed as naïve and the sort of soft headedness that hard-liners think is at the root of the problem’, but observed that, ‘effective, constructive, diagnostic testing is expensive and poor testing could distort the curriculum and demoralise learners.’
Accepting that politically it would be unrealistic to expect the National Curriculum to be couched in other than conventional terms, ie subjects, I questioned the absence of a rationale.
The National Curriculum's aims — to give pupils knowledge, understanding, skills and attitudes to equip them for the responsibilities and challenges of adult life and  tomorrow's world — will be widely supported.
But in order to achieve them you need to work out as precisely as possible what knowledge, concepts, skills and attitudes it is you want to develop.
It isn't good enough to fall back on a somewhat arbitrary list of subjects without specific aims.
This disconnection between aims and curricular plans seems to be an endemic disease of curricular planning and, unless amended, the National Curriculum will show that in the late twentieth century the policy makers still couldn't get out of the rut of traditional thinking that has dogged education throughout this century.
Of the other contributors, some expressed outrage, some were more optimistic, but I believe that these views of Cornall, Lawton and Hewlett typically reflected professional concerns of curriculum developers and teachers, especially those grappling with the persistent problems of how to implant enlightened ideas into a traditional subject-based curriculum.
Common themes included concern at failure to think through to an underlying purpose — the absence of any rationale.
There  was little sense of any forward-looking vision, of any sense of critical prioritisation.
Where were the important elements: inventiveness, initiative, adaptability, intellectual curiosity, sensitivity, confidence, determination?
There was disappointment that the best structure for our educational future was an unimaginative list of subjects, and fear that testing would turn the clock back even further.
I think everyone felt it was stodgy; it was not a dynamic springboard from which we could leap into a new era of effective education.
How the National Curriculum looks now — remaining reservations and constraints
How do things look now?
Superficially things look brighter.
I need to say, lest this sounds too one-sided, that I leave more positive comments to the conclusion, in which I describe more specifically how we will be attempting to take advantage of those aspects of the National Curriculum which offer hope of progress.
I say, ‘Superficially things look brighter.’
Speaking at the 1989 BEMAS Annual Conference, Martin Davies, Director of NCC, referred back to the early gloom and outrage, but then went on to say: ‘What is remarkable is how little dissent and how little opposition there is now the overwhelming majority have accepted the idea of a National Curriculum.’
I recalled that Lawton had explicitly said that some kind of National Curriculum was not undesirable.
Neither had Cornall and I condemned the notion out of hand.
But perhaps, I wondered, had we not been a bit harsh, a bit premature?
Of one thing I am certain: I am sure we all agree that what has emerged over the last two years has exceeded our expectations.
In particular, much of HMI's enlightened thinking has permeated the National Curriculum.
But let us keep a sense of proportion.
Our original fears were so gloomy, our expectations so low, that almost anything would be better.
While expressing relief that what is emerging could be worse, it is not the promised land; it is just about approaching the standard of some of the good practice which preceded it.
And, as I say above, we are paid to adapt and to get on with what we've got; we are not going to waste energy on futile complaint.
How many of the criticisms and problems of the National Curriculum remain — or more accurately how many appear unlikely to be solved soon?
It should be recognised that many of the problems that face us are not a result of the National Curriculum; they have existed in the curriculum for decades.
The overriding criticism of the National Curriculum proposals was that it was not designed to achieve significant fundamental aims: it did not obviously focus upon ‘great issues, principles and  values’, or on the development of fundamentally important attitudes and skills, which educators, industrialists, and all those concerned with the welfare of society and the enrichment of the individual, would see as paramount.
Having said that, it would be possible to extract from the rhetoric, and the general statements of the NCC and from the syllabuses so far produced, words which might suggest that the NCC executives agree.
But there are grounds for scepticism: there has not been produced a clear coherent overall plan which places significant values, skills and, characteristics at the forefront of the curriculum.
There is a scepticism about the likely effectiveness of the cross curricular themes, which, if genuinely given prominence, would weld the curriculum together, giving it direction, coherence and purpose.
The fact that the first components in the structure are syllabuses for four individual subjects which have been placed in position before the other components (subjects and cross-curricular themes) have even been sketched out, confirms that the approach is ad hoc .
There is no evidence of their being part of any coherent overall design.
Much rests on cross-curricular elements, but unless enmeshed as an integral part of the overall curriculum, assessment and testing systems which will give them parity of esteem with other elements, they are likely to be ignored, or to remain peripheral.
Omissions remain, of course.
The preference for geography and history over other social sciences is pure inertia, unadulterated conservatism lacking rationale.
From our own experience we know that sociology, psychology, political science and anthropology have proved much richer sources of theoretical models and general concepts with which to equip students for understanding the social environment they inhabit.
But aren't we asking for everything on a plate?
If schools feel that the National Curriculum does not get to the heart of the matter, that it is a relatively superficial means to more important ends and has important omissions, then is it not up to the schools to work through the National Curriculum or add to it to secure their goals?
Possibly so, but this brings us to two practical problems.
First, the curriculum appears seriously overcrowded.
It is extremely difficult to provide a balanced education of core and foundation subjects and offer even standard additions like a second language, English literature, and a full careers and work experience programme.
This we know already.
We shall have even less time than before to enrich the curriculum with a range of imaginative exploratory activity.
Secondly, frequent testing and the enormous pressure of parents and pupils to succeed will almost certainly have the effect of focusing attention on assessment targets, at the expense of other activities  to an even greater degree than has occurred in the past.
The safeguard for cross-curricular elements is, ironically, to ensure that they are fully incorporated into schemes of assessment.
We are thus constrained.
Rawlins' ideals and aims: education to serve people's needs
Having suggested that the National Curriculum is a constraint, what is it that we are being constrained from?
The answer I have so far given that it is from achieving effectively and efficiently, fundamentally important aims such as developing inventiveness, initiative, adaptability, intellectual curiosity, sensitivity, confidence, and so on— general transferable skills and attitudes which will equip our students for their future lives.
There are some fundamental general principles to which we are committed, arising from our tradition as an active community college, including a long tradition of involvement in the arts; we have been involved in TVEI, whose emphasis coincided with our tradition of innovation in design, technology, IT and business studies and in our humanities, health education and fitness for life programmes, particularly our involvement with the local industrial community.
This list reflects an acceptance of contrasting ideas and ideologies which does not allow us to be simplistically labelled (‘progressive’, or otherwise) and we don't want to be.
This is best exemplified in our community education work where our idealism, our welcoming environment, our sensitive support for the handicapped and our  initiatives in integrating special-needs students into the college are underpinned by hard-nosed accountancy and entrepreneurial activity.
I present five extracts from the college's aims to give a flavour of our determined commitments, but we recognise that anyone can write rhetoric, so I hope they do not engender cynicism:
1.
The short term sees the challenge of full entry into the European market bringing with it the prospect of intensive economic competition.
The longer terms sees the continuing and growing challenge of educating people for an increasingly sophisticated technological world where business acumen and economic flair underpinned by management skills and intellectual flexibility are needed for survival.
Academic success is no guarantee that a person is empowered to tackle challenges of modern society with confidence.
We must ensure that our students leave school functionally literate for a complex competitive economy.
2.
We need people who are not only economically literate, but politically and socially literate, well informed about and sensitive to crucial social and moral issues; we must be developing a society whose  members are aware and tolerant of others and manifest concern for their welfare.
3.
We want to lay emphasis on the concept of community education: it represents a whole attitude to education which makes science, maths and all the other subjects students learn, meaningful by relating them to the real experiences of life outside school.
We should hope that all our students have opportunities to engage actively in and experience the personal satisfaction of working with and for others in the community.
4.
Giving students skills, information and conceptual abstractions is worthwhile but only if it is usable in the various circumstances of their future lives.
5.
If there is a danger that we have fallen into the trap of vocationalising education let me emphasise that we must actively encourage the development of intellectual curiosity and imagination by exploration in fields, however theoretically abstract — in science, maths, humanities, the arts or any sphere that captures students' interests; education has suffered as much from failure to excite interest in the world of ideas as failure to prepare for practicalities of daily living.
It has fallen too often into a dull middle ground.
But the major problem with the curriculum has not so much been lack of vision or aims, as a failure to translate aims in a clear and logical way into a curriculum to achieve them.
A curricular structure to achieve our aims: the regions of application model
The conceptual hotch-potch of the traditional curriculum, based on subjects which are a random assortment of content-based, concept-based, skill-based and moral-based collections of ideas (whose confusing absurdity is in part exemplified by the NCC's cross-curricular skills which are exactly the same as the curricular subjects) has never been designed from first principles to do the basic job of a curriculum, which is to help achieve aims in the most effective and efficient way.
Our starting point of curriculum design was a carefully worded summary of aims (acceptable to the DES, TVEI, the governors, to a community college, indeed to any educational establishment).
The curriculum should help learners acquire and develop (i) knowledge and conceptual understanding,(ii) skills,(iii) personal qualities and attitudes, so that they will be able (iv) to take advantage of opportunities and cope with challenges in the various circumstances of their present and future lives — to enable and encourage them to contribute responsibly and constructively to society (in its various facets) and so that their personal lives may be enriched.
Note that, roughly speaking,(i)(ii) and (iii) are means to (iv) ends which reflect the real purposes of the college; and it is the ends, the most important elements which tend to get lost or blurred in the confusion of the standard, over-crowded subject-based curriculum.
The above summary of aims reflects ideals given in the five extracts of the college's general aims given in the previous section.
The essential idea is that the purpose of learning is to illuminate people's understanding of the environments (sets of circumstances) they (will) experience: The learning of skills, knowledge and so on must be applicable in some form, or it is dead.
It is no good saying your curriculum is to prepare people for life, and then ignoring what life's experiences will or might consist of.
Figure 7.1 incorporates the four major elements of the curriculum, focusing on the circumstances in which learning will be applied.
This model reflects the philosophy and the priorities of the college.
The notion of the overriding importance of applicability of learning is born of long immersion in community education.
Daily contact with infants in the crèche (next to the sixth-form coffee bar), the elderly, the frail, the physically and mentally disabled, employed people who come to us for literacy support or computing courses, active retired people attending daytime A-level classes, members of the community using our library, students on the threshold of professional careers in music playing with non-too-gifted amateurs engaged in recreation, academically-gifted students about to enter university engaged in social work with our special-needs students, has perhaps given us an unusually clear insight into the different ways people need and want education and the different circumstances in which it enriches their lives.
So we know that we have to think carefully and critically through the general idea of ‘preparation for work and adult life’.
This can be a vacuous form of words, conveniently forgotten as students settle down in their maths, their physics, their geography lessons to acquire ideas which are, we acknowledge, of potential general application, but which are likely to be of little use if the connections between theory and practice are not made explicitly.
The details of how the connections are made appear in ‘Curriculum to serve society, how schools can work for people’ which incorporates a case-study of how we in Rawlins have thought about this problem.
It considers the way in which we might make a reality of the observation (by Keith Joseph) that ‘the curriculum should be relevant to the real world and pupils’ experience of it' by considering the range of challenges and opportunities which people face in, say, the domestic environment, often regarded as too trivial for ‘academic’education, but where arguably most important economic, technical and social decisions are made and acted upon: in the community where a host of issues require an informed public to exercise judgment and active commitment to ensure that the quality of the social and physical environment is constantly improved, and so on in other contexts which will require people to make an active and hopefully informed response, underlain by conceptual understanding of general issues to which,if taught effectively , geography, history, physical sciences and design, indeed all academic disciplines, can make a powerful contribution.
In emphasising how theoretical study can be applied , in practice we are equally conscious of how the application of ideas in a wide range of specific context can contribute to the ‘academic’ pursuit of identifying general theories and models, traditionally taught and still to be taught through disciplines which often impose rather arbitrary boundaries of content.
We hope we shall be educating future academics and researchers who will be much more effective and imaginative thinkers, who will perceive areas of conceptual exploration beyond the traditional boundaries of their disciplines.
This describes where we are in terms of an overall structure.
We are equally concerned with the learning process.
Recognising that while there is a place for carefully programmed input, we endeavour to emphasise active independent learning through direct experience: for example through business enterprise, designing products for and in local companies, work experience, residential experience, community experience, family placements, recreational activities, which we hope will be recreative in the fullest sense.
We are equally concerned that backing this up is an organisation which (in addition to being efficient) ensures equal opportunity, and an adult ambience of personal care in which responsibility and individuality can flourish (not easy to achieve).
There is, of course, nothing in this paragraph which might not appear in many schools' booklets.
So what is the difference?
Only that we would want all students to experience these things to the fullest, so that they all have varied and rich experiences in all these spheres, and that we make special efforts to provide the time and space for the students to explore and develop their abilities and inclinations to learn and develop personal qualities without being directed.
Although we acknowledge that the National Curriculum is presented in a conservative context, and probably has to be couched in conventional terms, we are conscious of its lack of a ‘qualitative thrust’, its inability to cater for all we want to offer all our students.
And we are very doubtful about our ability to incorporate our ideas into a crowded programme in our ten-column curriculum with powerful constraints imposed by a heavy schedule of testing and assessment.
So we have a clearly articulated philosophy, and we have a curricular model which reflects it — a model which is superior we think to any off-the-shelf models, and we have looked at Bruner, White, Bloom, and at HMI's areas of experience, all of which lack the coherence and universality of the ‘regions of application’ model.
Adapting our ideas to National Curriculum requirements
But to present the ‘regions of application’ model as our only version of the curriculum in our prospectus would be to put us out of business.
So how are we going to manage with the National Curriculum?
In a structural sense we have turned our model on its side.
The focal points of the diagram are now arranged down the left-hand side of Figure 7.2 below.
The regions of application have been amalgamated with the National Curriculum cross-curricular themes.
How far this will work depends on how far we can inject into cross-curricular work the essence of our ideas and make them genuine focuses of our work (and not peripheral elements).
We are assuming that the knowledge concepts and skills, also the development of attitudes and personal qualities, will be delivered through the foundation subjects, options, extra-curricular activities, tutorial and careers guidance programme, and our extensive individual staff-student consultations which are a major feature of the school's work, and perhaps more than anything else manifest our central concern for the academic and personal needs of each student.
The implications of the National Curriculum on our determination to enliven the learning process are not wholly discouraging.
For example, subject guidelines encourage problem solving, exploratory, experimental activities.
The effect on our ability to further enrich our work through a wide range of direct experiences or work and community involvement is arguable.
Greater pressure on staff time significantly reduces our capacity.
The solution to this problem lies elsewhere (in an increasingly aggressive fight for resources).
Positive opportunities offered by the National Curriculum
It sounds as if we are doing little more than making the best of a bad job.
Compared with our ideal this is certainly true, and I shall await developments over the next decade with interest.
But I should be more positive than this.
I want to say that, given the political constraints, and the constraints of past practice which keep us within the old mould, it is a better-balanced mould than what preceded it.
Given the commitment to the arts which is a central feature of Rawlins, I welcome the inclusion of the arts as a foundation element: it strengthens our hand, though why just music and art are specified I do not know, but we can get around that unless SEAC imposes unrealistic demands and arbitrarily forces students into choosing just one specialism for GCSE certification: we must have flexible (eg modular type) arrangements to allow us to offer what is best for our students.
A specific element which has struck a chord with community educators is the encouragement to involve parents.
Expand this to encourage involving other adults, and we should feel in tune with the NCC.
But two features strike me as being particularly significant: cross-curricular themes and the planning of syllabuses from 5–16.
Cross-curricular themes were welcomed by Cornall, Lawton and Hewlett, but we were sceptical.
For NCC to continue to reiterate the theme and amplify the idea of cross-curricular themes in official documentation is very encouraging: it is a definite step forward and one which I would want to secure.
My fear is that the proposals of the relatively forward-looking NCC will come to naught in SEAC.
In syllabuses produced to date, only perfunctory attention has been given to cross-curricular themes.
But if SEAC can be persuaded to give parity of esteem to the assessment of cross-curricular themes within subjects, and better still, to revise syllabuses when an overall plan does eventually emerge, much will have been achieved — in fact, nothing less than the coherence and purpose educators seek.
The second feature which offers the possibility of overcoming the problem of how to incorporate the rich and exciting range of activities we would like, is the move to planning the curriculum as a progression of learning from 5–16 (hopefully eventually 3–21).
If we can eliminate the wasteful duplication and discontinuity caused by ad hoc muddled planning in education, we in effect create space to fit in what we want.
Our local family of schools is designing a business education/world of work/economic awareness curriculum 5–16 (which will incidentally identify the  contributions of each subject).
The immediate reaction was: ‘just think what we can achieve given an 11-years span to work with.
It gives us more than enough space and time to do what we want, even given the pressures of frequent assessment.’
Planning over an 11-year period could, I believe, bring about a veritable revolution, especially if the whole curriculum (both subjects and cross-curricular themes) can be welded together, but I want to see some rapid practical progress if I am to be reassured.
Finally, I return to the introduction, in which the pervasive theme was failure to plan from first principles, and lack of vision.
I am not wholly retracting that, but as Martin Davies said in the speech to which I refer, when questioned about the relationship between NCC and SEAC and our traditional disease.
‘At least this time the assessment is curriculum led.’
The fear that the assessors (SEAC) might ignore the curriculum developers remains.
Educators must attempt to encourage NCC to accept their ideas and ideals, and to encourage NCC to insist as far as possible that SEAC follows their lead.
This is one very powerful reason why I am writing this chapter.
It would be tragic if teachers committed to achieving worthy and high ideals felt that idealism was dead, and if the innovatory drive which has characterised English schools ran out of energy.