

Vice-Chancellor's Message
Dear Graduate
I am very happy that at the very moment you are admitted to your degree and become a graduate of the University of Nottingham I have the opportunity to shake your hand in congratulation.
These sentiments are expressed on behalf of all the staff here at Nottingham.
To our prizewinners may I extend my particular congratulations.
To those of you who have enriched student life through various clubs and societies, enhanced our sporting reputation or assisted the people of the city through Community Action I offer my admiration and thanks.
Every one of you has made a contribution to the character of this institution and I take pleasure in acknowledging what each of you has done to make this such a satisfying academic and social environment.
We hope you are proud of your university and we hope to keep your friendship as we plan its future.
Please do not forget your university, come and visit us as often as you can and watch how we grow and change.
It is our intention to maintain a university of which you will continue to be proud.
May I wish you good health and good fortune in the future.
I hope that graduation day will always bring back happy memories.
Honorary Graduates
The University of Nottingham, in common with other universities in Britain, is empowered by its Charter to confer honorary degrees on persons of distinction and those who have rendered great service to the University.
Over the years since the granting of the Royal Charter in 1948, honorary graduates, starting with the first Chancellor, Lord Trent, have included politicians, musicians, men and women of letters, scientists, industrialists, lawyers, sporting personalities, all subsequent Chancellors and Vice-Chancellors and several long-serving senior employees of the University.
The award of an honorary degree is the highest honour a University can bestow and may, in the case of Nottingham, be either a Master's Degree (Master of Arts, Master of Laws), or a Doctorate (of Divinity, Laws, Letters, Music, Science or Medicine).
The actual degree awarded to an individual will be that which is most appropriate to his or her background and experience and carries with it all the rights and privileges of membership of the University.
Before each honorary degree is awarded by the Chancellor, the candidate is presented by a senior member of the academic staff known as the Public Orator.
In the speech, the public orator will highlight the major features of the honorary graduand's career, particularly those which have led to eminence and the reasons why the University is bestowing the honour.
Anthony CLEAVER , Chairman and Chief Executive of IBM United Kingdom Holdings Limited, will receive the honorary degree of Doctor of Laws (LLD).
Mr Cleaver joined IBM in 1962.
In 1988 he became a member of the Board of Business in the Community.
Roger GODFREY , President of the Council of the University of Nottingham, will receive the honorary degree of Doctor of Laws (LLD).
He graduated from the University with an LLB in 1950 and is a partner in a solicitors' practice in Nottingham.
Sir Charles MACKERRAS , Musical Director of Welsh National Opera, will receive the honorary degree of Doctor of Music (DMus).
Sir Charles' career has included many periods conducting many of the world's major orchestras.
Iona OPIE , the oral historian of childhood and, with her husband, of many books including Lore and Language of Schoolchildren (1959),The Oxford Book of Children's Verse (1973), and A Nursery Companion (1980), will receive the honorary degree of Doctor of Letters (DLitt).
Jonathon PORRITT , campaigner on green issues, will receive the honorary degree of Doctor of Laws (LLD).
He began his career as a teacher and is former Director of Friends of the Earth.
Professor William STEWART , Chief Scientific Adviser to the Cabinet Office, will receive the honorary degree of Doctor of Science (DSc).
Professor Stewart has been Secretary and Deputy Chairman of the Agricultural and Food Research Council since 1988.
He was Head of the Department of Biological Sciences at the University of Dundee between 1968 and 1983, and is internationally renowned for his work on nitrogen fixation in plants.
Professor David WILLIAMS , Vice-Chancellor of the University of Cambridge, will receive the honorary degree of Doctor of Laws (LLD).
Professor Williams has been Rouse Hall Professor of English Law at the University of Cambridge since 1983 and President of Wolfson College since 1980.
The Ceremony
Today's Graduation Ceremony is a twentieth century version of a tradition which has its origins in medieval times.
The modern ceremony contains only vestiges of the original Latin in such phrases as in absentia , for candidates graduating in their absence and honoris causa , applied to honorary degrees.
Degrees are still however conferred by the Chancellor, whose title dates back to pre-Reformation days and whose authority is represented by the University Mace.
A further modified survival from the medieval period is the academic dress of gown, hat and hood worn by graduates, University Officers and members of the academic procession.
The varying colours of the gowns and hoods, and the more subtle variations in their style and cut, indicate the degree (Bachelor, Master or Doctor), the University which awarded the degree and even the faculty or subject.
Further colour and splendour is brought to the occasion by the gold trimmed gowns and hats of the senior University officers: the Pro-Chancellors, the Vice-Chancellor and the Chancellor, whose gown has a long heavy train carried by his page.
The procession which opens the ceremony includes academic staff of the University, Deans of Faculties, Pro-Vice-Chancellors, Honorary Graduands and Public Orators, the Senior Officers and finally the University Marshal, Esquire Bedell (the Mace-Bearer) and the Chancellor.
Each ceremony usually starts with the presentation of one or more honorary graduands who are introduced by speeches from the public orators and then admitted to their degrees by the Chancellor.
Thereafter each student passes before the Chancellor, who says ‘I admit you’ and at that moment the student changes from being a graduand (one who has satisfied all the requirements for a degree) to a graduate (one who has been admitted to the degree and is entitled to the privileges thereof including use of the designatory letters, e.g. BA, MSc or PhD).
Students who are not able to be present are admitted to their degrees in absentia .
At the end of the ceremony, the procession leaves the hall in reverse order, led by the Mace-Bearer and the Chancellor.
The University Past and Present
A rowing boat on the lake at Highfields Park is an excellent vantage point from which to view the building that most clearly evokes the University of Nottingham.
The Trent Building, with its clock tower and sonorous chime, was, at its opening in 1928, a university in miniature.
There were laboratories and lecture rooms, a library, a refectory, a ballroom and a theatre.
This was an elegant and substantial location for higher education but it was to be only the beginning.
Today the activities of 9,000 students and 1,000 staff are accommodated not only in the parkland campus of 330 acres surrounding the Trent Building but also within the adjacent Medical School and University Hospital and in the Faculty of Agricultural and Food Sciences some 10 miles to the south.
It was over 60 years ago that Sir Jesse Boot (later Lord Trent), founder of the Boots Company, made a magnificent gift of land and money which enabled the University College to move from Nottingham town centre.
Much later the Boots Pure Drug Co. endowed professorships in honour of Lord and Lady Trent which made a substantial contribution to the academic growth of the University.
Other generous donations include those received form the Cripps family.
They have endowed professorships and buildings, most notably Cripps Hall of Residence and Cripps Health Centre.
Major expansion followed the granting of the Royal Charter in 1948.
The monumental Portland Building rose in the early 1950s and teaching and residential accommodation space grew rapidly in the 1960s and 70s to keep pace with the growing demand for university places.
A major new library opened in 1973 and soon afterwards Nottingham was proud to open the first Medical School to be established in Britain this century.
In more recent years new buildings have included the Computing Centre, the Institute of German, Austrian and Swiss Affairs, research accommodation both at University Park and at the School of Agriculture, and further student residences.
A new Arts Centre is nearing completion at the South Entrance.
The growth of the University reflects the country's confidence in its contribution to education and research.
Here at Nottingham it is recognized that the source of our special contribution to academic achievement is the quality of the people who work within it.
The interaction of the enquiring and critical minds of students and staff, the pursuit of ideas and the desire to move forward the boundaries of knowledge are the hallmarks of higher education.
The University has many staff whose work of outstanding international merit in many diverse fields has brought it great acclaim.
Today pioneering work is being carried out in every faculty: engineers work on the motor car engine — botanists on plant breeding — physicists on the production of images of the soft tissue of the human body using revolutionary new techniques — social scientists on the political development of Eastern Europe and on computer systems which mimic human experts — literary scholars produce new insights into the works of major writers.
The University is abounding with ideas which have been shared with those who have studied there.
Growth is once again the watchword as the country looks for another period of expansion in higher education.
Radical changes in the way education is delivered and increasing competition for scarce resources are some of the challenges universities will face in the years ahead.
The University of Nottingham is meeting these challenges by maintaining its commitment to the highest quality teaching and research.
Student Life
Ask any university graduate a few years on what they best remember from their student days and the answer is unlikely to be anything to do with their course.
Important as the academic qualifications are, university is as much about education in the wider sense of the term as it is about lectures, essays and exams.
In this the University of Nottingham Union plays a central role, either running or being connected with almost all of students' extra curricular activities.
On offer are over 150 clubs and societies ranging from Gliding to Gilbert and Sullivan and from Animal Welfare to Chess.
For those with a competitive mind, all major sports are represented as are several up and coming ones, like Bat Polo and Korfball.
Much students' time is also spent helping others.
Through Community Action, over 1,000 students are involved in areas of work with the local community such as running a shelter for the homeless or teaching an adult to read.
Karnival, another high profile area of the Students' Union, concentrates its work on fund raising and in the last year raised over £100,000 for various charities.
If, as is so often said, one of the most important parts of life is getting on with people, our years at Nottingham University have certainly prepared us well!
Beyond Graduation Day
Congratulations to all graduates and welcome to membership of a special group of people of a wide variety of ages and careers, in all parts of the world who share with you the experience of studying at this University.
Nottingham Graduates have always been proud of their association with the University and you will find a special welcome form them wherever you go and whatever you do in the future.
When you leave Nottingham you take with you enduring memories and friendships.
We hope that you will build upon these so as to form a continuing association with your University.
You can do this through the many Hall and Department associations, through clubs and groups at home and abroad.
You will soon be receiving your free copy of the graduate newspaper to keep you up to date with the University, your contemporaries and the graduate associations.
Your student days at Nottingham may be over but your links with the University are just beginning.