

WHAT IS ODOUR POLLUTION?
It is widely recognised that air pollution due to human activity in populated areas and in the vicinity of isolated sources has become one of the significant environmental health problems of our time.
Improvements in the quality of the air we breathe have been achieved and are being achieved all the time particularly in respect of those pollutants either proven or suspected of causing physical environmental harm, especially to people.
Thus the dreadful smogs of pre-1952 have been eliminated and the emission of noxious and offensive gases limited.
Higher environmental standards have to some extent highlighted the problem of offensive odours.
Offensive odours which emanate from domestic or industrial premises can cause serious annoyance to persons in the locality, and inevitably give rise to public concern, spreading as they do in some cases over a wide area.
Maggot farm odours, to mention but one source, have been known to spread over several miles and affect up to 20,000 people.
One of the reasons for increasing public concern about odours is because industry of all types, from animal husbandry to chemical plants has had to become more concentrated because of‘economies of scale’, and the chemical industry in particular has also extended its range of manufactured chemicals.
The effect of such changes is to concentrate the emission from such industries, per unit area, and as Dr. B.  Leadbeater, a leading chemist in the field of odour pollution explained the effect of the amount of emission can be examined in the light of atmospheric dispersion theory in which the downwind concentration is a direct function of the emission rate.
Consequently double the emission rate and unacceptable concentrations of odour pollutant will persist for double the distance downwind, and, providing the population density remains constant, four times as many people will be subjected to the odour.
Information compiled by the author from a survey of 100 local authority environmental health departments in England, illustrates the public's concern.
Every local authority which responded to the survey, 65 in all, had received complaints about offensive odours in their areas.
Definition of an odour
An ‘odour’ is simply what we can smell just as sound is what we can hear and touch is what we can feel.
In short it is a ‘sensation’.
‘Any further search for a definition would be axiomatic’ suggests Moncrieff, and this does seem to be true, the Third Karolinska Institute Symposium on Environmental Health, defining an odour as ‘The product of the activation of the sense of smell, an olfactory experience’.
There are many thousands of odours arising from a multitude of sources which can be variously described, by those persons with a sense of smell, as pleasant, unpleasant, feeble, faint, strong, bland, pungent, rancid etc.
Not everyone subjected to a particular odour will however describe it in the same manner.
People react in different ways to odours, for example most people would probably describe rural odours or odour from a brewery, perfumery, or fish and chip shop as pleasant, but not all, some would find them unpleasant, pungent even, especially after being subjected to them for any length of time.
This subjective nature of an odour is one of the many problems facing a complainant who turns to the law seeking its abatement.
The odour may be objectionable to him but is it sufficiently so to amount to a nuisance at law?
It is important to draw a distinction between an ‘odour’ as defined above and an ‘odorant’which is ‘Any chemical compound which can stimulate the olfactory (smell) sense’.
The components of a chemical compound can be identified and their concentrations measured, but unless it has already been proved that the particular component identified is odorous at the concentration encountered, such measurements will have little evidential value in proving the odour complained of either does or does not amount to a nuisance at law.
This is because, no chemical analytical technique presently available can assess the impact of a particular odorant or component of that odorant on an individual.
It is the realisation of this that has led to sensory methods of assessment being developed.
Reception
The human olfactory system, illustrated in Figure 1, although not as well developed as in many animals, is nevertheless far more sensitive in detecting odours than any known instrumental technique and is capable of discriminating among many thousands of odorous substances, often carrying the memory of a particular odour for life.
For the majority of people the response to an odour is instantaneous, disappearing immediately the odorant is removed.
Others are amnosics either because they have no sense of smell, or their sense of smell has become temporarily impaired due to prolonged exposure to an odour.
This can in fact be quite useful in some circumstances such as where a person works in an odorous environment.
Odour is perceived when air carrying the odorous material travels through the nostrils, along the air passages up into the olfactory cleft where the odour receptors are situated.
These olfactory cells, are long and narrow with their length perpendicular to the plane of the nasal cavity and attached to each are five, six even eight olfactory hairs, or ‘flagella’, which are believed to be affected by odorous materials, setting off a chain of events which results in the odour being perceived.
The ‘flagella’ are kept moist by mucus material from adjacent parts of the nose and if the mucous thickens, as when we have a cold or catarrh or due to changes in humidity or temperature, they are incapacitated and our sense of smell impaired.
If a person continually inhales odorous air, fatigue sets in, due to the  adaptation of the nervous responses to the stimuli.
When fatigue is complete the olfactory nerves become so  de-sensitivized that the odour is no longer noticeable.
The more concentrated the odour, the more quickly fatigue becomes complete, resulting in temporary amnosia.
It can be seen, therefore, that there are certain prerequisites necessary for the perception of an odour.
Moncrieff identified three: volatility, adsorbability, and customary absence from the olfactory region.
(1)
The substance to be odorous must have a measure of volatility, so that it constantly  loses molecules which make contact with the olfactory sensitive region of the nose.
Metals, glass, brick, paper, plastic, cotton, nylon for example are non-volatile at room temperature and therefore non-odorous, whereas the solvents carbon tetrachloride, trichlorotrifluoroethane, alcohol etc., perfumes and petroleum products, to mention but a few, are volatile to some extent at room temperature and consequently have distinctive odours.
(2)
It must also be capable of being adsorbed, that is the molecules must be attracted onto the sensitive surface of the olfactory receptors.
Most gases and vapours being readily adsorbed tend to be odorous, some of the most objectionable being organic sulphur compounds such as mercaptans and amines.
Light gases, for example hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, helium, carbon monoxide and methane are however, an important exception being non-odorous.
On this occasion the lack of odour can be detrimental, as several light gases, notoriously carbon monoxide and methane are toxic and the human nose unable to provide a warning of their presence.
Once the adsorbent surface of the nose is filled with odorant molecules, however, it becomes saturated and no ‘stronger’ smell will be perceived, even though the concentration  of the odorant may increase.
Thus is the sense of smell limited, perhaps to our benefit.
The effect of odours on health
Odours produce a wide variety of emotional and physical effects, unpleasant odours giving rise to unfavourable reactions which can, at the very least, cause much unhappiness for the recipient.
There is no doubt that odours do pose a problem for environmental health but to what extent they affect the health of an individual exposed to an odour is difficult to say with any precision.
In Victorian England unpleasant odours were synonymous with disease and it was believed that pleasant odours could neutralize them.
As a result most of our large towns had their select residences on the western side, in positions where they received the benefit of the prevailing wind before it passed over the town or city; the poorer population residing on the eastern side.
The origin of the slang term ‘Beak’ for Magistrate is also associated with the belief that they had herbs in a horn to protect them from any disease that might be contracted from evil smelling criminals.
Considerable advances have been made since then with regard to the concepts of health and disease and the old belief linking offensive odours with disease is gradually disappearing and being replaced by concern about the injury to comfort and amenity caused by such odours, plus the possibility of financial loss due to the depreciation in selling value of a property subject to odour pollution.
Odours are very subjective in nature and affect people in different ways.
Various common reactions which are associated with exposure to odours have been identified and include physiological, toxic, psychological, annoyance and  social reactions, many people experiencing more than one reaction at the same time.
A physiological reaction is one which results in ‘a change in a measurable attribute or function, performance or status of some system or organ in the body, or evidence of altered responsiveness of the organ, system, or organism’.
It is clearly demonstrated by the onset of temporary amnosia due to prolonged exposure to an odour.
More difficult to assess is the toxic reaction of an odour, that is an effect ‘which may influence survival or which produces unfavourable changes in the gross and microscopic appearance of organs or tissues or in the entire organism’.
Here it is important to distinguish between any reaction brought about due to the perception of the odour, and any reaction brought about by the odorant itself, or the presence of other substances which accompany the odorant.
The reason for this is because some odorants are toxic but their toxic effects are not necessarily related to the perception of the odour per se.
In fact where toxic substances are odorous, the odour can have a positive effect on health, effectively warning us of their presence.
A good illustration is North Sea gas which consisting of 96 per cent.
methane, is like its predecessor coal gas, toxic, but unlike coal gas which was contaminated with sulphur compounds, non-odorous.
Consequently an artificial odorizer in the form of tetrahydrothiophen is added to North sea gas at the off shore terminals to achieve a ‘distinctive smell’ similar to the characteristic smell of coal-gas, as required by regulations made under s.26(1) of The Gas Act 1972 — the intention being no doubt to ensure that the majority of members of the public are able to detect a gas leak by its characteristic odour.
Medical evidence at present available points to the conclusion that odours per se are unlikely to have any direct toxic effect unless a person is allergic to a particular odour.
Offensive odours do however put people in a ‘bad mood’.
This is a typical psychological reaction,i.e. one which is said to cause ‘a reversible alteration in mood, behaviour, attitude, or thought processes of which the subject is or may become aware and which may be favourable or unfavourable’.
Closely related to this is the so-called annoyance reaction, defined as ‘the extent to which people report being bothered, disturbed or irritated’.
It is always an unfavourable reaction of which the subject is aware.
The extent to which a person is annoyed by the perception of an odour varies.
It can take many forms and should not be underestimated.
Typical complaints refer to depression, lack of sleep, loss of appetite, irritation of the eyes, nose and throat, nausea, headaches and respiratory problems.
Finally, the social reaction i.e. ‘an alteration of interpersonal or person-group behaviour as a result of the awareness of odour, which is either favourable or unfavourable.’
All three reactions are related.
The ‘bad mood’ syndrome brought on by an offensive odour and the resulting symptoms of annoyance can lead to antisocial behaviour; relationships with family, friends and others become strained, the persons most affected perhaps blaming other members of the family for the position in which they find themselves and which they consider intolerable, leading in  extreme cases to marriage problems or at least much unhappiness.
The World Health Organisation's viewpoint is that health is more than the absence of disease or infirmity.
It is ‘a state of complete, physical, mental and social wellbeing’.
If this is accepted then odours per se , destroying as they do any feeling of well-being, the enjoyment of food and home, are prejudicial to health and adequate legal measures ought to be available to ensure their control.
Measurement
Once again a distinction must be made between an ‘odorant’ defined earlier as ‘any chemical compound which stimulates the olfactory sense’and an ‘odour’being a sensation of smell.
Instrumental analytical techniques such as gas chromatography combined with mass spectrometry can separate, identify and measure the concentrations of the major components of an ‘odorant’, though even this is  fraught with difficulty as odorous gases from a rendering plant for example have been known to contain more than 30 components.
What instrumental techniques cannot do is evaluate the sensory attributes of an odour, in particular its acceptability, nor can they compete with the human nose as far as sensitivity to most odours is concerned.
A human nose is reported to be able to detect and identify an organic sulphur compound at a concentration of one molecule per billion molecules of air, far lower than any present day instrumental technique.
Odour assessment has developed therefore using sensory methods of analysis, that is measuring human responses to them.
The sensory attributes of an odour
The sensory attributes of an odour capable of measurement include its intensity, character, acceptability and detectability, all of which are relevant in deciding whether or not a particular odour amounts to a nuisance at law.
Intensity is the magnitude of the perceived sensation and can be categorized as strong, moderate, faint etc., whereas the character of an odour is the odour sensation which enables the nose to distinguish one odour from another presumably on the basis of prior knowledge.
As mentioned earlier many people can in fact ‘remember’ an odour all their life.
In environmental health the most important dimension of an odour is its acceptability, or ‘hedonic tone’ as it is sometimes called.
This can be described as the degree to which an odour is perceived to be agreeable or disagreeable, pleasant or unpleasant.
Simply it is the extent of the annoyance reaction, depending not only on individual  idiosyncrasies but on other factors including intensity, frequency, duration, the time, place and emotional context of its perception.
The detectability of an odour on the other hand is the level at which the odour can be detected by the human nose.
The ability to determine this level, referred to as the ‘odour threshold detection value’ is provided by dilution techniques, the value itself representing the number of times an odour-bearing gas has to be diluted with clear air before 50 per cent of a panel of sniffers will just not detect it.
Where this value is low, as with mercaptans for example, there are obvious technological and financial problems posed in seeking to control the emission of such odours.
Techniques of Odour Measurement by Dilution
Various methods of measuring odour strength using dilution techniques have been developed, including the Katz and Allison Olfactometer, the ASTM syringe technique, Nader apparatus, and the Hemeon apparatus, to mention but a few.
Probably the best known and most convenient method is the sensory measurement of odours by dynamic (continuous) dilution.
Apparatus to carry out such sensory measurements has been incorporated into a mobile odour laboratory capable of investigating odours on site either at the source of the odour or in the ambient air.
Initially on arriving at the site a panel consisting of between four and six persons is chosen, after careful screening to eliminate those with poor olfactory perception, to observe the odour.
Two parameters are then measured:
(1)
The flowrate: the volume of the odorous gas per unit time, referred to standard conditions, usually measured in cubic metres per second, and
(2)
The dilution factor: the number of times a sample of the odorous gas has to be diluted with odour-free air before 50 per cent of the panel of the six observers will just NOT detect an odour.
By way of illustration a factor of 10,000 indicates that one cubic metre of odorous gas as sampled will require 10,000 cubic metres of  clean air to reduce it to a level where the ‘average,, nose will not detect it.
That is assuming the six chosen observers represent the ‘average’ nose.
The product of the flowrate and the dilution factor give a numerical value for the odour emission, which whilst not a direct measurement of odour nuisance is shown to be a guide: the higher the emission the more likely the odour is to give rise to complaints and therefore more likely to amount to a nuisance at law.
The decision as to when an odour will amount to an actionable nuisance at law depends on the whole of the circumstances of the case in question.
what is clear, however, is that in the event of litigation it is extremely difficult for a complainant to describe the nature of an odour to the court.
Veale, J. in Halsey v Esso Petroleum Co.
Ltd. solved this problem by unexpectedly visiting the area where the odour was allegedly perceived, but this is the exception rather than the rule.
Sensory measurements in particular, complemented where relevant by instrumental analysis of the components of the odorant, could assist the complainant by providing valuable objective evidence to bolster his and other witnesses testimonies which are necessarily subjective.
There are drawbacks, however, in placing too much emphasis on sensory measurements, stemming from the choice of panellists for example.
Are they truly objective in the sense they represent the average nose i.e. the nose of the reasonable man: the now famous man in the Clapham omnibus?
It would seem that on the basis of recent research in the U.S.A. the answer would be ‘no’ as it has been suggested that even a panel of eight is too small to obtain consistent and reliable results.
Common Odour Sources
The range of industrial and rural activities which may produce odours is considerable.
Seventy one different sources were identified in the author's survey and are listed in Table 1 in order of the most number of complaints received in respect of each particular odour source.
Whilst animal by-product and chemical plants were responsible for the most complaints, odours from manure spreading and intensive pig and poultry farms affected the largest number of local authorities as shown in Table 2 below.
A survey of this type, whilst useful to illustrate the extent of the odour problem in England does not, however, give an accurate picture and may even underestimate the problem, as it is apparent that in many cases the public, for various reasons do not complain.
Often people become accustomed to odours especially those arising from works which have operated in a particular vicinity for a long time.
Locals in one area for example became accustomed to pungent odours, which can arise from the manufacture of mushroom compost if the mix is not correct, and did not complain.
Newcomers to the area did.
Elsewhere members of the public had experienced odours from one source for  over 20 years; needless to say even the most persistent critic became tired of complaining over the years.
In addition, where an odour arises from a works on which many people rely for employment the decision whether to complain or not is influenced by the realisation that should a local authority press their employer to take costly steps to abate the odour, it could result in closure of the works with consequent loss of employment.
This reluctance has been overcome in some areas by the setting up of ‘ Liaison Committees’i.e. informal committees usually consisting of local representatives from the environmental services committee, officers from the environmental health department, the Health and Safety Executive, local residents and local industry.
These committees act as a forum for interested parties to air their grievances and as a result enables a clearer picture to emerge of the extent of any odour problem in the area.
It goes without saying their effectiveness is dependent on the co-operation of all the parties involved, in particular local industrialists.
ODOUR — A COMMON LAW NUISANCE
Any member of the public adversely affected by an odour will naturally seek its abatement.
In order to achieve this the following forms of legal action are available:
(1)
Complaint may be made to the local authority environmental health department whose responsibility it is under s.91 of the Public Health Act 1936 to inspect their areas for the detection of nuisance and institute formal proceedings either summarily or in the High Court, where, in their opinion, the odour complained of amounts to a statutory nuisance within s.92 of that Act.
Where the odour does not fall within that category it is still open to the local authority to reach informal agreement with the odour emitter, offering advice and assistance as to methods of abatement, or take formal action under one of the statutes discussed in Chapter 5 which may have the effect of controlling certain odour emissions indirectly.
(2)
Should the local authority refuse to initiate formal proceedings for some reason, perhaps because they are of the opinion that the odour does not amount to a statutory nuisance or they themselves are causing the offending odour, then an individual complainant may himself take summary action under s.99 of the Public Health Act 1936,(see Chapter 3) but may not bring proceedings in the High Court.
(3)
Alternatively, reliance may be placed on the common law, alleging that the odour amounts to either a private or public nuisance at law.
Other forms of action, non-legal, are available including the referral of a complaint alleging maladministration to either the Parliamentary or Local Ombudsman (See Chapter 7) and use of a Liaison Committee, if one is in existence in the area, in order to air any grievances and seek their resolution.
This chapter is concerned with the common law of England and Wales,i.e. the body of principles developed by the judges in decided cases.
It is dealt with first because not only is it an important form of legal control through the tort of nuisance, but it is a prerequisite to understanding the controls afforded by the Public Health legislation, discussed in Chapter 3.
Nuisance
Many odours which can be described as ‘disagreeable’ and cause annoyance are a ‘nuisance’in the ordinary meaning of the word.
They are not necessarily regarded as a nuisance at law however and may not be actionable under that branch of the common law known as the tort of nuisance.
This is because when there is an actionable nuisance the law provides a legal remedy by way of injunction or damages and this it is not prepared to do in respect of every odour found to be annoying or objectionable; neither would it be practicable especially since odours are notoriously subjective in nature affecting some individuals and not others and causing a variety of symptoms.
Two types of legal nuisance are recognised at common law: private nuisance and public nuisance.
Private Nuisance
A private nuisance may be, and usually is, caused by a person doing, on his own land, something which he is entitled to do.
This conduct only becomes a nuisance when the consequence of his acts are not confined to his own land but extend on to his neighbour's land.
For such conduct to become tortious it must cause either:
(1)
physical damage to his neighbour's land, or buildings, or works, or vegetation on it, or
(2)
unduly interfere with his neighbour in the comfortable and convenient enjoyment of his land.
The action for private nuisance is therefore designed to protect the use and enjoyment of land, and as a result only the occupier of the land affected or persons having some interest in that land are entitled to sue.
It is most unlikely for an odour per se to cause actual physical damage, but where it causes a diminution in the selling value of the property or injures the plaintiff's business by, for example, causing potential customers to be lost, this may be regarded as sufficient invasion of the plaintiff's interest to be tortious.
In most cases, however, reliance is placed on the effect of the odour on the plaintiff's use and enjoyment of his land.
The all important question is, therefore,
‘When will an offensive odour amount to a nuisance at common law, in the absence of actual physical damage to property?’i.e. ‘When will the interference caused by the perception of the odour be ‘unreasonable’ in the eyes of the law?’
One point which has been decided is that an odour need not be prejudicial to health to amount to a nuisance, rather in deciding the question the court will consider all the circumstances including the character of the locality in which the plaintiff is living, the nature, intensity and frequency of the odour, the time and effects of its commission.
In Bamford v Turnley , a case concerning odours from brick burning, Pollock, C. B. expressed the above by saying:
‘That may be a nuisance in Grosvenor Square which would be none in Smithfield Market, that may be a nuisance at mid-day which would not be so at midnight, that may be a nuisance which is permanent and continual which would be no nuisance if temporary or occasional only’.
The character of the locality has been emphasised in many cases.
The classic statement of Thesigar, L. J. in Sturges v Bridgeman that ‘What would be a nuisance in Belgrave Square would not necessarily be so in Bermondsey’, is still true today.
‘In an urban area’, said Veale, J. in Halsey v Esso Petroleum Co.
Ltd .,
‘Everyone must put up with a certain amount of discomfort from neighbours’.
One consequence of adopting the prevailing standard of a district in which the nuisance occurs is to permit the gradual deterioration of an area.
It has been suggested; that this creates a system of judicial zoning, in the sense that the law recognises that in one particular area, near an industrial estate for example or in a rural community, certain odours are to be expected and the standard adopted will as a result be lower than in a purely residential area where odour pollution of the air is not expected.
It is therefore of utmost importance for a plaintiff to provide sufficient evidence of the above matters to the court to satisfy them that an actionable nuisance does in fact exist.
This will include, in addition to the plaintiff's testimony, evidence from other individuals in the neighbourhood, local authority officials, objective evidence as to odour strength, and where possible, with the court's agreement, a visit to the site of the alleged odour, or a sample of the odour for the court's consideration.
Undue Sensitivity 
The law aims to strike a fair and reasonable balance between the right of the plaintiff on one hand to the undisturbed enjoyment of his property and the right of the defendant on the other to use his property for his own lawful enjoyment.
As Vice Chancellor Knight Bruce explained in Walter v Selfe any inconvenience to amount to a nuisance at law must be ‘more than fanciful, more than one of mere delicacy or fastidiousness’.
It should be an inconvenience which ‘materially interferes with the ordinary comfort of human existence, not merely according to elegant or dainty modes and habits of living, but according to plain and sober and simple notions among the English people’.
The law of nuisance, therefore, affords little or no protection either to a complainant who is unduly sensitive to an odour emission, or where the use interfered with is a sensitive one, as when the taste of biscuits manufactured under controlled conditions, was adversely affected by odorous fumes from a source a few miles away.
Odours from the following activities have been found to amount to a private nuisance and the remedy of an injunction and, or damages granted: odours from a fried fish shop, in close proximity to a dwellinghouse; odours from stables; odours from smoke and effluvia from a factory chimney; odours from a gasworks affecting the plaintiff's plantation of trees; odours from a sewage disposal works, and odours from the spraying of cars and the burning of tyres.
Public Nuisance
A public nuisance is both a crime,i.e.  misdemeanour at common law and a tort,i.e. a civil wrong giving rise to damages.
The commission of a public nuisance can only be tortious however where an individual can prove he has suffered damage over and above the rest of the community and that such damage is direct and substantial.
So in Benjamin v Storr , for example, the plaintiff, who kept a coffee house and whose customers were subjected to noxious smells from horses standing outside his premises, succeeded in an action for public nuisance.
The aim of the law of public nuisance is to prevent interference with the rights of the public at large.
As Romer, J. said in Attorney General v P. Y.A.
Quarries Ltd.
‘Any nuisance is public which materially affects the comfort and convenience of a class of Her Majesty's subjects’.
Consequently, odours may amount to a public nuisance if they substantially inconvenience a sufficient number of people.
It is a question of fact in every case whether the number of people affected will constitute ‘a class of Her Majesty's subjects’, but Lord Denning provides some guidance, saying ‘A public nuisance is a nuisance which is so widespread in range and so indiscriminate in its effect that it would not be reasonable to expect one person to take  proceedings on his own responsibility to put a stop to it, but that it would be the responsibility of the community at large’.
Legal action seeking abatement of a public nuisance may be taken by the relevant local authority, or authorities if the odour spreads into several areas, in their own name(s), as is permitted by s.222 of the Local Government Act 1972, or via a relator action, with the consent of the Attorney General.
Three local authorities decided on the latter form of action in the case of Her Majesty's Attorney General at and by the Relation of Salford City Council, the Eccles Borough Council and the Urmston Urban District Council v C.P.C. (UK) Ltd. in respect of offensive odours allegedly emanating from the defendant's works.
In Attorney General v Squire , it was held that obnoxious odours from pigs kept by the defendants, and arising from the number of animals, the place in which they were kept, and the food with which they were fed, were such as to create a public nuisance, and in Attorney General v Cole and Son noxious gases created by the defendant carrying on the trade of fat-melter were also held to be a public nuisance despite the fact that the defendant had carried on his trade, in a proper manner and in the same way for 30 years.
Defences
Developers frequently obtain planning permission to build residential property near to existing factories, sewage disposal works, waste tips and other potential odour emitters, yet it is no defence to prove that the plaintiff came to an existing nuisance.
This highlights the need for effective co-operation between planners, environmental health  officers and other responsible bodies, in order to prevent this sort of situation from arising.
Neither is it a defence to claim that best practicable means have been taken to abate or prevent the odour complained of from arising, or that it is emitted during the exercise of a business or trade in a reasonable or proper manner.
This was made clear by the Court of Appeal in Rapier v London Tramways Co .,
a private action brought in respect of an odour nuisance caused by stables belonging to the defendant.
The non-availability of this defence at common law is one of the reasons why local authorities, having decided to take action in the High Court, in order to secure an injunction requiring the cessation of the odour, often prefer to bring an action in respect of a public nuisance rather than rely on s.100 of the Public Health Act 1936 where it is uncertain whether or not the defence of best practicable means is available.
However, an injunction being an equitable remedy awarded at the discretion of the court, will usually be suspended where best practicable means are being taken to abate the odour, and more time allowed for further efforts to be made to secure its abatement.
In the case of Attorney General v C.P.C. (UK) Ltd. the case was adjourned sine die to enable the defendants to undertake further measures to abate the odour, and in Attorney General v Squires an injunction was refused, the court finding that although a serious public nuisance had been created by the defendants, it had been abated, the way in which the pig farming was  now carried on being considerably improved since the case was tried.
Often odour nuisance is the result of emissions from several sources, none of which alone would amount to a nuisance at common law, but should the aggregate odour amount to a nuisance at law, it is no defence that the nuisance was caused by many.
this is not to say there is no problem for the plaintiff in such a situation, on the contrary the difficulty lies in obtaining sufficient evidence to identify the separate point sources.
Instrumental techniques to identify emissions from possible sources may be useful here, in conjunction with sensory techniques at the point of perception.
Defences which may be available include: an Act of God; the plaintiff's consent; or where the odour nuisance is a result of the act of a trespasser and the owner or occupier is ignorant of the nuisance, not having the means of knowing of the nuisance in time to prevent or abate its effect.
It was held in Attorney General v Tod Heatley , however, that an owner of land has a common law duty to prevent it being used so as to amount to a public nuisance.
An injunction was granted in that case to enforce that duty ordering the owner to maintain a hoarding around a vacant piece of his land or find some other way to prevent trespassers from using and depositing filth and refuse there, which amongst other things, gave rise to foul odours.
The right to commit a private nuisance, but not a public one, may be acquired by prescription, that is 20 years user, providing it was nec vi, nec clam, nec precario (without force, without secrecy, without permission).
This defence was raised unsuccessfully in the case of Halsey v Esso Petroleum.
It failed because the frequency and intensity of the odour, which constituted the nuisance, was over and above the ‘general background of  oily smells’, and had not unlike these general smells, continued for anything approaching 20 years.
Furthermore, where an Act of parliament imposes a statutory duty on the defendant(s) to perform some necessary function, such as the provision of electricity or gas and public sewers, if in carrying out this statutory duty a nuisance arises by way of odours, for example, then in the absence of negligence the nuisance must be borne by the neighbours, however injurious to them or their property.
Odours from Sewage Disposal Works
The legal control of odours arising from sewage disposal works merits attention at this point in view of statement of Wills, J. in R. v Parlby that the proper course of action for a local authority complaining of odour nuisance from a sewage disposal works is to obtain leave to file an information in respect of a public nuisance in the name of the Attorney General, ‘A great public officer, who will not lightly interfere himself, or allow his name to be so used’, and for an individual to bring an action for private nuisance.
It was decided in that case that a court of summary jurisdiction had no power under sections 91 to 96 of the Public Health Act 1875 (now replaced by ss.92–99 of the Public Health Act 1936), on proof of a nuisance from a sewage disposal works, constructed under that Act, to make an order for its abatement.
Two reasons were given.
Firstly, on the narrow ground that the word ‘premises’ in s.91 of the 1875 Act (now replaced by s.92 of the Public Health Act 1936) does not include sewage disposal works.
Secondly, on the broader ground that the legislature could not have intended to give power to a court of summary jurisdiction to control nuisances from such works.
The Water Act 1973 transferred the responsibility for sewerage and sewage disposal from local authorities to ten regional water authorities in England and Wales.
Section 14 of that Act imposing the following duties on those water authorities:
(a)
The duty to provide such public sewers as may be necessary for effectually draining their district for the purposes of the Act, and to make such provision, by means of sewage disposal works or otherwise as may be necessary for effectually dealing with the contents of their sewers. (s.14(1))
(b)
The duty to discharge their functions so as not to create a nuisance.
(s.14(2))
A water authority will, therefore, be in breach of its statutory duty if it permits obnoxious odours, which amount to a nuisance at common law, to emanate either from its sewage disposal works, or due to any recycling of treated or untreated sewage sludge on to farm land, and it is open to a local authority or person aggrieved, in the absence of informal agreement perhaps via a  Liaison Committee, to seek an injunction to restrain the water authority from causing the nuisance.
The judgement of Upjohn, J. in Smeaton v Ilford Corporation , however, makes it clear that a water authority, being a statutory undertaker, will not be liable for creating a nuisance unless it was also negligent.
He said, ‘So far as this court is concerned it must be taken as settled that the proper construction to be given to [s.14(2) of the Water Act 1973]is to exclude liability for escapes in the absence of negligence’.
This view was also taken in the earlier case of Bainbridge v Chertsey Urban District Council where an injunction was granted, restraining the defendant council from conducting their sewage farm so as to cause offensive smells and vapours in the plaintiff's premises.
Sargant, J. granted the injunction, even though in doing so it would involve considerable hardship on the part of the Council.
The court was influenced by evidence pointing to the fact that the defendants had been negligent and it was stated that had steps been taken to mitigate the nuisance, the Council would not have found itself in the position it was now in.
This additional need to prove negligence imposes a considerable burden on the plaintiff, but where a Code of Practice is in existence failure of the water authority to adhere to the Code's terms, will provide valuable evidence of their negligence.
By way of illustration the following is an extract from one such Code of Practice:
‘A distance of 100 yards to the nearest residence must be maintained, with greater distance in areas directly downwind of the site to avoid odour nuisance.
Judicious timing and spraying operations to suit wind conditions will guard against odour nuisances’.
‘No sludge shall be spread on land within two miles of any recognised village’.
The trend towards non-legislative constraints of guidelines for land application of sewage sludge was commented on in the Report of the Sub-Committee on the Economics of Sewage Sludge Disposal which surveys legislative and other constraints affecting sewage sludge disposal.
ODOUR — A STATUTORY NUISANCE
With the advent of the industrial revolution the common law became inadequate to control pollution in general and odours in particular.
What was needed was a simpler more speedy procedure and so Parliament intervened with the first Public Health Act in 1848, the forerunner of modern public health legislation.
Definition
The present day Public Health Act 1936 and the Public Health (Recurring Nuisances) Act 1969 give local authorities acting through their environmental health officers, and in certain circumstances an individual, limited powers to control odour emissions which amount to a statutory nuisance, as defined by s.92(1) of the 1936 Act, reproduced below:
s.92(1) (a)
‘any premises (in such a state as to be prejudicial to health or a nuisance,,.
s.92(1) (b)
‘any animal kept in such a place or manner as to be prejudicial to health or a nuisance’.
s.92(1) (c)
‘any accumulation or deposit which is prejudicial to health or a nuisance’.
s.92(1) (d)
‘any dust or effluvia caused by a trade, business or manufacture or process which are prejudicial to health or are a nuisance [to the inhabitants of the neighbourhood ]’.
The  words in square brackets have now been repealed by the Local Government (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982, removing the anomaly which prevented local authorities from taking legal action under this section, in respect of odours affecting employees and others who were not inhabitants of the neighbourhood, despite being of the opinion that the odour was sufficiently obnoxious to amount to a nuisance.
s.92(1) (f)
‘any other matter declared by any provision of this Act to be a statutory nuisance.
The latter, s.92(1) (f), a sweeping up provision, would include, for example, ‘any pond, pool, ditch, gutter or watercourse prejudicial to health or a nuisance’, designated a statutory nuisance by s.259(1) (a), and under s.101 certain smoke nuisances, the Clean Air Act 1956 having introduced a new system of control over emissions from chimneys but retained certain emissions as statutory nuisances subject to the control of the 1936 Act.
Power of Entry
Power to enter private premises at all reasonable hours, on production of a duly authorised document, if requested, is given to environmental health officers to enable them to carry out their duties under the Acts, and any person who wilfully obstructs an officer in the execution of his duty shall be liable to a fine not exceeding £50.
Choice of Subsection
The choice of subsection is of practical importance as defences are available to the defendant in respect of proceedings brought under s.92(1) (c) and (d) but not otherwise.
It is to the plaintiff's advantage, therefore, to avoid these subsections if at all possible.
For example, in relation to odours arising from the presence of putrescible material, such as fish and poultry offal used to breed maggots or manufacture animal feedstuffs, proceedings may be initiated using either s.92(1) (c),(d) or (a) depending on the actual source of the odour.
Similarly, where obnoxious odours emanate from the keeping of animals; either s.92(1) (b),(c),(d) or even (a) may be relevant.
It has, however, been doubted whether s.92(1) (d) could be used to control odours caused by animals per se where the husbandry of the premises could not be faulted, on the basis that ‘effluvium’ is a reference to ‘particulate matter’which is not present if there is merely an odour.
As an odour is defined, however, as ‘any chemical compound which can stimulate the olfactory sense’ and in the absence of any judicial dicta on the point, ‘effluvium’appears to include any odour irrespective of the presence or otherwise of any particulate matter.
A further difficulty with s.92(1) (d) is that it does not apply to emissions from premises not used for a trade, business, manufacture or process.
It cannot be used, therefore, in respect of odours emanating from residential premises.
The choice of subsection can also be important where odours arise from a works registered under The Alkali, etc., Works Regulation Act 1906 as amended.
Where a local authority proposes to take action under s.92(1) (d) or (c) and it would be possible for action to be taken under the above 1906 Act, consent must first be obtained from the Secretary of State for the Environment.
‘Prejudicial to Health or a Nuisance’
The assessment of whether an odour problem amounts to a statutory nuisance within s.92 of the Public Health Act 1936 is a most difficult decision and then to justify that decision before a court equally so.
Section 92(1) states that to amount to a statutory nuisance the odour must be EITHER prejudicial to health OR a nuisance.
This was emphasised by Stephen J. in Local Board of Health for the District of Malton v Malton Farmers Manure and Trading Co.
Ltd .,
an old case on the offensive trades provisions of the Public Health Act 1875.
In reply to a question of law for the opinion of the court, namely ‘Was it necessary on the part of the appellants to prove as part of their case, not only that a nuisance was caused by the effluvium but also it was injurious to the health of the inhabitants of the district?’ he said, ‘I answer that it was sufficient to prove that, the manufacture being one causing effluvium, such effluvium was a nuisance, injury or not’.
Similarly, Lord Widgery in Coventry City Council v Cartwright cited with approval,Bishop Auckland Local Board v Bishop Auckland Iron and Steel Co.
Ltd. a case on the corresponding section to s.92(1) (c) in the 1875 Act.
It was held that an offence under that section had been committed where the accumulation emitted offensive odours which interfered with the personal comfort of persons living in the neighbourhood, but did not cause injury to health.
This said Lord Widgery, ‘Is entirely consistent with the  provisional view I have formed of the extent of this section within the ambit of the Public Health Act.
It is concerned with effluvia and the like which have always been very much the concern of the local health authorities’.
Prejudicial to Health 
To be prejudicial to health within the meaning of s.343 of the Public Health Act 1936, an odour must be injurious or likely to cause injury to health.
In the case of Coventry City Council v Cartwright it was held that under s.92(1) (c) an accumulation or deposit of matter was prejudicial to health if it was likely to cause a threat of clinical disease or attract vermin, but did not include visual matter which could cause physical injury to people who walked on it.
A similar interpretation was evident in Bone v Seale where it was accepted that the test of a public health nuisance was ‘whether it caused risk of infection’.
A higher test, namely that ‘nothing in the way of smells was a nuisance to public health unless it so nauseated the smeller that he vomited’ was rejected.
It is generally accepted that odours per se do not cause a risk of infection and it is doubtful whether nausea, sleeplessness, mental strain or depression, commonly suffered by people exposed to odours, would be regarded as evidence of prejudice to health, as they affect a person's general well-being, rather than threaten a clinical disease.
Odours which cause an existing condition to worsen, however, will be regarded as prejudicial to health.
‘The kind of smell which makes sick people worse must interfere with the vigour and vitality of those who are well, but at all events it is sufficient to show that sick persons are injured thereby’, per Stephen, J. in the Malton Manure case.
Nuisance 
Formal proceedings may be instituted under the ‘nuisance’ aspect of s.92, thus avoiding any difficulties in alleging that an odour is prejudicial to health.
In N.C.B. v Thorne it was held that the word ‘nuisance’ in s.92(1) (a) of the Public Health Act 1936 must mean either a public or private nuisance as understood at common law.
The case dealt with a housing issue but it is logical to extend the meaning to other matters, and to all subsections of s.92(1).
Such a construction put on the word ‘nuisance’ however renders the public health legislation ineffective in controlling odours which are neither prejudicial to health nor amount to a nuisance at common law but are still a source of annoyance and it still leaves environmental health officers with the task of assessing whether the odour complained of amounts to a common law nuisance.
Summary Procedure
Choosing the Right Notice 
A local authority, once satisfied that an odour amounts to a statutory nuisance is under a duty to serve an abatement notice in accordance with s.93 of the Public Health Act 1936 on the person whose act, default or sufferance gave rise to the nuisance or caused it to continue, requiring that person, in a specified time, usually two to six months, to abate the nuisance and to execute such remedial works and take such steps as may be necessary for that purpose.
If the person who caused the nuisance cannot be found and it is clear that the nuisance did not arise as the result of the act, default or sufferance of the owner or occupier, the local authority itself may take steps to abate it and prevent a recurrence.
Odour emissions are affected by wind direction, temperature inversion, ambient temperatures and humidity.
In respect of odours arising from the incineration of waste, the type of waste burned, the height of the discharge, and meteorological and topographical effects on the plume rise are also relevant.
A local authority may therefore find it preferable in the case of transient odours to serve a  prohibition notice under s.1 of the Public Health (Recurring Nuisances) Act 1969.
Such a notice may be served where an odour has occurred and is likely to recur on the same premises, the advantage being that unlike an abatement notice there is no need for an odour to exist at the time of service.
Ashworth, J. in Peaty v Field recognised the difficulty local authorities may have in knowing which is the appropriate notice.
By way of assistance he gave the following example:
‘A man may deposit on his land excrement which is foul smelling and a nuisance, but it may be that the evil effects wear off in twenty-four to forty-eight hours so it is difficult for a local authority to serve an abatement notice and prove that the nuisance was still in existence when service was made, whereas now, once the deposit is made and is indeed a statutory nuisance, then the statutory nuisance has occurred, and if the local authority are satisfied it will occur again they may serve a prohibition notice’.
For convenience both notices may, if the local authority wish, he served together in the same document.
Problems Facing Local Authorities
(i)The Problem of Specifying Works 
Section 290(2) of the Public Health Act 1936 states that any notice requiring remedial works to be carried out must indicate their nature and also specify the time limit in which they must be done.
The latter requirement holds no difficulty, rather it is the former requirement which gives rise to difficulties because on occasions odour problems are complex, the source of the odour being difficult to identify, and it is not always possible to know whether or not a particular method of abatement will effect a cure in any given case.
In one instance various methods were  contemplated to abate the odour from a maggot farm without success, catalytic incineration finally proving successful, and in another extreme case a company carried out the following trials, without success, in an attempt to abate the odour emanating from their factory:
Masking compounds;
Reduction in drying temperatures and improved drying equipment;
Liquid scrubbing;
Increased height of stack by 15 feet;
Adsorption processes;
Direct incineration;
Catalytic incineration (a ‘Kavag’ pilot plant was installed).
If the works specified are insufficient to abate the odour then in any further proceedings to obtain a nuisance order under s.94, the notice itself may be held bad, as in Whatling v Rees where the work specified in the notice, the draining of a cellar, would not have been sufficient to abate the nuisance.
However, commenting on this case Humphreys, J. in McGillivray v Stephenson said, ‘that was a peculiar case very unlikely to recur’,.
Furthermore, should the specified remedial works be carried out, and the odour emission continue, in any further proceedings, in respect of a statutory nuisance within s.92(1) (c) or s.92(1) (d), the odour emitter could avail himself of the defence of best practicable means provided by s.94(4) and s.94(5) respectively.
(ii)Where Planning Permission is Required 
The remedial works specified in an abatement notice sometimes require planning permission, for example, the erection of a tall chimney, and may result in a  clash of opinion with local planning authorities.
An abatement notice specifying these works would not be invalid, but should planning permission be refused and further action be taken to obtain compliance with the notice, the Justices need not take the local authority's advice and order the defendants to implement those works, but if they do, and planning permission is again refused, the defendants may be able to avail themselves of the defence of ‘reasonable excuse’, under s.95, leaving the local authority to find alternative means to seek abatement of the odour.
(iii)Where an Odour has Multisources 
Occasionally it is difficult to trace the source of an odour.
It may be due to two or more separate odours, emanating from two or more works, combining to give rise to a statutory nuisance.
This eventuality is provided for in s.97 of the Public Health Act 1936, and proceedings may be instituted against any one, or all of the odour emitters providing sufficient evidence can be obtained to satisfy the court that a particular works is in fact contributing to the statutory nuisance.
Alternatively, the odour may arise from one works only but it's actual point source or sources within the works is difficult to identify.
This gives rise to difficulties in serving an abatement or prohibition notice, as it is not possible to specify any works to abate the odour, and yet a notice which merely requires the recipient to take steps to abate the odour, is unlikely to achieve the desired effect.
Action by Individuals under Section 99
A person aggrieved by an odour, which amounts to a statutory nuisance, may himself initiate summary proceedings against the person creating the nuisance under s.99 of the 1936 Act, whereupon like proceedings shall be had with the like consequences as to making of orders, penalties for disobedience of orders, and otherwise as in a complaint brought by the local authority.
Ministerial opinion, put forward in Circular 52/69, is that this right is not affected by the 1969 Public Health (Recurring Nuisances) Act.
The right of the individual to initiate proceedings was considered by the Divisional Court, in R v Newham Justices ex parte Hunt and R v Oxted Justices ex parte Franklin.
It was held that the words, ‘like proceedings shall be had’, should be construed to give any person aggrieved the right to apply by way of information and summons for the penal orders available under s.94 of the 1936 Act.
Accordingly, a person who wishes to complain of a statutory nuisance is not required to issue an abatement notice before laying an information.
It also follows that the defences provided by s.94(4) and s.94(5) and s.95 of that Act will still be available to the defendant.
As a result legal proceedings may be taken by someone who is being adversely affected by an odour which in his opinion amounts to a statutory nuisance and against which the local authority is reluctant to institute formal proceedings.
This can occur, for example, when odour emanates from the local authorities own establishment.
The complainant need not show he was aggrieved on the date mentioned in the summons, it is enough that he had been aggrieved earlier, otherwise as Darling, J. pointed out in Hilton v Hopwood it would be virtually impossible for an individual to bring an action under s.99.
Nuisance Order
If an abatement notice, served in compliance with s.93 of the 1936 Act, is not complied with at the expiry of the specified time, or the local authority thinks that the nuisance, although abated, is likely to recur, s.94(1) of that Act provides that it is the duty of the local authority to institute summary proceedings for a nuisance order, in order to obtain compliance with the notice or otherwise abatement of the nuisance.
Section 2(1) of the Public Health (Recurring Nuisances) Act 1969 imposes a similar but lesser power: where a prohibition notice has not been complied with and the odour nuisance recurs, a local authority may institute summary proceedings, whereupon the Magistrates' Court hearing the complaint shall have like power to make a nuisance order in the same way as if the local authority had acted under s.93 of the Public Health Act 1936.
If the Magistrates' Court is satisfied that the odour complained of does indeed amount to a statutory nuisance, a nuisance order must be granted for one or both the following purposes:
(a)
requiring the defendant to comply with the abatement or prohibition notice or otherwise abate the nuisance in a specified time, and to carry out any necessary works,
(b)
to  prohibit the recurrence of the nuisance and to require any works to be executed which are necessary for that purpose.
In addition, a maximum fine of £1000 may be imposed on the defendant.
Where the nuisance was in existence at the time the abatement notice was served, and continued or was likely to recur  at the time proceedings for a nuisance order began then whether or not it was continuing or was likely to recur at the date of the hearing, the court must also order the defendant to pay the local authority the cost of the proceedings to obtain the nuisance order.
Terms of the Nuisance Order 
The court may include such terms in a nuisance order as it considers necessary to abate the odour nuisance.
In the words of Lord Goddard, C.J., in the case of McGillivray v Stephenson 
‘It is for the Justices to say what is to be done.
They must first order the respondent to abate the nuisance.
They can then go on to order him to do such things as they consider necessary to effect the abatement.
No doubt, they would pay great attention to what the local authority consider should be done, because they would want evidence as to the best way that the nuisance could be abated, but the decision is the decision of the Justices.
It is clearly laid down in the Act that it is for them to consider whether or not the nuisance exists, whether or not it has been abated, and whether it still exists, and, if it does, it is for them to consider which of the requirements of the abatement notice are to be carried out or how otherwise the nuisance is to be abated.
They have full jurisdiction to say: ‘We are satisfied that there is a nuisance here, but we are not going to order you to do what the local authority say you are to do because we think it can be done in another and cheaper way or in a more effective way’.
Alternatively they may say: ‘We think the best way to do it is to follow what the local authority have said you are to do’.’
By s.95 failure to comply with a nuisance order without reasonable excuse, can result in a maximum fine of £2000, plus a fine of £50 for each day on which the offence continues after conviction, or the local authority may abate the  nuisance and do whatever is necessary to execute the order whereupon expenses can be recovered from the person by whose act or default the nuisance was caused.
these may be registered as a local land charge to ensure payment.
The latter remedy is only possible in practice however where the work to be executed is within the scope of the local authority's expertise.
Reasonable Excuse
The Act provides no definition of what amounts to a reasonable excuse and what little guidance there is, is provided by case law.
In Saddleworth Urban District Council v Aggregate and Sand Ltd. it was held that lack of finance was not a reasonable excuse for failing to comply with a nuisance order under s.94 of the Public Health Act 1936, in respect of an abatement notice served under s.1 of The Noise Abatement Act 1960 and s.93 of the 1936 Act.
Ackner, L. J. in the more recent case of A. Lambert Flat Management Ltd. v Lomas pointed out the need for the defendant to have encountered some ‘special difficulty’ preventing compliance with the nuisance order, such as illness, or non-receipt of the notice.
By analogy, therefore, where the refusal of planning permission makes it impossible for a defendant to comply with the terms of a nuisance order, this could be regarded as a reasonable excuse.
Defences
Two defences are available to a defendant in proceedings for a nuisance order.
Where the proceedings are in respect of a statutory nuisance within s.92(1) (c), it is a defence under s.94(4) to prove, on a balance of probabilities,(the burden being on the defendant) that the accumulation or deposit was necessary for the effectual carrying on of a business or manufacture, was not kept longer than necessary, and that best practicable means were used to prevent  them from being prejudicial to health or a nuisance.
Similarly, when proceedings are taken in respect of a statutory nuisance within s.92(1) (d), it is a defence under s.94(5) to take best practicable means to counteract the emission of dust or effluvia, caused by any trade, business, manufacture or process.
No defence is available in respect of statutory nuisances within s.92(1) (a)(b)(e) or (f), or to a private individual causing a statutory nuisance under s.92(1) (c) or (d).
Best Practicable Means 
Section 110(2) provides an aid to the interpretation of the phrase ‘best practicable means’ requiring that the court shall have regard to cost and to local conditions and circumstances.
However, no reference is made to the current state of technical knowledge, the ‘means’ to be employed or any relevant codes of practice, unlike the Control of Pollution Act 1974, s.72, in relation to the control of noise.
The court may, at its discretion, however, be guided by those additional factors mentioned in s.72 of the Control of Pollution Act.
Indeed the Department of the Environment issued in 1976 a code of practice aimed at the prevention and abatement of smells from animal wastes which states that ‘in any proceedings brought because of an alleged odour nuisance it may be a relevant consideration if the company has adhered to the code of practice to the best of its ability’.
By referring to ‘any proceedings brought because of an alleged odour nuisance’ it is clear that the Department of Environment did not intend to restrict the occasions when adherence to the code of practice may, at the discretion of the court be a relevant consideration.
Therefore, adherence or otherwise to an existing code of practice would be relevant in establishing whether or not the defence of best practicable means can be established.
In the future there will be even more codes of practice, as the aim of a three year co-operative research programme on odours, undertaken jointly by Warren Spring Laboratory, local authorities and industry, was to investigate each method of odour abatement and periodically issue further codes of practice for guidance to industries with odour problems.
The availability of this defence causes problems for a plaintiff especially where the defendant has carried out works specified in an abatement notice, without success, or where the odour problem is so complex that it is difficult to ascertain just what are the best practicable means.
Experts may offer some guidance but from a plaintiff's point of view it is far better to frame an action using a subsection of s.92 other than s.92(1) (c) or (d) if at all possible.
High Court Proceedings
Where the local authority is of the opinion that summary proceedings provide an inadequate remedy, for example, where a fine will have little effect in persuading the odour emitter to abate the odour, or where summary action has failed, or is unacceptable due to the availability of the defence of best practicable means, proceedings may be taken in the High Court under s.100 of the Public Health Act 1936, even though the local authority has not itself suffered any damage, provided the odour amounts to a statutory nuisance.
There is no restriction on the local authority regarding works registered under the Alkali, etc., Works Regulation Act 1906, indeed in the case of Shoreham-by-Sea Urban District Council v Dolphin Canadian Proteins Ltd. action was taken against the company under s.100 to  obtain the abatement of offensive odours emanating from their animal by-product plant which in part processed chicken feathers, a registrable process due to the emission of hydrogen sulphide.
these proceedings are not available, however to a private individual who is restricted to summary proceedings under s.99.
Summary proceedings need not be exhausted before High Court proceedings may be initiated.
Availability of the Defence of Best Practicable Means in the High Court 
Section 100 of the Public Health Act 1936 is silent on the availability of any defence to an action in the High Court, but the words of s.94(4) and s.94(5) clearly refer to summary proceedings, stating that ‘where proceedings are brought under this section (that is s.94) it shall be a defence that best practicable means were used…
’. The defendants in the case of Cheltenham Borough Council v A. H. Taylor's Butchers, Hide, Skin, Fat and Wool Co.
Ltd. an action brought by the local authority under s.100 to obtain the abatement of obnoxious odours, raised the defence of best practicable means, and Brabin, J. in his judgement said obiter, ‘I do not find the meaning of sections 92 to 100 of the 1936 Act ambiguous.
I consider that the defence open to a person as defined in s.94(5)4 relates solely to summary proceedings…and in my view it cannot avail the defendants in s.100’.
Unfortunately, Brabin, J. then introduced an element of uncertainty by continuing to say, ‘If I am wrong and the defence does apply then I have to decide, have the defendants proved (the burden being on them) that the best practicable means has been taken?’
He concluded that in his opinion they had not.
Remedy 
The remedy granted by the High Court is an injunction, a discretionary remedy and a very serious one for the defendants, which may result in closure of the premises without compensation if that is the only way in which the nuisance can be abated.
Courts are however reluctant to take any action which will close premises down, as evidenced by the Shoreham and Cheltenham cases, in which it was between four and five years after the issue of the original writ that the businesses were finally closed down.
It is clear that time will be allowed for improvements to be carried out and only when it is clear that there is no prospect of the business in question being able to operate without causing an odour, which amounts to a statutory nuisance, will the court permit the issue of a writ of sequestration for contempt of court, in committing breaches of the undertaking not to cause a statutory nuisance, thus closing the business down without compensation.
Michael Davis, J. who heard the motion by Shoreham-by-Sea Urban District Council, in the High Court, for an order that they be at liberty to issue writs of sequestration, held that it was not necessary for the plaintiffs to satisfy the court that the defendants had acted wilfully in the sense of contumaciously, with a deliberate intention to defy the court order, since the Rules of the Supreme Court, 1965, do not contain in Order 45, Rule 5(1), the word ‘wilful’.
What has to be shown he said, is that by deliberate acts the court order has been defied and broken and accordingly a contempt of court has taken place.
The main disadvantages of High Court proceedings are the expense, the need to obtain sufficient objective evidence that the odour does amount to a statutory nuisance and the delay in obtaining an injunction.
THE LEGAL CONTROL OF ‘OFFENSIVE TRADES’
Odour problems often arise in connection with premises used for activities designated ‘offensive trades’, either by s.107(1) (i) of the Public Health Act 1936 as extended by Schedule 14 of the Local Government Act 1972, or by Order made by the local authority and confirmed to be so by the Secretary of State.
Examples of such trades are given in Table 3, below.
Odour emissions from these trades are controlled in two ways:
(1)
They may only be carried on with the local authority's consent, and
(2)
The manner in which the offensive trade is carried on may be controlled by byelaws made by the local authority under s.108(2).
Section 107 of the Public Health Act 1936 provides:
(1)
‘Any person who owns premises within a borough or urban district, or ‘certain rural districts or contributory places’…establishes, without the consent of the local authority , any offensive trade as hereinafter defined shall be liable to a fine not exceeding £400’.
(2)
‘Any person who on any premises — as aforesaid,carries on an offensive trade without such consent , if any, as at the date of establishment of the trade was required by subsection (1) of this section…shall be  liable for a fine not exceeding £5 for every day on which he carried on the trade — after receiving notice from the local authority to discontinue the trade’.
The need for written consent
If the site chosen is in the opinion of the local authority not suitable for the carrying on of an offensive trade, being for example too near to residential properties then consent may be refused, or granted for a limited period or subject to conditions.
In this way provision can be made for the control of potential odours by requiring certain odour abatement equipment to be installed.
Consent must be in writing.
This was established by the House of Lords in the case of Epping Forest District Council v Essex Rendering Ltd. in compliance with s.283(1) of the public Health 1936.
Their Lordships held that such consent cannot be given or implied by a course of conduct over the years as it is important in the interests of both the local authority and the public that consent should not be accidental or informal.
‘Section 107 creates criminal offences’.
Said Lord Templeton, and ‘Prosecution, defence and magistracy must be able to determine whether an offence has been committed without recourse to vague or disputed recollections…which might or might not constitute consent, binding on the local authority’.
In that case the appellant rendering company and their predecessors had for many years carried on various offensive trades, namely blood boiling, bone boiling, fat extracting, fat melting, tallow melting and tripe boiling, without concealment, to the knowledge of the local authority and under the control of their inspectors.
At no time was the company informed that the establishment of the trades in question required consent in writing.
For some reason, which was not disclosed, the local authority served a notice alleging the trades had been established without their consent and requiring discontinuance of the activities.
On the company's failure to comply with the notices, informations were laid and summonses issued alleging breaches of s.107 of the Public Health Act 1936.
The Justices found the offences proved on the ground that the company had no consent in writing for the establishment of such a trade.
On appeal to the Divisional Court and to the House of Lords, pursuant to s.1(2) of the Administration of Justice Act 1960, on a point of law of general importance, the company unsuccessfully argued that the requirement of s.283 of the Public Health Act 1936 was directory only and therefore consent over 23 years constituted a defence to a breach of s.107 of that Act.
Appeal
Provision is made by s.107(4) of the 1936 Act for any person aggrieved by the refusal of the local authority to grant a consent to the establishment of an offensive trade, by a time limit attached to the consent, or by the refusal to extend such a time limit, but not if the consent is conditional, to appeal by way of complaint to the Magistrates' court.
Essex Rendering Ltd. in the above case complied with the Justices direction to apply to the local authority for consent in writing but such consent was refused, and their appeal dismissed.
This refusal is difficult to understand in view of the fact that the trades in question appear to have been adequately controlled and caused no nuisance.
Even their Lordships commented:
‘The district council, however, have not given any reason why the palpable hardship in the present case has not been alleviated by the grant of a consent in writing on terms which will safeguard the company's business but will also protect the public’.
Control over the manner in which offensive trades are carried out
Many problems which arise from such trades are caused by ‘bad housekeeping’, used figuratively to describe the  way in which some businesses carelessly handle and store raw materials such as slaughterhouse waste.
Consequently, in order to diminish any noxious or injurious effects a local authority can make byelaws under s.108(2) of the 1936 Act which may lay down specific standards and ensure good housekeeping practice.
Failure to observe the requirements laid down in the byelaws usually leads to a fine whether or not prejudice to health or a nuisance occurs.
Where odours arising from offensive trades are, however, in the opinion of the local authority a statutory nuisance within s.92 of the Public Health Act 1936 the local authority is under a duty to take action to seek the odour's abatement and compliance with the byelaws bestows no immunity in respect of any action which may be taken using the statutory nuisance provisions, nor in respect of any action for a private or public nuisance at common law.
Some local authorities have taken action under s.100 of the Public Health Act 1936 which has resulted in the eventual closure of premises involved in the animal by-product industry.
It has been recognised that without sufficient processing capacity a potentially serious waste problem could arise.
As a result local authorities have been requested to take into consideration the following Code of Practice: ‘Control of Smells from the Animal Waste Processing Industry ’ when contemplating any action they might take in order to reduce odour nuisance, and to be aware of the Reports of the Working Party on the Suppression of Odours from Offensive and Selected Other Trades, which gives guidance on the best practicable means for dealing with odours.
The impact of planning controls
Siting premises used for the carrying on of designated offensive trades is all important.
Therefore, co-operation at an early stage between environmental health officers and planners can do much to prevent a nuisance arising from such trades, many of which fall within Class IX of the Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1972.
For example in Cheltenham Borough Council v A. H. Taylors, Butchers, Hide, Skin, Fat and Wool Co.
Ltd.
Brabin J. commented on the site chosen for the defendant's premises which were used for fat rendering, an offensive trade.
He said,
‘Looking back now to the time when the site for these premises was chosen, and realising the state of affairs existing in this type of works, it is surprising to me that this process was ever permitted on this site at all(being figuratively speaking within arms length of the dwellings).
The risks of trouble arising were too great’.
Odours from the trade of fish frying
Originally under the public Health Act 1875 the trade of fish frying was, in many districts, declared to be an offensive trade.
It was recognised by local authorities, however, that to classify as offensive so popular a trade dealing with food was a drastic step.
As a result, s.107 of the public Health Act 1936 decreed that any order, in any area, declaring the trade of fish frying to be an offensive trade, should cease to have effect three years from the date of commencement of that Act (October 1937), and the trade of fish-frying was instead subjected to control by byelaws made under s.108(1) of that Act, in order to prevent any noxious or injurious effects of the trade or business on the neighbourhood.
Odours and fumes given off from pans in which fish is fried, particularly when rancid oils or vegetable oils are used  as the frying medium, are liable to give rise to objections from nearby residents.
Byelaws are generally made to ensure proper precautions are taken to prevent or reduce the odour, for example, by insisting that a fish frying stove should be accessible and easily removed for cleaning, and has a satisfactory fume extraction system.
Recently there has been an increase in the use of mobile fried-fish vans which cause odours in many places, and these are not easily controlled.
They are, nevertheless, still subject to any byelaws in their area due to the wording of s.108 which refers to, ‘the business of fish frying, carried on, or in any premises or street’.
Whilst byelaws therefore go some way to control fish trying odours from existing fish and chip shops, the primary most effective control still lies with planners to ensure that new premises, or those where a change of use to a fish and chip shop is contemplated, are sited where they will cause the least irritation to local residents, perhaps siting them together with other shops.
It is recognised in planning circles that planning applications for fish and chip shops are contentious and it has been said that whilst ‘Joe Public wants hot food shops he does not want them near him and he is prepared to fight tooth and nail to stop anyone opening one near his house’.
INDIRECT LEGAL CONTROLS
It is often possible for offensive odours to be controlled indirectly through various statutes, other than the Public Health legislation.
Alkali, etc., Works Regulation Act 1906
Many odour problems arise in connection with processes which are required by s.9(1) of the 1906 Act to be registered annually with the Director General of the Health and Safety Executive.
At present these are alkali works or works mentioned in the first schedule of the 1906 Act, as amended by the Health and Safety (Emissions into the Atmosphere) Regulations 1983 (S.1.
No. 943) which came into operation on the 5th August 1983.
These processes come under the jurisdiction of H.M.
Industrial Air Pollution Inspectorate which has the responsibility of ensuring that best practicable means are being taken for preventing the escape of any noxious or offensive gas into the atmosphere, and for rendering such gases where discharged harmless and inoffensive.
Many of the noxious or offensive gases, at present listed in s.27(1) of the 1906 Act as amended by Regulation 4, Schedule 2 of 1983, S.I.
No. 943, have obnoxious odours.
For example, carbon disulphide, amines, acrylates, oxides of nitrogen, pyridine and recently included, specifically by reason of their foul odour, volatile organic sulphur compounds.
Consequently, if best practicable means are taken  to limit the discharge of such gases to levels recommended by the Health and Safety Executive, odour emission will be correspondingly reduced and even totally removed where the concentration at which a particular odour is perceived, i.e. its odour threshold detection value, exceeds the recommended emission level for that particular substance.
There are occasions, however, when this is not so as some noxious or offensive gases have very low threshold detection values, e.g. many of those malodorants associated with sewage treatment processes which include gases such as methyl mercaptan, ethyl mercaptan and dimethylamine.
It is these odours which give rise to problems, being technically difficult to control at such low levels.
If the odour persists after best practicable means have been taken and in the opinion of the local authority environmental health department it amounts to a statutory nuisance within s.92(1) of the Public Health Act 1936, then permission would have to be sought from the Secretary of State for the Environment as required by s.92(2) of that Act, before the local authority could institute summary proceedings under the nuisance provisions of the Public Health Act 1936.
Alternatively, s.22(1) of the Alkali, etc., Works Act 1906 provides for formal complaint to be made to HM Industrial Air Pollution Inspectorate via their inspectors, by any local authority or inhabitant of the district, if a process to which the Act applies is being carried on in contravention of the provisions of the Act and a nuisance has arisen.
On receipt of a formal complaint the Inspectorate is required to investigate the problem and direct their inspector to take such proceedings ‘as they think fit and just’.
In view of the customary informal  liaison between  environmental health officers and inspectors, however, it seems that as long as the inspector is striving to abate the odour, no action will be taken by a local authority until the odour becomes very bad indeed.
Certainly nothing would be gained if action was taken under s.92(1) (d) of the Public Health Act 1936, as the defendant would be able to avail himself of the defence of best practicable means provided by s.94(5) of the Public Health Act 1936.
Alternative action in the High Court under s.100 of the 1936 Act requires no such permission but uncertainty as to whether the defence of best practicable means is available to such an action is a further deterrent to local authorities contemplating taking action under this section.
Cable burning
The activity of cable burning, that is the burning of insulation from cable with a view to recovering the metal is a source of obnoxious odours.
Section 78(1) of the Control of Pollution Act 1974, makes it an offence to carry out this activity, unless it is done in a place registered under the 1906 Act, where controls can be exerted to minimise any pollution.
Breach of this section renders the offender liable to a fine not exceeding £2000.
Following the Health and Safety (Emissions into the Atmosphere) Regulations 1983, referred to earlier it is expected that local authorities will take over the responsibility for prosecuting persons for such offences, as Regulation 7 repeals s.78(3) of the 1974 Act which had required proceedings to be instituted by an inspector appointed under s. 19 of the Health and Safety at Work, etc.
Act 1974 or with consent of the Director of Public Prosecutions.
The Clean Air Acts of 1956 and 1968
On occasions an odour may be due to, or coincide with, the emission of dark or black smoke, in which case a local  authority may be able to initiate action under the Clean Air Acts of 1956 and 1968, except where the emission arises at works registered under the Alkali, etc., Works Regulation Act 1906.
Section 1 of the Clean Air Act 1956 prohibits the emission of dark smoke from a chimney of any building, whilst allowing regulations to be made exempting emissions for prescribed periods.
Defences are provided by s.1(3) (a)(b)(c) and (d), but should they prove unsuccessful an emission will amount to an offence punishable by a fine not exceeding £400 in the case of a private chimney and £2000 in the case of any other chimney.
As the 1956 Act applies only to buildings, s.1(1) of the 1968 Act extended the offence to include dark smoke emitted from ‘industrial and trade premises’ defined, for the purpose of that Act, by s.1(5) as ‘premises used for any industrial or trade purposes or premises not so used on which matter is burnt in connection with any industrial or trade process’.
The main aim was to prevent excessive smoke emission caused by the indiscriminate burning of industrial or trade refuse in the open, but will also control dark smoke emission from industrial processes not having a chimney.
Local authorities which receive complaints regarding:
(a)
the burning of wood wastes containing ‘formica’, off-cuts, and
(b)
the burning of rubbish on industrial premises, may find this provision useful, rendering the occupier of the premises liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding £1000.
Dark smoke from the burning of rubbish in connection with demolition work, is however in certain circumstances, permitted by regulations being a necessary evil.
In the case of Sheffield City Council v A.D.H. Demolition Ltd the Divisional court of the queens bench made it clear, for the first time in a reported case, that ‘premises’ within s.1(1) of the 1968 Act covered more than a building standing on a particular piece of ground, but did include a vacant site.
It was also decided that the burning of rubbish did constitute a ‘process’ within the meaning of s.1(5) of that Act, despite the argument that there was insufficient continuity of activity in the burning of rubbish to constitute a ‘process’,.
In the case of smoke other than dark smoke emitted from a chimney, which is giving rise to a nuisance, s.16 of the 1956 Act extends the provisions of Part III of the Public Health Act 1936, to include smoke nuisances.
This does not apply however to:
(a)
smoke emitted from a chimney of a private dwelling,
(b)
dark smoke from a chimney of a building or boiler or other plant (controlled by s.1 of the 1956 Act), or
(c)
dark smoke caused by industrial or trade burning (controlled by s.1 of the 1968 Act).
It does apply however to smoky garden bonfires and smoke arising from straw and stubble burning after harvest, which can often be a source of nuisance, including odour nuisance.a The National society for clean air (N.S.C.A.) comment.
‘If the local authority are satisfied that a nuisance has occurred, temporarily ceased, but is likely to recur, it may without serving an abatement notice, cause a complaint to be made to the magistrates court for making a nuisance  order.
Following this, the provisions of Part III of the Public Health Act 1936 for enforcement of the order will apply.
It is unlikely that such action would be taken unless the offending bonfire(s) occurred very frequently and witnesses were produced to that effect’.
It has been suggested that bonfires, which not only cause objectionable odours and smoke, but also release polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons into the atmosphere which in sufficient concentrations could constitute a health hazard, ought not to be permitted between certain set hours.
What those hours will be poses a difficult question.
Bonfires are more likely to cause a nuisance during daytime hours but to limit burning to for example one hour before sunrise and one hour after sunset could lead to objections from fire prevention officers.
Perhaps the problem could be solved by amending the Public Health Act 1936 on the lines of s.58(1) of the Control of Pollution Act 1974 in order to enable local authorities to act where a nuisance is likely to occur.
They would then be able to deal with potential smoke nuisance in advance.
Preventative measures are indeed being advocated by the N.S.C.A. as an interim measure to deal with the widespread nuisance caused by straw and stubble burning after harvest.
Despite an existing voluntary Code of Practice, reproduced in part below, drawn up by the National Farmers' Union to minimise any nuisance and existing legal controls, complaints appear to be on the increase.
As a result the N.S.C.A. is seeking a change in the law requiring farmers to obtain prior approval for such burning from the local authority, whose officers would have an increased supervisory role.
A summary of the National Farmers' Union voluntary straw and stubble burning code of practice says:
Make an effective firebreak at least 15 metres wide.
Never burn when wind conditions are unsuitable.
Burn against the wind whenever possible.
Ensure that burning is responsibly supervised.
Burn only during daylight.
Inform your neighbours; notify the local fire brigade if required by a local byelaw.
Take extra precautions where there is a risk of causing damage or annoyance to the public.
Avoid burning on a bank holiday and during weekends whenever possible.
The recent Report of the Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution even goes so far as to recommend that straw burning should be banned in five years time.
A further measure which could be of value in preventing odour emissions from waste incineration or blast furnaces, is that contained in s.3(1) of the 1956 Act.
This requires all new furnaces other than domestic boilers with a rating less than 55,000 Btu/hr to be, as far as practicable, capable of operating continuously without emitting smoke when burning fuel of a type for which the furnace was designed.
The success of smoke control areas throughout the country has also had an overall effect on odour pollution, due to the fact that the reduction in smoke has been accompanied by a fall in sulphur dioxide in the atmosphere, which in itself is odorous.
As postulated in Chapter 1, one of the results of the air being much cleaner is that people are more aware of other odours which previously they had not detected.
The so-called ‘Teesside cat smell’ of the late 1950's is a notorious example.
Local authorities in industrial Teesside received many complaints about an unpleasant odour resembling decaying fish.
The original plant, manufacturing amines, which was the cause of the odour was replaced in 1961 by one where welded pipe-lines eliminated bolted joints and greatly reduced the number of leaks.
Complaints  continued however because the chemical compounds responsible for the odour were detectable at minute concentrations (0.002 ppm).
The Chief Alkali Inspector commenting on the above in his 109th Annual Report on Alkali, etc., Works, 1972, said:
‘Curiously enough the reduction in low level concentrations of sulphur dioxide, resulted in an increase in the frequency of detections and complaints about fish smells because the acidic gases had been reacting with and neutralising the smell of the amines’.
The Control of Pollution Act 1974
With the coming into force of Part 1 of the Control of Pollution Act on 14th June 1976 came a further means of controlling odours emanating from premises used for the disposal of ‘controlled waste’, that is household, industrial and commercial waste, or any such waste defined by s.30(1) of that Act, especially where the odour is due to bad housekeeping, bad handling or spillages of waste.
It is worth pointing out here that sewage sludge deposited on land is treated as industrial waste, except:
(1)
that deposited, whether inside or outside the curtilage of a sewage treatment works, as an integral part of the operation of those works,
(2)
that spread on land for agricultural purposes.
The licensing provisions of the Act described below will therefore apply unless the waste is deposited on certain land occupied by the waste disposal authority.
In this case the waste disposal authority's consent would be necessary and it may be subject to conditions.
Section 3(1) of the 1974 Act prohibits the unlicensed disposal of controlled waste.
The owner of premises to be  used for this purpose is required to obtain a ‘disposal licence’ under section 5(1) of that Act to either commence, or if disposal was already being carried out before the Act came into force, to continue operations.
The disposal authority, which is the county council for this purpose, may not reject an application for a disposal licence on the grounds of possible or existing odour pollution which is not prejudicial to health but is merely detrimental to the amenity of the area.
It is in fact the duty of the disposal authority not to reject the application unless planning permission is still required for the use of the site, for the purpose of preventing pollution of water or danger to public health.
However, conditions may be attached to any site licence which may have the effect of preventing any odour pollution from arising.
The only restriction being that a condition must directly relate to the site and must be reasonable.
By way of illustration the following two conditions, extracted from a site licence, are presented:
Condition: ‘The types and quantities of waste accepted at the site shall not exceed the limits of its operational and storage capacity’.
Reason: ‘To ensure that the operation of the plant does not give rise to an environmental hazard or danger to public health’.
Condition: ‘Wastes shall be initially blended before incineration and the plant operated in such a manner as to ensure that the flue gases discharged to the atmosphere are such that  they do not give rise to an environmental hazard or danger to public health’.
Reason: As above
Plant and equipment used for disposing of controlled waste is also subject to authorisation by licence under s.3(1) (b).
Non-compliance with the licence conditions is a criminal offence and would result in a fine not exceeding £1000 on summary conviction, or on conviction on indictment to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years, or a fine or both.
Defences are provided by s.3(4) and it would be open to a defendant to plead s.3(4) (c),i.e. that they, ‘took all such steps as were reasonably open to them to ensure that the conditions were complied with’.
The question of reasonableness would be for the court to decide.
If the same criteria is used however, as is used to determine the ‘best practicable means’ under the public health legislation, then the cost involved in complying with the conditions and the financial state of the company would be considered.
In addition, s.9(4) imposes a duty on the disposal authority to ensure that conditions are complied with, and they may under s.9(4) (a), serve on the licence holder, a notice requiring compliance with a condition(s) within a specified time.
If the notice is not complied with then the disposal authority may under s.9(4) (b) serve on them a further notice revoking the licence at a time specified in the notice.
If complaints still continue after the disposal licence conditions have been complied with, and if the disposal  authority is of the opinion that a modification of those conditions is desirable to achieve further improvement in abating any odorous emissions still being caused, a notice may be served on the licence holder, under s.7(1) (a)(i) to that effect.
The modification must be unlikely to require unreasonable expenditure by the licence holder, who may appeal against the notice to the Secretary of State under s.10(1) (c).
While an appeal is pending the notice will be ineffective becoming effective again if the appeal is dismissed or withdrawn.
Alternatively, if in exercise of their supervisory duty under s.9(1) the disposal authority form the opinion that modification of the licence conditions is necessary to ensure that the disposal operation does not cause pollution to water or danger to public health,or become seriously detrimental to the amenities of the locality then s.7(1) (b) imposes a further duty on them,i.e. the disposal authority SHALL serve a notice on the company modifying the conditions.
Ultimately, a disposal licence can be revoked by a disposal authority, by issuing a notice under s.7(5), even where conditions are being complied with, or under s.9(4) (b) for non-compliance with those conditions.
Section 7(4) imposes a duty on the disposal authority to issue such a notice where it appears that continuation of activities to which the licence relates would cause pollution of water, a danger to public health or are seriously detrimental to amenities of the locality , and cannot be avoided by modifying the conditions specified in the licence.
This seems to suggest that the policy of the 1974 Act is the recognition that there is a need for industrial waste to be disposed of, and the companies doing so are providing a much needed service, but such operations ought to be closely controlled to ensure that any interference on the surrounding locality is minimal.
Only if its many controls  fail will the ultimate sanction, i.e. revocation of the disposal licence, be invoked.
It should be noted that where the grounds for revocation be serious detriment to the amenity the area, any disposal operation will be allowed to continue pending an appeal under s. 10(2).
The difficulty for the disposal authority would lie in providing sufficient evidence to show that the odour emission is causing ‘severe’ detriment.
As yet, most of Part II of the Control of Pollution Act 1974 is not yet in force.
It will become an offence under s.31(1)
(1)
to cause or knowingly to permit any poisonous, noxious or polluting matter to enter streams, controlled waters or specified underground waters;
(2)
to cause or knowingly to permit any matter to enter a stream, so as to tend (either directly or in combination with other matter which is caused or permitted to enter the stream) to impede the flow of the stream in a way that would lead to a substantial aggravation of pollution due to other causes;
(3)
to cause any solid waste matter to enter a stream or restricted waters;
unless the discharge is authorised by a licence or consent granted by the appropriate Secretary of State or a water authority and is in accordance with any conditions of that licence or consent, or if it is in accordance with good agricultural practice — good agricultural practices being those recommended in codes of practice approved by the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Foods.
It will also be an offence to discharge trade and sewage effluents into streams or controlled waters without the consent of the water authority in accordance with s.34.
Consequently, these provisions will make a valuable contribution to the control of obnoxious odours arising from the discharge of noxious effluents into streams, rivers and other water courses and will strengthen the codes of practice already in existence in relation to spreading sewage sludge on land.
THE ROLE OF PLANNING IN THE CONTROL OF ODOURS
Responsibility for controlling odour emissions which affect the public, lies as we have seen, with two main control agencies, the local authority environmental health department and the health and safety executive through their industrial air pollution inspectors, the latter in respect of odours emanating from premises registered under the Alkali, etc., Works Regulation Act 1906 as amended by The Health and Safety (Emissions into the Atmosphere) Regulations 1983.
Control in most cases is ex post and akin to closing the stable door when the horse has bolted.
Often this cannot be avoided where odours emanate from existing premises and uses, but where new development is concerned planning authorities are in the unique position of being able to prevent odour pollution.
Planning powers to control odour pollution
The Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution drew a distinction between two aspects of planning: that which the local planning authority initiates and that to which it responds.
The first, which will be referred to as strategic planning, includes policies, strategies for development, location of industrial and residential zones, densities, etc.
The second covers development control, the main tool by which strategies are implemented and through which, a planning authority essentially reacts to proposals for land use put forward by potential developers.
It is the role of the county councils to draw up structure  plans which contain strategic policies and general proposals for the development and other use of land in their areas.
The district councils being usually responsible for drawing up detailed local plans in accordance with policies defined in the structure plans.
Local planning authorities (county councils in this case) are required by s.7(3) (a) of the Town and Country Planning Act 1971 to include in their structure plans, ‘measures for the improvement of the physical environment’, whilst s.11(3) (a) of the above Act, a less demanding provision, states that they,(usually district councils in this case) shall include in a local plan such measures as the authority thinks fit for the improvement of the physical environment.
It follows, therefore, that if the prevention of odour emissions from premises could be regarded as improving the physical environment the local planning authorities have a responsibility to take environmental considerations, including odour prevention, into account in formulating their policies.
Evidence in favour of this interpretation of the phrase ‘the physical environment’ is found in DoE Circular 55/77 (now withdrawn) which made it clear that a statement of pollution policy could appropriately form part of a structure plan, albeit necessarily of a general nature since they are policies stated by an authority (county council) responsible neither for air pollution control nor for most development control.
Certainly general policies, such as those reproduced in part below, could have the effect not only of preventing but abating existing odour nuisance, the county council having recognised that in most cases where odour pollution causes problems, the source of the odour is either close to residential property or industry is so densely concentrated that the total odour emission is unacceptable.
Policy: ‘The location of industrial development will in all cases be subject to local and amenity consideration’,
Policy: ‘To intensify action to deal with problems created by obsolete and bad neighbour industry…undertaking or encouraging relocation etc.’.
Policy: ‘Waste Disposal — New sites for controlled land-fill will be determined having regard to: environmental matters such as the proximity to residential properties etc.’
Opinions vary, however, as to the form of air pollution policies in structure plans, the Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution for example felt that the only way to control the air we breathe is by indirectly limiting emissions and recommended a system of air quality guidelines for major pollutants which could be adopted by local authorities and incorporated in their structure plans.
These guidelines would not be legally enforceable but would provide objectives against which local and national air pollution control policies could be judged by all concerned.
This quantitative approach has been adopted to some extent by at least one local authority as the policy statement below illustrates:
Policy: ‘To reduce air pollution levels to comply with the air quality standards in the European Community Directive’.
Such a quantitative approach could have the effect of reducing odour problems where those are the result of major pollutants such as hydrogen sulphide, sulphur dioxide and oxides of nitrogen, but is unlikely to have much effect on other odour emissions,e.g. those rural in origin or those arising due to minute concentrations of chemicals with low  odour threshold detection values.
These are probably better dealt with at the development control stage.
Development Control
Planning permission is required in respect of all ‘development’ that term being defined in s.22(1) of the Town and Country Planning Act 1971, as ‘the carrying out of any building, engineering, mining or other operations in, on, over or under land, or the making of any material change of use of any buildings on land’, as qualified by s.290(1) of that Act.
District councils receive and decide the majority of planning applications, with the exception of a small number which refer to county matters, the most relevant of which, from the point of view of odour pollution, being waste disposal applications.
When determining planning applications planning authorities are required to have regard to structure and local plans.
Therefore it follows that odour emissions can be a ground for refusing planning permission or imposing conditions to prevent or reduce any possible odour pollution.
This is implicitly recognised by DoE Circular 22/80, para 13 which states that wherever possible planning objections should be met by attaching conditions to the permission or by use of agreements under s.52 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1971, rather than refusing planning permission.
It goes on to say that ‘permission should be granted unless there are convincing objections such as intrusion into open countryside, noise, smell, safety, health or excessive traffic generation’.
Not all planning authorities, however, are of the opinion that odour pollution is best dealt with by planning controls, many considering that‘planning’ is not intended to deal with such problems being the responsibility of the Health and Safety Executive and the District Environmental Health Department.
Perhaps this latter attitude is the reason why new housing has been permitted near to existing odour  emitters, in particular sewage disposal works, intensive pig poultry or other farms, and, conversely, why potential odour emitting uses have been permitted near to existing residential developments.
Refusal of Planning Permission
The most effective way to prevent odour problems arising is:
(a)
to refuse planning permission for development which is a potential odour emitter near to residential property; or
(b)
to refuse planning permission for development which would be affected by and sensitive to existing odour emitting uses.
A survey by the author of 100 district and county planning authorities showed that of the 76 district planning authorities which responded to the survey, 26 of them refused planning permission for the type of development mentioned in (a) above, stating odour emission as a reason for refusal.
The survey also provided information as to the types of development most likely to be refused planning permission due to anticipated odour emission.
These are hot take away food shops, including fish and chips, Indian and Chinese hot food shops, near to residential property, but as the following example shows, not exclusively: an application for a plant to dry poultry litter to form protein meal was refused.
The site was in a rural area in a particular situation where it might have been acceptable on planning and highway grounds but for the problems of smell and dust.
The refusal did include policy reasons, but the fundamental aspect was those other problems which were given very considerable investigation.
That particular reason for refusal was: ‘the local planning authority is not satisfied that certain nuisances from smell and dust (for which little or no remedy exists) would not result if the proposed development took place, to the detriment of residential properties within a wide radius of the site’.
The site was to the west of, though some  way from, a residential area.
If it had been less populated open country the application may not have been refused.
Similarly, plans for a slaughterhouse were turned down, the site being too near to residential property and in the opinion of the chief environmental health officer, would cause environmental problems including obnoxious odours.
Alternatively, where a local plan is in existence it is usually stated policy to confine certain types of industry to particular areas, restricting land use in and around residential areas to that of a ‘light industrial’ nature within Class III of the Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1972; defined as:
‘Where the processes carried on or the machinery installed are such as could be carried on or installed in any residential area without detriment to amenity of that area by reason of noise, vibration,smell , fumes, soot ash, dust or grit’.
It follows that any proposal for a use with potential odour emission problems could not be classed as ‘light industrial’ and might therefore be refused planning permission on the grounds of conflict with the local plan.
A local plan, however, is still a fairly new procedure but gathering in momentum although there are still authorities which do not have formal plans and even where there is such a plan they often only cover parts of the authority's administration area, usually the central area only.
Therefore, there are part areas of towns not covered, and where a particular use is not considered appropriate in these areas other valid reasons must be found for refusal perhaps on the lines suggested below:
‘The proposed development by reason of the emission of odours would represent the introduction of an undesirable use into the area to the detriment of the character of the  area and to the amenities of nearby residents, therefore, being contrary to proper planning’.
Regarding the type of development mentioned in (b) above, only a few planning authorities seem to consider odour emission to be a major factor when deciding whether or not to grant planning permission for development which would be sensitive to any existing odour emitting use.
In fact of the 76 district planning authorities responding to the survey referred to earlier only 10 did so, the following being examples of where odour emission was so regarded,i.e. where a proposed residential development would have:
(1)
adjoined an intensive pig production unit,
(2)
been adjacent to a foundry,
(3)
been in close proximity to a sewage disposal works, or
(4)
been near to a site which had recently been granted planning permission for use as a waste disposal site.
Even though odour emission may be regarded as a major consideration, as shown above, only rarely is planning permission refused on that ground alone, generally permission is granted but the development modified in some way to minimise any potential odour nuisance.
Planning conditions
As an alternative to refusing planning permission, permission is often granted subject to conditions aimed at controlling any anticipated odour emission, in the same way as conditions are imposed to mitigate nuisance caused by noise emissions.
Guidance on the use of the power to impose conditions is provided by the Ministry of Housing and Local Government Circular 5/68, which suggests the following useful tests:
Is the condition (1) necessary;(2) relevant to planning;(3) relevant to the development to be permitted;(4) enforceable;(5) precise;(6) reasonable?
Once again opinions vary as to whether conditions should be attached with the aim of controlling odour pollution and is regarded by some planners as an undesirable duplication of powers, a view endorsed by the Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution especially with regard to planning conditions designed to control air pollution from registered works.
‘This practice is misguided’, they said, ‘the Alkali Inspectorate (now HM Industrial Air Pollution Inspectorate) is legally responsible for controlling emissions from registered works and it is wrong in principle for local authorities to attempt to assume authority by use of planning laws’.
Nevertheless, out of 76 district planning authorities responding to the survey mentioned earlier, 30 of them granted planning permission for potential odour emitting uses subject to a condition relating to odour emission, being of the opinion that the imposition of conditions, including those relating to odour emission, were relevant to securing reasonable and proper planning objectives which complemented rather than conflicted with the responsibilities of the Director of Environmental Health in his dealing with public health matters under the public health legislation.
Types of condition which may be imposed fall into two categories:
(1)
Those in which the form of words used are based on the definition of a ‘light industrial’ use,i.e. a Class III use under the Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1972, usually referred to as a ‘no nuisance clause’, being imposed to protect the amenity of the locality, and
(2)
Those which require equipment to be installed,e.g. carbon filters, odour neutraliser plant, or plans for abatement of potential odours to be submitted to the district planning authority for approval, and implemented before a particular use may commence.
Many district planning authorities in fact use standard conditions and some have a policy of attaching certain  conditions to particular types of development,e.g. it is the normal practice of some local planning authorities to impose a standard condition on all hot food shops requiring that, ‘No noise, dust, grit, fumes or odours shall be emitted from the development, which in the opinion of the local planning authority create a nuisance in the locality’.
Other planning authorities prefer not to impose standard conditions but refer each application on its own merits, and whenever there is a likelihood of odour emission the matter is referred to the Director of Environmental Health and his advice either incorporated into the planning application or is covered by a condition.
A limitation on the type of condition which can be attached to planning permission for those uses which require a waste disposal licence under s.3 of the Control of Pollution Act 1974, in order to operate, such as waste incineration plants, is imposed by the Department of Environment Circular, 55/76, para 43.
This limits conditions to those matters relating to the use and appearance of the land,e.g. considerations of visual amenity, access, tree planting and preservation and landscape in general, leaving conditions to be attached to the site licence to regulate the proper conduct of operations and day to day management of the site together with the protection of water, the environment and public health generally.
This division between planning conditions and site licence conditions highlights the need for co-operation between planners, waste disposal officers and other pollution control agencies, at a pre-planning stage wherever possible, in order to reach agreement on those conditions which are to be attached to the planning consent, and those to be attached to the site licence, thus ensuring that problems of control do not arise at a later stage.
Change of Use
Whilst in general planning permission is required for all development, certain uses falling within a class specified in  an Order made by the Secretary of State may be undertaken without the need for planning permission.
The Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1972 is one such Order, specifying 18 use classes, and stating that where a building or other land is used for the purpose of any class specified in the schedule to the Order, the use thereof for any other purpose of the same class is deemed not to involve development.
Often the types of process in one class are very wide, consequently changing from one use to another can lead to odour nuisance yet no planning permission is required unless a condition had been attached at the time of the original planning permission prohibiting a change of use even within the same use class.
Attaching such a condition as the one reproduced below is permitted on planning grounds, even though it is in conflict with the Use Classes Order and its imposition a useful preventative measure:
‘The premises shall be used for…and for no other purpose including any purpose in class…of the Schedule to the Town and Country (Use Classes) Order 1972 ’.
Judicial authority for this is provided by the case of City of London Corporation v Secretary of State for the Environment and another.
Talbot, J. in that case was required to decide the validity of a condition imposed on a grant of planning permission to use part of the ground floor of certain premises as ‘an employment agency and for no other use.’
He held this to be valid even though the condition could mean a restriction on a use which would not amount to development.
‘The power would seem necessary’ he said, ‘so that planning authorities can meet the varied and particular circumstances of the planning of a particular area.’
Intensification of use
Many odour problems arise with the intensified use of land, e.g. a farmer may begin by keeping 50 pigs and expand until he has several hundred.
If the intensification of use could be regarded as a material change of use, then planning permission would be required thus enabling any odour emission to be controlled by planning legislation.
Whilst intensification of use has on occasions been deemed to amount to a material change of use, it is a difficult decision for a planning officer to make involving both fact and degree.
MTCP Circular 67/49 advised that whether a change is a material change comparison with the previous use of the land or building in question is the governing factor and the effect of the proposal on the surrounding neighbourhood is not relevant to the issue.
It emphasises that a proposed change of use constitutes development if the new use is ‘substantially’ different from the old.
A change in kind will always be material,e.g. from a house to a shop, but a change in degree of existing use may be ‘material’ only if it is very marked.
Consequently the effect on the surrounding neighbourhood of increased obnoxious odours is not a relevant consideration.
Nevertheless in Guildford Rural District Council v Fortescue the court was not prepared to accept as a general proposition that mere intensity of user could never be relevant.
Without deciding the point, the court indicated that whether intensification of use amounted to a material change in use would depend upon the particular circumstances of the case.
What is clear however, is that when hearing appeals from the Secretary of State as to whether there has been a material change of use, the courts have consistently held that the question is one of fact and have declined to substitute  any decision of their own for that of the Secretary of State.
Lawton LJ in Brooks and Burton Ltd v Secretary of State for the Environment and another , concerning the intensification of use of land for the manufacture of concrete blocks, said:
‘We have no doubt that intensification of use can be a material change of use, whether it is or not depends upon the degree of intensification.
Matters of degree are for the Secretary of State to decide.
He did so in this case (deciding that it did amount to a material change of use).
There was ample evidence to support his decision on this point.
It cannot be upset by this court.’
Appeal
Local planning authorities must be able to justify the refusal of planning permission or approval subject to conditions, for if an applicant is aggrieved by their decision, appeal lies to the Secretary of State for the Environment in accordance with s.36 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1971, as amended by the Local Government Planning and Land Act 1980, Sched. 15 para 4(2), within six months of receiving notice of the authority's decision.
The need for ample justification is illustrated by the following:
Planning permission for the erection of three poultry houses, each 34 metres by 11 metres was refused the main reason being that the development of a substantial poultry business in such close proximity to a village was considered undesirable, by reason of the inherent risk of odour.
An appeal was allowed after a local inquiry on the recommendation of the inspector.
His conclusion in respect of the alleged risk of odour was that:
‘Concerning the day-to-day running of the proposed development, I am unconvinced that the poultry units would be situated close enough to nearby houses to cause unacceptable nuisance to people living there, from excessive smell or noise.
In regard to smells resulting from the transportation of manure it seems to me that, irrespective of the methods employed, the necessary journeys would occur so infrequently as not to be unduly detrimental to the residential amenities which nearby residents in this rural community could reasonably be expected to enjoy.’
A different attitude was taken when planning permission was refused for proposals to extend an extensive pig breeding unit, causing obnoxious odours.
The inspector on this occasion said:
‘A number of local residents commented that there was already a disproportionate ratio of pigs to people in the locality and although proposals to extend the operation would have led to some improvement, in that a new farrowing house would have been built to bring the pigs in from the old farm buildings, in fact the larger pig population would increase the scope for offensive odours to permeate the village.’
Enforcement
One of the tests of any condition is its enforceability.
Very little benefit is gained by imposing a condition relating to odour emission if it cannot be enforced, and for that reason conditions which refer to the responsibilities of a third party, such as: ‘all odours must be abated to the satisfaction of the Environmental Health Department’, should be avoided.
Conditions seeking to confine a use within Class III, or other ‘no nuisance’ conditions may prove difficult to enforce if there are any difficulties in establishing at law that a nuisance is being caused.’
It is often more effective therefore to impose a condition requiring odour abatement equipment to be installed before a particular use may commence, then, if such equipment is not installed an enforcement notice may be served under s.87 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1971.
Alternatively, where an existing use gives rise to a serious odour problem a local authority may wish to issue a Discontinuance Order under s.51 of the 1971 Act.
Such an Order may be used where it appears to the authority to be expedient in the interests of proper planning of their area, including the interests of amenity, regard being had to the development plan and to any other material considerations.
‘Amenity’ is not limited to ‘present amenity’, therefore an authority is quite entitled to have regard to future detriment.
There are two safeguards however, such an Order requires the Secretary of State's confirmation and would probably result in a public inquiry and should the local authority be successful s.170 of that Act provides that compensation is payable in respect or any exercise of the power.
Compensation is payable under three heads: for any depreciation of value in the claimant's interest in the land, for disturbance in his enjoyment of the land and for the expense of carrying out any works in compliance with the Order.
Therefore from a local authority's point of view action under section 100 of the Public Health Act 1936 in respect of a statutory nuisance would be more advantageous than the issue of a discontinuance order because the court, on finding a statutory nuisance, has the power to issue an injunction closing the premises down without compensation should it consider that the only way of abating the odour nuisance.
Planning agreements
Section 52 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1971 gives the power to a local planning authority to make an  agreement with a potential developer for the purpose of restricting or regulating the development or use of land.
Consequently there appears no reason why regulations could not be included in such an agreement which prevent or restrict odour emissions, particularly as the 1971 Act provides that a local planning authority may take into account the ‘improvement of the physical environment’.
Such agreements would be particularly useful in ensuring a ‘Cordon Sanitaire’ or ‘Buffer Zone’in which no residential development or odour sensitive uses will be permitted, around existing sewage disposal works for example , or other odour emitters.
They would also be useful in requiring odour emitters to install equipment to reduce or prevent emissions.
The problem with such agreements lies in their enforceability, or lack of it, against successors in title.
Positive regulations requiring the developer to install equipment to prevent, and or abate odour pollution would probably be unenforceable as s.52(2), which overcomes the limitations of privity of contract, does so by the fiction of placing the local authority in the same position as a landowner entitled to enforce a  convenant against an adjoining landowner.
This merely enables the local authority to rely on the private law concepts relating to the passing of the burden of covenants attached to land, i.e. the burden of a covenant cannot pass to successors in title at common law,Austerberry v Oldham Corporation , and only restrictive covenants, as opposed to positive covenants may pass under the equitable rules, first proposed in Tulk v Moxhay.
The result is that only those negative regulations, restrictive in nature, contained in a s.52 agreement may be enforced against successors in title who have notice of such an agreement.
This is so, unless an alternative broader interpretation is  put on s.52(2).
Lord Denning in Gee v National Trust favoured such an interpretation when construing a similar provision of the National Trust Act 1937.
In practice reliance is placed on s.33 of the Local Government (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982 which provides the local authority with an express power to enforce positive obligations against successors in title.
A clause is commonly added therefore to the s.52 agreement which permits reliance on the 1982 Act.
Section 52 agreements can be advantageous both to the developer and the local authority, but there is a drawback in that if one of the parties, usually the developer or his successor in title, wish to alter the agreement, then in the absence of consensus, the only way is by application to the Lands Tribunal under s.84 of the Law of Property Act 1925.
At the present time the Tribunal may only concern itself with the modification and discharge of restrictive covenants, therefore only the restrictive obligations contained in the agreement.
Following the case of Re Beecham Group Ltd's Application there seems to be a good chance of any restriction contained in a s.52 agreement being modified or discharged on application; the Tribunal in that case modifying a restriction contained in a s.52 agreement to allow development, on the basis that the local authority would suffer no injury if the restriction was modified.
If this reasoning is applied generally then in almost every case the local authority, not actually owning the land to be benefited by the restriction, will not be injured by modification or discharge.
Changes have been recommended by the Law Commission in their tenth report [1984]4 —‘The transfer of land-the law of positive and negative covenants’.
New and unified rules governing both positive and restrictive covenants are proposed, with land obligations', new interests in land, being proposed for the future which could be modified or  extinguished by the Lands Tribunal.
If implemented this would remove one of the  criticisms of a s.52 agreement which can be a useful tool in achieving, amongst other things, odour prevention and abatement.
In 1981 the DoE Advisory Group investigated the use of s.52 agreements, and expressed the view that, with some exceptions, the practice of using them to bargain for planning gain was unacceptable.
This in turn led to DoE Circular 22/83 which recommends that planing gain is only reasonable where it can be said to fairly and directly relate to the actual development being proposed.
Therefore the use of s.52 agreements to achieve odour prevention and abatement would seem to be unaffected and still legitimate.
Need for co-operation
The need for co-operation between planning authorities and pollution control agencies is essential at both strategic and development planning levels if odour emissions are to be controlled effectively, a view recognised by the DoE in Circular 43/76 which states:
‘If nuisance from smell of either animal waste processing or any other industry is to be minimised, good planning is important.’
In practice the majority of planning authorities do consult the relevant environmental health department either directly or indirectly by an informal system whereby all planning applications are automatically scrutinised by environmental health officers, thus enabling them to comment, when the need arises, on any with prospective odour problems.
HM Air Pollution Inspectors are also consulted in the event a planning application concerns or affects a works registered under the Alkali, etc., Works Regulation Act 1906 (as amended).
Perhaps there is an argument for clarifying and formalising this co-operation.
NON-LEGAL CONTROLS
The Ombudsmen
An avenue open to persons aggrieved, who feel they have suffered injustice because of maladministration is to ask for their complaints to be looked into by either the Local Commissioner or the Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration.
The Parliamentary Commissioner Act of 1967 established the office of Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration, whose main task is to investigate complaints of citizens who claim to have suffered injustice in consequence of  maladministration by central government departments, which include the Health and Safety Executive and the Department of the Environment, in the exercise of their administrative functions.
Similarly the Local Government Act of 1974 established Local Commissioners for Administration to investigate complaints of injustice caused by maladministration by local government departments, which would include for example environmental health, planning and waste disposal departments.
Maladministration refers to the way in which decisions have been taken covering administrative action or inaction based on or influenced by improper considerations or conduct.
Arbitrariness, malice, or bias are examples of improper  considerations.
Neglect, unjustifiable delay, incompetence, failure to observe relevant rules or procedures, or failure to take relevant considerations into account, are some examples of improper conduct.
Failure to take formal action under the relevant legislation or unjustifiable delay in doing so, in respect of obnoxious odours which amount to a statutory nuisance or for breach of a condition attached to a site licence for waste disposal, may be deemed to amount to maladministration if they cause injustice such as injury to health or depreciation in the value of property.
Whether maladministration has in fact occurred is a matter for the Commissioners to decide.
Complaint may be made by an individual or by a body of persons, for example a residents association and should be directed in writing to an M.P.
for referral to the Parliamentary Commissioner or a Local Councillor for referral to the Local Commissioner, although it must be remembered that the Local Commissioner can only investigate after a complaint has been brought to the attention of the authority complained against and they have had a reasonable time to reply.
Certain matters are not subject to investigation.
Normally amongst these is included any matter where the complainant has or had a right of appeal or right to go to the courts but has not used it.
This may be relevant where the ground for claiming maladministration is failure of a local authority to take formal action in respect of odours amounting to a statutory nuisance, in view of the fact that an individual has the right to take summary action under s.99 of the Public Health Act 1936 in respect of a statutory nuisance.
However, a Commissioner may still investigate if he is satisfied that it is not reasonable to expect the complainant to use or have used this right.
So for example where the odour effects a number of people this may fall within that category.
There is also a time bar: the Commissioners may only investigate a complaint if it is made within 12 months from the date the aggrieved person first had notice of the matter complained or, but a Commissioner has power to accept a complaint outside the time limit if he considers that there are special circumstances which make it proper to do so.
When a complaint is received it is normally handled as follows:
(a)
It will be examined to decide whether it is within the
(b)
If it proves to be outside his scope, a letter of explanation will be sent to the complainant and to the member who referred the complaint.
(c)
If a complaint is received directly from a member of the public, or if further information about the complaint is needed, the matter will be taken up in correspondence.
(d)
Before beginning to investigate a complaint, the Commissioner will tell the complainant and the member that he has accepted it for investigation.
He will also notify the authority and any person named in the complaint as having taken or authorised the action complained of, giving them an opportunity to comment on any allegations contained in the complaint.
(e)
In the case of a Local Commissioner, if at any stage in the investigation he decides that the action complained of also concerns a government department or part of the national health service (e.g. a hospital) he will consult the Parliamentary Commissioner or the  Health Service Commissioner as the case may be.
If he thinks it advisable that the complainant should ask for an investigation by either of those other Commissioners he may inform him of the steps necessary to do so.
(f)
The investigation is carried out in private, the Local Commissioner having the power to examine all the internal papers of the department complained against and the power to take written and oral evidence from anyone who in his view can provide relevant information.
The Parliamentary Commissioner can examine the relevant departmental files and has wide powers to call witnesses, neither is his investigation restricted by the doctrine of crown privilege.
(g)
When the investigation is completed a report giving the Commissioner's findings will be sent to the complainant, the member, the authority or department concerned and any person complained against.
A report will not normally give the name or other identifying details of the complainant or of any person involved in the matter.
Where a report finds that injustice has been caused to the complainant by maladministration, a local authority if responsible must consider the report and inform the Local Commissioner what action it proposes to take, but it is not legally bound to follow any particular course of action.
If the Health and Safety Executive or the Department of Environment is responsible then the Parliamentary Commissioner may lay a special report before Parliament.
He cannot alter a departmental decision or award compensation but may suggest an appropriate remedy to the appropriate Minister.
In one case a complaint was made on behalf of a Residents Association to the Parliamentary Commissioner alleging maladministration by the Department of Environment and the Health and Safety Executive at an inquiry into two appeals against the refusal of a Metropolitan Borough  Council to give planning permission for the erection of a waste material incineration plant and an energy recovery plant.
The council and others had objected to the proposed development and the council had refused planning permission on the ground that the proposals would result in an intensification of air pollution in an area where the level of existing pollution was high and would create additional health hazards to residents of the area.
The firm, a manufacturer of additives for lubricants and petroleum fuels, appealed to the Secretary of State for the Environment against the council's decision, and he appointed an inspector to hold a local inquiry into the appeals at which the District Alkali and Clean Air Inspector (now HM Industrial Air Pollution Inspector) gave expert evidence.
In her report to the Secretary of State the inspector concluded that the additional pollution would be small and that the design of the plant was such that the emission should he odourless, the sulphur dioxide properly dispersed, the grit and dust unharmful to local residents.
The Secretary of State accepted the inspector's conclusion and recommendation to allow the appeals.
The complainant maintained (amongst other things) that the District Alkali Inspector should have offered in his evidence the fact that a similar plant owned by the firm had been mentioned in the Chief Alkali Inspector's Annual Reports for 1962 to 1965 as a result of a complaint about a ‘tom cat smell’.
The inspector and the Health and Safety Executive denied knowing of such a plant.
The Parliamentary Commissioner however said, ‘I have seen the reports in question and have noted that there was a reference to an industrial process which caused such offence, but there was no mention of an incineration plant, nor was the appellant firm involved’.
He concluded:
‘I can deeply appreciate the complainant's disappointment at the outcome of the inquiry after the council and others had objected to the proposed development.
But I have found no evidence of maladministration by the DoE or the Health and Safety Executive and in the circumstances  I do not question the merits of the decision allowing the appeals.’
In another case the Parliamentary Commissioner investigated complaints alleging failure on the part of the Health and Safety Executive, to take legal proceedings in order to abate obnoxious odours emanating from a nearby factory which produced methyl methacrylate monomer, a registered works under the Alkali, etc., Works Regulation Act 1906.
The complaint of maladministration was not upheld, the Commissioner finding that the complainant's grievance essentially turned around the meaning of the phrase ‘best practicable means’ the complainant being of the opinion that any emission of obnoxious odours provided grounds for legal proceedings, whereas the Health and Safety Executive, while accepting there was an occasional emission which produced some slight smell, did not consider that this constituted an offence.
The Commissioner pointed out that it was not for him to decide how statutes should be interpreted but he was satisfied that the complaints about odours from the factory had not been ignored.
ODOURS IN THE WORKPLACE
So far we have been concerned with odours which affect the public at large, but consideration must also be given to the protection afforded by the law, to employees and other workers who may experience odours in their places of work, whether in a factory, office, shop, or educational establishment, etc.
Much has been written on the topic of occupational health and hygiene and it is recognised that the provision of an adequate and tolerable physical working environment and the promotion of a general feeling of well being among the workforce, is not only important in preventing occupational disease, but in the prevention of accidents.
To what extent occupational odours pose a problem is not known, perhaps due to the fact that workers often become accustomed to odours after continued exposure.
What is clear is that once again it is important to distinguish between the perception of odours per se , here on in referred to as ‘odour nuisance’, which may be a source of annoyance to workers and the existence of toxic odorants in the working environment.
Quite often however the question of whether materials are merely an annoyance or in fact a danger to health is a quantitative one.
The Factory Inspectorate, part of the Health and Safety  Executive and local authorities, responsible for the enforcement of the present health and safety at work laws, would be mainly concerned with the latter, being a source of danger to the health of employees; the control of odour nuisance, whilst not ignored being accorded a lower priority, as the legal requirements concerning occupational hygiene are mainly orientated towards the degree of risk i.e. the harmful effects on the body, arising out of exposure to toxic materials in the form of fumes, gases and dust.
These contaminants can be measured in their airborne state and evaluated against the Threshold Limit Value (TLV) for the particular substance.
TLV's are published by the Health and Safety Executive in their Guidance Notes.
They refer to airborne concentrations of materials to which the majority of people may be repeatedly exposed without adverse effects.
They represent acceptable exposure levels based on eight hours a day for five days a week.
Therefore, exposure to concentrations over and above the TLV may be permitted where the number of hours of exposure is less than those referred to above.
TLV's form a non-statutory system.
They are not legally defined values but are recognised as levels of good working practice and have the advantage of being easily amended if necessary in the light of new evidence as to the toxicity of a particular substance.
They may however be introduced in legal proceedings under The Factories Act 1961, the associated Codes of Regulations, and under The Health and Safety at Work Act 1974.
Although TLV's are not designed with nuisance, particularly odour nuisance in mind, adhering to the Health and Safety Executive Guidelines will prevent obnoxious odours in the workplace where the level at which the odour of a particular substance can be perceived, that is where its odour threshold detection value, is higher than its TLV.
Furthermore, should the level of perception of a toxic substance be lower than its TLV, then the odour is in effect acting as a warning to the workforce.
The present legislation on health and safety at work is contained in the following:
(1)
The Factories Act 1961, and
(2)
The Offices, Shops and Railway Premises Act 1963, both taking effect within the framework of the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974.
(3)
The Health and Safety at Work Act 1974.
(4)
Regulations and Approved Codes of Practice made under those statutes.
The Factories Act 1961
The health provisions, contained in Part 1 of the Factories Act 1961 provide that every factory must be kept clean and free from effluvia arising from any drain, sanitary convenience or nuisance.
Accumulation of dirt and refuse, often a source of odour nuisance, must be removed from floors daily and at least once a week floors must be cleaned.
Moreover, the inside of walls and ceilings must either be washed or painted at regular intervals.
By s.4(1) workrooms must be adequately ventilated by the circulation of fresh air.
In this way any potential odour nuisance may be dispersed, but as a method of controlling  any toxic odorants present in the air by reducing them to their TLV's, it is most unreliable and not recommended as a method of control unless the concentration of contaminants is low.
Whilst s.4 is concerned with dilution of existing contaminants, s.63(1) (reproduced below) is concerned with preventing contaminants from getting into circulation at all.
‘Removal of dust or fumes :
63. —(1): In every factory in which, in connection with any process carried on, there is given off any dust or fume or other impurity of such a character and to such extent as to be likely to be injurious or offensive to the persons employed, or any substantial quantity of dust of any kind, all practicable measures shall be taken to protect the persons employed against inhalation of the dust or fume or other impurity and to prevent its accumulation in any workroom, and in particular, where the nature of the process makes it practicable, exhaust appliances shall be provided and maintained, as near as possible to the point of origin of the dust or fume or other impurity, so as to prevent its entering the air of any workroom.’
The phrase ‘likely to be injurious or offensive’, would seem to indicate that ‘all practicable measures’ should be taken to protect employees, not only from toxic odorants, by reducing them to their TLVs, or below, but also from odour nuisance.
However, in Coote v Eastern Gas Board , Byrne, J. decided that regard must be had to the nature of the industry in question, thus the plaintiff, a gas worker, could not complain about the ‘usual’ smell of gas.
The requirement to take ‘all practicable measures’ involves more than taking reasonable care: it means doing what is feasible in the light of the state of knowledge existing at the time of the alleged breach of duty, thus knowledge as to the availability of abatement methods and the  likelihood of the dust or fumes to cause injury or offence is relevant.l
Breach of any of the provisions of the Factories Act 1961 may give rise to either a civil action which may be initiated by an employee for breach of statutory duty, or criminal proceedings in the magistrate's court initiated by the Factory Inspectorate.
However in view of the emphasis on prevention rather than punishment, the most likely form of action to be taken by the Factory Inspectorate is the service of an improvement notice to the factory occupier requiring certain measures to be taken, within a specified time, to achieve compliance with the Act's provisions.
Not all places of work are controlled by this Act, it only applies, as its name suggests, to ‘factories’.
Broadly this expression means any premises in which or within the close or curtilage or precincts of which, persons are employed in any process for or incidental to any of the purposes, outlined in s.175 of the Act, provided the work carried on there is part of a trade or for profit.
Offices, Shops and Railway Premises Act 1963
This Act fills part of the gap left by the Factories Act 1961 by regulating the health, safety and welfare of employees in offices, shops and railway premises, all of which are widely defined.’
The relevant provisions which have the effect of preventing odour nuisances in the workplace are sections 4 and 7, both of which impose similar duties on the employer concerning cleanliness and ventilation, as does the Factories Act 1961.
Enforcement is delegated to local authorities (with the exception of railway premises).
The Health and Safety at Work Act 1974
The Health and Safety at Work Act 1974 is the most far reaching of all the statutes having the widest impact on working conditions, its aim being to secure the health, safety and welfare of all at work wherever they may be employed.
It is envisaged that the existing health and safety regulations, the Factories Act 1961, the Offices, Shops and Railway Premises Act 1963 and the Agriculture (Safety Health and Welfare Provisions) Act 1956 will all be gradually replaced by revised and updated legislation in the form of regulations and codes of practice.
Its enactment followed the recommendations of the Robens Committee on Safety and Health at Work, published in July 1972 whose main concern was health and Safety in the workplace and which stressed the need to involve both management and employees to achieve that aim.
No direct reference was made by the committee to nuisances, other than noise nuisance, yet if employees want a working environment free from odour nuisance there are provisions in the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974 to enable them, with the aid of their safety representatives or safety committee to achieve this.
The relevant provisions are contained in s.2 of this Act, in particular s.2(2) (e) which refers to the provision and maintenance of a working environment for employees, ‘that is, so far as is reasonably practicable, safe, without risks to health, and adequate as regards facilities and arrangements for their welfare at work’.
However, the test of what is ‘reasonably practicable’ as opposed to‘practicable’, is not just whether the measures taken are financially or physically possible but the degree of risk must be balanced against the sacrifice involved.
If the sacrifice is disproportionately heavy in relation to the risk, then the measures are not ‘reasonably practicable’.
Odours from outside the workplace
Finally, it must be remembered that where odour nuisance arises from outside the workplace, affecting employees inside the workplace, for example from a nearby factory or due to manure spreading in the surrounding fields, then sections 92 to 100 of the Public Health Act 1936 will apply should the odour amount to a statutory nuisance, since the Local Government (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982 amended s.92(1) (d) of the Public Health Act 1936 to ‘any dust or effluvia caused by a trade, business or manufacture or process which are  prejudicial to health or a nuisance’ deleting the words [to the inhabitants of the neighbourhood ].
Alternatively, where relevant, any of the indirect controls mentioned in Chapter 5 may be relied upon.
TECHNIQUES FOR ODOUR ABATEMENT AND PREVENTION
The law, as we have seen, via planning legislation can, by careful siting of new industry and new residential development, minimise any potential odour nuisance.
The common law and legislation further require that best practicable means be taken to abate any existing odour nuisance, the ultimate sanction being closure of the premises, imposed only where all other methods of abatement have failed.
Aware of the need for effective practical techniques of odour control, in June 1971, the Department of the Environment set up a working party with the following terms of reference: ‘To examine the problems of unpleasant odours emitted by offensive and selected other trades, and to make recommendations about the best practicable means for their minimisation and suppression’.
The first report of that working party assessed the problems in Great Britain, whilst the second report, published in 1975, by Warren Spring Laboratory, Department of Industry, is a comprehensive summary to best present practice in odour measurement, prevention and abatement as well as planning, design and operation of factories and installations liable to produce unpleasant odours.
It is an invaluable source of information to those attempting to prevent or seeking to abate odour problems.
Following those reports co-operative research into the control of odours continued through the auspices of the  working party, the CBI and local authority associations, in which many companies, trade associations and local authorities participated, resulting in a series of reports published by Warren Spring Laboratory summarising the work carried out there during that three year research programme.
Again these reports provide valuable information for those involved in odour control.
With particular reference to agricultural odours advances have been made in odour abatement since the publication of the Working Party Report and for the best current practice on odour control reference should be made to reports by the Agricultural Development and Advisory Service of the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
Further information is available from the Royal Agricultural Society.
Odour control — Difficulties
Odour control is made more difficult due to:
(1)
The wide range of odour sources.
(2)
The need to identify the point source.
Where an odour has multi-sources this problem is exacerbated especially when it is created by two or more chemicals coming together neither of which individually amount to a nuisance.
One unusual illustration of this is provided by Baskerville Technical Services.
After a thorough investigation as to the source of a phenolic type odour being generated within a newly completed  building, several possible sources were identified including foam-backed carpeting laid on concrete floors, which under certain conditions appears to generate this type of odour.
(3)
The low odour threshold detection level of some odorants, particularly the notorious volatile organic sulphur compounds.
(4)
The old age of some industrial plants, many of which were not designed for their present use.
It is often impossible to totally abate odours from such plants by installing odour abatement equipment without completely redesigning the plant as a whole, which usually means the construction of new buildings, with the consequent need for planning permission.
(5)
The position of the plant.
This too is linked with the problem of old age, as many older plants are situated either in built-up areas, or in poor areas geographically where the topography of the site and weather conditions, particularly temperature inversion, hampers the escape of exhaust gases into the atmosphere and in doing so can result in the intensification of an odour for short periods.
Choice of control method
Many factors influence the choice of control method some of which are:
(1)
The capital and operating costs of any method.
However important this is, it ought to be born in mind that what may appear to be the cheapest at the time may not necessarily be the most effective in solving a particular odour problem and consequently not the cheapest in the long term.
(2)
Age of the plant.
As mentioned earlier, the methods of abatement capable of achieving effective control are governed to some extent by the age of the plant, the older plants probably giving rise to most difficulties.
(3)
The quantity and emission rate of the odorous effluent.
Some abatement methods are more suitable where high emission rates are involved and vice versa.
(4)
Source of the odour.
To assist in reaching an informed decision as to which control method is the best one in respect of any particular problem, expert advice is well worthwhile as often it is a matter of trial and error with the consequent need to set up a pilot plant plus experience of similar cases is very beneficial.
The Departments of Industry and Environment, the Health and Safety Executive and local authority environmental health departments are usually willing to offer advice as are private consultants.
Once again with particular reference to agricultural odours the Agricultural Development and Advisory Service (ADAS) Farm Waste Unit advises farmers on the best current practice on odour control.
Whatever control method is chosen it must be rigorously adhered to and where specialised equipment is installed the design is all important, as is the correct operation and regular maintenance of such equipment in order to minimise any breakdown and subsequent odour problem.
Moreover, good housekeeping and husbandry practices in respect of storing, transporting and handling materials which are or may become odorous must not be overlooked in any type of trade or industry, whether or not additional odour abatement methods are required.
Methods of Control
Methods to control odours from many sources are being developed and refined all the time.
Valuable information as to the different types of method  available and more particularly the best present practice recommended for certain specified trades and industries is available from various reports, in particular the Odour Reports and subsequent research reports published by the working party and ADAS mentioned earlier.
The aim of this chapter is merely to draw the attention of the reader to some of the main methods of odour abatement currently available, bearing in mind that successful abatement may require a combination of the methods described below.
Methods available include the following:
(1)
Masking and Counteraction.
(2)
Good housekeeping and husbandry.
(3)
Absorption.
(4)
Adsorption.
(5)
Dispersion through tall chimneys.
(6)
Thermal destruction.
(7)
Catalytic Incineration.
(8)
Oxidation other than by Air.
(9)
Filtration and condensation.
(10)
Ventilation.
For best current abatement methods of agricultural odours see reports by ADAS, mentioned earlier.
Masking and Counteraction
Odour masking and counteraction can be regarded as two distinct methods of odour abatement, although both processes often take place together in practice.
Masking aims to eliminate the perception of an unpleasant odour by superimposing a second odour to create a more pleasant overpowering sensation, whereas counteraction is the mutual diminution of two odours, involving the addition of a second odour to cancel the one complained of, so that when ‘smelled’ together they are almost odourless.
The latter phenomenon has been known for some time, Zwaardemaker recording several ‘cancelling pairs’ as far back as 1875, which included:
rubber and balsam of tolu
wax and balsam of tolu
wax and rubber
cedarwood and rubber
In practice the selection of masking and counteracting odours requires much experience in order to avoid further complaints about any resultant odour which could be equally unpleasant, to some people, as the one complained of.
As control methods they have the advantage of low capital outlay, although there is the ongoing need to purchase the masking and counteracting agent, as and when necessary, and case of application, being particularly valuable where other methods cannot be applied.
For example in the open air or where a temporary problem necessitates urgent remedy.
They are not recommended for odours arising from  toxic or inflammable gases, such as hydrogen sulphide, formaldehyde or chlorine, since the odour of such gases is a warning.
The manufacturers of these products recognise this suggesting it is nevertheless possible to reduce such odours to an acceptable level without neutralising them completely.
The Working Party in their report commented that they would like to see more practical research into the effectiveness of this method as on the basis of the published data alone, available at that time, it was not possible to make an impartial judgement or a best present practice recommendation.
Some typical applications of counteractants recommended by the makers are provided below.
(1)
Cooked, burnt or decayed food (animal, fish, fowl, vegetable and grain products).
(2)
Human and animal occupancy odours, waste and sewage.
(3)
Chemical and petrochemical process odours such as sulphides, mercaptans, amines, plastic monomers and polymers, rubber compounds, textile fibres, resins, inks, dyes, intermediates and solvents.
(4)
Metal and mineral processing odours.
(5)
Smoke odours resulting from fires.
Good Housekeeping and Husbandry
Odour nuisance can be considerably reduced by adhering to good housekeeping practices and often byelaws are made  by local authorities under s.108 of the Public Health Act 1936 to ensure they are followed at all times.
Simple measures such as keeping doors and windows closed, providing adequate containers for odorous material, covering the contents, refrigeration where necessary and the careful disposal of odorous or potentially odorous waste, are just a few preventative measures which ought to be taken in all trades, but particularly so in the animal byproduct industry, where putrescible matter is concerned.
One local authority in tackling the problem of odour nuisance from maggot farms in their area not only insisted on the installation of catalytic incineration equipment but on disposal of the sawdust waste, which still contained some maggots after sieving, by bagging and subsequent incineration in the municipal incinerator, instead of burying the waste as had been done previously.
Apparently complete abatement of the odour has been achieved and other nuisances such as flies and vermin caused by the burial of the waste eradicated.
Good husbandry is important in reducing farming odours to acceptable levels.
A recent survey on the incidence of agricultural odour nuisance has indicated that land spreading operations are the most frequent source of complaint, followed by animal housing and slurry/manure storage facilities.
Odour nuisance is sometimes also related to silage handling and storage and to processing and handling other feedstuffs such as swill boiling.
Cleanliness and hygiene are obviously important as is the siting of new animal houses or manure stores  in order to obtain maximum dispersion of the odour.
In addition good building design enabling easy and regular removal of waste  prevents odours from forming.
For example it is reported that overstocking in litter-based poultry will result in an overloaded offensive litter; whilst understocking may also be undesirable, since this may result in a dry and dusty litter which may help disperse the odour over a wide area, unless dust filters are installed.
With regard to the storage of manure, the effect on odour development depends on whether the manure is in solid or liquid form, and whether it is stored aerobically, that is with a sufficient supply of oxygen, or anaerobically, that is in septic conditions, in the absence of oxygen.
Solid manure stores, carefully sited and tended, are less likely to give rise to nuisance problems than is liquid storage in the form of a slurry.
It is usual for a crust to form on the surface of the storage tank, the sludge settling to the bottom with the liquid in the middle.
This crust prevents odours escaping and hence reduces odour emission.
Unfortunately, its formation can cause problems, the solids sometimes remaining unpumpable on the bottom of the tank.
To avoid this the slurry can be agitated and treated aerobically using one of the commercial aerators available ensuring intimate mixing with air.
The oxygen requirement and hence energy consumption and running costs for effective odour control depends upon slurry residence time and the volume treated.
The disadvantage, however, is that odour is regenerated if the treated slurry is stored following aeration.
Floating plastic ball blankets which lie on the surface in the same way as a crust have been tried, the manufacturers claiming they have on occasions been beneficial in reducing odours presumably by reducing evaporation, although the precise reason is not apparently known.
A further reported development has been the addition of enzymes to slurry.
These products, claim the manufacturers, prevent crust formation and solids settlement without the need for agitation, thus permitting easy and total emptying of the slurry store, digesting the solid material and biochemically breaking down the odorous chemical molecules.
Alternatively anaerobic digestion of the slurry by bacteria at a temperature of about 35°C has been shown to be effective in alleviating odour emission.
This involves the controlled conversion of the complex odorous organic molecules into much simpler molecules, ultimately forming biogas, a mixture of methane (60–70%), carbon-dioxide (approximately 30%) some hydrogen sulphide and other trace products.
This has the advantage of apparently allowing storage of digested slurries without regeneration of offensive odours.
As regards land spreading, the equipment available must be considered carefully and  guidelines are available as to the best time to spread the manure, in order to minimise the possibility of causing a nuisance.
These are summarised below in Tables 1 and 2.
In the tables a rating of 1 is given to conditions in which most annoyance is likely and a rating of 5 for those conditions in which the weather will give most help in dispersing and diluting odours.
When good husbandry or storage techniques fail then it may become necessary to carry out control measures by the installation of appropriate additional equipment, the choice of equipment/control method being decided only after seeking advice and taking all the circumstances into account.
Dust filters and biological air filters appear to be capable of achieving considerable success in removing odours but can be fairly expensive, and new developments are taking place all the time, for example compost soil filters have been developed mainly in Germany and are being investigated by Warren Springs Laboratory.
Absorption
Absorption is commonly used as a method of odour abatement where odour nuisance is the result of a gas stream becoming contaminated with low concentrations of mixtures of compounds such as fatty acids, ammonia, amines, sulphur  dioxide, and perhaps to a lesser extent sulphides and organic sulphur compounds,i.e .
in general those compounds, organic or inorganic which are soluble in a liquid, usually water.
Simple physical  absorption requires large quantities of water and its effectiveness depends upon the solubility of the odorous compound(s), which in turn depends, not only on the absorption co-efficient of the system concerned but on the surface area for gas/liquids interaction and the gas-phase driving force.
Several designs of absorption towers are available which incorporate various types of gas/liquid counteracting equipment.l Absorption is not suitable therefore where the odorous contaminant is only slightly soluble or where the odour threshold detection concentration is particularly low.
Often performance of simple washing towers can be improved by the addition of small amounts, usually 1% weight/weight of chemical reactants, the most suitable being neutralizing agents and oxidising agents which will react with a wide range of malodorous compounds.
Neutralizing agents are usually either acids or alkalis which neutralize the odorous gas on impact, so for example acidic gases such as fatty acids, sulphur dioxide, chlorine, hydrogen-chloride and sulphides and mercaptans can to some extent be neutralized by contact with sodium hydroxide or sodium carbonate (both alkalis) whilst weak sulphuric acid or phosphoric acid for example can be used as a neutralizing media for alkaline gases such as ammonia or amines.
Care must be taken to select the correct neutralizing agent for the specific odorous gas to be treated and there are obvious difficulties when both acidic and alkaline compounds are present in the gas stream.
This is not uncommon.
Other compounds contributing to the odour may also be present which may not react with either an alkaline or acid  reagent.
It may then become necessary to use the neutralizing agent in conjunction with an oxidising agent.
Sodium hypochlorite, potassium permanganate, chlorine and chlorine dioxide are the most common oxidising agents added to water in scrubbing towers.
The use of ozone as a reactant in absorption systems is relatively new but one increasing in popularity as it reportedly requires lower dose rates and reaction times, is less susceptible to changes in water temperature and acidity or alkalinity and produces no harmful by-products.
Potassium permanganate has the disadvantage of producing solid manganese dioxide during the process of oxidation which can cause blockages and importantly where any of the chlorinated oxidising agents are used care needs to be taken when phenolic contaminants are present as there have been instances of chlorophenols being formed which in turn produce most obnoxious odours sometimes toxic which are extremely difficult to break down.
Absorption or wet scrubbing as it is often called has however the disadvantage of having to dispose of the liquid effluent obtained, which may itself require treatment before disposal, and has led to the comment that we may be merely replacing one effluent problem by another by using this method.
The presence of particulate matter and/or condensible fractions in the odorous gas stream must be removed, normally by filtration and condensation respectively, before the main absorption process, and in doing so often partial abatement of the odour nuisance is achieved at that stage.
Typical industries utilizing absorption as a method of odour control are metallurgical industries, plastic/production, waste incineration plants, animal by-product industries, and it is reported that absorption scrubber units have been fitted with a fair degree of success on plant processing meat for pet food manufacture and for the production of animal feedstuffs.
A pilot-scale packed absorber has been designed and is being used to investigate the absorption and reaction of various odorous compounds with different reactants, enabling the performance of this type of absorption equipment to be predicted.
Adsorption
In simple terms adsorption is the attraction of molecules onto the surface of a solid.
Consequently, the more odorous molecules adsorbed, the more the odour is removed.
Several adsorbents are available including silica gel, alumina, specially developed resins and activated carbon, the latter being the most important for odour removal, not being affected to the same extent by the presence of water vapour as are the other adsorbents.
It is however usual to remove both particulate matter and as much water vapour as possible from the air or gas stream by filtration and condensation, before the adsorbent stage.
Activated carbon, is formed by treating carbonaceous residues of coal, wood and shell in order to obtain a carbon with a surface covered both internally and externally with tiny pores of molecular dimension, which trap the odorous molecules yet allow free passage of other gases.
Careful manufacturing techniques can vary the pore sizes and the  number of pores so that a whole range of carbons with different adsorptive properties can be obtained.
It is available in granular form, in various sizes and is usually used in deep beds, sited as near as possible to the odour source and can be obtained as a charcoal cloth.
The manufacturers of this cloth, which has been developed fairly recently list among its advantages flexibility and an effectiveness higher than granulated charcoal, recommending it be used to eliminate obnoxious gases and odours in industry and from restaurants, food processing plants and homes.
Activated carbon tends to be used to treat low concentrations of highly odorous compounds or large concentrations of lesser odorous compounds which may or may not be toxic.
As a method it appears not to be favoured for the removal of large concentrations of highly odorous compounds, which is necessary in the animal by-product industry for example.
This is due to the very limited life time of the adsorbent in this situation and the cost of its replacement is considered to be too high.
Nevertheless adsorption may have a use, albeit more limited, in that industry, namely as a final method of odour removal following exhaustive pretreatment of the odorous air by other methods such as wet scrubbing or oxidation.
When the adsorbent becomes saturated with odour molecules its adsorptive capacity is greatly reduced and it becomes necessary to regenerate the adsorbent, usually by treatment with superheated steam.
Care must be taken during this process, firstly not to liberate the contaminants in gaseous form and so cause a repetition of the odour nuisance  in a more concentrated form, and secondly, where steam is used, to minimise the quantity of liquid effluent formed by condensation, which will require disposal.
Dispersion through tall chimneys
Dispersal of pollutants via tall chimneys is a well known, acceptable method to control, aimed at ensuring that certain fixed concentrations of pollutants at ground level are not exceeded.
Where dispersion is used as a method of odour control, the aim is to ensure the odour is diluted with sufficient air such that the ground level concentration of the odour pollutant is below its threshold detection concentration.
Much work has been done and formulae developed to enable the dilution effect of chimney height to be calculated.
However, it has been pointed out by Dr. B. Leadbeater, that great care must be taken before these formulae are used to determine the efficiency of dilution for abatement of odour nuisance, for in order to achieve concentrations below the threshold detection levels some odorants would need diluting by a factor in order of 6,000, so unless very high chimneys are contemplated this method only provides a limited answer.
In one instance however the erection of a 100 foot chimney was successful in easing odour problems from a sugar factory, which had been a source of annoyance to nearby residents for over 30 years.
Siting the chimney, for which planning permission will be required, is still all important for it to be effective, as the release of pollutants into the atmosphere depends to some extent on the topography of the site.
Siting in a valley or, as in one case, between two slag heaps can result in eddies forming and prevent effective dispersion.
Thermal destruction
Odour nuisance is often due to mixtures of organic compounds, many of which can be removed from the air or gas stream by simple combustion, on burning producing oxides of carbon and water which are odourless.
It is claimed that this method of control is the most simple.
effective, permanent, and not beset by secondary effluent problems, a drawback of wet scrubbing and condensation techniques; but there are disadvantages.
Not least of these is the need to achieve complete combustion and consequent complete oxidation of the contaminants, as partial oxidation can result in the production of intermediate chemical compounds with far more offensive odours than the original substances.
Saturated hydrocarbons can burn to aldehydes, alcohols to organic acids, and aromatics to unsaturated compounds which are pungent and irritating.
Furthermore, some final combustion products e.g. oxides of sulphur and nitrogen are odorous and will probably require dispersion via a tall chimney, depending on the quantity formed.
To achieve complete combustion, in most cases, high temperatures in the order of 600–900°C, for not less than 0.3 seconds are required, in order to ignite and burn the odorous gases before they form the fine carbon of black smoke which is far more difficult to burn.
If the odorous compound is sufficiently concentrated it may be burned directly provided there is an adequate oxygen supply, but it is more usual to require  auxiliary oxygen and fuel supplies.
This leads to the second disadvantage, cost, due in particular to the high price of fuel.
To cut costs and save heat, the hot gases formed during combustion may be recycled and used to preheat the incoming effluent gases.
Research into this problem, into the physical and chemical parameters  affecting thermal destruction systems, their performance and design is being carried out with the aid of pilot plant experiments.
Catalytic Incineration
A catalyst is a substance which speeds up a chemical reaction but remains chemically unchanged at the end of that reaction.
The use of catalysts therefore enables the combustion of odorous organic compounds to be achieved using lower temperatures than those required by simple thermal destruction techniques, thus saving on the consumption of fuel and consequently costs.
Usually temperatures in the order of 300 to 500°C are required to achieve complete combustion.
Catalysts must have a high surface to volume ratio to be effective and a physical form which presents minimum resistance to high velocity gas streams and be capable of operating at high temperatures and often under high humidity conditions.
Those commercially available are made of noble metals, usually platinum or platinum alloys, supported on nichrome ribbons or honeycomb monoliths.
As a method it is apparently effective for removing odours from low volume, low rate gas or air streams containing a relatively high concentration of pollutants.
It has been used effectively for example in destroying odours from maggot farms which had caused a nuisance over a wide area, for more than twenty years and not even a tall chimney was necessary to remove the resultant exhaust gases.
Disadvantages are the high pressure drop which occurs across the catalyst, although modern designs are said to have reduced this, and poisoning of the catalyst due to heavy metals such as lead, arsenic, zinc etc. and phosphorus compounds, which reduces the effectiveness of the catalyst and makes its useful service life, in any particular application, difficult to predict.
In any case filtration of the odorous gas stream before treatment and regular cleaning of the catalyst by simple washing is advised in order to remove any dust and reduce the poisoning problem.
Oxidation other than by air
Typical oxidants, other than air, include sodium hypochlorite, potassium permanganate, chlorine, chlorine-dioxide and ozone, which are often used in conjunction with absorption techniques, being added in small quantities, to the scrubbing liquid which is usually water.
Ozone deserves particular mention, being a powerful oxidation agent, easily and cheaply produced, which is often mixed in gaseous form with the odorous gas stream, where it reacts, oxidising the organic odorous compounds.
The effectiveness of this method depends on the rate of reaction between the odorant and the ozone and is not suitable therefore for odour abatement where the rate of reaction is too slow.
Where this method is used care must be taken to avoid leakages and to keep to a minimum the concentration of residual ozone remaining at the end of the reaction, as it is quite toxic with a Threshold Limit Value of 0.1 ppm.
As well as contributing to the control of industrial odour, oxidising agents are also used to alleviate farming odours which arise during the storage of slurry.
Potassium permanganate and sodium hypochlorite being added to anaerobic waste to speed the digestion process.
Ventilation
In order to minimise odour pollution in the work place, legislation; requires adequate ventilation.
The type of ventilation necessary in any given situation varies from simple dilution techniques through local exhaust systems to personalised protection depending on the toxicity and concentration of the particular odorant.
Design of ventilation systems is a specialist field, and two studies by the Heating and Ventilation Research Association, contained in the Working Party Report on ‘Odours ’ indicate the main features to be observed in good ventilation systems design.