

THE CLOUDS GATHER
My first experience of service with HM forces was when I was just over three and a half.
It was a fine June morning in 1919.
My father had been demobilised from his service with HM Minesweepers which had sailed from Chatham dockyard.
He came home from a night's fishing with the news that King George V was having a review of the British fleet, and would sail through the Channel to Chatham at the head of his Navy, leading them in a dreadnought.
He had also asked that as many of HM fishing fleet as could do so should sail with him, as far as possible.
‘Yes,’ my father said, ‘I shall go and take you two girls if you are fit to be seen, and it won't do your mother any harm either.’
My grandfather, leading skipper James Veness, led us out of the then quite good harbour at Hastings, East Sussex in his fine lugger Jim and Eliza .
My mother had washed us, and dressed us in semi-sailor uniform.
She had also prepared a good packed lunch.
With the boats of the line, which included our little ship the Jim and Annie Rye, Sussex 146 we followed the luggers out to mid-channel.
It was flat calm.
Even mother was not sick.
Sure enough, over the horizon, beyond Beachy Head came the Navy.
We were far too good sailors to risk the wash of a dreadnought, but we steamed in near enough to see the sailors on the deck of one of the accompanying destroyers.
We yelled and waved the small Union Jacks mother had bought, and they shouted back their approval.
Then we saw that Boniface of Eastbourne had already headed for home, so we turned and started back for our good harbour.
The shore boys were ready for us with slides and ropes, and the local corporation carthorses were ready to be harnessed to the capstan ropes to pull up the beach the Jim and Eliza .
All through that summer we children were happy.
We got tired, and sunburnt as we ran over the beach stones without shoes.
Our little feet became hardened.
We were no trouble to our mother, who was at last recovering from the dreadful ‘flu’ that killed more folk than the 1914–18 war itself.
Later on, my nursing studies taught me it had been a form of bubonic plague.
We learnt to swim in the opaque water with our little slips sewn up half way seamwise.
The stored up sunshine and seasalt in our pores saved us from having another attack of the dreaded ‘flu that winter, although we had also used very much potassium permanganate in our sinks and drains, as the health authorities asked.
By day we went to school, and in the evenings our grandmother read to us from the Bible and Dr David Livingstone's journal.
Mother read us Arthur Mee's encyclopaedia.
We felt ourselves happy children.
This was as well for the 1930's came all too soon, with more depression, and in its wake an even more terrible war.
We joined first the Brownies and then the Girl Guides and Ranger Guides.
Nancy and Daisy in Ecclesbourne Glen Hastings after our sea trip
Another delight of our early days was to visit Pevensey.
We went with the other All Saints Juniors, and the Rector, the Rev. Edward  Penson M.A. made the arrangements.
We were introduced to the Mint House and, as Nancy and I listened, we learnt that money had been made there before the Royal Mint in London.
Scorning more than a small peppermint humbug, I went into the little church of St. Nicholas.
I am sure this had a Saxon beginning.
There is a sense of peace and security I still find there today.
We survived the General Strike of 1926, as we could exchange fish for other foods.
In 1926 I won a scholarship to Hastings High School for Girls, and was able to have four years of Grammar School education.
My father and his brother, who had both passed such exams could not do this, as there was no grant for clothing, books, etc.
The 1st Hastings Girl Guide and Ranger Troop, celebrate Captain  McDougall's birthday
From 1926–30 the country's fortunes fell lower.
In June 1930 I had to leave school and take work in a subscription library.
This was a real blow to me, as I had done well in form 5a at school and had to watch my luckier contemporaries going into the sixth form for another year  with the sure prospect of getting to teacher training college, or the luckiest of them all, to university.
It seems odd now that I was offered a place at Somerville College, Oxford, by my Headmistress on the strength of my extra-mural Diploma and my war service.
But I was married with a baby then, and, in 1949, this was considered my first duty.
Not till 1960 as a senior Lay Preacher did I set foot in Oxford, for a crash course at Mansfield.
At both the Girl Guide meetings and in the Rangers I was able to add to the knowledge of First Aid and General Nursing I had began when in 8th Hastings Brownies.
We had really good teachers from the local St John's Ambulance Brigade.
I also was able to attend the School Speech Day in the evening of one of my work days.
I received the Geography prize for my last year at school and also collected the certificates for my six other subjects taken at ‘A’ and ‘O’level standard.
I joined the Congregational Church.
The Minister at Robertson Street Church was the Rev Edward J. Hawkins BA (Hons) of Taunton, Exeter and Balliol.
He was a very good teacher of theology, but it was not long before we discovered that he had a dreadful fear that the depression that was sweeping Europe, as well as this country, was becoming the cause of another even worse war.
He had seen his earliest pupils, as had my father, either not come back at all, or come back broken men.
He joined a reconciliation organization to try to prevent this, but he had the wisdom to do his best to build up our characters in case peace was not possible.
He insisted that we met the ‘best’ people of the day.
Sir Wilfred Grenfell of Labrador came to speak at the White Rock Pavilion, Hastings, at his request.
To our church came such spiritual giants as Rev Reginald Barlett of Samoa, and the South Seas, Miss Mabel Shaw of Mbershi, whose adopted daughter is helping with modern Zambia, a housewoman from Dr Ida Scudder's hospital at Velore, central India and a missionary from China who knew about the conditions there and in Hong Kong, and who had also met Toyohiko Kagawa of Japan and knew that, in very truth, this son of a Geisha and who knows who, was a world figure, now pleading at the League of Nations for more attention to World Health than to armaments.
But neither our Minister, nor his programme was very popular with some of the older folk, and our pews began to empty.
I might have gone myself, but where else could I hear the music that accompanied the Congregational hymns and anthems?
Also it was expected of Rangers to attend divine worship.
By 1934, although we seemed happy enough at this still very poorly paid work and our recreation, the economic situation worsened.
I was dismissed from the library, but with a good reference and I was taken on the staff of the local Employment Exchange to ‘sign on’ the others.
Then even Civil Service temporary staff were dismissed.
Although I came third out of fifty folk competing for established status by examination, it was no good, only one candidate was accepted.
My father worked so hard that I did not have to give too much of my ‘dole’ money to housekeeping.
We heard that a Quaker lady, Miss Maud Gurney Tyler, was giving private shorthand classes for one shilling and sixpence a lesson.
Who knew but that someone might teach typewriting?
This could get one a good office job.
On my twenty-first birthday I walked out to Battle, to the grounds of the Abbey and thought very deeply.
Even shorthand-typing posts were becoming rare in Hastings.
It had to be London.
When I lost a temporary job in a local Traffic Office, I packed my things rather than face another bleak winter and with seven shillings and sixpence in my pocket I went to some friends in south-east London.
I queued at Bermondsey Employment Exchange with the charladies.
They thought I was really funny, but when my particulars were taken at the end of the week, I was again brought across the counter to sign other folk on.
How I really loved Bermondsey.
Of course there were again too many people chasing too few jobs, but they took it so well, from the older ones amongst the women, who shared out the few cleaning jobs that were going in the City of London, to the elderly Scottish temporary Clerk-in-Charge of the boy's department.
‘Mac,’ as of course he was known, would promise to bring down the wrath of almighty God on them if he found them in the Trocadero, Elephant and Castle, when they should be ‘capable of, and available for work,’as one had to be in those days.
Yet he would spend hours pleading with a reluctant employer to take on a boy he knew needed desperately to work.
Then came another chance.
The local Evening Institute, at a reasonable price, offered to teach anyone who asked, touch typing.
I signed on there, and although I was twice made redundant by more cuts in the temporary civil service list, and also from two private jobs that were only temporary, I kept up my ‘Rangering’ with the SRS active crew on Regents Park Lake, and on Sunday attended the City Temple (Congregational) Church.
Dr Leslie Weatherhead, its Minister, grew more and more concerned about the situation in Europe.
We received refugees from  Austria.
Hitler was obviously up to no good.
Our prayers for ‘God's ancient people, the Jews’ seemed not to be answered.
Overseas Mission was not so popular when we realized the heathen were nearer than we thought.
We studied Pastoral theology at depth with Dr Leslie.
We played badminton and sang folk songs, but we knew as we wept and prayed with refugees from Czechoslovakia that it would not be long before we were asked to make even the supreme sacrifice to stop, if we could, the Nazi menace.
There were the Pacifists, with an accent on the fist, as was once said.
There were the folk whose fathers had fought in 1914–18.
We girls were all preparing to nurse or become deaconesses in order to help with the pastoral life of the Church.
I got another breakthrough, my typing teacher told me that the London County Council were advertising for a Medical superintendent's Clerk at the Western Fever Hospital in Fulham SW6.
It was a job.
Why not try?
I did, and this time out of forty applicants I was successful.
I could offer one of my favourite subjects, Latin.
My employer would be Dr John Davy Rolleston, who was a scholar and had asked for this.
No-one else had this qualification.
It was with absolute truth that I answered one of the interviewers who asked ‘Are you a bird of passage by choice or do you really wish for a steady job?’
‘A steady job’ I replied.
How steady this was to be I could not have known.
I sometimes wake up and think I am still there.
INTO HOSPITAL
It was a fine clear sunny morning in the middle of September when I first walked into the grounds of the ‘Western.’
The gate porter brought me to the main entrance, and I was shown into a small pleasant office in the front of the administrative block.
Autumn, my favourite time of the year.
Everything nice happens to me in the autumn.
The leaves of the row of London plane trees across the tarmac from the office were just turning into bright yellow, the clouds were high, and the sky was blue.
There were still some drops on the leaves from the morning mist.
A girl, even younger than myself greeted me.
‘I am Miss Maine, my father is an officer in the London Fire Service.
I am here for about a fortnight whilst you settle in.
I'm thought too young for your job, besides I'm not sure I want to work here.
I did work a little while at first with the girl who had the job.
She was very nice, but she was thirty-eight and she died.’
Then, ‘Come on we'd better make a start.
Here are the letters.
Dr Rolleston will be over at ten, with Matron, and they will want to see you.
We started.
I was taught how to deal with the medical post, and how to file patients' records.
At 10 am precisely a bell rang and Miss Maine took me for introductions.
I could immediately guess why she was not too keen to stay.
The gentleman to whom I was presented was an upright, elderly man with piercing eyes and a chin that looked as if he would stand no nonsense.
Matron was equally dignified, with a towering cap of white linen and a penetrating gaze.
I was asked where I was living.
The Borough of Southwark was not thought a very suitable district for me to live.
But I was congratulated on my general knowledge of nursing, and the Latin.
Back with Miss Maine I was shown what was thought to be the trickiest of all the work I must do.
It was to take the information from the patients' records, their age, diagnosis, treatment etc.
And mark it  up on what were called ‘Powers Cards.’
I now know that these were really Powers-Sallmas cards and that this was the beginning of computer technique.
The amount of serum given had to balance with the amount given me by the Pharmacist from the records she kept of that given to Ward Sisters for use on the wards.
It just would not balance.
The serums were mainly calf lymph for the whooping cough patients, and the diphtheria anti-toxin given to the patients who needed this.
How this deficit occurred I shall never know, but in some strange way the Medical Clerk was held responsible.
I once fled in tears to the hospital Steward, but to no avail.
The figures were required each month, and it was at the third month that the worst discrepancy came.
The author dressed for a hospital party at The Western, 1941.
It was only this monthly accounting that worried me though, for I read every patient's case notes with avidity.
Who would have thought fevers were so interesting?
I loved it when a whole pile of notes met me in the morning and I did not surface till lunchtime.
Yes really, lunchtime, 12.30 pm.
Elevenses were not given to clerks then.
Nor were we provided with lunch, so I walked down into Walham Green, past pleasant little gardens full of the colour of autumn.
Michaelmas daisies, yellow tansy, roses still, even geraniums.
I ate at the Corner House, very little, as it was not easy to pay the modest sum my  landlady in Southwark, Mrs William Vitou, whose husband was a dental mechanic trained in Guy's hospital, charged me, and eat a great deal apart from breakfast and a high tea.
But I did not mind.
My stomach did for a while, as it did not like the vapours given out by the hops in the borough market after the sea air it had been used to in Hastings, but one cannot live on sea air.
Here indeed was life.
Each night I could take out the Vitou dog, a fine little white fox terrier called Mitsy.
Round ‘Guys’ we would go to see what was doing, then along Tooley Street, over the Tower Bridge, say ‘Goodnight’to the folk in the Tower, then along to Billingsgate to get the homely smell of fish.
Amongst all the noise of London Bridge Station, I could sleep like the proverbial top.
Indeed, I disgraced myself once or twice by oversleeping.
It could not last.
When Miss Maine left the office was very quiet.
One morning when there were only about three powers cards to deal with, I was visited by Sister Phillips, a senior medical Sister.
She noticed I was a bit green from the sickness.
‘Oh dear,’ she said, ‘you did know this was a fever hospital, didn't you?
Our last good clerk, Miss Cameron, died of one of our worst fevers, infectious meningitis.
It nearly broke Dr Rolleston.’
I told her about the hops.
Yes it had to be that.
I was much more sick of being unemployed.
I wrote to my Aunt Florence Veness who was now doing private work in Eastbourne.
Yes, Aunt Florence was, and still is, an ‘Angel,’ She had begun her training at eighteen years old at St James' Hospital, Balham, SW.
When she had been there for about six weeks she received the Medical Superintendent's recommendation for her bravery.
London had one of its worst thunderstorms, and she had had to cope alone with thirty women in varying stages of labour on the gynaecology ward.
It did not deter Aunt Florence.
Like her great namesake she was always well organized, and of course she had had so much experience helping with my grandmother's last six confinements, and going out sometimes with our local midwife, who to some would be a Sairey Gamp, but to those who knew her, another angel of mercy.
Aunt Florence wrote back.
‘Stick it, you should be alright, there's enough of the good sea in your blood to get you through.
Come and see me if you need me.’
We met next time with me in uniform, and she evacuated with some of her patients to Polegate.
Dr Rolleston's letters got fewer.
Only from Prague did a request come for his expert knowledge.
I could then realize that he was a fever  specialist of world renown, but that his colleagues in many European countries were being insulted and even attacked by their own pupils, probably because they would not assent to the Herrenvolk theory.
I had to end the letters ‘Always supposing this letter reaches you in time.’
The  author's Aunt, Sister Miss Florence Veness, S.RN SCM with her cat outside Wellington Square Nursing Home Hastings.
It was surely time for me to take life more seriously.
I joined a Saturday morning class at Morley College, Westminster, in Sociology and sat with the principal, Mrs Eva Hubback to test the new curriculum in sociology.
Dame Margery Fry came to lecture, and began her talk by apologizing ‘to my hearers when the true criminals of the world are getting away with it so well.’
I joined an evening political group in Bermondsey and listened, with five other people and a dog to Miss Ellen Wilkinson's plea for no more steel to be sold to Germany.
‘You will get it back’ she said.
We did.
I took a small class of Bermondsey Girl Guides, and realized the nobility of girls who after working for so many hours in bad conditions were still loyal.
I was able to take one of them across with me to Regents Park, where we joined SRS Active and had a boat on the lake.
They could no longer afford the premises in Bermondsey.
Autumn went, and winter came.
I was able to go home for Christmas with my new friends.
My father was anxious, so was the Rev Vera Brazier of Rye Congregational Church, in Sussex.
She took my friends into her little guest house.
We enjoyed ourselves, but I think we all knew this might be our last time together.
In the early spring we received refugees of Jewish birth from Europe at the City Temple, and tried to find them homes.
Other Czechoslovaks came as well to fill domestic posts.
Strange visitors from government departments came to see Dr Rolleston.
He showed them the careful lay-out of the hospital planned by Miss Nightingale herself.
Much of it was on one floor and other wards were only one storey.
It could all be administered from one office.
Then we were introduced to Dr William Howlett Kelleher who was to be our new Superintendent.
Dr Rolleston was retiring quietly to let a younger man prepare for what we were beginning to think was inevitable.
There was a retirement party.
We were sad.
I shall never forget the responsible attitude to his work of ‘Old John.’
He was really loved, even for his eccentricity, which was that he would never allow alcohol in any form to come into our walls.
He taught us that it could be done without in normal circumstances.
As they began to know me better, other members of the medical staff began to talk to me.
I watched the wonderful work done in the  laboratory by Dr Louis Jacques Maurice Laurent, deputy Medical Superintendent.
‘Streamline your mind, Miss Veness’ he said to me.
I soon needed that advice.
Dr Ursula Blackwell, who had been born in India interested me.
She had the name of one of the women medical pioneers, and also the thoroughness.
Racial hatred was anathema to her.
‘A criminal assault’ she called the dosing of Jewish patients in German hospitals with heavy aperients.
We needed Dr Margaret MacFarlane's stolid nature.
She did not leave the hospital without the cello she played in a London symphony orchestra.
The wind of change was becoming gale-force.
Jeanne, the  Vitou's only daughter was being prepared for evacuation, but my newly found knowledge in medicine and sociology was making me over optimistic.
I really cheered when Chamberlain came home from Munich with ‘that bit of paper.’
I got a reproof from Dr Kelleher when I facetiously said I'd grow geraniums in my gas mask.
In a matter of a few days it seemed, I was crying unashamedly with other City Temple folk at a prayer service arranged by Dr Weatherhead to ask God's mercy on the people of Czechoslovakia.
I went to Cromer with the Holiday Fellowship for a brief summer holiday.
Then came back to sign on at Westminster Evening Institute for a University extra-mural course in Sociology.
Sandbags were put up against my office windows.
I hated it, and Dr Kelleher got some of them taken down so that I could at least see the daylight.
Jeanne Vitou was really ready to leave home.
I came to the Putney Young Women's Christian Association Hostel to be near the hospital, and went to Fulham Congregational Church, so as to be near when IT happened.
On September 3rd I was indeed in that Church when war was declared.
I dashed into my office puffed from running, to meet Dr Kelleher who asked where I had been.
I was allotted a little room in the domestic servant's block.
It was not ‘otium cum indignitate,’ for who should have an even smaller room over mine, known as the horse boxes, but Mr William Gilliat, who later became the royal gynaecologist, and brought the Prince of Wales into this world.
Our doctors were delighted for they knew they would soon need expert surgical help, but secretly they enjoyed showing the ‘greats’ who had little rooms adjoining each other on that top floor, the good work that had been done in ‘the acute exanthemata.’
As everyone knows these first alarms were phoney.
After a fortnight the great ones left us, with just their phone numbers to call.
More junior  staff came, who were to be a great help to us.
Dr John Hill, who had been with the International Brigade in Spain, Dr Neil Leitch from Queensland, Australia, Dr Fytiaras from Greece.
We needed them, and Dr William Green from Kent and Dr Thomas O'Brien from Ireland, also we acquired a Liddell, Dr Vida Louisa.
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE
The first official post after September 3rd confirmed what we were told might happen, we were no more members of the London County Council staff, but had been taken over by the government and were to be known as part of the Emergency Medical Service.
In that first quiet week of the ‘phoney’ war I had plenty to think about.
Could I really be part of a war machine?
I was given a day off of my annual leave to think it over.
It coincided with the funeral at St  Paul's Cathedral of Canon Hugh Richard Laurie Shepperd, whose life and work we had so much admired.
He also hated war, but had given his life to working for the down-and-outs in London.
In the Cathedral and afterwards on a quiet walk outside, I knew I must go back to the hospital.
My father again had to part with his men, but, armed with a shovel and a pickaxe he was working on Rye marshes to put up defences against an invasion.
He had also told me that any German who came his way would ‘get it,’ so I felt I must do likewise in hospital.
Almost a month passed.
It was so quiet, but Dr Rolleston's good training was paying off.
With no casualties to deal with, but with new staff and better equipment our doctors settled down to work with a will for the children from ‘Peabody buildings’ at the back of the hospital who had either come back from evacuation, or who would not go anyway.
Dr Leitch was a tonic himself, his bright eyes and Australian manner made him a favourite with nurses and children.
He was soon called ‘Neil drip’ for he had the patience to feed our worst cases of enteritis with a fountain pen filler, in which he inserted nutritious liquid to keep life in the tiny bodies, and begin to build them up again.
There was no penicillin as yet.
He was much admired by our Senior Pediatric Sister, Mary Murphy.
Sister Murphy had been the last nurse to be with Sister Edith Cavell, and King George V had honoured her by making her the first to receive a medal for bravery at one of his levees.
‘He will go far’ she said of this brave Australian boy.
He enlisted the help of Dr Blackwell, who needed moral support now.
They were often together trying to think how the babies had got into this state.
They found out.
There were no classes in child welfare for the very young mothers, and many had been fed on milk from dirty Nestles milk tins.
Both she and Dr Leitch spent as much time as they could spare talking to the young parents who would come to collect these patients on discharge.
‘If it is quiet much longer, we will hold classes in Fulham’ they proposed.
This could not be as our drug supplies were not coming through so well.
In desperation Dr Green sent home to his family and we received boxes of his father's apple crop.
Yes, crushed apple was a very good medicine when properly blended with glucose and sterile milk for small stomachs.
Our death list got shorter.
Then more of our staff were called up for service with Queen Alexandra's Imperial Military Nursing Service.
Only a Sister in her sixties, and two staff nurses were on duty in reception.
They had to relieve on the wards too.
One afternoon, there was drama.
A child was brought in in the last stages of diphtheria.
Dr Thomas O'Brien was duty officer.
Instruments needed had not been properly sterilised.
Every minute counted.
O'Brien sterilised his hands and removed the spongelike growth with them.
The child recovered, but three notices and a visit by a porter failed to trace his parents.
‘I have a son’ said O'Brien.
Our Priest agreed, and the necessary arrangements were made for the boy's adoption and transfer to Eire.
Westminster Evening Institute also settled down to serious work.
We were introduced to Dr Adams of the London School of Economics who was to supervise our course.
Then Miss Frances Younghusband came to lecture in general sociology.
We were drawn from all branches of the London Social Services.
My nearest desk companion was from the offices of Dr  Barnardo's Homes at Barkingside.
Some were probation officers in training and some from County Hall, who had not yet specialised, but were hoping to.
With the casualty beds still unoccupied the medical staff in hospital grew bolder in their attempts to help Fulham's children, who were returning from this first evacuation in large numbers.
It had been Dr Rolleston's great sorrow that he had not been able to help children who had come in with the dreaded Infantile Paralysis, not that any other professor in Europe had been able to do better than by careful nursing stop the paralysis spreading.
Again from Australia had come Sister May Kenny with her method of nursing the child incessantly in the  arms, massaging the withering limbs and gently lowering them into warm water.
Indeed the London County Council had built her a special unit at Queen Mary's Hospital Carshalton.
The declaration of war had meant that this had to be closed, Sister sent back to Australia, and her nurses recruited for duty with the forces.
Both Dr Laurent and Dr Blackwell thought that it was a virus infection but we could only isolate bacteria in our small microscopes.
Then came that great morning when the newly made electron microscope had been used on polio slides.
It was, it was indeed, a virus so small that the eye of man had never seen it before.
But see it now we did.
How well did Kipling describe a microscope as ‘the eye of Allah,’ and these wretched creatures as the legions of the devil.
Messrs May and Baker, our trusted pharmaceutic friends worked around the clock to make vaccines.
The  author's brother-in-law, Sergeant Major Neville Smith, REME, photographed in September 1943, at Constantine, BNAF.
The doctors were delighted.
A paper was to be prepared for publication with the particulars of treatment and the results.
I went home again for Christmas alone.
My father had recruited three young gypsies who had not been and could not be called up for the Navy.
He himself was considered too old for general naval duties  so he began to teach these young folk to be first class fishermen.
They are.
The Jim and Annie , now so wanted to get fish for food, could not have done without them.
For my birthday in February I was given a good quality ‘used’ rowing boat.
I christened her HMS Daisy .
She needed one or two things doing to her, and I spent my short leaves at Easter and Whitsun re-painting her and making her seaworthy.
My brother-in-law, later S'Major Neville Smith had had to give up his little garage and prepare for REME service overseas.
My sister, later WAAF Nancy Smith Mentioned in Dispatches, was waiting for her call-up papers.
My mother cooked and cleaned and knitted almost all the time.
Leading WAAF Nancy Smith-Veness, who was mentioned in despatches.
She was married to Sergeant Major Neville Smith Shown opposite.
As the spring came Dr Fytiaras became more proficient in English.
So far appreciation of other's work had been his gift to us.
His dark eyes shone as he realized he was part of a British medical team that could and would meet any emergency that came along.
Then I too realized I had made the right decision to stay put in hospital.
From a source that we do not know came Dr Vajdova from Prague.
She immediately had to be ‘warded’ as she was suffering from acute torticollis.
She could turn neither her head, nor her neck to look at us.
We were told that this was the result of Gestapo torture.
This had to be stopped.
Dr Vida Louisa Liddell of Scotland ‘specialed’ Dr Vajdova and she recovered.
Winston Churchill was back at No. 10.
We began to take men who had volunteered for the guards, but who had been found by senior Service Medical Officers to be suffering from tuberculosis.
It was good to have adults about as we were to find out, also it was nice to know what was going on in SW1 apart from evening classes.
Now I look back I marvel at the devotion of the teaching staff of these Evening Institutes, and also to the men who staffed the District Line from West Brompton to Westminster.
Without them I could not have completed my course.
I used also to go to Blackfriars and up Farringdon Street to visit friends still attending the City Temple.
Here, one Friday evening I heard the best news so far.
It was music to our ears in a hospital staffed by women from both sides of the great Christian divide, and men of that ilk also.
There was to be a Prayer Group established at Westminster Abbey.
It was to be called the Cloister Group, and meet in the Cloisters.
Whether this was Winston's idea, or His Majesty's I do not know, but I so strongly suspect His Majesty who we knew to be one of the best Kings we have ever had.
To this group had been invited Dr William Temple, Archbishop of Canterbury, Archbishop Heenan of Westminster, Dr William Sagster of Westminster Methodist Hall, Dr Sidney Berry of the Congregational Union of England and Wales, General Carpenter of the Salvation Army, the Secretary of the Religious Society of Friends, the Chairman of the Baptist Union, Winston himself and, of course, the King.
It was to meet as often as was thought desirable.
To commit our cause to God, and especially to pray for those who had been trapped in France and were hurrying to the beaches of Dunkirk.
I had been given a week's leave and so I hurried to Hastings as I felt sure that would be my last leave for some time.
I went straight from the station to the beach.
The sea was flat calm, a dark mist hung over it.
No boats could be seen, all the big luggers had gone to Dunkirk, I had been told.
Then just occasionally, a larger flat bottomed boat came into the pier with exhausted mudcaked soldiers on her decks.
They were taken first to the Royal East Sussex Hospital and then further a field.
We sat not knowing what to do, all fishing had been forbidden.
‘That is not a normal fog,’ said one of my young uncles.
‘I hear they've poured oil on the sea and set it alight’ said a shore boy.
‘This is not a usual calm’ said my father.
‘The last week in May is so often windy and the sea choppy.’
We knew we were experiencing something beyond our understanding.
Next morning came the news ‘This town must be evacuated.’
Hitler and his panzers were sweeping all before them, they had got into the low countries and were heading for Britain.
I knew I had to go back to hospital but I just had time to see my mother and sister off and to help my father close up grandmother's house and to see uncle Henry take her off to the station, with destination Somerset.
I caught the next train back to London and my office.
‘Thank goodness you're back’ said one of the clerks who had been seconded to us from County Hall.
‘It's clear the decks for action.’
I was quite sure of that for my father had again gone back to Rye marshes to reinforce the defences.
The following weekend I dashed down to Bromley, Kent, to see my aunt.
She had spent much of the week in and out of the air raid shelter dodging hit-and-run raiders who we knew were also reconnoitring for further attacks.
She had heard that my father was preparing now to go to Somerset to be with the other Hastings folk.
We decided we had just got to stay put in Bromley and in Fulham.
It was the last time I saw our family home.
A land mine fell near shifting the two roads next to Weston Grove and demolishing our No. 6.
Auntie and friend had been saved by lying in the gutter outside with an eiderdown over their heads.
Back at hospital we were beginning to get civilian casualties, as well as soldiers from Dunkirk.
I was just let off for an afternoon to sit my first year Sociology exam and then I came into the hospital that was to be my home for the next three years.
OUR DARKEST HOUR
It was only 5.30 pm when I came into the main hospital building, but a cheeky nurse said ‘Bon soir, Miss Veness, parlez-vous Francaise?
A whole load of French soldiers have got away from Dunkirk too, and we have got to take the lot.’
Although I was not sure what ‘the lot’ meant, I was sure that something big was expected, for even Matron was in a hurry as she went to her office, at that time of day too!
Well, thanks to Dr Leitch's ministrations our enteritis beds were nearly empty which freed Sister Murphy.
Our Medical Superintendent wanted to know whether we had beds allocated in the Outer London hospitals for the civilian casualties who were with us, and the non-infectious soldiers.
We did have them, for County Hall had sent us the list of these hospitals and their separate functions.
Old Windsor, Berks, would take medical cases, Shenfield would take shocked soldiers and Queen Mary, Roehampton, burns.
So off they went and the decks were really cleared for action.
And of course, come it did.
Red Cross ambulances came in with bedraggled soldats  Francaises  .
Some were walking, some on stretchers, some being supported by their friends.
We really were in the front line.
But all had been prepared for them.
Civilian casualty wards were empty, Sister Phillips' medical ward was free, two old diphtheria wards had been so very thoroughly sterilised, and two more which had housed acute scarlet fever cases were bright with polish and clean sheets and they smelt to high heaven of disinfectant.
It seemed as if the nurses were already part of the angelic host as they flew along the outdoor corridors with provisions, that the Steward's staff, under the direction of Mr Charles Read, soon to be a Desert Rat, had brought in from West Kensington, Fulham and Chelsea.
The first night passed quietly enough as the newcomers were thoroughly examined and were glad to get a roof over their heads.
Likewise the second night passed without incident, but on the third  night, when I was tidying away papers in my office, a dishevelled deputy Sister came in.
‘There is hell to pay on the French wards.
We served them up corned beef, cheese, pickles and hot cocoa, and they threw it back at us.
‘Good gracious, corned beef, cheese and bread and butter, they were lucky.’
‘They didn't think so,’ said nurse.
The Western  Hospital's handsome male clerical staff, who were sent out to count Italian prisoners — in thousands.
So Dr Kelleher had to be alerted, and Matron too.
Taking with him portly Dr Lloyd, a good surgeon from Guys who had joined us, and Dr Hill, in case they understood Spanish, our Medical Superintendent prepared to read the Riot Act.
He did, and there was quiet again for a few days more.
Then loneliness and their failure to appreciate our culinary efforts must have depressed the visitors, also ‘ Defence de’ notices had gone up everywhere.
They were really feeling like prisoners and in need of consolation.
But they had reckoned without Sister Murphy.
She thought her nurses were there to dress wounds and to feed hungry patients, not to provide emotional care for les braves .
Several passes of affection from them to her young ladies brought passes of another kind from Sister to all offenders.
She slapped the faces of the Romeos.
They learnt that Les  Irelandaises  were women to be treated with care.
Fortunately for all concerned we learnt that General De Gaulle was setting up a headquarters in Putney, and we could have help from there.
I did not see le Grand Charles myself.
He sent Lady Reading and two secretaries to talk with the men.
There was to be a review for them, when any man who would like to go back to France would be sent back by a route through Marseilles, and he would provide for any man who wished to serve with his newly formed force, the Free French.
After that relations improved considerably.
I was allowed up to chatter with the older men about the good old days on Le Manche, when my grandfather had not only held serious philosophical and religious conversation with les  pecheures  over his loud hailer, but had also been in to Boulogne harbour as thanksgiving for a market or two in Hastings at needy times.
These older men definitely wanted to go back to their families, and the younger ones were all for fighting the enemies of La Belle France in this most superior kind of foreign legion.
De Gaulle formed these youngsters into ‘The Free French.’
Before the great day of their departure came, I experienced the sadness of France for one of her very brave sons.
He was dying on Sister Phillips' ward.
He was about twenty-three to twenty-five years of age.
He was still wrapped in the cloak he had been wearing when, as a Priest of the Roman Catholic Church, he had gone into the front lines with his men, completely unarmed.
I think I did see him die, with the look of utter peace I had only read of previously.
The blood had been washed from his face and body, and he was still wearing the very good quality underwear that showed him indeed to be the son of an aristocratic family, who, despite Robespierre and Talleyrand still gave one of their sons to the Church.
We both said ‘Requiescat in pacem’ and sent for our priest.
It was nearly the middle of July before all was quiet again.
‘Ah!’ we thought.
‘Back to pediatrics.’
It was not to be, for although we were all keyed up like first violins, having heard Churchill's great ‘Their finest hour’ speech on June 15th with les soldats  Francaises  listening as well, Whitehall had decided that better arrangements had to be made for children than care in one of the best London hospitals.
Before the end of July we had been visited by General Gough.
The Steward's staff seem to have heard a rumour about his being out of favour with the War Office, but he seemed a most efficient and kindly gentleman to us, with the welfare of children very much at heart.
He told Matron of a better plan for evacuating any child from our area, from what he so rightly expected would be one of the worst winters we have ever had.
So it was back to adult medicine, and the odd casualty who needed treatment.
There again, we had one of the best encouragements we ever had.
The discovery of the Sulphonamide drugs by Messrs May and Baker on their 693rd attempt revolutionised our records.
We had been taking into the adult wards men and women suffering from the most serious fevers, encephalitis lethargica, polio-encephalitis, serious poliomyelitis, with two ‘Iron lung’ cases in a special isolation ward and unit, tuberculous meningitis, and poliomeningitis were also with us.
It was a miracle happening under our very eyes.
Our death rate went down seventy-five per cent in one week!
After a month of this the doctors began to prepare a paper for ‘The Lancet.’
I therefore walked on air as I went to Westminster Evening Institute to sign on for the next Sociology year.
We met our new lecturer Mr H.B. Acton of the London School of Economics who was to lecture in Social Philosophy.
‘We will begin from the beginning’ he said.
‘I want you all to be au fait with some of the Greek democratic thought before term starts.
Learn as much as you can about Plato, Socrates and their times.
I recommend the books of Dr Gilbert Murray.’
It was possible to get very cheap treasures from Messrs Foyles in the Charing Cross Road, even on a Saturday afternoon, so we went thither.
We had just started our first lectures, when apart from helping to prepare the Sulphonamide paper I was given a weekend off to visit City Temple friends who had started a Community House at Highbury New Park.
I arrived early for lunch on September 14th, and then went up to my shared room to unpack my few belongings.
There was an unexpected noise of aircraft overhead.
‘Oh! dear,’ we thought, ‘it could be beginning.’
IT certainly was.
Etched in the sky above us were smoke lines like skater's trails.
They seemed to be left by minute aircraft.
It was so hot we lay on the floor and watched the wheeling and turning of the planes and the occasional flare-up which told of a kill.
It lasted till well after tea and then there was a quiet night.
I went back to hospital on Sunday morning but it was not until Monday that we knew that ‘seldom in the world of human endeavour have so many owed so much to so few.’
We  had watched the Battle of Britain.
‘They'll be back,’ said our stalwart gate porter.
I was glad I had made arrangements with a City Temple friend to go back to the flat in Southwark to collect the last of my wanted books etc.
The Vitou family had gone.
It was early October and still warm in the late afternoon when we got the key from the Borough market porter, and started to collect my belongings.
The nights were drawing in fast.
Just as dusk came the siren went.
We waited in the safety of the cellar for as long as we could, but there was no ‘All Clear.’
It was getting time for the last bus across London Bridge for the District Line.
We decided to walk across.
It was definitely not dark.
The sky to the east of us was lit up like noon-day.
‘They've got the docks’ said my London born friend Miss Robin.
Yes, worried folk were coming along from the Tower to Billingsgate, some carrying a few possessions.
‘ It's like hell in there, they've strafed us tonight alright.’
Back at my desk I sat thinking about our East End hospitals, now they were out of action.
No Lock Hospital for venereal diseases, no kindly infirmary type homes for the elderly.
Dr Hill was  allocated to deal with this previously unmentionable condition.
He did so with the help of the School of Tropical Medicine who were experimenting with treatment by triparsaidide from malarial insects.
It was a relieving remedy, but patients had to go to the North Surrey hospital at Epsom for final clearance.
November came with especially nasty frosty fog.
I was so glad of the company of Plato and Socrates, and the journeys I could still make to hear Mr Acton's good lectures.
I also went to a theatre or two in the West End on quiet nights.
I remember the first production of The corn is Green with Sybil Thorndyke playing the hopeful headmistress and Emlyn Williams himself as the talented Welsh miner.
I also visited the Sadlers Wells Ballet, sitting up in the gallery with friends for one shilling and sixpence in old money and watching the Corps open up before us like the flowers whose waltz they were dancing, and that talented new ballerina Miss Margot Fonteyn taking her first curtain calls.
Then John Gielgud played in one of Sir James Barrie's fairy stories about Lob's wood.
We knew the Germans were still sentimental about Christmas, and I was given several days leave.
I sat in the children's ward, the only one left, and nursed a little boy who had once again returned, but who had developed a whooping cough complication on ‘the day’ itself.
As  all transport resumed on Boxing Day, I went to Highbury in the afternoon, having shared one of the other Sister's parcels in the morning.
It had come from Eire, but was so like the one I had received from my folk in Somerset, we could hardly believe a Catholic and a Non-Conformist Junior Church magazine could look so much alike.
On the Sunday morning I went to the last service to be held at the City Temple.
As the afternoon closed the siren blared out.
Then there was a noise we had not heard before.
Looking back, I thought it was a symphony from hell.
There were the droning of the engines of six hundred odd Dorniers, the screeches of the bombs as they dropped, the wail of the ambulance sirens, and the crash of the explosions as bombs hit the target.
Throughout the raid the rhythm of the Dornier engines did not alter, then they also dropped, for the first time, a form of Verey light to guide themselves.
Where, I wondered, is Stravinsky to see this look and sound-alike?
About one in the morning we went to our cellar to try to sleep a little.
I got up about seven, had a little breakfast and went to catch the bus for Fulham.
A bus did come, but not surprisingly it was not going through the City as it usually did.
I was put off at Smith field and asked to get to the Strand as best I could for another bus.
The ‘All Clear’ had gone.
But I could not go there without checking up on our dearly loved Temple.
It was no more, yet the statue of Dr Joseph Parker, one of its best known preachers, was still defying the opposing rage.
I clambered over the rubble where I thought it was safe to do so, and got one piece of the great white pulpit, and the last page of the Bible I knew had been used by Dr Thomas Chalmers before his mission to New Guinea.
Firemen were soaking everything to finally extinguish the blaze.
I went to the top of Ludgate Hill and watched exhausted men being carried out of the Old Bailey, then down side streets to where the steeple of St Bride's church was tottering and the bells had gone crashing down minutes previously.
It was 30th December, I did catch a bus before I got to Charing Cross Station, it was good old No. 30, for Fulham.
I worked for the rest of the morning and in the late afternoon, rang Highbury to tell them I was safely back and ask how they fared.
‘We are alright’ they said.
‘But we lost Ivor last night.’
Yes, it had been Edwin's turn for fire watching in Farringdon Street, but his wife was having a baby so Ivor Gundry, one of our best scholars, from Bridport in Dorset, had volunteered to take his place.
At his funeral Rev Leslie had to offer his arm as well as his heart to the young lady, who only six weeks previously he had married to Ivor.
Actually  we think she supported our Minister, and was an inspiration to Miss Barton, our Assistant never-ordained Minister.
‘La Citie Temple est morte, viva  la Citie Temple ,’ said Albert Clare, our Chief Deacon.
I could not go back for some time as the Germans had obviously built up their air force to great strength, so I threw in my lot with Fulham church in my rare off-duty times.
We knew that any night we also would be ‘target for tonight’ for through West Brompton, along our borders, ran the only usable railway from the south to the north of Britain.
The Rev Kenneth Oliver, Congregational Minister of Dawes Road, Fulham, had been appointed to our Free Church Chaplaincy.
He wanted to help practically, so he went around the borough and elsewhere, looking for talent.
He then measured the corridor outside my office for an emergency theatre for drama and films, should the recreation room be needed for other things.
It was just right for his small cine projector, and as many as could be packed in, watched happy films about ‘Fulham in the springtime’ or ‘The London Parks’or the antics of Mickey Mouse.
But February came with the lowest temperatures for years and March was not much better.
Almost every night there was a raid, Rev Kenneth had to join Father O'Sullivan in the local shelters where morale was very low.
I made myself a cape from an old camel hair coat, I could not wear that of Queen Alexandra's Service.
I was so glad of it as I ran from the admission ward to my office and back.
Yet once again there was a medical triumph.
Dr Laurent came in late one cold night with the results of lung resection and a complete cure from seemingly hopeless tuberculosis.
And that was not all.
Dr Kelleher had been working in close cooperation with Dr Laurent and there had been long consultations in the Pathology Lab.
Our microscopes had been improved, and the deadly killers were being isolated and identified as never before.
All this was as well, for we were beginning to need this information, and one special study has saved untold thousands of lives from deadly infection in swimming pools.
I was working late on one of these bad nights when an excited Dr Laurent rushed into my office.
‘Miss Veness, Miss Veness, tonight I save a man from the gallows!
Give to me the death certificate book, and this new patient's notes.’
I did.
He wrote as ‘cause of death’ polio-encephalomyelitis.
He went out and  Sisteradmission-ward came in for a short while, and we reconstructed the story.
The patient, a fine girl of about twelve years  old had been admitted unconscious to the ward.
She was accompanied by an hysterical mother who kept saying, ‘I know he did it.
It's the first time I have ever let her be alone with him, and now look.’
Sister and her nurse had calmed her down a little and found out that the child's father had deserted them, and she had taken up with another man.
The girl and the new man did not like each other.
So much so that she was not left alone with him, but that afternoon the mother had had to go shopping and the child had returned from a swimming session in the baths and had been alone with the man.
This should have been no problem as she was a swimming champion of the South London Schools and had been in excellent health.
The man's story was that she had told him she did not feel at all well, and he had told her to lie down on the sofa in the living room.
The child had then become unconscious.
On her return the mother had screamed aloud that he had killed the child.
An ambulance brought her to us.
The admitting doctor had taken a specimen from the child's spine and sent it to the Lab.
After his evening rounds Dr Laurent had gone to see the result.
He let Sister see this.
The whole specimen was alive with the wretches that are the polio viruses, at their very worst, attacking the whole spinal column and the brain tissue.
How had this happened?
The child's diet, as that of all of us, left much to be desired.
She had stayed at the baths a long time, probably getting a chill, but worst of all no-one would testify that the water in the pool had had a proper dose of chlorine.
The baths were closed for a fortnight at least, for a complete disinfection, a change of water, much stronger chlorification and new instructions for the cleansing of the feet of would-be bathers and a thorough check-up of the much higher chlorine addition.
This really took our minds off the enemy above.
May and Baker were of course informed, and they were briefed to make better vaccines, if ever they could do so.
schools.
What a pipe dream, we thought, as many children were getting no education at all.
OUR FINEST HOUR
It was well to begin 1942 with a triumph for Dr Laurent, for now tribulation was really beginning.
The year began with cold clammy fogs, and although some industry had come to a standstill because of workers called to the colours, and factories bombed by the enemy, we still did not have the Clean Air Act, and there was still quite a lot of smoke from domestic fires, and from the slack coal burnt by factories making munitions.
This blended with the mist and was most unpleasant.
Having made such a set at London and subdued any important resistance on the continent the Germans turned their attention to the total destruction of Britain.
As Mr Charles, our chief male nurse and I passed each other on our way to and from the admission ward and our offices we had first one and then another sorry tale to tell.
As he had thought ‘Coventry’ had only been starters, one by one the names of our principal cities were mentioned.
For him Plymouth was the worst, and that went for me too.
We both had links with the Navy.
‘Good God,’ said this devout Welshman, ‘this will do for many of the Navy boys worse than the sinking of their own ships, they will have no wives and children to come home to!’
We both winced and I went back to some more work on the sulphonamides, and he to dressing his patients.
Then we were blessed with a rather noisy comfort.
It was now quite clear that barrage balloons were much more a hindrance than a help to London.
The one on Parson's Green was brought down by the ARP boys and packed tidily away, and then we were granted an AA gun, all to ourselves.
He was placed in West Brompton cemetery amongst the tombs, but he was very much alive.
The Luftwaffe came back to have a go at Chelsea and South Fulham, and above the noise of their engines we heard, for the first time ‘Salt Peter Bluey,’ as our nurses called him, give them hell's delight with his raucous bark.
We cheered aloud.
We were reminded, as if we needed it, of another old barker  probably on the Air Ministry roof in SW1, having ordered their Majesties to take good cover.
If January was shocking, February was much worse.
The fag became really icy and sleet and snow fell.
‘This must be the bottoms,’ said my friend on our way to and from.
‘It's the Iti's turn to have a go at us tonight, Hitler has said that they may have a good go at us, as a reward for their help to him.’
‘They’ did not come as far west as Fulham that night, but we did get it before the end of the week.
I suspect the Luftwaffe were back.
I was just packing up my medical papers when I got a call to Ward 16, now also a reception ward.
‘Sister asks if you will come to help, Miss Veness, there is a bit more writing than she can cope with.’
I quite understood, for more and more of our nurses had to go to the fighting zones.
We were getting very good trainees from Southern Ireland, but they were too busy with actual nursing.
I took my stationery and reported for duty there.
We had about twenty casualties from our own immediate district.
I think the Germans had been after ‘Salt Peter’, but they got the empty coal yard and one or two small buses instead.
Putting on my best bedside manner, I went to the cheerful locals.
They were now sitting up, most of them.
The sun had pierced through the mist, and they were not believing their good luck at being alive, and being cared for by the beautiful colleens.
‘Well, Sir,’ I said to one man, ‘may I have your name, address and next of kin, please.’
This was given, then I said ‘You were the gentleman who was brought in from the ‘Cock’ are you not?’
‘Good heavens, no, lady’ came the indignant reply.
‘I was fire-watching in the coal yard.’
I thought of the empty coal yard, and how much it had not needed fire watching.
Then I looked at the cheerful cockney.
‘Hitler again,’ I said.
‘You must have been blown in there by the blast of the bomb.
The Cock is no more.’
The loss of his favourite local was quite enough punishment to this patriot so ‘Found in the coal yard’ went on to the documents.
The Christian Church was quite united in Fulham.
The Fathers of the Church of the Servites served in the shelters with the Rector of All Saints, the Baptist Pastor and our Rev Kenneth Oliver.
Rev Kenneth was determined, now that we were not able to leave the hospital grounds after darkness fell, to see that our minds were not imprisoned.
He had a list of all the local acting talent.
Of course it  came and went, but he found the colleens were not only beautiful, but also good, and good at singing, though they were very shy on stage.
About mid-February there was a lull in the bombing, and the recreation room could be used.
A little Fulham girl who he said was quite promising came in with a friend or two to dance with her.
She had a strange name we rather connected with ‘Salt Peter,’ she was called Petula Clarke.
Our nurses were ‘backing’ for her, and that then gave them confidence to sing one verse or even two solo.
‘Kitty from Cork’ sang as good a rendering ‘Bless 'em all,’as she struggled with her shyness, as I have heard from some professionals.
Although it seemed trivial to high minded folk, like Deputy Matron and Sister Tutor who were burdened with the difficulties of their office, these concerts were so important.
Our morale was beginning to weaken.
Even now I am ashamed when I think of the night I ‘let fly’ to one of our best auxiliary nurses who had come to ask me to help when I was just going off duty.
Some of us could not walk quite straight, for when ‘Peter’ really got going our foundations shook.
Freezing fog gave way to real ice.
One such dreadful night I was called to the gate house by Mr Rideout, our so loyal and efficient gate porter.
‘There is a man here, Miss Veness, who says his wife is on the encephalitic ward.
That is true, but he says can he spend the night with her.
It could be their last in more ways than one.’
I hesitated.
 E ncephalitis was a strictly certifiable condition.
But Ward 18, where this lady was being treated had been made into separate cubicle wards with glass screens, at the order of Dr Kelleher for ‘barrier nursing.’
The nurses observed the cleanliness rule to detail.
I rang Sister on the intercom.
‘Very well, Miss Veness, came the reply.
Bring him up, and explain barrier treatment to him.’
I was so very pleased for us all.
As morning light came I saw a much happier man leave the main gate.
‘What he can do, I can do’ I thought, and I again began to venture out to our local small cinema on my evening off.
However I had a stiff lesson.
It was ‘Thinking Day’ 22nd February.
I shed a tear or two as Movietone news told of the death of our dearly loved Chief, Lord Robert Baden-Powell.
Then I enjoyed the good Pinewood Studio British film and stood for ‘The King,’ at the end of the show.
I then slowly walked along Fulham Broadway in the complete darkness, as I knew the road past Halford School would be safe with the  clergy around.
As I passed what we then called ‘The Doll's hospital’ I felt a very firm hand come on to my shoulder.
I do not really like being touched by a stranger since I had been mildly attacked as a child, but something told me this was no casual greeting.
I fled, even in the darkness to the bottom of Halford Road, along it, into the main gates and to my office.
Matron was in the corridor.
I told her.
‘No more going out after blackout’ she said, ‘and that will go for the domestic and nursing staff as well.
I will have the bottom gate leading to the Buildings and the Broadway permanently closed.’
How wise she was.
The next night.
before the padlock could be put on, one of our maids dared it.
The ‘Buildings’ caught a hundred pound bomb all to itself, and we lost the only member of staff to die by enemy action.
What was more, some six weeks later we learned that a sadistic killer was abroad in Fulham and that bodies had been destroyed by acid in a bath in the house next door to the ‘Doll's hospital.’
I was then almost too busy to shudder.
Bombed Ambulance Station.
American Red Cross took over SW London ambulances
As March came, the frost strengthened.
Our staff who were older felt it worst.
Dr Ursula Blackwell sent a letter to County Hall for a  ‘Cosy’ stove to be put in her room, for comfort after duty.
She was refused and then had to be taken off duty with bronchitis and exhaustion.
What petty little tin god had been responsible for this I do not know, for Mr Herbert Morrison, the leader of the LCC as it was then, had set the example after the great fire of December 1961 by taking his bed into the next office to his, and staying there all night.
A bed in the room next to one's office!
The idea was revolutionary.
It had never been done before.
I expect he was using it, as Winston did his famous chamber under No. 10.
At this stage of the war, before his illness he was much more often out of it till about 4 or 5 am ‘fire watching’ in more ways than one.
With ‘Our Herbert’ next to the ill-fated St Thomas', very rare occasions saw me back at Westminster, with Matron's permission, to give in an essay or two and get the gist of the rest of the Philosophy course.
Ambulance team before  its destruction .
Senior Sister Barber and Deputy Sister Cooler take our ambulances.
We did get an occasional glimpse of the sun towards the end of the month, and it was so welcome for even our ambulance station had been put out of action, and it was not easy to get patients moved before  the next batch came.
So, imagine my relief when I was called to the front porch, and I was greeted by a cheery ‘American Red Cross reporting for duty Ma'am.
Can we take your casualties today?’
I really did feel like a Queen for a moment, well, even longer when I found it was not a flash in the pan, but that they were really going to stay with us.
And America was only just in the war.
Yet I did know one other ‘Yankee’ was with us.
I had become engaged to Leading Seaman Arthur Saunders RNVR who was serving in HMS Reading, a fourstacker loaned to us under the lease-lend arrangements.
One of our favourite shipmates was Sub Lieutenant Cherry Yankee RN, as he called himself, and as he has called his autobiography.
How he got there no-one knows, but he was a very good sailor and an even better artist.
His impressions of the Atlantic during the dreadful winter 1961–2 and spring remind one of ‘The Tempest’ and the ordeal of the prophet Jonah.
This superb American served the Allies on the sea and in the post-war relief organizations till disgust at the treatment of the Poles by the Western Alliance sent him back home to lick his wounds and write an epic book.
March brought no real relief in bad weather conditions.
The winds were cutting.
But the Church in Fulham began to think of Easter.
Rev Kenneth had got in touch with ENSA.
We had the most extraordinary auditions on Saturday mornings at the little Dawes Road Church.
The artistes were a very mixed bag.
Not all were up to the standard of Miss Clarke, most were a lot older.
The only remaining male member of our Church choir was a Vic-Wells ballet fan.
He had wept almost at the calling up of Michael Soames, who he thought might never dance again, but had given us a most glowing description of an Egyptian hand dance by Mr Anton Dolin.
However no-one had ever heard of dancing in Church, except in Seville in Spain, so we had to stick to choral and solo singing.
We found one fine young organist, who was C3, and in a government office.
Then we could ask for really good singers.
‘Let the bright seraphim’ and ‘Alleluia’and then ‘Trees’were sung between alerts.
We really could do better than that and began rehearsing the ‘Messiah.’
Another spate of serious raids stopped this, and the organist, now choirmaster as well, found a good supply of scores of ‘Olivet to Calvary’ by J. Maunder.
We set to work on this with a will.
Another organist was found amongst the ARP personnel and soloists came from ENSA and Fulham.
Americans were really beginning to arrive in London now.
I went to Westminster one night in mid-March, and was waiting for my bus just outside the Abbey.
I was allowed to carry a small torch then, and  had another student with me.
Verey lights dropped again, and I could see Big Ben.
The bombers were not near, but across the road from us were two Yankee soldiers.
I suspect they were being cared for under the Central Methodist hall.
A rather inebriated older Englishman said ‘Yankees — go home.’
The first time I had heard this.
‘We can still do without you English b…s.’
We neither of us knew how to deal with this, and so we went across to the Underground Station.
The District Line seemed always safe and reliable.
After ‘The Bank’ tragedy, I could never ride on any other part of the underground.
But by the beginning of April with the frost still quite strong, we had another problem to deal with.
It was decided that, even with the American successes in North Africa, Gibraltar could be under serious threat from the Axis powers.
The Rock must be evacuated, at least of her women and children.
Who could deal with this?
‘The Western’ of course.
She was so good with children.
In they came to us.
Dr Hill our Spanish speaking medico rallied what  troops and equipment he could find.
‘There will be about five hundred,’ we were told.
‘Five hundred, what to do with them?’
We did not have far to seek, the big hotels in Kensington did not house wealthy Englishmen and women any more, nor attract wealthy foreign tourists.
They were empty except for a caretaker or two.
As they were examined in the special admission ward Doctor and our Medical Superintendent tried to keep families together.
Some were quite healthy, but more than a few had measles.
Measles, one of our old stocks-in-trade.
But where were the nurses to deal with them?
More girls came from Eire.
Mild forms of the sulphonamides were used.
Sister Murphy was needed again for some cases of enteritis.
This time she had her way, and the very tiniest of doses of brandy were added to their ‘drip’ feeds.
It did indeed work, thanks to the Sister's and nurses other care of the little ones.
The worst problem was to try to explain quarantine regulations to the black-clothed mothers who would not go away from the main gates and wailed bitterly ‘Oh! mio bambino! mio bambino!’ till Mr Rideout had to have Dr Hill's attendance lest he too became a patient.
We engaged out-station nurses to be in attendance at the hotels by day and night, by day to supervise feeds and help the mothers get food from any shop they could.
By night to comfort them in the shelters during raids.
Then Fulham got one of her worst raids of the war.
I suspect the enemy was really after the railway this time.
‘Salt Peter’ got a direct hit and was put out of action.
Matron had prepared herself by carrying  a ‘Scutari’ lamp.
I had got a ‘Cavell’ collar, and I needed it.
The Verey lights were coming down, red, white and green right above us.
We were in for the worst.
Sister Cleeve clasped my hand as we went to our ‘Action Stations.’
One part of us was bit, and the glass cascaded down the walls of the main building like a running stream.
Then it really came.
A molotov cocktail.
Men were rushing all around us with buckets of sand.
Wards 16 and 17, now full of Gibraltarian babies were ablaze.
Wards 14 and 15 still had guards waiting for tuberculosis cures.
They rushed in, caught up the babies from student nurse Bridget's and Kitty's arms and handed them to young male nurses.
Neither Bridget nor Kitty left the burning wards till every baby was safe.
No-one could be spared to get fresh cots, so these men from farthest Arran and the  Rhondda Valley sat up for the rest of the night with a brown baby under each arm.
I don't think I went to bed, and at first light Father O'Sullivan came into my office.
‘May I have a list of the dead?’ he asked.
‘No-one died last night, father’ I replied.
‘Glory be to God, if it was not the Lord himself that sent His Holy angels to spread their blessed wings over you and keep you from all harm.
And now may I go to comfort the living?’
He had my permission and blessing.
Someone came from County Hall to ask for a list of folk for decoration.
I suggested Bridget and Kitty.
‘Not at all’ said our Medical Superintendent.
‘Everyone did their duty last night .
 It's either the lot of you, or none.’
None it was, even when less than a week later the enemy came to ‘finish us off’ we thought.
It was the same pattern, the Verey lights, the noise of aircraft engines, and no ‘Salt Peter.’
I waited in my office.
‘Could you come to the theatre, please?’ asked a nurse.
‘Sister Hancock has really got her hands full.’
Again I went to help the best of English Sisters who had not joined Queen Alexandra's Service, but had stayed for our children.
Sister Marjorie Bell, later decorated for her bravery in the Lewisham Rail Crash was in charge of the case.
A little Gibraltarian girl with pneumonia in both lungs, was not responding to the May and Baker Lung resection I knew was in progress.
The noise of the aircraft stopped, there was a screech, as from an aircraft diving.
‘Duck!’ cried out Dr Hill.
He, Sister Hancock and I ducked under the operating table.
Sister Bell threw herself over the body of the child, the repetitive tap of the bullets told us were we being especially dive-bombed, and shot up.
Prayer saw us through till all was quiet again.
Then the operation proceeded, I got the required notes and recorded the operation.
Later that night I did sleep.
Even May was so cold.
Late April had been lightened for us by our very successful rendering of ‘Olivet to Calvary’ between the raids.
Now we did look for better things.
Only one little Gibraltarian had died.
She was a tiny baby called Lourdes Periera aged eighteen months.
A very strange thought for Catholic and Protestant alike.
But we were all so happy that the out-nursing scheme was working.
The Gibraltarians began to like and get used to Kensington.
I was allowed another weekend off.
I knew that St Sepulchre's Church Holborn had survived the Fire of London, and had offered to house City Temple folk for services till the end of the war.
I took myself up to Highbury to hear about all this.
But I had to be back before dark still, and in the fairly late afternoon I had to change buses at Hyde Park Corner.
Oh! dear, the siren again.
Beside me stood an aged Gibraltarian granny.
‘Come along grandma’ I said.
‘We must take cover.’
I led her to a small shelter in the Palace side of the Park.
‘Good gracious, that was close’ I said, as I heard a God-Almighty thud.
Many fire engines rushed about.
Then came the All-clear.
I put ‘Granny’ on her bus.
An ARP worker rushed by.
‘They've got the Palace this time.’
‘The King?’
I begged.
‘OK,’ was the reply.
‘They were down the shelter…or out of the way, for once.’
We had one or two casualties to deal with from that raid.
I got a very interesting letter from my fiance.
He had been in Reykjavik harbour when Churchill and Roosevelt had had an Atlantic meeting.
He had seen ‘the old man’ on deck and had cheered him, with the other sailors.
Also HMS Reading was due into Liverpool the last week in May.
He could get some leave as she was no longer sea-worthy and was paying-off.
Get a licence, we could be married.
This seemed just too good to be true.
I had wept back in the office after Mr Charles had told me the Scharnhorst was steaming up the channel unchallenged.
HMS Reading should have been coming in the other direction.
What a hope against the pride of the German Navy!
I had sorrowed over the loss of the Hood, on which my father's brother had been ‘sparks,’ and mourned for the Barham and the Ark Royal.
The last time I had seen ‘Reading’ in Cammell Laird's yard, on a fleeting autumn visit, she had resembled nothing so much as a  squashed Nestle's milk tin.
Her re-fit was over in less than a fortnight and she was back on the Atlantic run and into the storms.
Mr Charles read the letter.
I went to a small dressmaker in Lillie road with some material brought from Newfoundland on one of the brief dockings.
Late May, the sun was returning at last, but it was still cold.
Almost all the Gibraltarian babies were gone then.
Now Queen Mary, Roehampton was overfull of severe burn cases, some civilian and some service personnel.
Would we take some?
We never refused.
In they came accompanied by a Sister whose red QA cape clashed horribly with her beautiful auburn hair.
A Churchill.
I did not doubt it.
As usual in full command.
I was allowed to talk with her and the patients, those who could, whose faces had not been obliterated by burns.
Sir Harold Gillies patched skin from buttocks onto burnt faces with his wonderful ‘plastic surgery.’
Why plastic, I shall never know, for the skin, which was sometimes hanging from the face, was so like normal human skin.
Even then the raids persisted.
‘Reading’ docked and I had another express letter to say the date could be June 6th.
I went to see the Minister who had come to help Rev Kenneth who now had duties in other parts of London.
Yes, June 6th would be alright.
I told Dr Kelleher.
‘Well, it'll be a change from the bombing’ he said.
‘You can have time off, perhaps even a week for a holiday, if things are quiet.’
They were not, Leading Seaman, now Sub-Lieutenant Saunders also came to see the Minister, and stay at the small guest house in Lillie Road.
We were walking round Walham Green Park discussing the hymns for the service when the siren went.
‘Say a prayer for us’ I asked, ‘I really would like to be married, but I would also like HMS Western to put up a decent show.’
‘I am sure you will’ came the reply.
‘How can you be off from it with a Churchill aboard?’
The raid was not too bad, but Gillies asked for his unit to be moved further out into the country after that.
June 5th was wonderfully quiet.
I went for the last fitting of my dress.
I stayed up late to clear things up, and got up early to do the same thing.
Then I handed over to Mr Whittington, a ‘County Hall’ clerk who had volunteered to do my job, as well as his own.
There was good news from Lillie Road as well as.
My parents, who had come back to Hastings from their exile in Somerset to fish and clean, as they always did, had braved all and were coming to the wedding.
THE WAY UP
June 6th certainly was a good day to marry.
The weather was so nice that it seemed even the enemy had forgotten us.
I woke before six and dressed in casual uniform and went to my office to get things ready for the day.
After a good breakfast at about eight o'clock, I informed the switchboard staff that I was leaving.
I went to the little room in the guest house in Lillie road, especially booked for me.
My parents had had breakfast too, and we talked about the service.
I had invited any of the hospital staff who had cared to come, and my ‘Dawes Road’ friend Miss Dorrie Pierce told me that church folk had organized a little wedding tea, and my husband-to-be had ordered and paid for a wedding cake.
He had been staying with our best man, Leading Seaman Geoffrey Bond, who, for health reasons was now leaving the Navy to do work in the coal mines.
At a quarter to eleven the taxi came for me.
Dorrie had helped me finally dress and my father and I went to the Church.
Mother came with my husband's brother, sister-in-law, and their little daughter.
They had come all the way from Chatham in Kent, bringing Beryl in bridesmaid's dress.
It was all coming on extremely well.
Arthur and Geoff were already there and the ARP organist was surpassing himself with appropriate music.
I was so very pleased to see, in next to the front row, Dr Kelleher and his wife.
Mrs Kelleher was wearing a beautiful new hat.
I am sure the Servite fathers had given their consent for this, although not one of them came themselves.
Rev Stanley Boreman conducted the simple Congregational marriage ceremony, and as we left the church the sun shone quite perfectly for the rather amateur cameras who had survived the bombing the record that happy event.
Sure enough, the kindly Fulham folk had pooled their meagre rations and we gave our guests a really good wedding breakfast with the cake and non-alcoholic wine, at about twelve thirty.
The usual speeches were made.
Mr Whittington proved that the LCC had got  themselves a very good orator to transfer back from the EMS when war was over.
Arthur was rather quiet.
I think he was thinking of HM S Reading.
He had had to bring her back through one of the worst storms on the North Atlantic.
After two days out from Newfoundland she had had to alter course for southern Greenland and the Arctic circle, the U-boat menace was so bad.
Her exhausted captain had had to hand over the wheel to Arthur and for eight days he was scarcely relieved.
The icy seas had swept over her decks, and men had had to work night and day with axes to keep her afloat.
Fortunately Chief Petty Officer Richard Saunders RN, my husband's father, had taught him very early how to box the compass and he was able to bring her north of Scotland, round our north eastern seaboard and bring her in to Chatham dockyard for paying-off.
No, their Lordships had decided she must make one more voyage, back to America.
Only three men would not go with her, Leading Seaman Webster, one other rating and Arthur, also the now Lieutenant Cherry RN (Yankee) would not be aboard.
Arthur had booked a room for us in a guest house at Windermere.
We said goodbye and thanks to our friends who had made the day so happy for us, changed into travelling clothes, and left for the station.
We were both keen members of the Holiday Fellowship, and Youth Hostels Association, so one of our main items of luggage was an Ordnance Survey Map.
We planned a good tour of the near peaks of Windermere.
When we came down to breakfast the other guests were so absorbed in some news in the morning papers that they forgot the usual ragging of newlyweds.
Arthur looked over someone's shoulder but said nothing.
We collected our packed lunch from the manageress, and, as the sun again was shining, set out for Helvellyn.
We began to climb from Fairfield.
It began to get quite hot so we sat on a mossy bank and shared an orange.
I asked Arthur then about the news.
‘You'll never guess what!’
‘No.’
‘Hitler has turned east and is rushing tanks in the direction of Moscow.’
For some time I could not speak.
I wanted to exclaim like my Servite friend ‘Glory be to God,’ but it did not seem quite right.
I did say several quiet praise be's.
It was the best news for us possible.
As no man can serve two masters we had long been told no wise general tries to fight on two fronts.
It had been hammered home to us during the previous winter.
A  certain section of the nation had tried to make Winston's life a misery by begging for a second front.
Indeed they had gone so far as to bring one Nicoleyva, from the Soviet Union to plead with British men and women to do just this, and open a second front in Europe.
We were treated to a pathetic song, whose sentiments we knew were real enough.
It was called ‘Russian Rose,’ and we sang it from our hearts knowing the agony of so many of the Russian women at this dreadful time.
We did not get to the top of Helvellyn.
We climbed a little further and Arthur cooled off in the tarn.
We really were thinking of the Russians.
Hitler was so very strong, and backed up by the Italians could put all the weight of his  Panzers against the Soviets.
The RAF had the unenviable task of bombing the Nazi munition factories, knowing that they were manned by forced labour from conquered European countries.
I was remembering what my father had told me about other conquering heroes who had tried to attack the great bear.
‘He has done for himself now’ I finally said as we came down through Grasmere to get some transport back to our room.
We both knew of Napoleon's retreat.
It would surely happen again.
We did get to Elterwater, but somehow we were both longing to get back to our posts, and help to end this wicked conflict.
I was quite sick on the train before we got to Euston, and have not liked long train journeys since.
But I reported back to the office on Monday morning.
Our Pharmacist, Miss Alice Gilliatt, sister of the Royal gynaecologist, had heard of a small flat in Fulham.
Arthur went to confirm the booking, and gather furniture for us.
Although they were pleased to see me back, a rift had come between the staff in the Steward's Office and my office.
My clerk had been transferred to there.
I should be alone, and the old custom that clerks resigned on marriage was told to me in no uncertain way.
Mr Whittington had enjoyed doing my work.
Industrial action was taken and I could get no help.
I went to Dr Kelleher and offered my resignation.
He asked me to reconsider this.
I said ‘No,’ but I waited a little longer than the usual month before leaving to soften the blow for both of us.
Now, I am so thankful I stayed longer, for in this time I had an unforgettable experience.
I was sitting quietly in my office tidying up records when a duty nurse came in.
‘Please get stationery ready, Matron has been told we are to take  another batch of severely wounded soldiers.
It must be the second front.
They are coming to us from Dieppe.’
Dept.
Sister Veness dressed as a Warden ready for street duty.
I got as many papers ready as I could, and then waited.
Sure enough, ambulances were arriving, and Dr Kelleher was supervising the examination of the men.
He had known some time before.
We only had three Sisters, about eight staff nurses, a few ward orderlies and fortunately eight doctors were within call.
They had decided to label each case ‘A,’‘B,’‘C,’ or ‘D’if necessary.
‘A’ were with dressable wounds for the medical wards, ‘B’were for the theatre, as they had wounds needing operative treatment, ‘C’were for as much morphia as we could give them for a quiet inevitable death, ‘D’were corpses.
Everyone did their best.
The younger medical staff worked the clock round on ‘dressing’ cases and some went into the theatre to help surgeons Mr Harding and Mr Thomas and Senior Sister Hancock.
Orderly Miss Bridget Murphy from County Cork kept all instruments sterile and ready for use.
Male orderlies took the post-morphia cases to tidy places in our little mortuary.
I did not know if we had a ‘D.’
Coming on duty, on what must have been the third morning for our ‘C’ cases I met Sister Hancock coming unsteadily down from the theatre.
‘I'm coming off now,’ she said, ‘but Mr Thomas wants to go on.
I think Bell will be with him.’
‘A whole morning, afternoon, night, another day, and now this morning Sister, how can he do this?’
‘He can, and will go on a little’ said Sister.
‘He has sent two orderlies to get another ten or so men from the morgue.
He is going to work on them.’
And work on them he did until late in the afternoon when the seemingly ‘dead’ men were transferred to a newly opened medical ward.
Mr Thomas was from Hastings where he practised privately and at the Royal East Sussex Hospital as a heart surgeon.
We therefore assumed that he knew what he was doing, and got on with our work as well.
Next spring, a messenger from the hospital told me that two of those men had come back to say ‘Thank you’ and take Deputy Superintendent Dr Lloyd out to lunch to celebrate.
One had brought with him his father who was an MP.
For me it was a time of revelation.
If we, with our feeble skills and instruments had brought back ten men from the seeming dead, I understand all did get well, what could Almighty God do if He had a mind to do something similar?
Why should anyone now doubt the truth of the Resurrection of Our Lord Jesus Christ?
Again there was a new beginning for me in September.
I joined the local ARP Services, and as my husband had not been considered fit for Navy service yet, he did too, unofficially of course.
His back was still raw from immersion in the icy Atlantic sea.
He had been eight days at the wheel of the destroyer, and had brought her back from Greenland by ‘Boxing the compass’ and his father, HMS Reading's senior officer, now more than middle-aged, had been put out of action by the rigours of the journey from Liverpool to America, and had had to hand over to Arthur when about two days out of St John's heading for Iceland.
Sub Lieutenant Saunders had instructions to bring HMS Reading into Chatham, so round the north most of the Atlantic passages he had taken her, and round the north of Scotland, down the  North Sea passage, and brought her safe with all hands, into Chatham main dockyard for paying off.
But she was ordered to yet another voyage.
She did not return to land again.
Only Lieutenant Cherry, my husband, and Leading Seaman Webster were left of that crew, as they had good reasons for leaving her.
So I did not feel too unhappy at leaving ‘The Western’ premises.
Who knew how soon I should be back?
All through the rest of the autumn the raids continued.
I was trained for my new work at the main ARP centre in the Fulham Road.
It took me a month to pass the first aid, anti-gas and light rescue tests, and then I was allocated to the Rivermead Court post.
This was the Hurlingham Club end of the court, and my patrol was along the front of the court, up Daisy Lane, to the junction with Fulham Palace Road, past the ‘local’ Six Bells, past the side of the Court, along the riverside back to base.
I went along to Westminster Evening Institute again.
I had sat the finals for Philosophy in late May.
I signed for yet another year's work, Social Psychology.
Our lecturer was Miss Wilson of the LSE.
I had had quite a grounding in this at the City Temple.
Dr Leslie Weatherhead talked much about individual cases, but we soon learned there were patterns of human behaviour.
On one of our periods off duty we went to see my mother and father.
They were doing very well indeed.
They had rented a cottage overlooking the sea on the East Hill at Hastings.
Mother loved it as she could watch the sea in all its moods.
Father was not quite so sure.
He had a healthy respect for his old ally, but as the little dwelling was about a hundred and fifty feet above the beach, he could not really complain.
No-one had ever known a tide as high as that.
During his fishing time though it was sheer delight for him, his boys were always ready and willing to go to sea, bother U-boats etc!
Etc, I regret to say, were sniping aircraft from Vichy, France, who flew over the channel, sometimes as low as twenty to thirty feet above the waves and were trigger happy.
One day an old fisherman, we called ‘Spider’ Phillips, failed to return.
His wife appealed to other younger men.
They walked over the cliffs searching the sea.
His tiny boat was seen washing ashore near Ecclesbourne Glen.
They waded out to get her.
‘Spider’ was aboard, but quite dead.
They had shot an old man alone in a row boat!
We were very angry indeed.
Even more determined were Hastings folk to get as speedy an end to the Nazi brutes as we could.
Father's parting present to us was a beautiful large lobster he and one of the boys had brought home when they went to pull up their  lobster pots.
Rev. Dr. Leslie D. Weatherhead, CH, Minister of City Temple.
We sat in our little flat recovering from a good dip in the briny channel and slowly eating some of the delicacy.
‘Oh! dear, the siren again.’
Into our uniform and out to the main post.
The bombers were very near.
A crash in the direction of the Town Hall warned us we would soon be needed.
‘Cool it’ said Mr Bob Cheek, Chief ARP man, ‘I heard too much noise from the road.’
He was right, a fire watcher came in saying that there was a stick of small unexploded bombs right down the Palace Road but that the junction of Munster and Dawes Road had had a hundred pounder and houses had gone.
‘We've got to go’ we said.
So four of us took our stirrup pumps and torches and picked our way through what was a minefield.
When we got there it really was a mess but services had come even from West Chelsea and we had to go back in case any of our unexploded bombs went off and we were needed nearer the river.
About 4 am things quietened down, and we went home to get a spot of sleep.
Next morning, as I went to take in the milk, Mrs Rankin, our Burnfoot Avenue landlady greeted me.
‘What a night’ she said.
‘We went down to Bishop Creighton House to help.
They got Munster Road alright, your little Winnie Wilmott is gone, and her mother too.’
This was a loss indeed.
Winnie was our Dawes Road Brown Owl.
She had not been called up as she had to care for her widowed mother and do a Civil Service job.
Very little was found of either body, but Winnie was so loved that we arranged a remembrance service for her the following Sunday.
Our Church was crowded.
The Mayor lead the mourners.
Her last tribute was a most fine rendering of the Hallelujah Chorus by our uniformed organist.
We were quite sure Winnie and her mother liked that.
Monday and Tuesday were quiet but Wednesday saw trouble again.
‘It's Dawes Road this time’ called the look-out.
So it was.
From his vantage point we could see the top of the road blazing to high heaven.
‘The Church!’ we cried out and rushed to get anything we could lay hands on to put the fire out.
It was only we Palace Roadites, and a few more, for Lots Road Power Station had been the target and they had not missed.
It was blazing worse than the Church.
After two exhausting hours we had to give in to the flames.
Almost weeping we went back to base.
What might we have to do next?
The All-clear went  before dawn.
We snatched something like rest, and then went to see our Church.
It had been almost razed to street level as the fire burnt all the wooden beams and the pews, but the lower hall was intact, water had seeped into the choir robing room and was spoiling the hymn books.
Willing hands helped us rescue as many of them as we could, and we got our robes out to take home and wash.
Even then there were vandals to guard against.
Next Sunday we met in a Deacon's house.
Dawes Road would go on.
Some of the ‘Heavy rescue’ men would come and continue shoring up the main walls, a roof would be put on at ground level.
We would sing again.
The following Sunday was bright and clear, and we sang the full morning service in bright sunshine under ‘the high vault of heaven.’
Our robes were clean and bright, our best Bible had been saved, and was used.
We really felt good.
Back to choir practice we said.
We had several new recruits too.
Late autumn was cold and we felt the winter would be bad.
We were issued with warm woollen navy blue overcoats.
I only used my cape at home.
I joined the queues in Putney High Street for food.
One day, not even fish arrived, and so I bought some of the goat's meat offered.
I cooked it in a cheap saucepan.
It was horrible.
We both felt sick.
I threw the saucepan away to get rid of the memory and the smell.
Toasted cheese at the Post tasted so well that night.
MUSIC IN THE NIGHT
Autumn was quite pleasant.
The raids were not so frequent.
We were able to play tennis in the Fulham Palace Park gardens.
In the evening there were snooker matches played between the various posts.
The tournaments were played at Munster Road headquarters, and with the women in trousers, the games were quite competitive.
I was able to go to Westminster for fairly regular lectures and we added anthropology to our social psychology studies.
We had the most tremendous lift from the victory of El Alamein in October.
Although my household and ARP duties did not allow of a visit to the Western hospital some folk came to see us at the main post, and laugh at the fact that the Steward of the hospital had had to send the last of his well-trained clerks to  Egypt to help count the number of prisoners and try to get the provision for them in some sort of order.
I know Britain gets so much criticism nowadays from less thoughtful nations, but when, please ask yourselves, in the history of the world, has a conquering nation more than half-starved herself, tried to feed abject, seemingly useless captives?
November came, again with cold fog.
We added darts to our sports achievements, and of course, now that a ground level roof had been put on the Church, there were choir practice and Church meetings to attend.
But as November 11th came, I longed to be at the City Temple again for the fine organ music, especially by Walford Davis.
I decided to go alone on the Sunday morning.
Late November brought chilling frosts.
We were very silent, at the Post, when the news of Stalingrad reached us.
‘If only this will shorten things a bit,’ was the most popular remark.
At church we began to rehearse the Christmas music, and get ready to cheer the people, if we could.
Food was getting even shorter, but it was amazing what sharing would do.
We ordered the candles for our ‘Candlelight Carol Service.’
On one of my patrols to the end of Putney  Bridge I found the body of an elderly woman, almost at the end of her life.
She might have been trying to reach our Post for help, but she had crawled under the last parapet, and could go no farther.
I was so glad the phone box was so near and was operational, as were almost all public phones at that time.
I rang immediately for an ambulance, and then went back to stay with her.
‘Into Western,’ I said so thankfully to the men when they came.
We greeted the New Year with courage and hope.
Another theatre or two had opened in the West End.
I did once get to the ‘Windmill’ and thoroughly enjoyed it.
Then John Gielgud opened in a Barrie play, but he had only got into the third act when the siren went.
Fortunately there was order, even though a bomb was heard to drop quite near.
Another fortnight's quiet made us coax my parents to come up to see Barrie's ‘What every woman knows’ with Barbara Mullen.
We also visited ‘Lord's’ before this performance, a place my father had longed to see.
The play was necessarily a matinee, and as we went down past the Albert Hall a siren did go.
We got off and took cover for a while, then came up and got another bus to Fulham.
Although maintaining all the Services we should, it was possible to ‘go up West’ almost every week.
The New Theatre opened again with the Vic-Wells Ballet performing.
And it was good that my brother-in-law and sister could have leave together.
We invited them to Fulham.
We decided on the ballet.
Just as we got to the doors a voice said ‘Full up.’
We decided to wait.
‘Two, and then one’ came a cheerful offer.
Nancy and I decided to take the two.
We were shown, for our seven shillings and sixpence each, into a fine box.
‘Where are we?’ we gasped.
We were even more amazed when we were joined by two handsome Polish officers.
Then the excitement seemed to start below us.
‘Can it be them?’ we distinctly heard.
‘No, Margaret is not as old as that, and not in the WAAF.’
But ‘Has Elizabeth joined the Navy then?’ came from more than one seat.
Then it was decided we were not, and soon the lights lowered.
But we still went on enjoying ourselves immensely for the officers handed us chocolates and were very kind.
I cannot quite remember the title of the Ballet, but Miss Margot Fonteyn was on her way up, we were quite sure, and that redhead Moira Shearer was running her a good second.
March again brought the Easter music.
Many choruses from the Messiah were learnt, but again we decided to give ‘Olivet to Calvary’ in Holy Week.
Our tiny underground Church was too small, so we invited everyone to the main hall of Munster Road School.
It was our best work, every soloist gave of his and her best.
The audience sang their hymns surpassingly well.
There were no ‘alerts.’
How glad we were soon to be of this memory.
April was not a good month.
It was cold and windy and yet we were often called out for help in the spasmodic raids on South Kensington and Chelsea.
But through it all stood good old Battersea Power Station.
The Mother of Parliaments got it, and Sir Bernard Spilsbury, the great pathologist, mourned the loss of his only son when the front of St Thomas' got a direct hit, and the team, at the ready to help others, nurses, ambulance men, and junior doctors, paid the supreme sacrifice.
‘C'est la guerre,’ is not funny for me any more.
Sir Bernard never recovered from the loss either.
The Americans were indeed making their presence felt now, and a tragedy or two in London's West End, whether this was intentional or not, united us in our common purpose against the enemy.
It did have its funny side as well.
True Londoners were sobered up by what was happening to their town, but young fellows, sometimes coming from as far as California, felt very lost and lonely, and sometimes escaped via the bottle.
I was waiting one night for a bus from South Kensington to Fulham when two of them, who obviously had had one or two over the eight came towards me.
‘Are you waiting for a bus Ma'am,’ one asked.
‘Yes…oh!
Where to?’
They had never heard of Fulham.
I really don't think there is one in the States.
They felt really unhappy.
‘Drunk…drunk,’ sobbed the other.
‘This whole darned city is drunk.’
I moved away from the bus post, they needed the support more than I did.
They made no attempt to molest me in any way, and after having hugged the post for about five minutes they went over to see if any of the Museums were open.
The bus was unusually late, for our No. 30, a whole quarter of an hour.
Although he enjoyed ARP work my husband was really fretting to be back with the Navy.
He had heard of the loss, on her following voyage of HMS Reading.
She had gone down with all hands in the North Atlantic.
Her luck had been pushed, most probably of necessity, too far.
All on board were  Britons , from all our islands.
We do have a noble heritage.
At last the call came.
Report to Liverpool but only for transport.
Seconded to second-in-command Tobruk harbour.
It was just after I found I was pregnant, but I was so pleased for him, and for myself, I did not fret.
I got leave to see him off at Euston.
His train was not due out until 10 pm.
I had planned to go back by bus to Fulham, as I still could not face the underground.
There were sad farewells as other relatives were obviously so afraid of the North Atlantic.
It would seem that even senior officers were quailing, but go they did.
Just as I left the station for the bus stop, the siren went.
I sped along Euston Road, hoping for more buses but as I neared Goodge Street all hell seemed to break loose.
I was in my uniform, but that could not be seen.
Hands clutched out to get me from all sides.
By the light of torches I could see one policeman but he could not see me, and my pleas for help were not heeded.
I ran as fast as I dared along the Tottenham Court Road.
Then I saw another policeman.
He did understand, and told me to stay close to him and he would take me to the YWCA.
I stayed right close to him, and parried off attempts to hold me.
We reached the Bedford Square House and he saw me up the steps.
It had a shelter for a hundred or so, and I spent the rest of the night there.
With morning light came the ‘all clear,’ and I went home.
Late June brought the fine weather.
We all felt a bit better.
We were joined at the Rivermead post by a jolly girl from Chelsea called ‘George.’
Her parents had been in the Chelsea Art set.
I also acquired a most intelligent cat.
He was black, and perhaps as I was in trousers, he thought I might have known Sir Richard Whittington.
I fed him well whenever I was lucky at the fishmongers, though the other staff were not all as fond of sea food as we were.
He came with me the whole way of my round south of the Court.
George had her beat along the north side.
But the Chief Warden had had instructions this was not to be an easy summer.
We were sent out in pairs after 6 pm in the evening when all the paterfamilias who were left might be at home, to make a thorough census of the district and ask who might be in a house, when, and what were the provisions for even more serious raiding.
We tried not to alarm our charges.
In the centre of the Court the door to a large flat was answered by a pretty fairhaired little girl of about three years old.
To the question could we see her Daddy, she replied ‘I am afraid Daddy is not home yet, Mummy is here, but I think you should see Nanny, she is looking after us.
Daddy won't be home till after eight, but Mummy has laid the supper.’
I was shown into the porch, and saw  it was so.
Mummy was coming rather slowly, so I asked the little girl her name.
‘Oh I'm Vanessa, and when I grow up I'm going to be an actress.’
The card told me the rest.
This was the flat of Mr, later Sir, Michael Redgrave.
Then the Mayor of Fulham thought people should be cheered up, and began to plan a party.
It was not yet to be.
Out of the sky came another really serious menace.
The V1 bombs or doodlebugs, or as they were later called the ‘Bob Hope’ bombs.
You bobbed and you hoped.
Indeed Mr Hope, always so ready to help the country of his birth, came over to be with us.
Yes, we bobbed and we hoped.
I remember putting the door mat over my head, as the engine mechanism of the bomb stopped right over our house.
No time to get to the shelter, there was a noise of metal all around us.
The final blast was three roads away and demolished about ten houses.
‘All clear, was sounded and we went out to find the clock mechanism of the disgusting contraption in the road just outside.
A month of this terror passed then again there was quiet, at least in Fulham.
We knew the RAF, and Allied friends were seeking out the launching sites of these monstrosities, and wiping them out where they could.
It was time for the party, early August.
No Bank holiday for anybody this year.
‘Except in Fulham,’ said His Worship.
He had acquired the use of Fulham Palace Grounds.
All hands went to it.
Catering ladies and men from the British restaurants manned a large marquee, for sandwiches, mostly paste, and even ice creams, with the inevitable cups of tea.
Coffee was practically unheard of.
Our post found some bunting, and George and I dressed as tin soldiers.
We had to charge three pence (old money) for adults.
Children were admitted free, accompanied by parents if possible.
As George and I were ‘the guards’ we saw that all children were supervised and that all passed muster on the way in.
Older wardens planned, and even some of them ran, races of all kinds.
It was the last but one happy time I had in Fulham.
Especial athletic prowess was rewarded by a tube of Smarties, all got a wine gum for their efforts.
The first week in July I was called to the Malet Street premises of the University.
We had to sit a three hour paper of questions about all our three years work in Sociology.
We could then consider ourselves qualified in theoretic work, and a letter from our superiors in our chosen field would mean the fall Diploma.
I duly arrived at 9.30 am.
All was quiet, but only five of us had dared to come.
The Invigilator gave out the papers and we began.
The  questions were on unemployment, the future of the Health Service, and the lives of the ‘greats.’
I fell to it.
But about 11.30 the siren went.
We were determined to finish, we did not hear the doodle-bug noise, or any thuds so we went on till 12.30.
We handed in our papers, and I do not think a more relieved set of students or an Invigilator ever rushed for the lift and down to the shelter.
The damage done by the V1's to life and property was so serious that ‘Heavy rescue’ had to come to help.
It was said that Wandsworth and Brixton gaols were relieved of their less violent offenders to join this service.
Also any ‘reserved occupation’ man or a less seriously disabled person could help.
An exercise was planned in Chelsea.
George and I were to be victims, I was to be taken to the top floor and George to the third floor up.
The house had already been damaged.
I was to have broken my leg attempting to get from bed to the top of the stars.
I was duly bandaged by the first aid folk, and then placed in position.
I waited for my rescuer.
I did get a shock.
Until the end of the war so very few folk had beards, and then only short ones nicely trimmed, but into the room came a most handsome young man with a black fuzz of over eight inches.
I was really deeply moved as I had only seen such a thing before in religious pictures.
He was so clean and tidy otherwise.
I was most willingly rescued and brought down manually the four flights of stairs.
George said some folk had all the luck.
The day was rounded off by news from the hospital of the first use of penicillin.
Our nursing squad described its discovery and its first triumphs over disease.
A red letter day indeed.
Then the party was over.
Out of the sky came the worst of all menaces.
Without the slightest warning at all bombs began to drop and shift whole areas at least fifty yards square.
The V2 had arrived.
It really was women and children out then.
I had to go to the Town Hall, and hand in my badges and battle dress, and then report to the station.
I was sent to Bedford in Bedfordshire.
MUSIC IN THE NIGHT
It was a chilly evening when I left London via Paddington for Bedford, and for the first time I saw signs of panic.
For so long the London folk had been patient and kindly helping one another, and always so cheerful.
This sudden attack, coming from they knew not where had been shattering, as no doubt it had been meant to be.
Although British intelligence had shrewd ideas of the launching sites of these abominations they were difficult targets even for the RAF.
As the train stood on the platform we did not know if we would ever board it.
Then came the order from one of the station staff for us to do so, and there was really pushing and place seeking.
Not quite as bad as I have seen on our modern commuter stations, but we were jam packed and could not be parted from our scant luggage.
I found a friend from Fulham Church, a qualified Chemist who had been allowed to keep his shop because of its value to the community, and the fact that he had an invalid wife.
He was taking this highly nervous lady away from the local hospital to one in the Bedford area.
We talked of the good days and our music.
Edgar knew his destination and they soon got a taxi.
I waited for help.
Nothing happened for half an hour so I asked where the nearest Young Women's Christian Association hostel was.
I then took another taxi.
Yes, I could stay the night, as I was homeless and compulsorily brought here, but in the morning, as I was over twenty-five, I must report to the billeting Officer.
I left the hostel at about 9 am and went to find the office.
In the meantime I noticed the door of the Parish Church in the main square standing open.
Greatly daring, as Non-conformists even in the war years did not go lightly into an Anglican Church, I went in and sat down.
In the distance I could see a habited Deaconess clearing away the vessels from the early Communion service.
Everywhere was quiet and order.
I could no longer contain my emotion, but going down on my knees I wept as quietly as I could for quite a long while.
The Deaconess came over and sat beside me.
When I was in a fit state she  asked if I would like to talk to her.
No, I could not talk, but I was grateful all the same.
She then quietly gave me a list of the services there and said I would be most welcome to come to them, or talk to her if I felt I could.
Within the hour I was feeling better and ready to tackle the billeting office.
Again there was distress.
Bedford was already bursting at the seams with refugees of all kinds.
We were apparently the last straw.
They rang the YW.
No, I really could not stay there any longer.
I was twenty-eight years of age.
So very reluctantly they took me to the home of a local merchant whose wife's health had been the reason for their not taking anyone so far.
I could see she was an unfit woman, and although I was resolved not to tell anyone now of my qualifications, except that I had been an ARP worker, I did try to be as helpful to her as I could.
She was really threatened by me, she thought.
I went to my room as often as I could, and then after a week I went to the local Employment Exchange.
A job would get me out of the house a lot and provide me with much needed money.
I registered as a ‘Clerk.’
I was smiled upon.
‘We have a good job with the BBC,’ they said.
‘We think you would suit them.’
Again I was smiled on by one who I am sure was Val Gielgud.
Then I had to be honest, and say that I could not guarantee to work for longer than four months.
He looked me up and down and with a twinkle in his eye said ‘Oh! dear, I think I shall have to let you know after all.’
We were both sad, but it was for the best.
Back at the Exchange the girl clerk was surprised.
I did not enlighten her.
‘Well I am sure Goldington Hall will take you, take this card and go along.’
I did that and was duly engaged to be a clerk in this pretty little mansion which housed the records of our fighting aircraft.
We had to check every morning that all their mechanism was in order.
This we did by making sure every request for spare parts, made on order slips, had been met by the delivery of these parts told us by the exact delivery slip.
It was not difficult, but most important, and we had to check and double check our work, and then it went to an official supervisor.
We were a very mixed bunch of women.
Some were housewives who had been called up under the call up for women of forty-five to fifty.
At that time I thought we were scraping the barrel.
But now I know better.
The old ‘pussy-cats’ as we called them were put together, and talked endlessly of the hardship of their lot.
I was sat next to an Army wife of about my own age.
She was a most responsible woman  who had been abroad with her husband on service before the war.
Her constant prayer was for the safety of ‘My John’ stuck, as she knew he was, in the mud around Ravenna.
On the other side sat a pleasant Bedford woman of about thirty years of age.
Like us, she was only required to work until 3 pm in the afternoon.
She was the organist of a village church, and the freedom from long hours in a shop, or former office work, had given her the opportunity of practising more on her dearly loved organ.
It does not seem possible that such women just were not able to have part-time work that would enable them to keep house for an elderly parent, and do their own thing as well.
But the main workforce was of younger married women.
Those whose husbands were working in the area in reserved occupations were fortunate indeed.
Those whose husbands were away went in constant dread of advances made to them by Allied soldiers in the area.
Even those with children were not immune from this.
They were considered lawful game for these men as if we had been conquered.
It was fatal to be out alone after dark, one had asked for it.
‘Mrs Army Captain,’ as we called her, did what she could.
She told them of the hardships suffered by our men.
‘They are doing it for you and the children.: This must have saved a lot of misery, as she was really listened to.
But one branch of these forces were much more subtle.
They tempted the women by treats and presents, and when that failed by psychological means.
‘Did your husband really love you and help you?’ after a drink or two and ‘How do you know he is not out with the girls where he is?
Do what you want.’
It is hard to forgive this.
Especially when after one who had seduced a mother of three, and had got what he wanted, threatened her by blackmail of telling a brutal husband about this if she did not continue the association.
I had to change my lodgings.
The invalid lady became hysterical.
I could not get her to believe I had booked a Maternity Hospital for the birth of my child.
It was, I know, in Hertfordshire, but I am sure she thought I was lying and that she might have to deliver the child.
I again had to find my own place.
I saw an advertisement in the local paper, answered it, and was accepted.
It was to share a bedroom with a wife in similar circumstances.
Well, not entirely, as she had a little girl of eighteen months old and her husband was missing reported killed in a bombing raid over Germany.
She was a gentle quiet girl, deeply thoughtful, and we hit it off from the start.
She did have a job with the BBC and someone cared for the child in the day.
Again I told no-one of my profession.
I was only just able to take  care of myself so further responsibility I could not take.
My room mate understood.
We both really enjoyed this old house in the Kimbolton Road, for as well as us there were quite a lot of folk from the BBC.
Shopping in the market place for some more knitting wool, I loved seeing Sir Adrian Boult buying brussel sprouts.
No mistaking that noble head and gait.
We all knew that the life of Sir Henry Wood was coming peacefully to its close.
He had a room in the small white hotel on the other bank of the Ouse and lay watching the boats, and in the evening Lady Wood read him a chapter from the New Testament before she retired herself.
We had four violinists from the Philharmonic Orchestra.
The second violin, whom we nicknamed ‘Dolly’ because we could not pronounce his  Portuguese name, was deeply depressed, and sometimes could not play.
The week when we really knew of the treatment of the Jews in Holland he could not eat either.
Childless himself, the love of his life had been his beautiful Dutch nieces.
He could not think of their fate.
I went to the little Moravian Chapel nearby and prayed Sir Malcolm Sargent's prayer for ‘God's Ancient People, the Jews.’
I was sad not to be able to go back to Fulham for St Cecilia's Day.
We always had given a concert.
Some I think went to London, but by now I was wearing maternity clothes, and Mr Vinct composed a special lullaby and played it in the house.
Mr Vinct was the third violin and supported ‘Dolly’ very loyally.
But my little ‘widow,’ as I called my room mate privately, could not be sad for long.
She was working with a variety group and we laughed together when Sir Henry, who had still a lot of influence, let it be known that it was his wish that Miss Anne Zeigler married Mr Webster Booth.
It was obvious I was in no condition to cope with a train journey and a stay in Hastings at Christmas.
My parents wrote to say that they were still getting some quite nasty tip-and-run raids.
The farms round about had had to employ German prisoners for labour, and on the whole they were quite well behaved.
They should have been, as they were given the same rations as a British farm labourer.
In Wealden Sussex there were Austrians, amongst them Anton Lang, who had played Jesus in the Oberammergau Passion Play.
He was indeed a carpenter, and spent his spare time carving small wooden toys for his children.
I began to prepare in a small way to enjoy the Christmas in Bedford.
I bought a Moses basket (quite rare at that time) for my baby, and  wondered why my room mate was not so enthusiastic.
I expected it was the loss of her husband, so I bought some material and made bead bags, and bags I filled with chalks, and a small drawing board for her quite intelligent little girl.
At the Moravian Church we had fine Advent hymns, and once I got as far as Bunyan Meeting and heard theirs.
I walked across the bridge over the Ouse and thought of the truly great prophet Bunyan who was once imprisoned there, but with care, as he was allowed a fire in his little cell, and in a small adjoining one, his little blind daughter could stay near him.
The weather turned bitterly cold.
I remember not being able to stand outside a phone kiosk any longer and dragging out a man who was obviously gossiping therein.
The buses to Goldington Hall were very good indeed for which we were so thankful as our clothing was getting thin.
‘Mrs Army Captain' was often in tears, for it looked as if the Army boys would be in the Ravenna mud until the spring.
Our landlady obviously liked Christmas for she began to prepare good fare for us, with the help of her mentally retarded maid.
The BBC, except for poor ‘Dolly’ were in high spirits.
Mr Vinct brought in some of the ‘Daily Service’ folk to see me and to tell me about their work.
On Christmas Eve there was a party for the Variety folk.
I agreed to care for ‘our’ baby whilst her mother had a little happiness.
I was so very near to Bethlehem that night, as pleading that some other homeless folk had come, our landlady had taken away one of our single beds.
I still had my navy blue greatcoat, and went to the billeting officer for a few more blankets.
We made up a bed on the floor and we took turns to sleep in the bed itself.
Fortunately she left the cot, so baby slept quite well.
At midnight, when, as the carol says, the animals were on their knees, I crept to the cot and put my pillowcase offering for the little fatherless one.
Then I slept till her mother came in.
She had had a wonderful time and took an extra turn of the floor.
During the whole of the great day we had most wonderful food.
As I do not, as a rule, take alcohol, the one glass of sherry I had with lunch enabled me to enjoy myself with the other guests.
Both ‘Dolly’ and I went to bed early, and said many prayers.
We did not celebrate the New Year.
What would it bring us?
Our King repeated his great prayer ‘I said to the man at the gate of the Year…give me a light….’
In our billets we all said ‘Yes, Your Majesty, we do too.
Our soldiers had made the Normandy landings almost six months before, but the Axis was still very strong.
We began to get worse and worse news from the Continent about Concentration Camps, for Jews  and others, that were almost unbelievably brutal.
Winston was picking a team of folk from all walks of life to see them as soon as they could.
I began to make quite certain I could go to Fulmer Chase Maternity Hospital for the Wives of Service Men started by Mrs Clementine Churchill.
Whether the Bedford health authorities did not like this, I shall not know, but they would give me no help at all.
I offered to pay for my transport, but ‘No’ was the answer.
Their local maternity unit was working overtime.
My Sister was at Sandy, but up to her eyes in her work with the Maquis.
Fortunately a country house nearby elected to take mothers for a month before their actual confinement.
I booked for this.
Nancy was able to come to Bedford and a kindly Methodist lady put her up for the night.
In the morning she took me to the station, with my luggage including the cot, put me on the train, and said ‘Goodbye.’
We went via Kings Cross and I got a taxi across to Baker Street for Hertfordshire.
I think the nearest station was Stoke Poges.
I rang to say I had arrived and a car came from Fulmer to meet me.
Again I felt so relieved to be ‘in care,’ and to enjoy the great comfort of a room with two beds and unlimited baths, and a nurse or two around the place to check on my progress.
It was not thought too good at one time, so I was sent to Slough General Hospital for an X-Ray.
There was so little heating.
How I did not develop pneumonia I shall never know, my sciatic nerve was outraged by this treatment, and fortunately I was taken back to Fulmer House.
There all had seemed worthwhile, for going up and down the stairs I saw the familiar ‘Barts’ nurses holding precious little bundles in their arms.
Soon I would have one of my own.
The quiet of Hertfordshire did wonders for me, I walked in the grounds and looked across at the ‘Immemorial elms’ and listened for the ‘Curfew’to toll the knell of parting day in the best Thomas Gray style.
It did not but the lowing herd wound its way to and from the milking sheds, and left the world to darkness and to us each night.
After three weeks it was my turn to go to the delivery ward at Fulmer.
It was a large airy oak beamed room.
I lay for what seemed hours on the bed, sustained only by cups of tea brought by an auxiliary nurse.
‘No, you are not ready yet’ was all she could say.
I repeated and repeated the twenty-third psalm, as I had done in so many kinds of danger before.
This time I was sure I was in the valley ‘As dark as death.’
Another mother joined me.
We talked a little till her cries took  her into the little theatre.
I had quite a restless night, and did not really fancy the tea I was brought in the morning.
I had been taught not to cry till I was really hurt, and so it was not until about eleven o'clock I really began to be noticed and I went into the theatre.
‘No, you are not ready yet’ still said the auxiliary nurse.
A doctor came, and said the same thing, then she went off duty for lunch.
I really cried out for God's help, and my baby answered it.
She was at least head first in this world when the auxiliary nurse rushed in and caught the rest of her.
Then and only then was I given a real dose of chloroform ‘for the afterbirth’ I was told.
That over I can remember nothing until I awoke in a pleasant ward with three other mothers who had already seen their offspring.
The three of us who had known that their babies were alive were very quiet.
The mother in the corner had been told hers was not very well but he was a little boy and would probably live.
At ten o'clock two babies were brought for feeding.
I was to have a day's rest.
I felt I needed it.
I was trussed up like a chicken for roasting.
I fell asleep again till the time for the evening feed.
Yes, four babies were coming we were told.
At first came a very senior Sister and went over to the childless one in the corner.
‘We are so sorry my dear.
Your baby is recovering well, but she is a girl.’
‘Thank God,’ said the practical ‘Airforce’mother.
She had been a champion skater at St Moritz, until her pilot husband had rescued her from what was becoming a very dreary grind.
At least that's what she said.
Her first reaction to her baby's birth had been to cable to him that he had a son.
Now another cable must be sent.
But it was done cheerfully.
‘Alice’ was a jolly girl and did not give way to deep depression as another ‘Army’mother had done on finding that baby would not be a Major as her father was.
We still thought the ATS were a wartime phenomenon.
A fine strapping baby boy was taken to the smart young mother in the opposite corner to me.
She was sitting up in bed showing off her sunburn.
‘So she should’ said Alice in an aside to me.
‘She has only been flown back a month ago from the near east.
Her husband is in the Camel Corps.’
My baby was wrapped in a beautifully crocheted pink woollen shawl.
As the Sister came to me she said ‘Don't you think this is yours because it is not.
Look at your funny round face, and your dark eyes  and hair, and just look at her.
This little sugar plum fairy is either a changeling, or you had an affair with the milkman.
You can feed her and then I'm having her back.’
I was so thankful she was well that I too laughed at the repartee.
Then behind her came a staff nurse.
‘Cheer up, the British Army,’ she said to the other, quiet, regular Army wife in the ward.
‘Here is your poor little starving private.
He will soon be seeing his Dad.
The German lines broke in Europe this morning.
Here, I've got you a paper to prove it.’
‘Oh!
Heather Joy,’ I said to my little girl.
Mrs D.F.
Sanders Veness and daughter Heather.
THE BELLS RING AGAIN.
Maternity care was still taken very seriously in 1944.
No getting up and leaving hospital in two days then.
Although I had had only two stitches at the delivery I was tightly bandaged and not allowed to get out of bed for three days.
But I soon recovered from the chloroform and really appreciated the company of the other Mums.
In the mornings all the talk was of the babies and their welfare.
‘Yes,’ said our Regular Army girl.
‘My poor little boy certainly resembles a frog, but of course we are Catholics, so he should be alright.
I have dedicated him to the blessed St John the Baptist and had him circumcised.’
As Heather was not a boy this latter did not really concern us, although I thought I was sure Blessed St John wept with the little one over the circumcision he had, of course, had himself.
But I thought that to have a saint's care was a good idea, even to my Protestant mind.
She had to be for St Cecilia as I hoped she would share my love of music and would know the lullaby Mr Vinct had composed for her.
We watched with admiration as Alice our skater, now recovering from her ordeal and the fact that her son was a girl, began to unpack the beautiful Swiss lace gowns she had brought with her.
‘Not to worry’ said Alice, ‘at least my mother will be pleased, but she'll not be a skater if I can help it.’
Quite a happy telegram came from father RAF with a remark about all being ‘right on the target.’
‘The Camel Corps’ was disgustingly healthy, and so was her offspring.
But they were so good-natured that we forgave all.
He was obviously going to be a Sheik in his own right, and it would seem that he knew it.
We were handed Turkish delights across the ward, and were read to and generally watched over as, I should think, the chief wife watched over the ladies of the harem.
Heather was the smallest baby of all, weighing in under six pounds.
She had to be fed, as well as by me, with a kind of pipette, like a  fountain pen filler.
Whether it was because she knew she was my baby and did not like being with ward Sister, I shall not know, but she only gained two ounces the first week.
That could however have been also due to the fact that on her third night in this world, although the Germans had never previously visited Hertfordshire, we got a bomb on the front of the hospital.
Fortunately it was nearly empty, all mothers being at the back, and staff too, except those who lived out anyway.
It upset both nursing and medical staff.
It also did something to the plumbing, and it was decided not to keep us for the month we had been promised, but to billet us out to houses nearby.
As a Navy wife, I was sent to the home of Admiral Shelley, ‘The Pickeridge’ nearby.
I was allowed to get up and dress on the tenth day after Heather's birth, and go to the day room of the hospital ready to go to my billet at the fortnight.
In this day room we again met the most interesting folk.
We gazed with admiration at Tanya.
How had she come from Murmansk, to have her baby here in England and be near the sailor father?
She was six feet tall and so strong.
The nursing staff said she got off the delivery table herself, and could not understand why she was ordered back to bed.
The first two days at ‘The Pickeridge’ I spent in my room, with my meals brought up by Ada, the housemaid, and being visited by Lady Shelley.
We were to have the Camel Corps for four days until her father could fetch her.
On the third day I was allowed down to dinner, and we were very appreciative of the good meal, and His Lordship's well-made coffee.
On the fourth day we were joined by a Lady Diana, who had come to spend the weekend with her aunt and uncle.
On Saturday two boys came over from Eton.
The younger one of Lord Shelley's sons had come via Windsor Castle where he had shared a dancing class with the Princesses.
All the young people admired our babies, especially Heather.
David Shelley was so taken with her beautiful blond hair and the pink ensemble he accompanied her back to her room and cot, asking Ada no end of awkward questions.
During the next week I was able to tell something about our hospital and work.
We agreed that a hospital was very much like a ship, and being under fire had made her like a man of war.
My letters to my parents at their cottage, No. 1, the Tackleway, Hastings and to my husband in Tobruk harbour were the source of much comment.
I was still not allowed out of doors, except on the lawn on fine days, and it must not have been the good luck of many ‘fishy’ characters to have had their letters posted by one of ‘Their Lordships.’
It was really done with much relish, and to prove his efficiency in all branches of His Majesty's Navy and Fishing Fleets, Lord Shelley went into Uxbridge, bought the best cod he could find, and insisted on cooking it himself and serving it for dinner.
It was a masterpiece of good cooking, baked with lemon and tomato inserted in the cuts on its back, and as tender to eat as the proverbial chicken.
His steady hand cut us ‘steaks’ by the slice with no wastage at all.
On the third Sunday I was allowed to go to Church, the Parish Church of Fulmer.
All the Shelley family came, the boys going back to school in the afternoon.
At dinner the state of the Holy Catholic Church in England was discussed and problems connected with it, after coffee.
I found that a Parish Church could present almost the same problems as our Congregational ones.
The solution must lie in education we decided.
Lady Diana stayed on and accompanied me on my first walk with the pram out of the garden.
We went in the direction of Stoke Poges and recited as much of the ‘Elegy’ as we could remember.
Then she kindly pushed back, as I was rather tired.
She was taking a secretarial course, and I was able to tell her about the importance of that work in hospital.
On the Saturday I was seen off by Ada, the Shelleys going away on the Friday night.
I had Heather in the Moses basket, and we went to Baker Street via Elstree.
At Elstree a quite famous actress got in, and cooed a bit to Heather until we got to London.
She then stayed with us, and got a taxi for me to Victoria, which was taking Hastings trains at that time.
then she bought a bunch of violets and put them on the baby's pillow, blew us a kiss and disappeared.
We were met at Hastings by my mother and sister.
Nancy could always be relied on to be there in an emergency.
Mother had given me a room in her cottage, but was very nervous about having a baby in the house after so many years.
She was to be proved right, as we had been taught a Spartan routine for our babies at ‘Alderbourne Arches’ the pre-natal training unit.
No demand feeding.
Everything to be done by the clock.
If baby cried, no nursing or cuddling, they must just be left.
It was not until I visited the SHAPE nursery in Belgium in 1969, with my then grown-up daughter that I saw this again.
I did break the rules and go over and cuddle her in her cot, but not pick her up out of it.
I also talked to her.
But the crying really upset mother, and because I had so strictly adhered to the feeding rule, I developed an  abscess on one breast.
Fortunately I realized what was happening and went to our Old Town doctor, who had some serious  things to say about this method she considered Germanic, and we were sent to St Helen's Hospital for a minor operation and a re-think.
Hastings nurses gave her so much more food, it was Cow and Gate baby food.
She began to put on weight at almost every feed.
Nancy then arranged that I should go to ‘Hastings House,’ the house of my Aunt Margaret.
This house had been lived in by Lord Byron at one time.
It had been owned by the Turner family, and my aunt's builder husband had bought it from them and was turning it into an apartment house when he was called up for service with the Army.
Heather and I had the large front room on the right of the entrance, which we understood had been a music room, and where Byron, in a temper had thrown an ink bottle at a maid.
There was still a dark blob, where it might have hit the wall.
We did not mind.
It was our first home, and we were going to make the best of it.
Aunt Margaret had with her her three sons, Cedric, Ronald and small Kenneth who was devoted to Heather.
Opposite on the left of our room was the home of an old sailor Mr May.
He had sailed before the mast in a windjammer, and then become a stoker.
We loved him, he was so kindly.
At first I had difficulty in getting Heather's feeds right, and I went to apologize to him when she cried.
He said ‘There are much, much, worse troubles at sea at the moment.
I really do not mind the baby at all.’
As the summer came I could take the pram along the Hastings promenade, and meet up with an old form mate of mine from school days.
Together we walked and talked of the war and our families.
Joan had been deserted in India by a worthless husband she had married whilst on service in Hong Kong.
He was only interested in himself and his business, and had married her under false pretences.
My friend was back with her mother and she and baby Felicity were going to make it together.
Then came the true report about the forced labour camps, the concentration camps, and the cruelties of the Germans in Europe.
As our Army moved forward to meet the Russians the dreadful truth was revealed.
Winston sent out a party of men and women from public life to see for themselves the horrors of Belsen.
CEM Joad came back and rushed for the nearest Vicar.
‘My God,’ he said ‘if mankind has spent three million years in evolution to descend to this, I know the Evangelicals are right.
There is no hope for man apart from the Cross.’
He was then baptised.
The Member for Frome, Somerset, who was  under other emotional stress, and could not ‘take’ what she saw, took her own life, rather than remember what photographs showed us.
‘Finish this whole disgusting business off now,’ the man-in-the-street urged the government.
They did not need telling twice.
We stood on the beach at Hastings, and even my quiet father cheered as wave after wave of the RAF went out to do just that.
It was with the greatest relief we soon heard of the surrender of the German Generals to Field Marshal Montgomery.
Yes, there would be a service of thanksgiving in All Saints Church, that very evening.
The bells crashed out the joyous news practically all day.
Heather could not sleep, and we watched almost the entire Old Town repair to the Church at about six o'clock that evening.
Yet I dare not take my restless baby in.
We stood out in the churchyard, wrapped in shawls listening to the hymns and hearing the organ peeling out.
It was over for quite a few of our friends and neighbours.
But not all.
My cousin Philip was with the Royal Sussex Regiment in the far east and my cousin Dorothy's husband was in the swamps of New Guinea with the Australian forces.
We had a small firework party in the garden of Hastings House, mostly for the children.
I sat on the remains of a Greek column, obviously left from its Byronic time.
Hastings began to try to get back to its pre-war holiday resort living.
We had very good musicians at the White Rock Pavilion, and my parents took Heather whilst I enjoyed a Sunday afternoon concert.
Mother also went with me to hear the Archbishop of Canterbury's wife, Mrs Fisher, talk to young wives and give them some advice on the repair of their families after the separations many of them had suffered.
For those whose husbands had not yet returned, which included my own husband, it was a time of unhappy waiting.
Rations were still very short.
Everything now had to be done to end the war in the Far East.
More forces were sent out, and resources stretched nearly to the limit, especially fuel supplies.
Yet this did not bring us the surrender we hoped for.
Then one morning I did not go early for my paper, and seeing it on the mat Cedric brought it to me.
‘It's happened’ he said very quietly.
‘Look.’
I took the paper from him.
Hiroshima was no more.
I was also very quiet.
I got on with Heather's bath and feed.
Then I went along the promenade to think.
It was the happening that we Hastings children had dreaded ever since our Junior School Headmaster, who also taught Physics, had told us one day in class.
‘If the power of the atom is released’ he had said, ‘it will set up a chain reaction that will not stop until the end of the world.’
It was indeed a serious thought.
Then I remembered the Gospel lessons at Robertson Street.
‘Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will not pass away.’
Mark 13 v31 and Luke 21 v33.
Although my certificate in Sociology had not yet come, I knew that my next and most important study must be Theology, only so I could understand the situation that my children would face in the future, and other people's children would have to meet as well.
Within a week there was surrender in the Far East.
The bells crashed out again, I went quietly into the Church myself, carrying Heather.
Then we spent the evening listening to the music of the young people's party by the Roman Catholics in their Hall opposite.
Yes, something certainly was over, but something else had just began to be thought about.
We were glad of the bells, we were glad of the music.
We were glad of the good fish my father brought for us to celebrate with.
Yes, fish it was for the mental energy to face our new situation.