

WITCHCRAFT
The traffic patrolman signalled for the speeding lady driver to pull over.
The events which followed put the police force of a large northern town on full alert for a missing officer.
The police driver asked for her documents but the woman explained, with a pleasant smile that they were at her home nearby.
She invited him to follow her, and the officer took the unusual course of agreeing.
After a short run, the lady driver turned down a narrow lane, and then into the driveway leading to a large ranch-type bungalow.
As the police officer followed, he saw two notices declaring, ‘No entry.
Trespassers will be prosecuted’.
Two things made him slow down as he came to the entrance.
The first was the knowledge that the bungalow was situated in the town's radio ‘black spot’ and he had failed to report where he was going.
The second was the sight of strange mythological beasts and demonic gargoyles which surrounded and surmounted the gateway.
Drawing to a halt, he recollected an investigation which one of his colleagues had conducted some weeks before.
It had been something to do with a young girl being held against her will on a secluded stud farm, and there had been a mention of witchcraft and drugs.
This, he now recalled, was the same place.
He had laughed when told about the ‘devil group with lots of surplus young  girls hanging around’.
Now he was not too amused as he stepped from his car beneath a large CB aerial flying a strange black flag engraved with a gold five-pointed star (an occult symbol).
By this time, the woman had left her car and the officer followed her into the house.
He noticed a picture of a furry creature with a goat's head and cloven hooves as they entered the sitting room.
‘That's a bit ghoulish,’ he joked nervously.
‘Is it the devil?’
The woman's strange reaction completely unnerved him.
‘Her eyes began to roll and then the pupils disappeared upward,’ he later told his superiors.
‘She began to make weird, inhuman sounds and went as stiff as a board.
And then the picture itself seemed to come alive.’
The picture incident proved too much for the officer and he decided to retire.
He did so quickly, but went into the wrong room which was full of ‘weird things’.
‘I lost my bottle completely and ran,’ he explained later.
It was two hours before he felt sufficiently recovered to stop at a phone box and report in.
A short while after the alert had been called off for the missing officer, a CID friend contacted me to see if I could help with their ‘enquiries’.
Apparently, the owners of the ranch bungalow were suspected of being involved in the exhumation of bodies at two local churches when skulls and other bones were removed, and also the disappearance of three goats on or about the thirteenth of each of the previous three months.
As I write, the police enquiries are still in progress.
Some days later, a farmer phoned to discover whether I knew the meeting times and places of witches in his area.
For several months he had been finding rings of stones, surrounding a large boulder which was often topped with melted wax.
On one occasion he had found a sheep's head jammed between some of the stones.
There were entrails of an animal to be found in other parts of the circle.
It sounded  more like a satanist ritual until he revealed that he had caught several people naked the previous evening.
Only witches normally practise their rituals ‘skyclad’, though other groups have been known to skip round in their birthday suits.
The farmer had fired a warning barrel, but his only reward was a pair of trousers.
The owner had bolted along with his fellow worshippers.
In fairness to witches, these two events are probably not typical.
Modern witchcraft has as many ‘denominations’ as does Christianity and, just as a respectable high Anglo-Catholic might shrivel with embarrassment at the gregarious worship of black Pentecostals, and vice versa, there are similar reactions between various branches of witchcraft.
The great witch trials
In days of old, people of a village would meet to celebrate pagan festivals.
As the influence of Christianity spread, the new religion gradually embraced and took over the festivals, giving them new names and meanings.
For centuries, the two religions co-existed uneasily though there were intermittent purges on witches and people who insisted on celebrating their pagan heritage.
Serious persecution began to arise in the days of King Henry VIII who, at first, was fascinated by sorcery and witchcraft.
He consulted diviners when Anne Boleyn became pregnant, anxious to know whether he could expect a male heir.
The fascination was, however, accompanied by fear, and there seemed to be an inner conflict between his Christian beliefs and the sorcery of witchcraft.
His spiritual advisers were none too happy with his reliance on pagan practices, nor probably was his court favourite Buckingham.
There is evidence that a seer had foretold that, should Henry die without an heir, the earl would assume the throne.
Buckingham lost his head over the matter.
By 1542, Henry's fear had become the dominant emotion  and he ordered Parliament to legislate against those who used incantations and practices of sorcery aimed at killing or injuring people, or destroying their goods and chattels.
Daughter Elizabeth later refined the laws and increased the penalties, partly because she and her advisers often suspected that there were occult plots against the throne.
For three hundred years the persecution of witchcraft was to continue until the advent of our modern scientific world.
Witchcraft itself never became illegal (as on the continent where the Inquisition held sway), only the alleged effects, such as damage to goods, or death and injury to people.
The first trial under the Witchcraft Act of 1563 was held in Chelmsford in 1566, when Agnes Waterhouse was hanged largely on the evidence of a small child.
This was often to be a disturbing element in many of the subsequent trials when children's uncorroborated evidence sent many to prison and to the gallows.
Hundreds of trials followed all over the land in the wake of Chelmsford.
There were the witches of Windsor, Northamptonshire, Bideford, Newbury, Burton, St. Osyth, Bilson and Faversham, to name but a few.
The Lancashire witches of Pendle were typical.
The sorry story began on 18th March 1612, when a teenage beggar girl, Alizon Device, flew into a rage when a pedlar refused to give her some pins.
As she walked away from him he suffered a stroke, and Alizon was later arrested and tried on the charge that she ‘practised, exercised and used her devilish and wicked arts’ and that by these she ‘had him lamed so that his body wasted and consumed away’.
It seems amazing today, and more especially because there was no torture in Lancashire, that Alizon confessed.
She said that a black dog had asked her, ‘What would you have me do to this man?’
She answered, ‘Lame him!’
Alizon went on to blame ‘Old Demdike’, her grandmother, and also incriminated others.
Later, the evidence of nine-year-old Jennet Demdike was used against other adults, and all were taken for trial at Lancaster Assizes.
On  18th August, the trial of nineteen witches, not all from Pendle, began.
Some pleaded guilty while others were incriminated by the children's evidence, and two days later a dozen were hanged before thousands on the hill overlooking Lancaster Castle.
The ready acceptance of children's testimony was not the only disturbing fact surrounding the executions.
Consider also the hysterical witch-hunt mentality of the moral and upright Protestants, later to be personified in the form of the seventeenth-century Witch-finder General, Matthew Hopkins.
Any individual with a socially unacceptable appearance might be suspected of witchcraft.
One description of the typical witch declares as highly suspect ‘women which be commonly old, lame, blear-eied, pale, fowle and full of wrinkles; poore, sullen, superstitious, and papists; or such as knowe no religion: in whose drousie minds the divell doth goten a fine seat’.
Looking back on the scant evidence we have to assume that, along with the guilty, some innocent men and women went to their deaths, despite their confessions.
Underground witchcraft
It was not until the later trials that the courts began to hear about ‘covens’ of witches.
What had apparently happened was that, faced with persecution, the committed witches had formed themselves into small clandestine groups and became separated from each other.
The covens were restricted to thirteen, possibly because they considered it unlucky for the enemy Christian church due to the number at the Last Supper.
More probably it was to do with each member representing one of the lunar months of the year.
Only the coven leaders had contact with each other to prevent infiltration of spies and to reduce the risk of others being incriminated should one of their number be arrested and interrogated.
This separation actually continued into this  century, and was only totally eradicated with the upsurge in witchcraft in the late fifties and early sixties.
‘Churchmanships’ of witchcraft
There are, broadly speaking, three types of witches.
One witch described them to me in newspaper terms.
There are the News of the World types who enjoy the sensational, the sex and the thrills.
Members of these covens are usually ‘nominal’ witches who pay only lip-service to the dogmas and are interested in it only for the kicks it provides.
This type of coven is usually on the borderline of satanism, and the ‘sincere’ members believe that the devil and his demons need them as agents to wreak havoc in the world.
The agents make a pact with the devil either privately or accompanied by great ceremony during one of the main sabbats of the year.
Whichever way, the devil will seal the pact for the usual price of his new agent's soul.
On occasions, the pact is accompanied by sexual encounters.
This type of witch is the most likely to desecrate ‘sacred’ property such as graveyards and churches, and to celebrate the black mass, which pokes fun at high church religion.
An ex-witch revealed that initiation ceremonies include the sacrifice of animals and the drinking of a ‘cocktail’ of animal and human blood and urine.
In some instances, a woman will be ordered to become pregnant and the resulting baby will then be sacrificed.
Male children are sacrificed by females and vice versa.
When adults break a coven's sexual rules, the punishment can be death.
The offender is sacrificed, with the ‘officiant’ being the one who was sexually offended.
The heart can be removed and offered to Satan, after which the body is removed to another location and burnt beyond recognition.
There is growing evidence that this type of witch-satanist is involved in child abuse on a growing scale.
In the two months prior to writing this chapter, my counselling has  involved one thirteen-year-old babysitter for a coven who was drugged and sexually abused for two years before eventually plucking up the courage to tell her parents.
A mother asked for help in rescuing her fourteen-year-old daughter from a coven.
Three children in the North-east were taken into care and their parents and other adults were charged and found guilty of using them sexually in their rituals.
One associate reported dealing with a mother in the Hull area who had refused to surrender her seven-year-old son to her coven.
She was placed in a safe house but later returned to the coven of her own free will.
She still refused to give up her son and instead was punished.
The mother, who herself had been initiated at the age of five, felt unable to break away from the group.
Another mother, from Burnley, spoke to me of her six-year-old son who was ‘tampered with’ by a witch in the neighbourhood.
She spoke of many teenagers being involved with this witch.
I asked for names and addresses so that I might pass on details to the police.
The mother refused.
It was this type of information which led to an adjournment debate on child abuse and the practices of witchcraft in the House of Commons on April 27, 1988.
Mr Geoffrey Dickens, MP for Littleborough and Saddleworth, announced that he would be presenting a dossier of evidence to the Home Office in due course.
Mr John Patten, a junior minister in the Home Office, assured the House that he would gladly amend the law if necessary, and added his own warning that schools and parents should continue to alert their children against the dangers and perversions of cults.
As we go to press, this matter is still under discussion.
Justice demands that I stress one important point.
This type of physical abuse is limited to the more extreme forms of witchcraft and satanism.
Other forms of the occult, I believe, certainly mislead and abuse youngsters spiritually and mentally, but it is unjust to accuse them of physical abuse.
The second type of witchcraft is what might be termed the Guardian newspaper class.
These witches are the ‘middle class’ of respectability, always concerned to distance themselves from the first group and ever keen to present the acceptable face of natural religion.
This group is the first to rise up in indignation and shout ‘witch-hunt’ and ‘persecution’whenever Christians condemn the occult.
These are the people who insist that, because the word ‘occult’ means ‘hidden’the church is, by definition, also part of the occult.
Christians, they complain, should refrain from criticism, and instead join with them for the good of each other and mankind in general.
The first group of witches are never concerned to defend their reputation.
They are content to maintain their secrecy and carry on  business as normal.
 Not so with the ‘middle-class, witch.
‘Join forces with us,’ invited one witch called Ian, ‘and try to understand us…try to find out what we really believe in.
Obviously Christians know very little about us.’
These are the witches who are dominant in the north of England.
The ‘blood and gore’ witches appear to be strong in the South of England, especially in and around London.
Our ‘second-level’ witch is probably quite a respectable member of the community and may meet with fellow members of the coven in a house down your street or on your estate.
He and his associates will even dedicate one of their rituals to the cause of understanding and the suspension of hostilities between ‘our brothers and sisters who follow other paths of religion’.
In this age of tolerance, it seems churlish to ignore so charitable an offer.
But let us first examine their beliefs.
This form of witchcraft is a religion of the earth.
The worshippers prefer to be known as followers of wicca; the wise ones who revere the natural life-force.
They reject the Christian God whom they describe as ‘a Father God standing outside everything and everyone’.
They prefer to personify  the life-force as male and female, known variously as the God and Goddess, Lord and Lady, the Horned God and the Silver Lady among others.
The female is always dominant as a Mother Earth concept, making witchcraft the matriarchal religion.
They still retain large elements of animism, a belief which assigns a divine spark or spirit to every material thing.
This religion often proves a great attraction to the romantic who is tired of concrete and high-power technology, and yearns for a return to nature.
The coven will also employ magic, but this is only secondary to its beliefs and worship.
The magic will be used in organised or private rituals for healing, and divination for guidance when important decisions loom.
The leader or high priest(ess) is chosen for the quality of psychic power exhibited, and how open he or she is to the life-force.
All members are believed to have the life-force within them, and they insist that only within themselves will they find what Christians call God.
It is difficult to find much in common between Christianity and witchcraft.
In fact, our ‘middle-class’ witches appear to be similar to the Canaanites (see p. 56), whom God roundly condemned.
Both religions not only put other gods before the one true God, they even fail to acknowledge his existence.
Wiccans therefore break the first commandment of a group with which they wish to work (Exodus 20:3).
Wicca followers, like the Canaanites, visualise their gods as images of animals or horned gods, thus breaking the second commandment of the group with whom they seek closer ties (Exodus 20:4).
The witches, as the followers of Baal, take the attributes and names of God and give them to other powers or to false gods.
They also fail to set aside a holy day for God.
In doing these two things, they tear up the third and fourth commandments of the Christian faith (Exodus 20:7,8).
Finally, they would not be too keen on obeying the seventh commandment concerning adultery and abuse of sex  (Exodus 20:14).
I explained this last point to one witch and he said that the same could be said for Christianity.
It was the week that the Church of England's General Synod had agreed that homosexuality was a sin but had refused to discipline the sinner.
However, before these ‘middle class’ witches invite Christians to work with them, it would seem that it is they who really need to ‘try and understand us and get to know what we believe’.
Christians would be forced to tear up half their commandments before unity could be achieved.
The third group of witches could be likened to the Daily Telegraph end of the spectrum.
These are the isolated witches; the hermits or ascetics of the occult.
They reject the first group for being too sensationalist, for being concerned only with ‘blood, gore and thrills’.
They insist that this group is ‘nominal’, rather like Christians who go to church for the comfortable feelings they get, but who never put their faith into practice.
The ‘middle-class’ witches are dismissed by the ascetics as a ‘weird bunch of ecology freaks’.
This third group of mystics are apparently disenchanted ex-coven members who have grown tired of the ‘backbiting and bitchiness’ in the occult.
They also tend to practise paths of magic which require solitude.
Some of the work of Gerald Gardner, and much of Aleister Crowley's magic, can only be satisfactorily practised in privacy and seclusion.
Satanism
A London Christian, who had spent fifteen years in many branches of the occult before his conversion at the Luis Palau mission at Queens Park Rangers soccer stadium in 1985, said: ‘In my experience, there are not too many differences between the first group of witches and satanists.
You might say they are two levels of the same thing, like the high and low churches of Christianity.’
There is, however, a distinctly religious form of satanism which states that Christianity has got the facts all wrong.
Satan is really the true Son of God and Jesus is the usurper.
‘The popular image of Satan is of this great evil force that can destroy anything,’ explained a satanist adorned with the title of High Priest of the Northern Order of the Prince.
‘We don't believe in evil and bad, contrary to what the popular media say.
We have a special code of ethics that we have to follow.
They are exacting and good, and they apply to everyday life.
All our fans are happy.
We teach people to look after themselves and how to heal…we've got to keep hidden because of the persecution we get through certain people who go on propagating this evil entity of Satan.’
It was interesting to talk with a family who belonged to this high priest's group and hear their side of the story.
They had come to me for help in extricating themselves from satanism because the high priest had insisted on performing the ‘Act of Unity’ with their fourteen-year-old daughter.
The mother had pointed out that her daughter was under the legal age for sexual intercourse, but the high priest had explained that the order had its own calendar.
According to this, the daughter was now nineteen years old.
The father of the family was not so much concerned about his daughter as about the ‘Acts of Unity’ he himself was ordered to perform on the temple's Altar of Initiation.
‘It wasn't fair,’ he complained.
‘The high priest got all the young good-looking ones while I was left with the old fat ones.’
The father's real purpose in allowing me to visit the family was not so much to get help, but to recoup the £40 he had spent on satanist scriptures, which he wanted to sell to me.
When I refused to buy them, he lost interest.
His daughter summed up the real emotions of herself and her mother.
‘We were supposed to follow our scriptures,’ she explained, ‘but all he [the high priest]did was to change them or make extra things up to suit what he wanted to do.’
This group represents a small minority of satanists.
They are dismissed by others in the occult, who claim that the group ‘tell outsiders this tall story (of Satan being the Son of God) to make themselves look respectable’.
These groups use either a re-written version of the Bible or ancient occult documents originating in Egypt, called the Raz Cathab Mishael (one of several spellings).
Historically speaking, neither their bastardised bible nor their own scriptures have any authority whatsoever.
We now turn to one woman's battle with satanism — a mother's fight for her son who was offered to Satan only hours after his birth.
The names and some of the details have had to be changed to protect those involved.
A Mother's Story
Real-life narratives never have beginnings.
But it is at least necessary to start Mary's story on the morning of Tuesday, 12th January 1937, when she was fifteen years old.
It was a moment of horror in a childhood lived on the edges of the occult east of London.
At that time, Mary's mother had a strange, possessive relationship with another woman; an affair which young Mary was only just beginning to understand.
Both women arrived without warning one morning at the home of Mary's grandfather, which had been the girl's permanent home.
Mary had been looked after by a nanny until the age of seven and had then stayed intermittently with elderly relatives.
Her mother could not be bothered with her.
The two women had barely crossed the threshold before they were halted in their tracks.
‘Get that woman out of my house,’ grandfather shouted from his sick bed.
‘I don't want her under my roof.’
Both women immediately turned on their heels without a word and left.
Mary wrote of the incident later,
‘My grandfather had signed his own death warrant, though only my mother knew it at the time.’
The local doctor had got into the habit of calling after his morning surgery, not that there was much need.
Grandfather was  only suffering from a nagging cough and mild flu but he was, after all, somewhat of a grandee in the town because of his wealth.
On that Tuesday morning my mother came with the doctor and took him to a spare bedroom, leaving the door ajar.
I was passing when I noticed a large roll of money in notes pass into the doctor's hand.
‘How long will it be?’
I heard my mother ask.
‘About half an hour,’ the doctor replied.
‘I went on down the corridor to see my grandfather, wondering what it was that would take half an hour.
I noticed the clock on the  mantelpiece and it was 10.15.
The doctor followed me almost immediately and injected my grandfather in the back of his hand.
He then went downstairs, and I heard my mother join him.
I stood at the foot of the bed and watched my grandfather go to sleep.
A little later, he took his last breath.
‘It suddenly came to me what they had done.
I looked at the clock and it was 10.40.
Strangely, I had no sense of panic, only a feeling of guilt.
I felt as though I should have done something.’
Mary was still standing by the bed when her mother came into the room and, without looking at the bed, walked over to where grandfather kept his emergency money, usually about £1,000.
It had already dawned on the girl that, from this moment on, she was on her own, and that there was nobody to stand between her and whatever might be devised for her in the future.
Her only chance of survival, she felt, was to keep a tight rein over her feelings and words.
Her mother announced that she was now going to her lady friend and put grandfather's money in her bag.
‘Get in touch with the undertakers and make all the arrangements.
Sampsons will do the cards.
Let me know the time of the funeral.’
Mary was not in the least surprised.
That had been the way of things for several years.
Whenever a crisis loomed, her mother would often turn on her off-spring and demand  to know what she was going to do about it.
She was so disorganised and absent-minded that, while out visiting, she would often forget that she had a daughter, leaving her stranded for hours.
Following the funeral, Mary stayed on at her grandfather's home on her own, or occasionally with distant relatives.
For several years, she had not been attending school regularly but had instead been sent on provincial theatre tours, first with a dancing troupe and later as a violinist or actress.
Mother, in the meantime, had supplied the school inspector with countless sick notes, always provided by her tame doctor.
The otherwise lonely mid-teen years were made bearable with the presence of Terry, a third cousin whom she had known since she was eight.
Their friendship blossomed when they met again at the funeral and developed into a love that was to stretch across forty years of marriage.
As early as sixteen they asked their respective parents to allow them to marry but no blessings were forthcoming.
Mary's natural tendency to fly into a temper probably did not increase their chances very much.
When they eventually became man and wife, it was the ‘quietest of quiet weddings’ and they had to pay half-a-crown for two passers-by to act as witnesses.
Their first baby, who was to cause far more than labour pains, arrived in mid-May 1939.
And Mary's mother seemed satisfied with her grandchild.
It was a boy!
She took the infant from Terry and quickly walked from the bedroom making, not cooing noises, but a ‘kind of shrill moan’.
The sound sent fear surging into Mary.
Throughout her childhood she had heard similar sounds when accompanying her mother on visits to her women friends.
They had all made that shrill moan during their funny parties, and by the time of Gary's birth, Mary had come to recognise them for what they were — satanic incantations.
‘Go and fetch me my baby!’ she yelled at an astonished Terry.
He replied with the soothing remarks only to be  expected from somebody who had no knowledge of this part of her life.
This was only the beginning of the strange influence which her mother began to exert over Gary.
Soon there were other worries to consider, and besides, Gary looked none the worse for those natal incantations.
War was declared and the family were evacuated to the Midlands.
They had little and sometimes no money, and Mary's mother was far too busy and uninterested to notice, spending her inherited fortune on her lovers.
Gary, for whom she appeared to feel something, received her full attention on her rare visits, together with expensive gifts and sweets.
The post-war years brought nagging doubts for Mary, when she was not surrounded by her now four healthy children.
She thought of her grandparents, their prayers for her and the sound Christian education they had provided.
She had fond memories of walking hand-in-hand with her uncle, a famous preacher, who was to have been her guardian had all her family died prematurely.
They had all been staunch Congregationalists, and Mary occasionally felt sad that she had left it all behind in childhood.
This was all to change on a pleasant spring day in 1947.
She wrote later of what happened.
‘I was standing at the sink after lunch with the usual daily mountain of washing at the side.
I was not thinking of anything in particular.
Suddenly, there stood beside me a very tall figure, six foot six or more, bearded and misty-white in appearance.
There was no immediate welcome in my reaction…
I was just overwhelmed with a sense of uncleanness.
And then he was gone.
My worst feelings were about the bit of a temper I had, and all I can remember was my silent prayer, ‘Lord, take this away’.’
Mary was left with a strange mixture of thoughts.
A part of her mind worried about pegging out the washing to make the most of a lovely day.
But the front of her mind was occupied with alarming questions.
Was she taking leave of  her senses?
Had she started to see things?
And yet it all seemed so real!
As the queries deteriorated into doubts, she again resorted to silent prayer.
She asked for a sign; some proof to verify her experience.
Before she had finished hanging out the clothes, there was a glorious double rainbow across the sky.
She felt as though she was walking on air.
The next thing she asked for was a job to do for the Lord.
A few days later Terry's brother asked Mary to act as stand-in pianist for three months at the local Baptist church where he was a member.
That job was to last for the following eleven years.
As for her new-found peace and joy, they were to be refined in the thousand-and-one ordeals which lay ahead.
In retrospect, it seemed that the Lord protected her for the first few days, and then…
‘About midnight,’ recalls Mary, ‘Gary started screaming in terror.
He came and threw himself on our bed, shaking all over.
There was no sleep that night for us, nor for the immediate neighbours, and he continued to scream and cry until about 5 am.
Both of us tried to pacify him but it was useless, and he wouldn't tell us what had caused it.
It was only much later, in 1981, that he told me what had happened.
He said that he was still awake when a black and fearful figure appeared at the foot of his bed.
The figure called himself the devil and declared that he had come for Gary's life.
It had been given to him, the devil claimed.’
Mary refuses to this day to judge the veracity of Gary's story, in view of his, by then, extensive record of crime and deceit.
Only one certain fact remains with her.
From that night onwards, Gary was a different person.
A seven-year-old lovable imp turned overnight into what can only be described as a ‘demon’.
The first and most enduring victim of the new Gary was his mother's purse.
Next came his three younger sisters whom he began to terrorise — biting, kicking and scratching them.
His fellow pupils at school suffered so badly that Mary became a constant visitor to the  headmaster's study, and Gary was banned from the playground.
Neighbours formed queues on occasions as they came to complain of mindless acts of vandalism.
Both Mary and Terry devoted much of their energies, time and love to solving their son's behaviour.
On one occasion, they tried to interest him in the piano but that finished within three weeks with two surprises.
Gary's teacher came round with both of them.
First was the news that the lad had such a natural ear and ability that the teacher felt that he could not teach him anything.
The second was the request for payment for the three lessons.
Gary had pocketed his piano fees.
The following years of unrelieved deception and destruction were tinged with the happiness of Terry's apparent conversion to Christ and subsequent church work.
However, this introduced a new pattern to Gary's war on the world around him.
Mary explained…
‘On the frequent occasions we were engaged in Christian work, we had additional problems with our black lamb.
He stole the Sunday school collection.
He eavesdropped on church leadership meetings in our home and then made it his business to tell everybody all that we had discussed.
The church visitors were intensely embarrassed shortly after we had agreed to have door-to-door visitation for a forthcoming town mission.
Gary had beaten them to it, and had demanded contributions for the mission.
Of course, he had kept the money.
‘It was strange how Gary would often know things he had not been told.
We soon took steps to ensure that Gary was otherwise occupied when private matters of the church and home were discussed.
Even then, Terry and I used to have arguments when one of us discovered that Gary had knowledge of things that only the two of us knew.
The only human explanation was that one of us had said something in an unguarded moment.
It was only later, when we compared notes, that we put his source  down to something inhuman.
The same was true for my mother.’
Looking back to that nightmarish night in the wake of her conversion, Mary can suggest only one explanation.
Gary had indeed been consigned to Satan by his grandmother.
It was only when Mary became a Christian that the devil came to stake a claim to his own property.
But this conclusion was reached only after experiencing the hell that still lay ahead of them.
There were moments of hope, such as the time Gary seemed to settle in the scouts, but they were dashed when he stole the troop's funds.
Around the same time, he took his mother's many dancing and music medals, together with his father's accordion, and presented them to the pawnbroker.
With Gary's teens came the police — often!
At thirteen he took a car and wrote it off.
At fourteen his probation officer suggested he should be sent to borstal, but Gary managed to evade that fate.
Terry offered a bike to his son if only he would use the good brain he undoubtedly possessed.
Some months later, Gary came top of the class with an average mark of 93%.
The following term his average marks were down to 22%.
‘Why did you let things go?’ his father demanded to know.
‘Because you didn't offer me anything!’
The lad looked his father straight in the eye as he gave his blunt answer.
Gary would often go missing for hours or stay out overnight.
Mary often suspected that he was with his grandmother and involved in her shady activities, though her mother would always deny it.
Perhaps, his parents thought, things might change when schooldays finished.
Again they were to be disappointed.
Gary's first job ended when he stole the factory tools and pawned them.
The second job was a repeat performance.
He was sacked from every other job for theft, harassment of female staff or vandalism.
The home itself was pillaged  often, and by 1957 both Mary and Terry were on the point of collapse after months existing on half-nights of sleep.
They had worked out a rota to stand guard on their remaining property, and also to protect their terrified daughters.
National Service seemed their last hope.
Gary fancied the uniform of the Coldstream Guards when he arrived at the recruiting office.
He was informed that he would have to sign on for an extra year to join the guards, but he told his mother, ‘I'll stay as long as I choose.
No more, no less!’
The recruiting sergeant noticed Mary's doubtful expression and tried some reassurance.
‘Don't worry, ma'am,’ he laughed.
‘We'll soon lick him into shape.’
The army had stopped laughing within one week of receiving Gary.
He had arrived home the weekend after reporting for duty, followed soon afterwards by the military police.
They told him in no uncertain terms that he could not take a holiday whenever he felt like it.
Seventeen months and several ‘holidays’ later, he was dishonourably discharged.
Meanwhile, a fortune in equipment had gone missing, including his own uniform.
The discharging officer called Gary — just nineteen at the time —‘the most evil man he had ever met’.
In the years that followed, Mary's eldest daughter went to Bible college to train for the mission field.
Another of the girls went into the nursing profession, while Gary joined the satanists.
He opened up various prostitute rings, and later extended his business interests to car thefts, burglary, the drugs market, and practised every ‘con-trick’ he could dream up.
These were mostly aimed at gullible Christians.
He seemed to take great delight in taking the church for a ride.
On the family side, he had ‘milked’ his grandmother dry of all her money before she died.
He had caused his father to have a near-fatal heart-attack, and finally, he had used a legal wrangle to cheat his mother out of two properties she  inherited on the death of her mother.
Mary was left penniless and without any income.
When she was rescued by the local authorities and given her present welfare flat, she asked that her address be kept a secret.
Mary wrote her life story as a therapy for herself, and also because she felt it might help others caught up, directly or indirectly, in the occult.
It remains unpublished today, save for this truncated and anonymous version, for fear of potentially ruinous legal action.
Mary offers many helpful thoughts in her story.
‘My life with Gary and my mother and her occult friends has enabled me to pick out the symptoms by which we may recognise those who are involved in the occult.
They may be summarised as a revolt against the normal.
Mary set them out as follows, adding to each her own comments.
1.
A radical objection to normal work .
‘Work was undertaken on a whim rather than as a responsible use of time.
There was no sense of obligation to society, or even to learn of the necessities of life.’
2.
A taste for extremes of dress, in colour, shape and style.
3.
An indifference to hygiene of body and environment .
‘At one point when my mother was ill, the district nurse refused to enter her home and treat her, for fear that she would be contaminated and consequently place her other patients in danger.’
4.
A lack of humour and common sense .
‘The women associated with my mother, all spinsters or widows, never smiled and were constantly worried by trivialities.
All of their problems could have been solved with a few simple decisions but they seemed to have been robbed of their ability to think straight.’
5.
A contrary pattern of life .
‘Night was preferred to day for whatever was to be done.
Cat-naps kept them going.
Meals were taken at irregular and unusual times and would be unconventional in content.
My mother would often phone  up around 5 am when I lived near her, and demand that I come over and cook her dinner.
Gary was very similar.’
6.
Death and suicide are favourite topics .
‘There was much fear of dying.
The thought of an instant death, chosen in time and manner, seemed to have some minimising effect on that fear.
My mother attempted suicide on numerous occasions.
Whenever she did, I prayed long and hard for protection for Gary.
On every occasion there was a suicide attempt, we would find out that the other had attempted suicide at the identical time, even though they may have been hundreds of miles apart and not seen each other for months.
It was as though they were twinned in some satanic fashion.’
7.
An anxious atmosphere .
‘Their presence militated against a relaxed and restful environment.
Their company seemed to drain me and send me into a state of nervous exhaustion after even a short while.
Was this the opposing spiritual force at work?’
8.
Lethargy .
‘Despite the restlessness, there was usually a slow, lazy habit of mind.
(Gary was the only exception I knew to this rule, and then only when he was up to no good).’
9.
A belief in man's goodness .
‘This may have been largely absent from their own lives, but it was the prevailing view of human nature.
Man was really quite a good species, they believed.
This was especially true of my mother's view of Gary, and vice versa.’
10.
A reversal of the biblical .
‘Each of the above is a contradiction of God's Word.
It hardly needs to be said that there is also a total rejection of moral principles.
Ethics were abandoned and despised in areas concerning sex, other people's property, personal lifestyles, care of young or old, and law and order.’
11.
Spiritual deceit .
‘In the last hours of her life, my mother seemed to turn to the Lord.
I still pray that this is true.
But Gary made innumerable professions of faith from childhood  onwards.
The most significant was in the middle of a prison riot when Gary had joined the roof-top protestors to escape the violence of psychopaths who were systematically tearing the prison apart inside.
Later, as a ‘Christian evangelist’, Gary would speak of meeting God in the hours of comparative tranquillity on the prison roof.
Just before his release from this five-year sentence, he sent a threatening letter to Terry saying that he intended to ‘get him’.
Terry died as a result of his injuries in a car crash just hours before Gary was released.
Soon afterwards, Gary was back on drugs, living with a girl, and then came numerous confidence tricks.
We are not called upon to judge each other.
I can only point out the immoral lifestyle that accompanied his profession and the evidence of spiritual deceit.
I leave the rest to God.’
12.
A lack of love .
‘A person involved in the occult is totally preoccupied with himself and his own desires.
Whether they are actually his desires, or those of the devil, must remain speculation.
Certainly, they do try to escape the desires via suicide on occasions.
‘I have learned that the love Christ gives to us is a mighty power.
I am left to live out my life with only the few possessions I have managed to buy from my pension, because of Gary.
But I love him.
And it is only the love of Christ in me that enables me to say that.
It is, in fact, solely the all-powerful love of God, expressed through each one of us, that will save people lost in the occult.
I still pray for Gary and continue to hope that he will eventually live up to the professions of faith that he has made.
I pray that God will really meet with him this time in prison.
How much of his life he is personally responsible for, and how much his grandmother's incantations affected him, I do not know.
It would be a dangerous practice to absolve those affected by Satan, even Gary.
Again, we must leave this with the Lord.’
We need to remember that Mary's twelve ‘revolts from the normal’ relate only to those in satanism and lower forms of witchcraft.
The majority in other occult areas are no different in outward appearance from the normal person in the street.
Many hold down regular jobs and quite a few are highly-paid, professional people.
Many witches with whom I have discussed Christianity have a real sense of humour and pleasant personalities.
Some are charming and a delight to converse with.
On a personal level, I find this the most distressing.
As a mere imperfect mortal, I find myself working twice as hard to introduce those whom I like to the Lord.
This includes more than a few in the occult.
I want them to share the Person who has filled my life with such abundance.
It is important to remember that the satanism highlighted in this chapter is exceptional.
Most in the occult would be at home in your local golf club.
You could even introduce them to your church's women's guild and they would not look out of place.
Ostensibly the average occultist is a perfectly normal person.
New Age for Old
The potential of the New Age Movement is frightening.
It could even now be starting the greatest revolution our British culture has ever known.
It has already changed the pattern of life in America, and it seems as though our turn has now arrived.
Christians need to be ready for it, and the most alarming aspect is that the vast majority have never
The last time I preached on the New Age before writing this chapter, I asked for a show of hands from those who had heard of it.
Two hands showed in the two hundred-strong congregation.
After mentioning some of the New Age practices and beliefs, I asked again for a show of hands from those who knew friends and neighbours who were involved.
This time virtually everybody raised a hand.
We meet the New Age and are influenced by it in everyday life, yet few Christians understand its full impact.
What are we to make of this movement?
Some commentators' views
Is it ‘an unparalleled mystical conspiracy threatening today's world,’ as Caryl Matrisciana maintains in her book Gods of the New Age ?
Hal Lindsay states that ‘the West has been  invaded by the East’ and ‘every Christian must be equipped to meet the onslaught of Eastern thought’.
Christian attorney Constance Cumbey goes a step further in The Hidden Dangers of the Rainbow when she writes of the ‘coming age of barbarism’, and describes the New Agers as a ‘viable movement that truly meets the scriptural requirements for the Antichrist and the political movement that will bring him on the world scene’.
Are the Americans going over the top again, or is this an indictment which we should place on trial?
At least one Englishman thinks so.
He is Roy Livesey, a leading New Age watcher on this side of the Atlantic.
For him, understanding the New Age is to witness the ‘preparations for Antichrist's One World Government’.
His books include ‘an exposé of Satan's secret rulers on earth’ and a strong ‘plea for discernment in the Church’.
Perhaps, with typical English reserve, we should go along with Alice and Stephen Lawhead's Pilgrim's Guide to the New Age (Lion Publishing).
This lavish book provides us with a full-colour holiday brochure; a ‘sightseer's guide for anyone journeying through this brave new world’.
The Lawheads may be American, but they have produced a book which comfortably suits the English mood of tolerance.
It has a ‘once upon a time’ approach and, while avoiding negative criticisms of New Age philosophies, it takes the reader on a tour of some of the more positive Christian beliefs.
Secular books on the New Age tend to treat it as the latest fad; the ‘in thing’ of the eighties, full of Alternative Types and quaint ideas about the ‘good life’down on the organic, backyard farm.
In a style guide to the New Age called Spilling the Beans , Martin Stott informs us that ‘perhaps as much as 10% of the adult population’ in Britain are New Agers.
They are likely to be found breast-feeding in the high street while swopping telephone numbers of their family acupuncturists.
They then hop into an old Morris Minor or CV6 and drive home to the ‘muesli belt’.
Are New Agers just simply home-grown nature-lovers, or are they one of the greatest dangers to confront Christendom?
You will have to make your own judgement as we investigate.
Two things, however, are certain.
Firstly, the New Age is sweeping through the American culture with the speed of a giant hogweed.
If the normal pattern is followed, Britain will experience an even greater invasion in the next decade.
Secondly, the New Age is ‘into’ the occult in a big way.
It is the new paganism, or rather the old variety with a facelift and a fresh application of make-up.
In short, no book which sets out to analyse modern occultism can afford to avoid this new movement.
What is the New Age?
It defies a one-sentence description.
It is all things to all men…and this is perhaps its number one axiom.
Whatever ‘turns you on’ is okay, so long as it is not connected with modern materialism or the one-God religions, like Christianity, Judaism or Islam.
The New Age is not one vast organisation.
It is more a movement involving tens of thousands of associated subgroups, all of which are independent, though sympathetic to each other.
Several groups claim to exert their influence, but insist that it is no more than that.
In the absence of any organisational identity, the best way to describe New Agers is to catalogue the creed common to most.
1.
They believe in self-realisation .
The first commandment is to love your self with all your mind, with all your soul, with all your heart and with all your strength.
No New Ager would put it this way.
They would far rather think of it as realising their strengths and weaknesses.
‘Removing the plank from one's own eye,’ was how one explained it.
The overwhelming tendency, though, is to so concentrate on ‘self that others are excluded.
The New Ager's prime goal is  to reach into himself, to plumb the depths of his psyche and live in harmony with the universal force.
He is called to the realisation that he is part of the force, the force is god, and therefore he is god.
His first duty is to realise his full potential as a human being, and to explore all possibilities until he reaches enlightened fulfilment.
So far, the New Age is about as new as man himself.
Adam and Eve were successfully tempted to become ‘like God’.
That was Satan's first ploy (Genesis 3:5).
Eastern religions — some of them the oldest known to man — have taught people for millennia to find their gods within themselves.
2.
They believe that all is one .
Essentially, there is no difference between you and the rose bush in your front garden.
Your pet goldfish and you are basically two ‘expressions’ of the one, cosmic force.
In fact, the gurus of the East teach that the goldfish might well have been your great, great grandmother in a previous existence if she did not make the grade as a human being.
In the West, reincarnation is ‘packaged’ in more attractive terms, with the talents and gifts of each life being passed on to succeeding lives.
This ‘snowballing’ effect is what evolution is all about, they claim.
It is big business in New Age circles (see Chapter 14).
All that we can see, feel, touch, taste and hear is of one, all-pervading force — the god force.
If god is in everything, then why not worship everything?
New Agers generally think that this is a good idea.
Mother Earth must be served, hence the explosion in ecology groups and Green Parties in the last few years.
And what about those dogs and monkeys being used for experimental purposes?
How dare we treat our ‘brothers and sisters’ in such a cruel fashion!
Animals, in essence, are viewed as of equal value to humans, so the Animal Liberation Front sees no great difficulty in maintaining humans to free animals.
Again, we find nothing new.
Seeing God in everything  has been known for nearly 400 years as pantheism, though the idea is as old as religion itself.
This teaches that the whole universe is identified with ‘God’ or ‘nature’— you choose which to call it.
The idea, however, has been in existence for as long as man has worshipped.
In Hinduism, practically everything is the manifestation of a god, and even the most seasoned guru has difficulty in keeping track of all of them.
Hindus know the cosmic energy as the kundalini or serpent force, and this is said to be coiled around the base of the spine in every human being.
Pantheism is also present in Buddhism, with Brahman being the life-force.
Pantheism conflicts with the Christian view of the fundamental distinction between God and that which he has created (Hebrews 11:3).
Christianity also teaches that man is a special creation, related but distinct from the animals, made in God's image and likeness (Genesis 1:26–27).
It has to be stressed that Christianity also takes seriously the welfare of planet earth and its animals.
Ecology and protection of animals from cruelty is part of man's God-given role as stewards of the earth (Genesis 1:28).
New Agers claim that Christians have abdicated from ruling the planet in a life-sustaining way.
They have taken over the Christian's own cliché and complain that many are ‘too heavenly-minded to be any earthly use!’
In some areas, Christians may have no alternative but to plead guilty to this charge.
As the question goes: ‘What on earth are we doing for heaven's sake?,
3.
May the force be with us .
To achieve self-realisation, and to get in tune with the cosmic force, the New Agers are introduced to the oldest techniques known to pagan man.
These include yoga and meditation, hypnosis, gurus, I Ching (the Chinese divination technique), and astrology.
Some of these are used to bring about an ‘altered state of consciousness’ in which reality can be perceived in different ways, not unlike our chaos magician who throws himself into his ‘void’.
The force within can also be manipulated through…Dieting , in which you are discouraged from eating meat because it provokes unhelpful vibrations and produces what might be called static interference in meditation.
This is said to block the way to true communion with the spiritual force.
Jogging , and the whole keep-fit scene, can be exploited to put you in touch with the force.
One woman athlete said, ‘Running is better than sex!’
This could refer to the New Age spiritual ‘high’ that some athletes attain through exercise.
I say ‘could’, because running and hard exercise can do wonders for body, mind and spirit without any New Age-type influence.
However, the latest approach to the force is through hyperventilation (special patterns of breathing) and the chanting of yoga mantras synchronised with the jogging rhythm.
Both these can produce trance-like vacuums allowing, it is claimed, the participant to reach pure spiritual union with the force.
Other techniques used to foster harmony with the force and improve mindpower include bioenergetics, Sufi dancing, biofeedback, positive thinking programmes, Silva Mind Control, martial arts, and the use of isolation tanks.
Christians beware !
At this point, Christians need to protect themselves against over-reaction.
We certainly need to be wary of yoga, Transcendental Meditation, hypnosis, and astrology and we shall come to these later.
However, the Christian has every right to keep himself fit and healthy.
It is good to observe a correct diet, even if for some it means being a vegetarian.
Breathing exercises can certainly be helpful and the average athlete or singer would be somewhat limited without the control that such exercises bring.
The body is, after all, the temple of the Holy Spirit (1 Corinthians 3:16), and as such should be maintained properly.
It is not, however, to be regarded as a receptacle to be emptied and purified for an infilling of some cosmic force.
Origins of the New Age
Here again, the question has no single-sentence answer.
We have to investigate several paths.
Eastern origins
I have already hinted that the New Age is a revamp of ancient and still existing practices mainly from India, Tibet and China.
It is the Eastern religions repackaged and made presentable for consumption by Western minds.
It does seem amazing that the West should now be entertaining an Eastern worldview which has created such cruelty and agonising poverty across a massive portion of the globe.
Much of the poverty, chaos and disease of the East can be directly attributed to its religious beliefs and ideologies.
The wealth of the West has been accomplished largely through applying the beliefs of Christianity to everyday life.
It was the Judaeo-Christian work ethic which produced an Industrial Revolution and brought modern technology to the West.
It was the Christian stress on man's free will that enabled the individual to realise that he had a choice.
He did not have a karma; he was not locked onto an inescapable railway line to a predetermined destiny — an idea that has frozen the will of millions in the East.
Modern science could only have come from a belief that there was a God who had made all things to a certain design.
The father of modern science, Isaac Newton, was as much at home in the pews receiving blessings from above, as in the orchard wondering why apples kept falling on his head.
It was a belief in a designing and orderly God which made it possible for him to think there might be a consistent cause for his ‘headaches’.
To be sure, the modern West has turned into a corrupt and greedy Scrooge, with each affluent nation ever-reluctant to share its gross national product with a starving and emaciated Third World.
The First World's miserly materialism is enough to make any honest seeker yearn for a  new alternative or age.
Our Western pre-occupation with concrete, plastic, silicon chips and nuclear bombs is causing increasing numbers to retreat to the simple life of nature.
I therefore have some sympathy with the New Ager, but I cannot understand why he is in such a hurry to rebuild his world on foundational beliefs which have already crippled millions upon millions of fellow human beings.
It seems far more reasonable to accept the great progress that Christian thinking has brought, while understanding the equally valid Christian teaching that man is a wretched sinner and needs to be changed.
The Christian beliefs work for the good of man.
The corruptions in the West have come from man's failure to apply those beliefs correctly.
The Eastern philosophies and religions have little to offer in improving the lot of mankind.
Western beginnings
There have always been the eccentrics and academics who have travelled the East only to return home to announce great spiritual discoveries.
One who was taken seriously was Madame Helena Petrovna Blavatsky, who founded the Theosophical Society in 1875, a much-quoted doyen of occult magic today.
Her society declared that the twin enemies were Christianity and science and ‘both must be made to respect their Indian betters’.
Several publications came from the society, including Isis Unveiled and The Secret Doctrine , both produced in a trance state and automatically written under the guidance of the ‘Masters’.
These ‘Masters’ were said to be the hidden wise men who were spread around the world with the aim of bringing in a New World Order.
Rector's wife Alice Ann Bailey and an outrageous accomplice called Annie Besant continued laying the foundations of a New Age Movement, both being governed by the ‘Masters’.
Their books were heavily influenced by psychic and occultic philosophies.
A publishing company named Lucifer was established in 1922, which distributed  the writings to an increasing network of New Age groups.
The goals were to establish a New World Order which would prepare the way for the New World ‘messiah’, the Lord Maitreya.
They also aimed for the elimination of dogmatic religions, such as Christianity, and the establishment of a one-world government and religion.
A New World Order would include a universal credit card system, the use of the figures ‘666’(the mark of the beast in Revelation 13:18), and an all-planet food authority and tax system.
The modern-day New Age Movement seems to get most of its direction from the Findhorn Foundation in Scotland, though Findhorn would insist that there is no leadership, only a loose confederation of groups ‘doing their own thing’.
The thousands of groups and organisations are as diverse as the colours of the rainbow, and they have taken this natural phenomenon as the New Age symbol.
This is the information which Constance Cumbey finds alarming in her book,Hidden Dangers of the Rainbow .
She maintains that many well-meaning New Agers are innocently misled through hypnosis and mind-control and are unaware of the movement's ultimate goals.
They are more victims than villains.
Miss Cumbey's work is a prophetic book and, as with all prophecy, the test of it lies in the future.
Is her prophecy coming true?
Will this really be the movement which introduces the Antichrist to the world?
Personally, I will wait and see.
As an over-zealous convert from Roman Catholicism, I have identified my fair share of Antichrists in the past — all centred on Rome and the Pope.
Some of my theories have fallen to pieces, including the nine-nation European Common Market being the ten-horned beast, with the Vatican, of course, being the tenth state.
When other nations subsequently joined the EEC, I decided it was time to hold fire on future Antichrist prophecies.
However, a watchful eye needs to be kept on the New  Age phenomena.
I notice, for instance, the growing number of families in my own area who are involved in Eastern mysticism and the soft fringes of the occult.
When I visit my home city of Manchester, or travel to London, New Age-types seem to greet me in every other conversation.
I note the results of two extensive local surveys we conducted into beliefs.
One of the questions asked, ‘What do you believe happens to you after death?’
In the adult survey, 11% opted for reincarnation.
When it came to the youth survey, an incredible 23% claimed a belief in reincarnation, which is only 2% lower than a nationwide opinion poll in America.
The findings of my own investigations into New Age groups and publications are also noteworthy.
The following four seem to be typical:
New Life Designs organises festivals of mind, body and spirit, and is celebrating its tenth anniversary at the time of writing.
The festivals are demonstrations of Eastern and occult practices, and they promote a ‘Networking Game’ throughout the UK.
It is described as a ‘method of meeting, and exchanging meaningful information, with like-minded individuals and groups’.
The founder-director, Graham Wilson, explains in the group's anniversary leaflet:
This networking of previously lone individuals and groups will be highlighted through a number of networking facilities including the innovative Networking Game.
I believe we truly have something to celebrate, not only what has been achieved but what must now be possible in the coming decade.
The Wrekin Trust runs courses on astrology and psychology, the way of the Kabbalah (their spelling), psychic sensitivity and others of a similar nature in many parts of the country.
The trust was founded by Sir George Trevelyan in 1971 and seeks to promote ‘awareness and study of the spiritual nature of man and the universe’.
It ‘does not offer any one way to the truth but helps people find the disciplines  most suited to them’.
It promotes the workshops of Ruth White, ‘a practising sensitive counsellor and healer’ who ‘established a strong and ongoing contact with her guide and communicator Gildas over twenty years ago’.
Malcolm Lazarus, co-director with Sir George of the Trust, was converted to the ‘Wrekin' philosophy when he experienced a release of ‘kundalini’ energy.
Mr Lazarus described it ‘as if a bolt of energy shot up my spine and burst through the top of my head.
I walked around flaming like a Roman candle.’
The New Humanity Journal is published internationally bi-monthly.
It ‘speaks for the new concepts required to create a better world structure’, and works ‘towards a spiritually-based civilisation’.
The journal aims ‘for peace, non-confrontation, unity in diversity, mental liberation and harmony with the Godhead’.
One article in the June–July 1984 edition equates God with Brahman and Buddha, and it advertises ‘Merlin’, the new magic to put us in touch with the new energy.
The journal also publishes what might be called The Ten Commandments of New Humanity, though the magazine invites its readers to ‘make up their own’ if they prefer.
The first commandment is ‘Thou shalt remember that the Essence and We are One and should strive towards that proper integration.’
The Aetherius Society is probably the leading light in the New Age Movement in this country, and has a growing membership under the guidance of His Eminence, Sir George King OSG, PhD, D Litt.
The knighthood is of foreign origin bestowed by the Constantinian Order of St George in Italy.
The letters after his name are from the Independent Theological Seminary in Nuyf, California.
This is part of the International Evangelists Crusade, which is legally authorised to ordain ministers.
The society claims that there are ‘cosmic masters’ in the universe and that they have come ‘to give priceless teachings to man to help him prepare for the New World and to bring  a great millennium of peace’.
Jesus and other religious leaders came from them, it is claimed, and there is now a spiritual hierarchy on our planet known as the Great White Brotherhood (white in this case refers to ‘white magic’).
When Dr Richard Lawrence, the society's secretary, learned that I was writing a Christian appraisal of paganism and the occult, he pointed out that Aetherius' members fully revered Jesus, and were convinced of his virgin birth and resurrection.
Dr Lawrence, who was confirmed by one of the previous archbishops in Canterbury Cathedral, said that his society would never allow one of their leaders to undermine these essential doctrines as had happened in the Church of England.
The ‘Masters’, said Dr Lawrence, were responsible for the miraculous birth and resurrection of Jesus!
These ‘Masters’ were at present in a spacecraft orbiting earth and their power was being magnified three thousand times by an international network of groups using Christian prayer and Buddhist mantras.
He believed that these groups were helping to alleviate the effects of  catastrophes caused by the dawning of the New Age.
‘All phases of our mission are helping to alleviate things such as earthquakes and hurricanes,’ he explained.
‘In the recent hurricanes in the south of England [October 1987], fifteen people lost their lives.
This was sad, but we believe that the figure could have been nearer 1,500.’
We wait for time to test Constance Cumbey's prophecy that the New Age is the herald of the Antichrist.
I have to recognise that my own findings in no way rule out the possibility.
The Age of Aquarius
Astrology provides another origin for the New Age.
It is perhaps best known through the smash-hit sixties musical  Hair !
Its lyrics and tunes celebrated the dawning of the ‘Age of Aquarius’ and had the whole nation chanting ‘Hare Krishna’for months.
For many it was their first introduction to a New Age in which the governments and countries would fall or be changed, society and the family would expire and a new order would rise up out of the ashes of old values and beliefs.
underlying the musical and, indeed the whole New Age Movement, are the astrological ages of man — each age lasting about two thousand years.
Adam is said to have been the herald of the  Taurean Age (the age of the bull which gives life), while Abraham began the Age of Aries (sacrificing the ram instead of his son).
Jesus Christ brought in the Piscean Age (hence, it is alleged, the ichthus fish sign of the new church and the numerous allusions to fishermen being turned into fishers of men).
As we approach the close of the next two thousand years, we are told to look forward to a new age — the Age of Aquarius, the water carrier.
This is the age of service, sharing, loving and caring and the age when man must also be prepared to help himself.
There is also the thought that we are inheritors of the previous three ages and that we become all that they have been.
The first age was said to belong to God the Father, the second to God the Son, and the last age to God the Spirit.
Now it is the age of fulfilled man who takes in all the Trinity and becomes one with them.
All we need to do now, we are told, is to wake up to the fact that we are God.
Salvation is found by reaching this enlightenment, and enables the editor of The New Humanity to write, ‘It is no longer a question of ‘What do we do to be saved?’ but more a realisation of ‘‘How do we express a richer, more abundant lifestyle as saved individuals?’
The true Aquarian is said to be friendly, progressive, creative, inventive, independent, original, tolerant, refined, artistic, discreet, optimistic and fond of science and literature.
The New Ager certainly demonstrates some of these  qualities in the way that he creates and refines an original artistic fiction.
It often seems that the New Ager has invented his ‘science’ independently of any authority except the optimistic inner influences, and that of lumps of matter whizzing through space.
The happy hippie origins
The Californian sun shines on some strange, off-beat groups but the vast majority are eclipsed by newer and crazier fads.
The hippies have proved a sturdier breed than most.
They became a worldwide phenomenon and are still in circulation.
They traditionally surface on British television every summer solstice as they trek across country to join the druids at Stonehenge, much to the dismay of local farmers and the police.
The hippies were a sixties reaction to a world of materialism.
It was a time for flower power and a return to nature and the simple ways.
It was a sixties of the Beatles and their guru, Maharishi Yogi, and the new search for spirituality in Eastern meditation, drugs and psychedelia.
It was a disillusioned generation which went east to find the new answers.
We realise today that this reactionary generation grew up to be the most materialistic the world has ever known.
Many of the drop-outs eventually left their flowers, cut their hair and dropped back in to the ‘rat race’ of business, commerce and industry.
The old rebellion was squeezed out by the pressure of survival, and the ‘young ones’ conformed to create a new world, not out of spiritual charity, but out of silicon chips.
It is now also dawning on us that, while they may have dropped their hippie beads and trinkets, they failed to let go of their new world view.
Our modern Western world is consequently run by captains of industry, commerce and business who have an underlying Eastern philosophy.
In America, those guru-led hippie students are now in their  fifties and the New Age is part of the shopfloor and even in the curriculum in university and school.
Britain, of course, lagged behind the States, but it is now beginning to surface.
In Skelmersdale New Town in Lancashire, for instance, a large Transcendental Meditation village was under construction at the time of writing to house the workers on an already existing TM industrial estate.
(More about this when we look at TM.)
Now we look more closely at the techniques which are being used to put Western New Age man in touch with nature and its ‘force’.
‘Stageprops’ of the Occult
Robert, a man in his late twenties with a long history of occult involvement, grew up in what he now knows to be one of the most haunted farmhouses in Lancashire on the Fylde coast.
One morning in his childhood he came downstairs, opened a door ‘and it was like below the decks of an old galleon complete with hammocks hanging up’.
Robert explained that this was not unusual.
‘I used to see and feel things in the house, but being a child I just took it for granted that everybody else was seeing and feeling the same things.
This is how my interest started.
Later on, I learned about tarot cards and ouija boards and just drifted into using these props, because they made it easier to see and feel these things.’
Here we get the first hint of why those in the occult and the New Age of paganism use special techniques and paraphernalia.
Talk to any magician or occultist for long enough, and the word ‘props’, or something similar, will crop up.
Jim, a converted satanist from the London area, spoke of the time he was being groomed for initiation.
‘They taught us how to use all the divination equipment….
I had a particular gift with the tarot cards…not using the traditional interpretations which are given on the back of any £5-pack from W H Smiths.
Each card is used as an aid.
You  deal a card, study it, meditate on it, let your mind go blank and allow a picture to come into your mind.’
A professional clairvoyant in Preston told me, ‘You know what a card is supposed to stand for.
Or you can look at the star chart cast at somebody's birthdate.
But the secret is to read between the cards or astrological signs.
Whatever I use, whether it is a crystal ball, a pack of cards, or an article belonging to somebody, it is simply a stageprop; something that gives me the right vibrations and helps me to see the right pictures.’
Most in the occult agree that the paraphernalia they use are simply aids in contacting and manipulating the power.
This is a vital point to grasp.
Christians can waste hours trying to explain the illogicality of, for instance, astrological predictions.
The fortune-teller will probably agree with the problems, and then tell you how irrelevant they are.
The star systems, right or wrong, are only there to provide the right atmosphere; to set the mood; to spark off communion with the spirit or energy force.
We do, however, need to spend time looking at some of the shortcomings of the ‘props’.
That next-door neighbour dabbler you are so concerned about is much more likely to be involved in the ‘soft-occult’, and may still be open to a little reasoning.
It is true that we live in an age when people are increasingly more likely to act on intuition, but many are still able to calculate when two and two add up to five.
On that basis, we shall survey some of these New Age and occult forms of divination.
Astrology
This is a belief that celestial bodies in some way influence our planet and ourselves (the macrocosm affecting the microcosm).
It goes back to the days when people used to worship heavenly bodies as gods.
Astrology reached its ‘modern’ form around AD 140 under the guidance of Ptolemy, the  famous Greek astronomer.
He, of course, assumed that the earth was the hub of the universe, and also that the cosmos was controlled by celestial beings, rather like the living beings or cherubim of Ezekiel.
He placed the beings, pictured as animals, in a belt embracing the known universe, and divided it into the twelve equal houses of the zodiac (Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Sagittarius, Scorpio, Capricorn, Aquarius and Pisces).
These houses were allocated a month each in a given year.
Each of the known bodies at that time — the sun, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, Mercury and the moon — were said to have powers or characteristic influences.
Popular Natal Astrology assumes that you can assess a person's strengths and weaknesses by charting the sky at his exact moment of birth.
You do this by assessing which of the ‘stars’ and their characteristics dominate his house at birth.
This is supposed to paint a picture of his personality, and the astrologer can then go on to tell the person his future by a complicated process of advancing the stars.
Christianity in the early days had little effect on the popularity of astrology.
But Copernicus dealt it a crippling blow when he discovered that the sun, and not the earth, was the centre of our insignificant system.
The rationalism of the eighteenth century, together with the discovery of two more planets (Uranus in 1781 and Neptune in 1839) eventually relegated astrology to the absurd.
It was not until just before the turn of the present century that it was revived by those who sought to promote the occult and a New Age mentality.
The Theosophical Society and Madame Blavatsky, with her mediumistic relationships with ‘The Masters’, led the way.
How it managed to survive in our sophisticated century remains one of the modern wonders of the world.
The science of astronomy had by this time totally undermined the old Ptolemaic system.
Now that we understand that the axis of the earth has moved significantly, we realize that  today's stargazers see a different sky from their predecessors.
Added to this came the discovery of yet another planet — Pluto — in 1932.
What is even more remarkable against this background is that modern science has now not only taken an interest in the mystical art of the Zodiac, but is actually trying to prove that a person's stars do have an effect.
Several doctors, professors and scientists came together in London in November 1987 to compare notes on current research.
A professor from Manchester presented his analysis of criminals' birth dates, which showed that a higher number than average were born in summer.
Of course, it could simply mean that winter foetuses might not get the same diet as others.
Journalist Diana Hutchinson, of the Daily Mail , pointed out that it might be a question of ‘the young baby left alone while the parents went out to play in the summer sunshine’.
It could also be, dare I state it, a case of criminals enjoying a more active sex life in the long winter nights.
There was also the French psychologist Michel Gauguelin, who has shown an inconclusive link between a child's birth date and a future career.
He has also shown that a child is likely to share the same birth months as other relatives.
But perhaps this not so much to do with ‘stars’ as the fact that related people often share the same preferences when planning their families.
The scientists, incidentally, had no help from the nation's leading astrologers, such as Derek and Julia Parker, Jillie Collings, Russell Grant and Patric Walker.
They avoided the conference as did the Faculty of Astrological Studies which trains two hundred and fifty astrologers a year.
The only assistance for the scientists  were from the Astrological Association of Great Britain who organised it.
Diana Hutchison, in her article, cited the astrologers' resentful reactions.
Patric Walker: ‘Astrology is an art and always will be.
The thing that disturbs me about statistics is that they can be  interpreted to mean anything.
The thing that worries me about scientists is that they say one thing one day — like cholesterol is bad for you — and another thing the next day.’
Jillie Collings: ‘I frankly don't care what these scientists are out to prove.
It would be the same as me going to a medical conference or to the stock exchange and telling them where they were going wrong.
I just remember the scientist who told the Wright brothers their machine would never fly.’
Student astrologers, along with some scientists, often try to defend astrology as a logical workable system, but the old hands know better than to try.
They know that their charts and signs are merely ‘props’ to aid their art.
Another problem for the astrologer is the widely varying lifestyles and fortunes of people who are born at identical times and places.
There is a case to argue for twins, though genetic similarities have more to do with their parallel lives than do the stars.
But what about babies born in the same city at the same time?
My wife still knows a person born shortly after her at the same maternity hospital.
They are psychologically, spiritually and in personality as different as chalk and cheese.
This would not be the case if astrology worked.
A nine-year-old boy has become the youngest in history to pass an A-level in mathematics at the time of writing.
But why should he alone make the headlines?
Why was there only one maths genius out of all the children born in his part of the country on the same day?
As other critics of astrology have asked: why is there only one William Shakespeare?
The only thing that can be said for astrology is that it makes money for those who write and publish horoscopes, despite being wrong on most occasions.
British newspapers collated all predictions concerning the course and outcome of the last war.
The vast majority failed to materialise.
Astrologers (not including medium Jeanne Dixon) were predicting re-election for President John F Kennedy right up to the time of his assassination.
German war records rescued after  the last war showed that Hitler's use of astrology was one of the major causes for his demise.
Almanacs rarely forecast the future accurately.
If an almanac editor gets ten per cent of his predictions right in a given year, he counts it a success.
If astrology was limited to the latest fad of providing newspaper horoscopes for the family's ‘pampered pooch’, it would be comical.
The Aquarian alsatian or the Capricorn collie would come to little harm from canine astrology.
However, when it comes to their owners, it can be a sad and destructive business.
People hooked on horoscopes sometimes refuse to try for good jobs because the signs are against them.
Some people feel restricted in their choices or limited to their present station in life, because their birthcharts declare that they are unlikely to better themselves.
Then there are the men and women who give up trying to strengthen their weak areas because they are informed that the conjunction of the planets at the time of their births will not allow them to do so.
There are even the odd cases of women who refuse to get out of bed until their husbands have brought up their morning paper horoscopes!
There is growing evidence of young people getting bored with their daily stars and seeking greater thrills in darker occult areas.
I have come to believe that the soft occult more often than not leads to the hard stuff.
Certainly it is a sad form of bondage.
The biggest problem with astrology is that it stops people from worshipping the one true God.
They are too busy worshipping balls of dead matter wandering through space.
The Bible has more than a few things to say about astrology and fortune-telling.
Let your astrologers come forward,
those stargazers who make predictions
month by month.
Let them save you from what is
coming upon you.


Surely they are like stubble;
the fire will burn them up.
They cannot save themselves
from the power of the flame.
(Isaiah 47: 13–14)
Other biblical renunciations are in Deuteronomy 18: 10, 11; 1 Samuel 28:3; 2 Kings 21:6 and 23:24; Isaiah 8:19,20; and Daniel 2:2.
The Lord clearly despises the practice of reaching for the stars instead of turning to him.
One final question needs to be dealt with before leaving astrology.
This chapter suggests that the stars are merely a ‘stageprop’ for contacting the cosmic force, which the Bible describes as an evil spirit.
The question must be this: Why does the devil not allow his ‘prophets’ to be right all the time?
I believe there are four answers to this:
1.
The Bible makes it clear that the devil and his forces are the masters of misrepresentation.
They delight to lead human beings astray (Matthew 24:24; John 8:44).
This is not a self-defeating strategy, as some occultists may claim.
The devil is careful to dangle just as much as is needed to keep occultists interested.
2.
The devil is limited in his knowledge of the future.
He does not have God's ability to know and see all.
3.
There are many frauds and tricksters in this area.
One editor, for instance, got away with reprinting old horoscopes for four weeks before a reader eventually rang to complain.
4.
It is a spiritual principle that we will receive only as much as we are prepared to use.
Jesus makes this clear in the parable of the ten minas (Luke 19:11f).
The devil can only ‘ape’ these principles.
Those who only ‘play’ at astrology are protected to a certain degree by their own reluctance to give themselves fully to it.
True, they are playing with great danger, but they may never really experience communion with the evil force behind astrology.
For them it is simply a party game or a hobby.
The same could be said for  Christianity.
There are so many in our pews who play at worship; who go to church but never truly open themselves up to power of God's Spirit.
Those who play at the stars will never reach them.
Those who give much, to them will much be returned.
Could this possibly be the truth surrounding one Michel de Nostredame?
Nostradamus published his Centuries in 1555 and they have never been out of print since.
He is said to have prophesied the French Revolution, the Crimean War, two devastating world wars, the rise and fall of Hitler, and the rise and rise of the Arab wealth.
He has been so accurate, some claim, that they have dubbed him the ‘historian of the future’.
Nostradamus apparently forecast a soviet invasion of Britain in the next decade, the fall of the Houses of Parliament and a nuclear wipe-out at the turn of the millennium.
Nostradamus, astrologer supreme and ritual magician, set out his prophecies in coded four-line stanzas with sometimes appalling alternative rhymes.
Some have called him a drunkard and assume that he saw puce poetry instead of pink elephants.
Many more have claimed him to be a genius of the hidden writings of the past; an unsurpassed esoteric; an extraordinary magician who deliberately mixed up his mysterious verses to hide them from weaklings and  meddlers .
His writings are notoriously difficult to interpret and understand.
But even this cannot hide an inexplicable accuracy.
Perhaps Nostradamus epitomised the spiritual principle: to him who has and employs, will more and more be given.
Which spirit was responsible for inspiring his prophecies we shall look at in Chapter 13.
Palm reading
Palmistry, as practised in seaside booths and council-house sitting rooms, is the study of the human hand to assess the  characteristics and future of its owner.
Assemble a handful of palm-readers in one room, and you will end up with an argument.
It often seems that there are as many ways of reading hands as there are palmists.
One concentrates solely on hand lines (chiromancy) while others are only interested in the form of the hand (chirognomy).
One palm reader may deduce her findings from a comparison between lines and hand form, while another may simply use the palm rather as she uses, at other times, a crystal ball.
In this case, the hand is simply an autoscope — a ‘stageprop’— used to help a medium contact her familiar spirit.
Fussing over vertical life-lines, pondering horizontal heart and head lines and anxiously measuring the girdle of Venus and zone of intuition, seems a desperate and futile way to fill the aching emptiness in many a woman's life.
It seemed especially desperate at a charter fair in my home town as we watched a local housewife who had set up her fortune-telling tent.
Admittance was gained by crossing her palm with a £1 coin.
Throughout the day-long fair, there was never less than a queue of about a dozen.
Four hours after the fair had officially closed, there were still six women waiting to have their palms read.
Kurt Koch tells the story of a thirteen-year-old girl who was told by a palmist that she would die in her thirtieth year.
The girl threw caution to the wind and tried to make the most of every minute via sex, drink, numerous abortions, and late-night revels.
She died of ulcerated colitis at twenty-four.
More happily, a colleague told me of a seventeen-year-old girl in his last parish who was cruelly told that she would be dead in a year.
She is now a teacher, a mother of two lovely children, and well into her thirties.
The sad truth and emptiness of palmistry can be seen in the hand lines of many elderly, but still lively, people today.
According to their lines, they should have died thirty or forty years ago!
Card laying
Cartomancy involves diving the future by reading cards.
A normal pack of playing cards can be used but the most popular version is tarot.
In the first version, each card laid represents a value, such as love or luck.
With 52 cards to turn up, the combinations are practically inexhaustible.
Tarot is even more complex with 78 cards, 22 of which are decorated with highly-symbolic pictures with names like The Hanging Man, the Pope, the Devil, the Lovers, Judgement, and an untitled image of death.
These cards are called atouts or the Major Arcana.
The remaining 56 are the Minor Arcana, and are similar to ordinary playing cards.
Most clairvoyants restrict themselves to the pictures for divination.
They also readily acknowledge that the symbols are not as important as the impressions, imaginings and emotions they provoke.
They are simply ‘props’ to aid divination.
Some claimed that the powers which they tapped were either from God or from their own subconscious mind.
Others believed it was some unknown, but benevolent, cosmic force.
Jim, the ex-satanist we met earlier in this chapter, does not mince his words.
He agrees that tarot are the ‘devil's picture cards’ and speaks of the time he was robbed of his powers just before his conversion.
‘I lived in a large house converted into flats.
At the time I was training…to cross the abyss or pit to become an Adept.
It was a dangerous time, and what made it even more dangerous was the arrival of some strange new neighbours.
I suddenly found that I was losing my powers at a time when I needed them most.
If you fail when crossing the abyss, two things can happen.
First, you can bounce right back to the beginning and lose all your powers.
Second, you can fall into the pit — then it's goodbye world.
‘With the arrival of these new people, things started to go wrong.
I found I couldn't do the tarot readings anymore.
The crystal ball didn't work….’
Jim later learned that the three new residents were all Christians.
One is now a Church of England minister and another was the girl he eventually married, Veronica.
Ouija boards
New people entering into the occult are reassured that ouija is a genuine part of the occult, despite its being hijacked as a family board game by Waddingtons House of Games.
The company later withdrew this from the high street stores and from its production schedule, following a large number of complaints from Christian individuals and groups.
A company spokesman was not able to say whether or not the two were connected.
Ouija is made up of the French and German words for ‘yes’, and this would suggest that it was originally an ‘answering machine’ for the spirits of the board.
The operators would ask questions and a wooden tripod on wheels would be guided to the correct answer.
A refinement of this, a mounted pencil on castors, was invented in 1853 by a French spiritualist called Planchette.
Today, the ouija is usually a board displaying the alphabet, the numerals up to 9, and other symbols.
The participants place their fingers on the top of an upturned glass or pointer on castors.
History has seen many types of spirit ‘answering machines’ including table rapping or tipping (each rap or tilt spelling out a letter or answer) and pendulum swinging over an alphabet.
The ouija board has proved the most enduring.
It is thought that perhaps as many as twenty million have been sold across America and Europe in the last forty years to people anxious to contact dead relatives or to get answers to difficult problems in life.
There are four main theories of what causes movement on a ouija board:
1.
Involuntary physical movements of one or more of the participants.
It is difficult to control one's arms after  prolonged suspension over an object.
This has to be ruled out when the movement of the glass begins to make sense of letters, and even phrases.
2.
Deliberate deception.
It is not unknown for practical jokers — among both dabblers and serious occultists — to have fun at the expense of others.
This can generally be ruled out when answers or messages include private details known only to one participant.
On occasions, the personal information revealed has been highly embarrassing for one of the circle, according to reports of those counselled.
Telepathy (mind reading) is another possible explanation when personal facts are unveiled, and this we shall cover more fully in Chapters 12 and 13.
3.
The subconscious of one or more of the participants.
This occurs when the deep desires, frustrations and fantasies of the hidden self effervesce to the surface.
Even private and personal information can evade the conscious controls or natural brakes, and an individual's subconscious will transmit information that the conscious mind would otherwise never dream of releasing.
Without the devil or demons being involved, the ouija board can act as stageprop to inspire the subconscious of the weak-minded and susceptible.
John Allan, an experienced Christian in the field of parapsychology and the deliverance ministry, spoke to me of his fears in this area.
He said, ‘It is possible to bypass the censor which normally filters the impulses deriving from our subconscious, and let out things which ought to be kept in.
In fact I think there is overwhelming evidence to show that at least some of the time a ouija board can be a device (like a crystal ball or a pendulum) for releasing the forces of the subconscious in an irresponsible way, which can cause untold damage to the human personality.’
Surprisingly, those in the occult could be similarly quoted, as in a Tyne Tees television programme broadcast live on Halloween, 1987.
A variety of witches faced us across the TV studio and encouraged us by supporting our warning to  the public to avoid playing around with the ouija board.
One witch said, ‘It is a powerful tool in the occult and we would also warn anybody who does not know what they are doing to stay well clear of the ouija.’
A few days before the broadcast I had been counselling one man in his early twenties who would also have issued the same warning.
He vowed to break his association with the board after being thrown back from it several feet across the room.
4.
Ouija can attract an external and evil guiding intelligence.
When dealing with those adversely affected by the occult and in need of deliverance, the ouija board is one constantly arising factor in their sad histories.
In the last decade, the ouija board has been a feature in several serious crimes.
I record three notable and recent ones.
The Glasgow High Court heard in January 1986 of the couple who were obsessed by the ouija board, tarot cards and the occult.
The twenty-three-year-old woman said that her spirit guide, a Tibetan monk, told her, ‘Your child has to die.’
She tried to strangle her three-month-old daughter and then her lover arrived to finish the evil deed.
At Gloucester Crown Court in August 1986 a young mother was found guilty of killing her four-year-old son whom she believed to be the devil.
The court was told that she dabbled in black magic and tried summoning messages from the spirit world by using a ouija board.
This led her to believe that her younger son, Ryan, was Jesus reborn and that four-year-old Ben was Satan.
She told the court that to save Ryan she had to kill Ben.
She stabbed Ben to death with a pair of dress-making scissors and then tried to kill herself.
On a less tragic but equally terrifying note, a family fled from their Worcester home in February 1986 to stay with relatives until the council could find them another house.
They allowed a council-appointed paranormal expert into their home to investigate a nine-month haunting.
They had lived in fear after hearing many noises and seeing objects fly  across rooms.
The expert used a ouija board in an attempt to contact the spirit that was believed to be tormenting them.
The board spelled out FIRE , confirming the family's fear that the spirit meant them harm.
The family refused to be reassured by the expert's promises that poltergeists did not harm people.
The ultimate warning over ouija comes from a high-ranking chaos magician who knew I was writing this book.
He wrote, ‘Please point out that many occultists also condemn the ouija board in untrained hands, though not for your reasons.’
Personal effects
You will recall those frequent stories of psychics who are called in, often by the police, to locate missing bodies.
They often require an article belonging to the missing person to aid them, or to act as a ‘prop’ for their psychic powers.
In fairness, some psychics believe that the personal effects are more than ‘props’.
They generally believe in a cosmic memory (known officially as psychometry).
It is the occult theory that physical objects are imprinted with their own history, and that of their owners.
Each object is said to possess, or be part of the Akasha, which to some is a universal ‘ether’ in which the world's events are said to be recorded.
To others, it relates to the ‘quintessence’, the luminous and invisible fifth element that binds together the normal four elements of earth, air, fire and water.
Cosmic memory is perhaps the oldest fortune-telling method known to man.
By handling an object, it is said that the sensitive person can not only identify its owner, but describe his character and even his whereabouts.
The theory was first put forward by H R Buchanan in his Manual of Psychometry in 1889, when he argued that all objects contain the history of the world because they are connected to the Akashic Chronicles.
These chronicles, he said, were a  universal ether-library with records of every personal experience, thought and deed that had ever happened.
His argument was based on personal opinion, feelings and intuition though it does have a loose connection to Carl Gustav Jung's theory of racial memory, which has fallen into disuse in modern times.
Many psychics pay lip service to the Akasha theory.
They prefer to use personal articles of missing owners as ‘props’ to assist their gifts of telepathy and clairvoyance (see Chapter 12).
Some use the articles as a focus to call up guiding spirits of the cosmic force.
Voodoo dolls
Ten years ago not many authors, Christian or otherwise, would have included voodoo in an English book on the occult.
Today it is increasingly surfacing in our country.
It is tied in with sympathetic magic which has been an enduring part of the British occult scene for many centuries.
One of the key elements of voodoo and sympathetic magic involves the manufacture of a wax or clay image of a person the magician wishes to influence.
This poppet, as it is called, is then damaged in an appropriate way, if the magician wishes a person harm.
Alternatively, it is treated pleasantly and gently if the magician wishes to secure a person's cooperation.
Its most popular usage is in rituals to obtain sexual favours.
Voodoo has been a contributing factor in many horrendous incidences in the United Kingdom in recent years.
Here are some of the most recent criminal court cases.
In July, 1986 the Old Bailey witnessed the trial of a woman branded ‘voodoo child killer’ by the press.
She was eventually given two life sentences for murdering her seven-year-old daughter and her four-year-old playmate.
She strangled the two girls, hid their bodies and then played the distraught mother making impassioned pleas for  the return of her ‘abducted’ children.
At the trial, the mother's defence was that she was haunted by black magic and voodoo, and a voice had commanded her to ‘Strangle!
Strangle!’
A London male prostitute knitted a voodoo doll out of black wool before killing his flatmate, an Old Bailey judge was told in February 1987.
The doll had pins piercing the location of the heart when the police found it lying on the victim's naked body.
The accused, who pleaded guilty, said, ‘I felt the devil and his horns on my head when I plunged the knife through his heart.’
London's Kingston Crown Court jailed an American and her lover for deception in December 1986.
Waiting in the court were two officers with extradition warrants in case the couple were set free.
They are wanted back in the States for the ‘voodoo murders’ of the girl's parents.
Interpol, at the time of writing, were looking for a Norfolk widow regarding their enquiries into the death of her husband.
Police found his body buried in a back-garden cesspit, and the widow was last seen by her next-door neighbour doing a ‘voodoo dance in the garden with blood smeared on the doorsteps.
Conclusion
Sympathetic magic and voodoo, with their dolls, are two of many more systems which use ‘props’ for contacting and manipulating the forces of evil.
There are a large number of other methods we could examine.
For instance, there are more than sixty separate forms of divination.
The occult even stoops to necromancy, the claimed practice of calling back into temporary life a dead body for the purposes of extracting information out of its spirit.
No matter which method we look at, the overall principle remains the same.
The methods and their paraphernalia are all ‘stageprops’, aids to contacting the same force and channelling the mind in that direction.
Package Tours into Inner space
Excursions into inner space are proving far more dangerous than man's ventures into outer space.
Increasingly man is being urged to launch himself into the barely-explored regions of his innermost self in ‘crafts’ which are often unstable.
The first modern pioneers began to probe inner space more than a century ago, but the data are still highly speculative, confusing, contradictory, and with a marked absence of hard facts.
Despite these great dangers, hypnotists, Transcendental Meditation gurus, parapsychologists, occultists and spiritualists, among others, are now offering ‘package tours’ for all who wish to venture into the great interior.
Often there are no tour guides and travellers are getting lost, or returning with spiritual, mental and sometimes physical distress.
The Bishop of Peterborough in his diocesan magazine warned of the dangers of playing with the occult and the unknown.
He stated that he had met too many people who had become mentally disturbed by playing about with ideas and activities which have done them deep emotional damage.
The Archbishop of Canterbury warned of the deliberate worship of evil through spiritualism and the occult.
He also warned that it was neither obscure nor medieval.
‘There is today,’ he explained, ‘a dangerous fascination with demonic devotion and ritual, and reports of their beguiling, destructive effects seem all too frequent.'
The Evangelical Alliance, representing more than a million Christians of all denominations, was so concerned over the increasing problems created by the occult that it published Doorways to Danger .
In it Christian psychiatrists, care workers, medical experts, ministers and those who had come out of the occult scene, spoke of the appalling wake of damage left by the occult.
Since the mid-seventies, each Church of England diocese has had an individual or small group to cope with the victims of the occult.
This is also true, although in a more limited way, for the free church denominations.
These ministries, many of the exorcists tell me, are being used increasingly each year.
So far in this book, we have looked at some of the more dangerous types of ‘vehicle’ used for inner-space exploration such as satanism, witchcraft, New Age paganism and occult magic.
Chaos magic is probably the most irresponsible way of launching people into the void of inner space.
In this chapter, I attempt a kind of Which ? report on the supposedly more respectable forms of interior travel.
Often they are cloaked in the respectability of scientific terminology or social acceptability.
Transcendental Meditation (TM)
This is so respectable today that Christians of all denominations have embraced it.
There is now a Christian TM Group based at Harbourne Hall, Birmingham, ‘which seeks to promote…a clearer understanding of the value of TM for spiritual growth.’
A 1983 book entitled TM: An Aid to Christian Growth was reprinted in 1987.
The contributors, Roman Catholic priests and TM teachers among them, sought to harmonise the teaching of the Maharishi Mahesh Yogi with their own views of Christianity.
They regretted TM's ‘eastern mystical’ connotations but pointed out that it was ‘a very simple, natural technique which allows mental activity to settle down to a state of increased inner quietness, producing deep mental and physical rest’.
It was not an hypnotic trance, they stressed, and the mind remained fully alert during the two twenty-minute daily sessions.
They denied that TM was addictive or produced ‘spiritual trips’, or that it was viewed as a way of saving themselves by their own efforts.
It was stressed that, for the Christian, TM led to a greater awareness and devotion of many aspects of scriptural faith.
The contributors suggested that Christianity needed TM because it was ‘the most direct way to gain a deeper state of inner quietness’.
In short, it was claimed that meditators' moral senses were enlivened and it helped them ‘become better Christians’.
The contributors' arguments became a little less convincing when they came to explain why mantras were used.
To many in the occult, a mantra is a meaningless sound, the resonance of which has a soothing effect on the body.
However, many of the innumerable mantras are, in fact, the names of fourth-class deities in Hinduism.
A mantra is given to a trainee meditator when his teacher initiates him into TM during an eastern ritual.
This ceremony, called puja , involves the recitation of a long list of seers and gods to show the ‘pedigree’ of a mantra.
Christian TM practitioners insist that a fourth-class god in Hinduism is not an actual deity but part of mythical folk lore.
A later contributor in the above book recognises the weaknesses of this argument when he suggests that TM should be modified to suit various cultures.
Another contributor, however, says that ‘Maharishi lays so much stress on the sound value of the mantra, and its vibratory effect, that without it, you just would not be practising TM.’
‘Please note,’ requested a TM official, ‘that a mantra is only the equivalent of prayer with a fixed wording.’
The  question arises: at whom then are the prayers aimed?
From my understanding, more than a quarter of a million TM practitioners in England are in ignorance, currently invoking heathen deities twice a day, and the majority do not even know it!
There is little said about what is called the messianic role of TM in the book, apart from a token two pages.
The Skelmersdale Transcendental Meditation project, mentioned in Chapter 9, is part of a structuring of TM teachers into National and World Governments of the Age of Enlightenment, complete with all sorts of ministries or responsibilities.
Full-time workers are engaged to promote ‘The Maharishi Effect’— the theory that a community or area will be changed for the better if one per cent of the population meditates.
One of these promoters assured me that there were now more than thirty scientific surveys (carried out by TM) to ‘prove’, among other things, that accident and crime statistics dropped in areas where one per cent(or even the square root of one per cent ) of the population were TM followers.
However, he failed to point out that the same trends could equally be the result of a large variety of other factors.
This eastern technique is being marketed as a way of salvation for society.
Our Christian contributors choose to dismiss this by claiming that not many practitioners take this part of TM seriously.
The TM public relations office, however, claimed that many were involved in the secondary form of TM.
The fact that TM has its direct roots in the Vedic Scriptures — the basis of Hinduism — is also brushed aside as irrelevant.
The contributors follow the modern theory that Christians need to discover the areas in which the Holy Spirit has been at work in heathen faiths.
Their belief is that TM should be recognised as the work of God's Spirit.
It seems a dangerous belief considering the numerous warnings in Scripture for Christians to avoid ‘different gospels’ and ‘false prophets’and ‘being unequally yoked with non-believers’(Galatians 1:8; Acts 13:6; 2 Corinthians 6:14).
It is hardly likely that the Holy Spirit would inspire those directions in his word, and then promptly break them with his deeds.
To be sure, God's Spirit is at work in the East and everywhere, but that is different from saying that he contributes to beliefs which deny the truth that he has inspired.
Perhaps the greatest difficulty concerning TM is the TM-Sidhi Programme.
Siddhis are the powers which can be added on to basic TM such as levitation, extra-sensory perception, telepathy, telekinesis, spiritual healing and control of mind over body.
The most well-known and televised of the TM powers is the ‘flying’ siddhi — the practice of ‘leapfrogging’along with legs folded in the traditional Buddha posture.
One Christian contributor writes of this, ‘It produces a rapid expansion of one's ability to act from a deeper level of consciousness.
It can also be extremely enjoyable to perform, incidentally.’
Apart from the ‘flying’ siddhi, the remainder are psychic gifts and we shall be looking at this area in the next two chapters.
We have already noted in an earlier chapter that meditation, along with yoga, is recognised by modern occultists as one of the four main paths of magic.
Before leaving TM, Christians need to accept part of the blame for its popularity.
Man is a spiritual animal and will seek spiritual satisfaction elsewhere if Christianity does not provide it.
Transcendental Meditation would have remained in the East if Western Christianity had not forgotten the mysticism of meditation.
Men and women need a peaceful time to be still and know the presence of God.
We need biblical ways of practising the presence of God and to listen to him in the power of his Spirit.
Somehow in this mad modern world we have lost this and, if nothing else, TM should inspire us to rediscover a biblical form of Christian meditation.
Yoga
This is a Sanskrit term meaning ‘union’ and is part of the Hindu philosophy of self-discipline which teaches self-control, with the aim of becoming one with the impersonal god force.
It is developed from an eastern world view, and each of the postures adopted is still used in the East to invoke various deities.
A Christian authority on eastern religions, Patrick Sookhdeo said, ‘I have seen that whenever a person uses yoga, he makes a shift from a monotheistic view of God, to a pantheistic view (God identified with nature), and finally to a monistic view (God as an impersonal IT , without form, personality and essence).
You have your basic yoga techniques — the Lotus posture.
Your fingers shape a circle.
What does that imply?
The wheel, the unbrokenness of life; life in an unending cycle.
Can Christians believe that?’
The occult views yoga as a system of mind-control, and the postures adopted are to facilitate certain types of breathing to help the practitioner get in union with the force.
For them, yoga is as powerful as any other path of magic, though it takes longer to achieve magical results.
This path of magic is recommended to the quiet, pacifistic person who dislikes the dramatic and likes to allow the world to take its own time.
The average person who practises keep-fit or lessen-stress yoga (hatha yoga ) will wonder what all the fuss is about.
He or she will probably have never heard of magic or the pagan philosophies undergirding yoga exercises.
Most will have started yoga after watching it on television or because a friend invited them to join a local group.
The members spend their evenings twisting and stretching on their mats.
Occasionally the teacher goes into some ‘funny explanations’, but apart from that they do yoga for health of body and mind.
However, what many yoga fans will have heard about is the ‘life-force’, especially if they followed Richard Hittleman's Yoga for Health series on television.
‘I have explained both in previous chapters and during our programmes,’ he writes in his best-selling book which accompanies the series, ‘that from the yoga viewpoint, all life is sustained by a force which the Yogis have named prana .
We can translate this Sanskrit word prana (literally ‘breath’) into English by using the term life-force….
One of the most important yoga techniques consists of directing the life-force….
All living things must continually receive life-force to sustain themselves….
If you comply with its needs, the Yogi believes you will succeed in your yoga practice and that you will grow mentally, emotionally and spiritually….
The yoga formula is as follows: the more life-force, the more awareness of life and all its implications; the less life-force, the less sense of life and the realisation of its meaning and purpose.’
A good, old-fashioned keep-fit session seems much healthier than Hindu-inspired life-force exercises which were originally designed as an act of worship to thousands of eastern gods.
Yoga has too many unfortunate non-Christian connotations, not least of which is the unhelpful eastern view of right and wrong.
Right is equated with enlightenment and knowledge of the life-force.
Sin is regarded as ignorance of it.
Again, the average yoga keep-fit enthusiast will not meet this concept at the beginning.
But he will before long.
It is built into a world view which, given time, rarely fails to bubble up.
Hypnotism
My first doubts about hypnotism surfaced twenty years ago in a Manchester nightclub.
At the time I was in public relations with the old National Coal Board, and we had hired the services of a club hypnotist to entertain some of our clients and agents.
I entered into the spirit of the occasion by volunteering as one of about twenty stage guinea pigs, but within minutes I had been weeded out and sent back to my  seat.
Six remained to ‘perform’ for a delighted audience.
One believed himself to be Mario Lanza, and, at the mention of a ‘key’ word, would assault a well-known aria in a way that would have peeled the paint off any bathroom wall.
A second ‘entranced’ victim kept leaping for cover every time the hypnotist mentioned another special word.
The victim had been told, while in trance, that the word would remind him that he had come out without his trousers!
The poor man was exhausted by the end of the performance and his cardigan looked like a sack!
It had been constantly pulled down to cover his imagined embarrassment.
The laughter faded away, leaving me with a sense of unease.
It was only years later, after becoming a Christian, that I was able to clothe that feeling with words.
It must be stressed that there are important differences between stage hypnotism and the techniques used in alternative medicine.
But the entertaining variety does help to illustrate a basic problem common to all hypnotism.
The ‘victim’ of the stage hypnotist was brought out of his trance before he was incited to perform outrageous actions which he would never have contemplated in normal circumstances.
On one level, the victim's mind was operating normally.
He was able to keep control of himself until the hypnotist mentioned a code-word.
This then suggested an altered reality in the victim's mind.
He believed his circumstances had changed.
The singer, for instance, believed himself to be a great tenor performing before an adoring audience at La Scala.
This raises the evergreen question of whether or not a person's will can be affected by hypnosis?
The popular belief is that it cannot.
I have been reassured on countless occasions that a hypnotist cannot make me do anything against my will.
I remain unconvinced.
I would agree that a hypnotist could not, for example, make me attack an innocent person.
This would be against my nature.
However, I do strongly suspect that he could change my perspective of reality so as to make it extremely difficult not to attack the person.
Under hypnosis, he could suggest, for instance, that this person was going to kill my wife and children and that, as a good Christian, I could not possibly allow that to happen.
In this way, the hypnotist is not making me attack against my will, he is conjuring up a set of circumstances in which to attack seems the lesser of two evil courses.
In hypnosis, I retain my ability to choose which actions I wish to execute.
What I lose is my full ability to monitor and assess correctly a given situation.
Martin and Deidre Bobgan in their booklet Hypnosis and the Christian state,
The monitoring function helps us in making decisions by comparing past situations to the current situation.
Such recall of information and application to the present situation may change our decision on how to act….
Since reality becomes distorted during a trance, the subject cannot properly evaluate which actions make sense and which ones do not.
Perhaps the greatest problem with hypnotism concerns man's ignorance.
Scientists are still unable to tell us what it is or even how it works.
We are therefore exploring inner space in a vehicle which is alien and with only limited knowledge of its controls.
Much medical opinion also assures us that hypnosis is not essential.
Equally satisfactory results can be obtained using more orthodox treatments.
There is also concern with the use of deception to induce hypnosis.
Hypnotists are taught ‘double bind’ talk to gain the confidence of patients.
In layman's language, this means that every reaction of the patient is regarded as the right reaction.
Every twitch, blink, yawn and movement is used to tell the patient that he is responding correctly.
If a hypnotist is willing to be so deceptive while hypnotising a patient, can he be trusted when the patient is in a trance?
Let us imagine that you have found a hypnotist who is honest.
You trust him not to lead you astray either en route to the trance or while in it.
Can a Christian in this case be hypnotised?
This becomes a possibility.
However, you then have another problem called the placebo effect.
You believe in the hypnotist and believe that he can help you.
Your faith then may become the dominant factor in any healing that might take place.
Faith plays an enormous part in healing.
Doctors can convince trusting patients that they will get better even while giving them a course of pills which consist of little more than sugar and water.
It is well-known in orthopaedic hospitals that mentally sub-normal people with broken bones recover fifteen to twenty per cent faster than normal patients.
Their trust can so easily be won by the surgeons and nurses, and it is the absence of anxiety and worry which enable bones to knit together faster.
Not only does the trusting Christian need to worry about the placebo effect, he also needs to be aware that he will want to please his therapist, having placed so much faith in him.
If the hypnotist does not turn out to be as trustworthy as expected, this can be extremely dangerous.
Regression hypnotism provides the Christian with his greatest worry.
Therapists will take a patient back to difficult areas of the past, if they believe that the patient's problems stem from this.
Less reputable hypnotists may then try to change the facts.
The girl who was beaten up, for instance, may be urged to reconstruct the incident in a way that is less traumatic than it originally was.
She may even be asked to visualise the whole incident in a different way.
She then returns to full consciousness with her past subtly changed.
Can a distortion of past events really produce a healthy outlook on life?
It seems extremely doubtful.
The patient ends up not knowing how to differentiate between what are her own thoughts, and those which have been implanted.
The therapist becomes a ‘con’ man, and the patient the dupe!
That seems a recipe for a mental breakdown.
Regression therapy can also involve taking a patient back into the womb.
Returning to the original metaphor of this  chapter, the patient is taken into dangerous and unexplored territories of inner space.
They are being used as the ‘guinea pigs’ of inner space exploration!
The whole of this area is a maelstrom of medical ‘meteorites’, all coming from different directions.
Martin and Deidre Bobgan believe that a baby or foetus has no capacity to record and store information.
‘The myelin sheathing,’ they write, ‘is too underdeveloped in the prenatal, natal and early postnatal brain to store such memories.’
This, of course, begs the question: if the source of information concerning life in the womb and at birth cannot possibly be of the patient, then who — or what — else could be the origin?
The opponents who refute the Bobgans' claim include Dr Thomas Verny and Christian clinical theologian Frank Lake.
These and others maintain that a human being can be affected by events, emotions and environment from conception onwards.
Frank Lake insists that counselling must take account of these pre-birth traumas.
Those on this side of the argument would refute any suggestion that prenatal knowledge comes from any other source than the patient himself.
Whichever side is right, do hypnotists have the right to take patients into potentially dangerous, unknown areas of inner space?
Personally, I am rather too fond of my sanity to risk it in this way.
The real problems start when the hypnotist regresses a patient back to ‘previous lives’ which have supposedly been lived on earth or on another planet.
In this realm, there is no controversy between Christians, only the certainty of doubtful origins.
This is especially true when the information given by the patient turns out to be astonishingly accurate, as on numerous occasions.
The occultist would label the source as ‘psychic’.
The Christian would be more inclined to call it ‘satanic’.
This is dealt with more fully in the next chapter.
I have written of hypnotism with fear and trepidation.
I am conscious of many in history who have opposed advances in medicine, and of the pioneers who have struggled on against difficult odds.
However, if a church member asks whether or not it is right for a Christian to be hypnotised, I have to give a negative answer.
I would then go on to provide a more positive option.
We are now blessed with a growing number of Christian counselling and pastoral care services in England, such as Ellel Grange, near Lancaster.
This residential healing centre has proved a great blessing to many of my friends.
They, along with a growing number of church ministries, are able to minister in the power of the Holy Spirit with notable success.
The ministry of Christian healing and deliverance introduces the missing part to the incomplete picture of modern and alternative medicine.
It reintroduces God, who created life, and who has no problem repairing it when it goes wrong.
Freemasonry
Does this surprise you?
What, you may ask, have the masons to do with ‘package tours into inner space’, or paganism or the occult for that matter?
The answer can be stated quickly: masons were the original modern pioneers of the occult voyages into ‘inner space’, according to several sources.
First, we will deal with the original occult links of freemasonry.
Secondly, we will look at the pagan links via the mason's name for God.
Finally, we will conclude with a brief review of freemasonry today.
The occult connection
To be fair to the United Grand Lodge of England, let me first start with a denial.
Grand Lodge Librarian and Curator John Hamill made it his first priority to assure me that ‘freemasonry contains neither pagan nor occult practices’.
He  also dismissed the allegation — popular with some Christian mason-watchers — that freemasonry was founded in an x ‘antiquity that goes back into pagan religions well before the birth of Christ’.
He would also refute the suggestion that the ancestors of the Craft were Druids or ancient Egyptians.
Grand Lodge are appalled by the often-used argument that modern freemasonry was founded by middle-class gentlemen who wanted a secret society to study alchemy and the occult.
‘What is true,’ writes mason investigator Stephen Knight, ‘is that the philosophic, religious and ritualistic concoction that makes up the speculative element in freemasonry is drawn from many sources — some of them, like the Isis-Osiris myth, dating back to the dawn of history.
Rosicrucianism, Gnosticism, the Kabbala, Hinduism, Theosophy and traditional notions of the occult all play a part.’
Mr Hamill, the masons' own leading historian, would be the first to acknowledge that there is no certainty concerning the origins of the Craft.
The founding brothers never entrusted anything to paper, fearing that rituals and their interpretation of them might fall into the wrong hands.
One long-standing allegation of satanic elements in masonry, however, still awaits a satisfactory answer.
Lady Queensborough claimed that the masonic god was revealed in the highest degrees as Lucifer.
She claimed to be quoting from the highest rituals when she wrote,
The Masonic Religion should be by all of us initiates of the high degrees maintained in the purity of the Luciferian doctrine.
Grand Lodge, in its evidence to a 1987 Church of England Working Party set up to investigate whether or not Christianity and freemasonry were compatible, claimed that this was wrong.
‘This is a typical example of the Judeo-Masonic-Communist-Occult world domination plot school of  conspiracy,’ they claimed, adding that the Lady's scholarship was ‘based on unreliable and hostile secondary sources’.
The Lodge also said that her reasoning was ‘inaccurate and biased’, and went on to imply that she was a Fascist who could not be trusted.
They did not, however, deny the above quote, allegedly taken from the 30th, 31st and 32nd degrees.
Surely, the most effective denial of this satanic allegation would have been to allow the rituals of the higher degrees to be published in full.
What is known is that the founder-members of this century's most influential occult order, The Golden Dawn.
were all high-ranking masons.
These included Dr William Woodman, McGregor Mathers, Wynn Westcott in 1877 and, later, Aleister Crowley.
Before continuing, it must be noted that though all freemasonry flows from similar origins, they are not all under the jurisdiction of the United Grand Lodge of England.
The above named were members of the Ancient and Accepted Rite of Freemasonry (a Scottish degree which originated from the continent).
R G Torrens in his book on the inner teachings of the Golden Dawn implies that all masonry once had the dark occult secrets, but had ‘become…an empty form’.
The real secret of masonry had been lost, he wrote, and could now only be found in other organisations faithful to the Ancient Mysteries.
Torrens also points out that many of the early masonic lodges were ‘orientated to the setting or rising sun’ and ‘others were aligned to receive the light from certain stars’.
This was done to ‘focus light from one of the heavenly bodies, direct and unpolluted, into the Holy of Holies over the heads of the assembled congregation’.
He adds that ‘anyone who has knowledge of masonic working in the higher degrees, will mark a part of one ceremony which maintains a record of this in its ritual.’
Mason Grand Masters were also responsible for the founding and structure of one of Europe's largest occult  societies, the Ordo Templi Orientis (OTO) in 1902.
Around the turn of the century, there was much disenchantment with freemasonry because it was negating its original secrets of the occult and becoming more a social club and friendly society.
In 1904, the OTO announced the nature of its teachings in the society's organ Oriflamme .
‘Our Order possesses the KEY, claimed the article, ‘which opens up all Masonic and Hermetic secrets, namely, the teaching of sexual magic, and this teaching explains, without exception, all the secrets of Nature, all the symbolism of FREEMASONRY and all systems of religion’[their capital letters].
I have in my possession the OTO's own list of ‘Administrative and governmental offices and official bodies as of 5/ 15/87’ showing it to be a worldwide network of undercover occultism.
I also have its organisation flow up to 1969 when many OTO lodge members were arrested and sentenced for child abuse in California.
By this time the organisational history had become vague and shrouded in mystery.
The British headquarters is given only as The OTO Oasis, BM Box 3338, London, WC1N 3XX.
Maury Terry, an award-winning journalist, published in 1987 The Ultimate Evil , his investigation into the ‘deadly satanic cults’ which involved the OTO.
His interest began after David Berkowitz was arrested for the Son of Sam murders, one of the most notorious murder cases in US criminal history.
It was linked with the Manson murders in 1969 and several other horrific crimes.
Far below the surface, Terry found ‘an infinitely more frightening spectre — that of a network of Satan-worshipping cults that criss-crossed the United States.’
The occult position, helped by the OTO, has become so acute in the States that police are now thankful to attend seminars on satanism.
In 1987, 120 members of the New York City Police Department attended one such day-long course conducted by the Interfaith Coalition for Concern  About Cults.
Here in England, few police officers will even acknowledge that satanism is a reality.
One officer explained to me that it would not help their credibility nor their promotion prospects if they were too closely identified with investigations into the occult.
A Northern force faced with several desecrated graveyards and missing bodies in 1986 found it easier to describe it as the work of vandals.
There was a similar reaction after several bodies went missing from Britain's biggest cemetery in Surrey in April 1988, even after a man had been arrested and charged for decapitating a disinterred corpse.
The OTO, founded by freemasons, has much to answer for in the last eighty years.
The pagan connection
In the past, freemasons have labelled and slandered the Christian God by reducing him to a miniature deity.
The mason god has been a Hebrew-Syriac-Egyptian mixture by the name of JAH-BUL-ON.
This is the composite word on the triangle which is the central focus of every Royal Arch chapter.
The letters have, until recently, invariably been accepted as the name of God in three languages.
Even as late as 1984, the Revd Francis Heydon, the then Third Grand Principal of Grand Lodge, gave this interpretation.
It has led critics to accuse, with good reason, the Craft of mixing the Biblical God JAH (YHWH or Jehovah) with the Syriac god BUL (or Baal) and the Egyptian god ON (or Osiris).
In recent years, several major Christian denominations have criticised freemasonry for this pagan trinity, and other matters.
It has provoked freemasonry to examine itself and nurtured a desire for a new image.
‘Tradition dies hard and it may well be that many zealous companions will go on quoting Syriac and Egyptian and perpetuating this extraordinary jumble of explanations,’ wrote Canon Richard Tydeman, Grand Superintendent over  the Suffolk province of Freemasonry, in 1985.
‘I will not say that they are wrong but I will say that I think they are definitely unwise in the present climate of opinion….
It is certainly not expedient to lay ourselves open to charges of idolatry or syncretism at a time when churches are seriously examining our beliefs and doctrines.’
Canon Tydeman went on to offer an alternative interpretation of JAH-BUL-ON.
He said that they should be taken all from the Hebrew language.
He then explained that ‘…what we are pronouncing are not the three names of God (or worse still the names of three gods, as some would suggest) but we are pronouncing three aspects or qualities of the Deity which are well-known and used, in Christianity and other religions, namely His Eternal Existence, His Transcendence and His Omnipotence.’
Christian mason-watcher John Lawrence has his doubts:
‘The fact that it [JAH-BUL-ON]stands at the pinnacle of Craft Freemasonry makes it well nigh impossible to change.
It is an idol, a false, man-made attempt at redefining God, and its position at the very heart of the Craft, as the innermost secret, simply serves to show how freemasonry stands on a spurious foundation.’
Present-day freemasonry
Freemasonry in England has negotiated a remarkable U-turn in the last three years due to the criticisms of church, state, its own embarrassed members, the police, the Press and the general public.
Out has gone the traditional ‘no comment’ to be replaced by an almost ‘open door’policy.
Commander Michael Higham, Grand Secretary, believes that freemasonry has become a ‘convenient whipping post’ mainly because it has refused to answer its critics.
Following widespread unfavourable publicity, Grand Lodge decided to redefine its rules on public relations in 1984.
The vast majority of masons today are genuinely puzzled at the criticisms of the last decade.
Those who live around  me in Grand Lodge's two largest provinces, East and West Lancashire (where 15% of the country's 320,000 masons live), would be horrified to read of their Craft's occult and pagan links.
They consider themselves to be pillars of society with long-standing royal patronage and a fine reputation for giving away millions of pounds in charity.
They point out that fellow brothers include the directors of all big companies, many of the doctors, accountants and solicitors, and a large percentage of church leaders (lay and clergy).
One provincial officer asked me, ‘How much more respectable can you be?’
Conclusion
There is an inherent incompatibility between freemasonry and Christianity.
The two cannot go together because of fundamental differences.
This is not only a personal view but also that of many Christian denominations.
Freemasonry has been criticised, with good reasons, for its false god, its inaccurate gospel, its secrecy and, consequently, its easy abuse, its confusion of Scripture with its own ancient myths and fables, and its susceptibility to being misused for members' selfish ends.
The origins of freemasonry, even though those in the occult may dismiss the Craft as an ‘empty form’, are most certainly not of God.
We have argued from Scripture in this book that there is only one alternative source — Satan.
For the following reasons, I believe that it is still under its original controller:
1.
I have had to minister to several who have felt oppressed by their connection with freemasonry.
One woman, a vicar's wife, spoke of her involvement with, and influence of her high-ranking masonic father.
Following her conversion to Christianity, she underwent a ministry of deliverance after experiencing oppression.
‘I didn't understand why I needed it,’ she told me, ‘but when the minister prayed over me, it was just like a weight being lifted right off.’
Several former masons, or close relatives of those still in the Brotherhood, have spoken to me in similar ways.
Some mentioned ‘a sense of bondage’ or ‘a sense of evil’.
The church of England Working Party on Freemasonry also received, and published, evidence of this nature.
An ex-mason, who gave his evidence to the working party, wrote of ‘a beautiful sense of lightness and freedom I experienced when that oppression was lifted.’
2.
Whenever a church leadership is dominated by freemasons, I find a dead tradition and lifeless ritual.
More often than not it is lively on the social side, but spiritually dead.
It has no vision and no sense of God's leadership.
This, of course, could be a coincidence.
But I think not.
Nor do the dozens of other Bible-believing Christians with whom I have discussed the matter.
All from personal experience agree that freemasonry brings the end of spiritual life in a church.
3.
Freemasonry claims the first loyalty of men.
Perhaps Christianity has been to blame for not providing manly worship and interests and fellowship.
Leading evangelist Jim Smith certainly thinks so, causing him to write three books on how the church can reach out and hold men.
Having taken the plank out of our eye, we can see clearly how the Craft has stepped into the vacuum.
Around my area, 50,000 men follow freemasonry and each has sworn to give his utmost allegiance to the Craft.
4.
There can be no fellowship with darkness.
The apostle Paul's warning to the Corinthians applies equally to our society.:
What fellowship can light have with darkness?
What harmony is there between Christ and Belial?
What does a believer have in common with an unbeliever?
What agreement is there between the temple of God ad idols?…
Therefore come out from them and be separate, says the Lord’(2 Cor 6:15–17).
Psychic Gifts
It was business as usual at the beginning of August 1987 for world-famous medium Doris Stokes — two months after her death!
There was one obvious difference: she was coming through from the Other Side.
This was the claim of her friend and associate Lee Lacey who said that he had received messages of love from Doris during her memorial service at the Friends' Meeting House, Euston Road, London.
She had revealed that she was surrounded by the spirits of her four dead children, her parents, and a host of spirit youngsters through whom she operated when she was on This Side.
Asked why it had taken so long for Doris to get back in touch with this world, Mr Lacey explained that it was probably the exhaustion caused by her illness, the brain operation and unsuccessful medical treatment.
What's what in the psychic world?
Psychic gifts and phenomena are now all the rage in both the New Age and the occult.
What are we to make of them?
Before looking more closely at our departed medium Doris and other psychics and their phenomena, let us remind ourselves of the main areas.
Mediumship
The alleged ability, in or out of trance, to contact the spirit-world, usually during a seance.
Some claim to extrude ectoplasm, the substance out of which spirits are said to be made.
One medium even claimed to have made a plaster cast of a pair of ectoplasmic hands before they dissolved.
There is no record of any laboratory tests on the substance though it has often been photographed.
It is seen as a white, gooey substance, said to smell vaguely of ozone, and is seen extruding from a medium's mouth or other natural orifice.
It is said to be invisible in its natural state but will form into semi-matter under certain conditions, rather like invisible moist air condensing into a filmy liquid on windows.
Mediumship is famous for its frauds.
They are often much more in contact with the spirit of materialism and money!
Spiritualism
More than seventy million follow this worldwide religion.
The services can be similar to those of orthodox Christianity, except they are led by mediums, and the sermon is often replaced by a seance.
Some treat Jesus as the greatest medium who ever lived while others accept him as ‘the psychic Son of God’.
Spiritualism began in a wooden hut in America on 31st March 1848, when the three Fox sisters — Kate, Margaret and Leah — claimed to receive messages from a murdered pedlar.
Within a few months there were several dozen mediums offering their services.
Margaret confessed shortly before her death that the whole thing had been a hoax.
Was she trying to clear her conscience, or was it Margaret's final act of revenge on Leah who had grabbed all the glory?
Spiritism
Generally, the same as above minus the religious bits.
It was the French version of Spiritualism with a strong emphasis on reincarnation.
Clairvoyants
Those who claim to see the past or future or to have clear sight or understanding of present events without the use of normal senses.
The most numerous would more accurately be described as clairsentients; sensing things through their ‘third eye’ or ‘sixth sense’.
Others are clairaudients (hearing voices).
Precognition
The knowledge or vision of something which will occur in the future.
People who foresee airplane disasters before they happen are said to have this gift.
Astral Travel
You might call it dreaming in a vivid, realistic way, though the occultist would like to go further, and claim that it is the ‘desire body’ going on an independent solo excursion from the physical.
A person with no connection with the occult can occasionally experience this when cat-napping during the day.
The dream can seem so real that he believes himself to be wide awake.
On suddenly realising he is dreaming, he may try to wake up only to find that his body seems paralysed.
It then demands a mental fight to regain physical control.
This is a normal vivid dream state and is a natural activity of the brain.
Occultists and some clairvoyants claim that this is the astral body.
It is said to be a luminous and dynamic nature capable of independent existence apart from its physical counterpart.
The astral body is said to be attached to the physical by an invisible silver cord, although it is not clear how something can be invisible yet silver.
Out-of-the-body experiences (OBEs)
Similar to astral travel but with differences.
Many claim to have had these near death; floating near the ceiling while looking down at their dying (or clinically dead) physical frames.
As with astral travel, some talk of being linked to  their physical bodies by a filmy cord.
Nearly all OBE patients tell of travelling along a dark tunnel towards a distant light.
They emerge into a beautifully peaceful park or garden, usually meeting a benevolent old man, and then are sent back through the tunnel to return to the physical world.
The resuscitated patients often speak of a great sense of disappointment and loss on waking.
Medical theorists suggest that these experiences are actually hallucinations caused by the brain's mood-controlling limbic system being starved of oxygen.
The practitioners of medicine on the other hand are not so certain.
They have had to explain why patients can sometimes provide vivid descriptions of their own resuscitation, explaining how it was done, who was involved and even what was said.
Telepathy
Similar in some ways to clairvoyance, but it mainly involves communicating with somebody else without using normal senses.
Clairvoyants and mediums are often rechristened mind-readers, especially by those who do not believe in a spirit-world.
A common criticism is that their ‘telepathy’ is nothing more than mumbo-jumbo covering the clever ‘detective’work of extracting clues and information from their naive victims.
However, not all telepathy can be discounted in this way.
Trance-channelling
Sharon Gless, of television's Cagney and Lacey fame, collected her 1987 Emmy for the best actress category and gave much of the credit to Lazaris, her spirit guide.
She explained that Lazaris came through to her via a medium who went into a trance, and had been helping her for the previous eight years.
Shirley MacLaine, according to her autobiography, similarly relies on contacting disembodied entities through various mediums.
Automatic writing
Receiving and writing messages from the spirit world (or the subconscious, depending on which occultist one is talking to).
Often an entranced medium acts as a ‘dictation machine’ under direct control.
Some act in a conscious state, more like shorthand-typists being guided by their spiritual bosses.
Some see the ouija board as a ‘machine’ to facilitate this process.
Much occult literature is said to have been written automatically.
Brian Inglis,The Times reporter and television presenter, suggests in a recent book that some of our famous authors may not have actually written their bestsellers.
Someone (or something) else may have been responsible.
Graham Greene, for example, said that he wrote The Confidential Agent in record time under the influence of benzedrine.
He said that it was like taking dictation, ‘as if I was ghosting for another man’.
Charles Dickens apparently claimed to hear every word he wrote.
Henry Miller spoke of the time unseen powers dictated the Tropic of Cancer to him.
Perhaps all this is no more than plain old-fashioned inspiration.
Or is it always so plain?
Divination
This word embraces multifarious ways of looking into the future, consciously or unconsciously, generally enlisting the help of spirit beings.
Possession
This is a technical occult word used to describe the state of a person who has a demon in residence.
The will of the person is under the demon's control, and this may also be true for the voice.
Some claim that demons can even change the physical appearance of a host body.
Exorcism is not limited to Christianity.
Occultists also claim to cast out demons affecting or possessing one of their number, and even friends outside their magic circles.
Most occultists would not agree  with the Christian definition of a demon.
To them, it is a product of the subconscious.
Ghosts and ghouls
The modern meaning of the first word usually relates to apparitions or spectres of dead people.
Ghouls are more accurately evil spirits, believed to haunt graveyards and similar places, and to ‘feed’ on human remains.
The word is Arabian and means ‘to seize’.
A fish and chip shop owner called me in to deal with the lower half of a long-skirted ancestor which often glided through her kitchen.
After several months, she felt it was time to lay the troublesome lady (and her own nerves) to rest.
At the end of a short service of prayer, she wanted to know why half a lady should want to materialise in her kitchen.
At that time, I trotted out the stock classical answer explaining that all events, especially those charged with high emotion, were permanently imprinted on the ‘ether’ or atmosphere of a place.
It was similar to the tape recording process, and the ‘machine’ was always being replayed.
Those who were psychically sensitive would occasionally be able to tune in to the ‘replay’.
Is it really an ‘echo’ from the past?
Or could there be another explanation?
We look at other possible answers in the next chapter.
Poltergeists
Seven or eight times out of ten, this is the phenomenon which greets those in the deliverance ministry when they are called on for help.
The main features marking the presence of a poltergeist are moving objects, electrical high jinks, or mysterious noises.
Local Christians took over our cinema to show the film Jesus of Nazareth and on the eve of the opening, the resident poltergeist threw a fit behind the closed doors of the projection room.
The staff had heard it before on numerous occasions but nothing as severe or as noisy as on this  particular night.
When the caretaker eventually ventured into the room the following day, all was as usual.
Ask an occultist for an explanation and a variety will be offered.
Some will speak of elementars , spiritual beings which invade the physical world from their normal residence in the astral plane.
They might describe them as the unsettled ‘shells’ of the dead.
Others will call them Diakka , unclean and amoral spirits, who take great delight in terrorising those who dabble in the spiritual phenomena without sufficient knowledge.
Ask a modern psychic and he will suggest that a poltergeist is no more than the manifesting energy of a disturbed human being.
This theory became popular when it was observed that, in many cases, flying objects, noises and mischief all appeared to centre around an ‘owner’.
This was usually a person undergoing great emotional strain, such as a girl experiencing a particularly traumatic puberty.
Though many poltergeist influences can be explained in this way, what of those which happen in empty, uninhabited properties?
Psyche
To the Christian, this is the Greek word for soul, the essence of man.
The occultist, thanks to Carl Gustav Jung as reinterpreted by Madam  Blavatsky and Theosophy, believe it is the animal and earthly nature of man.
This nature is a dim refection of the great ‘I’ or Ego in the sky.
There is a universal indestructible ‘I’(called Manas ) and each individual man is said to be merely a ray projected down from it.
Psychic (psi for short)
A psychic is one who senses by invisible means.
He or she may be clairvoyant, a medium, or have a gift of telepathy.
In fact, the psychic will be sensitive to most things in the above ‘dictionary’.
Fact or fiction?
Doris Stokes claimed the attention of millions through her books, public hall seances and appearances on the television.
She was a confidante to the stars including Coronation Street's Pat  Phoenix , actor James Dean, and Elvis Presley.
There were one hundred and fifty mourners at Doris's memorial service when Lee Lacey claimed to receive the messages from her.
Is this another case of fraud?
Was Mr Lacey making a take-over bid for Doris Stokes's empire?
Or did Doris really come through?
Are these gifts real?
From some of the illustrations we have already noted in our first chapter concerning Jeanne Dixon, there is circumstantial evidence to support these gifts.
Mrs Dixon must either be ‘in the know’ from some source, or be incredibly good at guessing.
It would, however, be much more convincing if we had proof positive: some sort of impartial and well-monitored test.
This was a line of thought pursued by scientist Peter Fairley, of the London Evening Standard , following the Aberfan disaster and the premonitions which preceded it.
He began the Standard's Premonitions Bureau to record and date any claims of prophecies, and which would act only as an independent and impartial witness.
The premonitions began to pour in about Grand National winners, storm warnings, earthquakes and other disasters.
Not all were correct.
But quite a few proved remarkably accurate.
The bureau began to notice that some of their regular contributors were achieving higher-than-average success rates, and decided to investigate.
‘The problem with all these stars,’ said Peter Fairley, ‘was that the moment they started to know that we were interested in what they could do, and we started to investigate how they did things, it just went.
It has come through to me as a firm conclusion that, if there is such a thing as premonition, it is something which is instantaneous — a flash of intuition….
If you ask anyone to apply conscious  thought to it, it just goes.
The other conclusion is that, when it happens to you, it is an overpowering sensation.
You know that it [the predicted event]is going to happen.’
If the London Bureau can only provide circumstantial evidence, let us head north of the border to Edinburgh University and the chair of Britain's first Professor of Parapsychology.
A quiet, bespectacled and sceptical American, Robert Morris, has spent the last few terms testing ‘respondents’(the academics prefer this term to psychic, witch-doctor, shaman or whoever else they are analysing).
Again, we come across tantalising circumstantial evidence, with the aid of standardised tests.
All ‘respondents’ wear ear pads and ping-pong-ball goggles to ensure that their normal senses cannot operate.
As a double precaution, they are locked in an electrically-shielded room.
They are invited to sense sounds played in another room, or try to match patterned cards drawn elsewhere.
Some ‘respondents’ have impressive scores, but these have never been sufficient to turn any academic hypothesis into theory, let alone fact.
The British Parapsychological Association received some bad news during their 1987 convention at the same university.
Dr Susan Blackmore, of Bristol University, presented a controversial paper on the history of research into paranormal phenomena since 1880 and concluded, ‘Psychical research has failed.’
There was, she admitted, some evidence, but it had not resolved the controversy over the existence of the paranormal.
‘We have no viable theory to account for the supposed phenomena and no technology at all,’ Dr Blackmore stressed.
‘We cannot produce or control them.
We are still asking more or less the same questions we were a hundred years ago.
And we still have no answers….
We have landed in a blind alley.’
The doctor, like many scientists, returned to the only workable theory she knew: man was a brain in a body.
Life ceased with the death of that body.
Many readers of our most respected newspaper The Times could not have disagreed more.
Despite severe criticism, the newspaper conducted a poll in 1980 into the paranormal beliefs and experiences of its readers.
The poll had inbuilt defects because the sample who replied were ‘self-selecting’.
Sixty-four per cent said they certainly believed psychic experiences existed and a further seventeen per cent thought them probable.
Only two per cent thought they did not exist.
Those who believed were asked to give their verdict on major psychic phenomena.
The percentages are of those who believed they existed:
Extra-sensory perception — 83%
Telepathy — 83%
Contact with the dead — 38%
Apparitions of the living — 33%
Out-of-the-body experiences — 54%
Reincarnation — 29%
Haunting — 53%
Poltergeists — 52%
Dowsing — 70%
Precognition (premonitions)— 73%
A similar poll was carried out among academics in the United States at about the same time.
Half of them (about a thousand) thought that extra-sensory perception was a likely possibility and sixteen per cent believed that it was ‘established fact’.
As stated elsewhere in this book, a national opinion poll conducted by Southampton University and published on its ‘Is Anyone There?’ programme on Halloween 1987, showed that nine out of ten people in Britain believed in the reality of at least one psychic phenomenon.
Where do we go from here?
I have to confess at this point that my own sensitivity to psychic phenomena is scarcely higher than that of a slab of concrete.
To be sure, I have had to deal with various phenomena and minister to those who have experienced them, and there have certainly been some chilling moments, but in general a ghost would have to flay me alive with its chains before I raised an eyebrow at the possibility of its presence.
I have, however, experienced enough, and spoken to sufficient numbers of experienced psychics, to come to the private conclusion that the psychic is a reality.
It is an opinion shared by ninety per cent of the population and there is some support for its reality in the criticisms of Scripture.
So, if these psychic gifts do exist, who is handing them out?
Who or what is behind the phenomena?
Whose gifts?
The Thalidomide drug may once have been described as God's gift to expectant mothers.
Today we know better.
For a generation we have witnessed the tragic, though often heroic progress of those handicapped by its use.
They were often born limbless because a pharmaceutical company failed to adequately test a product.
The medical profession benefited from a cruel lesson.
Other disciplines also learned to double-check.
But para-psychologists continue to jump to unchecked conclusions.
Christian parapsychologists, almost without exception, view psychic phenomena as gifts of God's creation; as natural, say, as a talent for music or sport.
The gifts are labelled ‘good’, though several dangerous side-effects are accepted.
It is my belief that the psychic has been labelled prematurely, without sufficient testing, and with a reliance on hopeful speculation which is beyond reason.
The whole area is still a minefield of doubtful theories and hazardous hypotheses.
The few known facts are dwarfed by a mountain of speculation.
Parapsychology is still trying to answer questions it first began to ask seriously a century ago.
We certainly need to continue our investigations; to advance ideas; to plumb the mysterious depths of the human psyche.
But premature confidence in a little-known, ill-tested theory  is not a suitable attitude for Christians who are urged to test all things.
We desperately need to avoid making hasty judgements, especially when it comes to the most basic question of all: whose! rifts are they?
A section of Christendom answers that question with a blunt, no-nonsense cry of ‘Satan!’.
The paranormal is automatically consigned to the demonic because it is not immediately biblical.
As a consequence, there is a reluctance to even devote thinking time to this subject.
This section of Christianity is just as guilty as the premature parapsychologists.
One believes that the psychic is satanic while the other presupposes that the gifts come from God.
All this, while the field is festooned with unanswered question marks!
Some of the larger ones demonstrate the uncertainties.
Angels on assignment?
Billy Graham retells a Reader's Digest story of Dr SW Mitchell, a celebrated Philadelphia neurologist, who was awakened one bitter, snowy night by a little girl knocking at his door.
She wanted him to follow her and treat her sick mother.
The doctor trekked through the driving snow behind the girl, and then left her downstairs to go and tend to the mother.
Later, the doctor complimented the mother on the intelligence of her child.
The woman looked at him strangely, and then said, ‘My daughter died a month ago!’
Seeing the doctor's uncomprehending expression, she added, ‘Her shoes and coat are in the clothes closet.’
Dr Mitchell opened the door to find a coat identical to the one the girl had been wearing.
It was warm and dry and could not possibly have been out in the snow storm.
‘Could the doctor have been called in the hour of desperate need by an angel who appeared as this woman's young daughter?’ queries Mr Graham.
He goes on to relate many other such stories, mainly involving apparitions on the mission field.
A Bible-based Christian will want to check this query against the ways in which God has worked in the past.
He will soon find, for instance, the stranger in the furnace with Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego (Daniel 3), and even the Mount of Transfiguration when Moses and Elijah conversed with the transformed and glorified Jesus (Matthew 17:1–8).
Our understanding of certain phenomena, it would seem, does have to allow for the possibility of God at work.
It would, however, be totally wrong to assume that all apparitions are angels on assignment.
There are other possibilities, as we shall see from other questions.
God-given ESP?
Canon J Stafford Wright, an evangelical scholar and former principal of Tyndale College, Bristol, believes that the psychic might be man's link with the rest of the animal world.
There is, for instance, he writes, the telepathic spread of habit changes, such as tits learning to peck through milk-bottle tops.
This habit apparently began in Southampton and rapidly spread nation-wide.
He agrees with renowned biologist Sir Alister Hardy that there is evidence of ‘a general subconscious shaming of form and behaviour patterns — a sort of psychic blueprint.’
He believes that there seems to be extra-sensory perception (ESP) between spiders who spin similar webs from birth, and flocks of starlings that twist and turn at great speed without colliding.
From this and other instances, Stafford Wright concludes that God has made ESP ‘a part of animal existence’.
Extra-sensory perception, however, seems to be an over-grand, and possibly misleading title for what may simply be God's pre-programming of his animal kingdom.
Innate robotic responses or patterns of rapid learning in animals may be nothing more than an extension of their basic instincts.
In other words, their senses are natural and in no way ‘extra’.
They are the basic, inbuilt minimum for survival.
The birds  and spiders do what they do because they can do no other.
They are programmed.
Instinct, or an extension of it, does not automatically equate with ESP or the psychic.
However, it would be wrong to dismiss this line of thought without further investigation.
It is true to say that man has lost much since the perfection of Adam.
It is possible that there are abilities of mind and soul that have been lost.
It is also conceivable that there are still natural laws which are still to be discovered and named.
Parts of the paranormal (perhaps telepathy or precognition) may yet have normal explanations.
It is wrong, however, to prejudge an issue on the basis of hopeful speculation.
Far better to wait, and continue testing.
Miracles or psychic ability?
‘God may use latent psychic tendencies,’ writes Canon Stafford Wright, ‘and draw them out for his purposes.’
He goes on to suggest that the amazing abilities of, say, Jesus and Elisha were ‘natural capacities’ which God took and ‘used to a profitable end’.
Jesus practised levitation when he walked on water (Mark 6:45f) and Elisha's clairaudience enabled him to overhear the enemy's tactical talks before battle (2 Kings 6:8–12).
The canon also sees a demonstration of hypnotism causing an ‘unusual form of blindness’ when the men of Sodom were unable to see the angels in Lot's house (Genesis 19:11).
The equating of the biblical gifts with psychic gifts is commonplace in such journals as The Christian Parapsychologist and The Quarterly Review , both from The Churches' Fellowship for Psychical and Spiritual Studies.
Is this approach justified on the available evidence, or is it another premature presupposition without a true basis?
Most Christian parapsychologists accept this equation without serious question.
Stafford Wright is the same, though his own reasoning, at one point, includes a  contradiction.
He implies that the psychic gifts are of a different order than other gifts, when he warns,
It is unwise for the average psychic to try to increase psychic ability.
Not only does it tend to concentrate on psychic inner experience at the expense of the spiritual, but it inflates one's pride in having some superhuman power that others do not possess, and it is only too easy to overstep the boundary between the neutral psychic and the evil occult.
The safer and proper thing is to offer the psychic phenomena to God, either to remove or to use them.
Scripture encourages the Christian to seek the gifts of God and to develop them as good stewards (1 Corinthians 14:1 and Luke 19:11f).
If the psychic gifts are of God, our duty is clear.
We should develop them to the full.
If they are not of God, then we are right to be wary.
Of course, there is yet another consideration.
In a Christian world view which revolves around the battle of good and evil, could not the devil — known as the father of lies — cause the gifts of God to be aped?
This certainly happened in the case of Moses and the Egyptian magicians (Exodus 7:8f).
Moses' staff changed into a snake when Aaron threw it to the ground before Pharaoh.
The Egyptian magicians did the same through their secret arts.
However, the Bible implies that the magicians' tricks were inferior and poor copies, for ‘Aaron's staff swallowed up their staffs’(Exodus 7:12).
This poses a query.
Satan's counterfeit gifts?
Scripture states that the devil is ‘Antichrist’(1 John 4:1f) and ever anxious to destroy (John 8:44).
He is also the enemy of mankind (Matthew 13: 37–39) and an angel of light (2 Corinthians 11:14,15).
Is it not then possible that Satan, in his opposition to Christ and man, and wishing to destroy all that God has given, could do so by appearing in a godly  angelic light?
Should we not therefore expect God's gifts to have their satanic counterpart?
From this point of view there is a remarkable parallel between the gifts of the Holy Spirit and those in the psychic realm.
Each scriptural gift (Romans 12:6f; 1 Corinthians 12:7f; and Ephesians 4:11,12) seems to have its ‘ape’:
Prophecy…mediumship, clairvoyance, precognition.
Teaching…automatic writing and mediums.
Wisdom and leadership…spiritualism, mediums.
Word of knowledge…precognition, automatic writing, mediums.
Miraculous powers…divination, automatic writing, telepathy.
There are several points to note:
(a)
Some of the above, such as mediumship and spiritualism, are banned by Scripture (Leviticus 20:6,7).
It seems reasonable to assume, therefore, that they are unlikely to come from the Author of Scripture.
(b)
The gifts of the Holy Spirit are always used to build up the body of Christ and ‘prepare God's people for the work of Christian service’(Ephesians 4:12).
Few, if any, of the psychic gifts could claim to do this.
Rather, they tend to turn people in on themselves, which certainly makes the devil happy.
(c)
The Spirit's gifts encourage, inspire and build up those who receive them, and benefit from their use.
Why is it that the psychic gifts often cause apprehension and even fear?
Why have I and many others had to minister encouragement to those who have been discouraged by the psychic?
Why have they needed extensive spiritual counselling in a bid to reconstruct their disintegrating personalities?
(d)
The Spirit's gifts guide and help.
Why then do the psychic gifts often seem to tease, confuse and obstruct?
What's the use, for instance, of alarming sixty-odd people with a preview of the Aberfan disaster without telling them where it is, when it is going to happen, or how they can help  to stop it happening?
Why should God! rive a gift like that?
For what purpose?
Would it not be more like Satan to shoot a dart into the dreams of an unsuspecting person, so that he foresees a plane crash without any hope of helping or saying the situation?
The resulting fear and frustration would seem to be more in line with the mockery of the devil.
(e)
Could Satan's plan be to belittle the miraculous element of Christianity by ‘aping’ it?
Astral travel seems to mimic the sudden disappearance of Philip after baptising the Ethiopian eunuch and his reappearance at Azotus (Acts 8:39,40).
It is even closer to Paul's description of the man who was caught up into the third heaven (2 Corinthians 12:2).
There are psychic similarities to many Gospel events whether it be the dreams and visions of Zechariah (Luke 1 and 2); the foreknowledge of Elizabeth concerning Mary's baby (Luke 1); Jesus knowing what was in people's minds (Luke 11:17); or the predicative prophecies of Jesus (Luke 19:39–44).
The list of similarities is too numerous for these pages.
Perhaps, in our ignorance, we should not dismiss this query too hastily.
Satan, who lacks creative originality, can only take that which God has created and misuse it for his own purposes.
This counterfeiter of creation is always happy to lead people away from the real Jesus Christ.
He tried in vain to misdirect Christ himself in the wilderness (Matthew 4).
When that failed, he set about misleading man's understanding of Jesus.
Every heresy and man-made religion that has ever been invented presents a fractured picture of Jesus Christ.
Presenting Jesus as a super-psychic seems to fall dangerously close to Satan's goal.
(f)
The gifts of the Spirit come out of a living relationship with the Father.
The psychic gifts appear to originate from no particular relationship, according to most of those to whom I have had to minister.
Jesus had no power of himself, he only communicated and performed through that which was given to him in relationship with the Father (John 17:7f).
Christianity blurred?
Psychics such as Jeanne Dixon, the late Doris Stokes and my local professional clairvoyant all claimed that their gifts fell from heaven.
My professional clairvoyant friend, who was once heading for the Christian mission field, said,
‘I was always sorry I wasn't converted.
But when I look back, I think it's this path that's been ploughed for me.
Any other thing that I would do now, I think, would be a violation of God's will for my life.
I really believe that.’
I asked her where she believed her clairvoyance came from.
‘I have to believe that it comes from angels, or spirit beings.’
She added to this her view of heaven.
‘I don't think they're all up there sitting, glorifying God.
That would be hell for me.
I'm an active person.
God's going to get me back to work…and I know exactly what I'm going to do.
I'm going to come from the light, right through the abyss (hell or purgatory) to help people down here….
I love my daughter very much.
There is no way that anybody is going to stop me helping her if I die tomorrow.’
Those on the fuzzy fringe of the psychic and Christianity are invariably governed by their feelings or experiences.
The Bible is treated as one of many sources of faith, but many tend to dismiss the bits they dislike while embracing the more comforting sayings.
The world's Jeanne Dixons have, for example, to explain away the numerous warnings about contacting the dead (Leviticus 19:31: 20:6,7 & 27,; Deuteronomy 18:10,11; 1 Samuel 28:7,8; 2 Kings 23:24 and others).
The professional clairvoyant also has to ignore the many scriptural bans on fortune-telling (1 Samuel 28:3; 2 Kings 21:6; Isaiah 8:19,20; Daniel 2:2 and others).
They must also overlook Jesus' specific illustration of the barrier which prevents real contact between the spirit-world and earth (Luke 16:26f).
Most of all, psychics of a Christian hue overlook one major contradiction.
How can an unchangeable God hand  out in this age what he has forbidden in another age?
It would seem we are left with a straightforward choice.
Do we believe God's written word or the feelings and experiences of clairvoyants?
a Satanic attack on the church?
Scriptural authority, or rather the lack of it, is at the heart of the difficulties experienced, for example, by The Churches' Fellowship for Psychical and Spiritual Studies.
The fellowship, founded in 1953, ‘exists for the study of wider reaches of the paranormal and extra-sensory perception in their relation to the Christian faith’.
On a personal level, I have to say that I found the fellowship's officials to be delightfully hospitable and to have a genuine love for God.
They offered their time, effort and resources to me willingly, and were ever anxious to set before me their personal views of this highly experimental area.
You might suspect that, so far, this is the old technique of flattery before flattening.
This would be only partially true.
The fellowship itself has an innate self-criticism which comes from wading in the quicksands of the psychic.
A major problem which the fellowship recognises among its 1,400 membership is the over-reliance on experience.
Nearly all of them have joined through exposure to psychic phenomena.
Often, the experience becomes the governing factor in their lives.
They have this ‘one thing I know’ experience, and in an uncertain world everything else tends to be judged in the light of that experience.
This is partly the view of the fellowship's chairman, the Venerable Michael Perry, who is also Archdeacon of Durham and the editor of the Fellowship's The Christian Parapsychologist .
The archdeacon — again a helpful and hospitable man with a great knowledge gleaned from more than thirty years' experience of the paranormal — has written  two books on his subject,Psychic Studies — A Christian View and Deliverance .
In both he treats the Bible as an important contribution to present-day theology.
Nevertheless, he feels at liberty to be his own final authority in judging which parts to accept and reject.
It seems to me that he tries the Bible before the bar of his own mind rather than the other way around.
This allows him, for instance, to speculate on the plausibility of a form of reincarnation, which enjoys a large following in the psychic, paganism and the occult.
He writes:
Instead of hell, God might consign the impenitent or spiritually immature or those ignorant of him to another round of earthly life.
It would be like returning to resit an examination in which we have not done well enough to proceed to another level of our education.
Michael Perry stresses that these are no more than speculations prefaced by ‘perhaps’ and ‘I don't knows’, and adds the caveat that they must be tested against the touchstone of a Christian understanding.
Tested against the touchstone of Scripture, his speculations would reduce the Bible to the size of a slim paperback.
Out would go Judgement Day, the separation of sheep from goats, wheat from tares, hell and punishment, the justice of God and his wrath.
Man's free will would have to go as well, and we would be left with an unloving, gatecrashing dictator God who refuses to allow people to choose their own eternal destiny.
This is a Gestapo God ‘who has ways of making us repent’!
The archdeacon's view of Scripture is again highlighted in his dismissal of the occult warnings of Old Testament writers.
He treats them as shortsighted, intolerant and abusive prophets.
The Old Testament has a nice line in vituperation of other cultures and their beliefs when its writers suggest that non-Israelites worship, not the true God, but satyrs or he-goats or  demons….
Perhaps all we are here witnessing is a picturesque way of making a scornful reference to alien religion.
And again…
Why were the prophets so dead set against mediumship?
They knew the same kinds of altered states of consciousness — could they not recognise the mediums as their allies rather than their enemies?
This liberal approach to Scripture is dealt with more fully in a later chapter.
For the present, it is wise to remember that Jesus did not have Mr Perry's problem with the Old Testament.
He accepted it as the word of God.
Certainly Jesus refined it and filled out its theology, but he still accepted it as God-breathed rather than the confused and ill-considered thoughts of ignorant men.
This take-some-of-it-or-leave-some-of-it approach to Scripture is the main reason for the fuzziness between Christianity and some forms of the psychic.
It leaves people with no authority by which to judge what is right or wrong.
They consequently have to rely on their own doubtful experiences and their imperfect reasoning.
Conclusion
With so many unanswered questions, it is an unwise man who comes to a conclusion.
We are faced with a fund of conflicting speculations.
No drug company would ever contemplate issuing a medicine which had so many unproven and untested facets to it.
Even the Thalidomide formula mentioned at the beginning of this chapter was only released after rigorous testing, save in one tragic area.
To change the metaphor, if airlines offered a similar speculative scenario, only fools would fly.
To encourage people to voyage into the psychic seems about as responsible as the Wright  brothers taking day-trippers on their first ever flight — without parachutes!
I think of one lady I am counselling as I write this.
Mary is 40.
She was raped in her teens, and is now highly strung, very sensitive, still single, and open to all kinds of suggestions.
Premonitions have fascinated her for several years.
Fear of the phenomenon is also present.
What do I say to this woman?
Should I tell her that all is well and that what she has comes from God?
Should I then go on to tell her that she should develop these gifts which frighten her?
Can I honestly reassure her that she will come to no harm in pursuing this phenomenon?
I find that I have to be honest with Mary and many others.
I have to point out gently that her gifts have never helped her become a better human being.
They have only increased her nervousness.
I have to point out that she is wasting her life caught up in waiting for her thoughts and ideas to come true in reality.
Many of her thoughts pass into oblivion, while the occasional thought comes true to life.
Her confusion is great in not knowing which of her thoughts is predictive of the future.
She knows this only after the event.
How then am I to counsel Mary in her distress and fascination?
I have no alternative but to advise Mary, and others, to keep their feet firmly planted on the sure foundation of Christ's teachings in Scripture.
And as I counsel, I need to stay alongside them to provide comfort, encouragement and guidance.
In fact I can offer no better advice than that already given by Canon Stafford Wright.
Avoid the temptation to develop it, and ask God to remove it.
The canon did add an alternative: that we ask God to control it.
This I omit.
I am not in any area satisfied that the psychic gifts are of God.
My personal preference, while awaiting further light, is to look in the opposite direction.