

SINGULARITY STRUCTURE
It has been seen that singularities inevitably occur in the solutions describing the interaction region of colliding plane waves.
Using the line element (6.20), we have in this region  (8.1) where f(u) and g(v) are monotonically decreasing functions for positive arguments.
It is therefore inevitable that some kind of singularity will occur on the hypersurface f + g = 0.
It can also be seen from (6.17), that this is the hypersurface on which the two opposing waves mutually focus each other, as the contraction of each wave here becomes unbounded.
This was anticipated by the discussion in Section 5.3.
It is now appropriate to consider whether the caustics formed in this way correspond to mere coordinate singularities, or whether they are necessarily curvature singularities as they are in the Khan-Penrose solution.
It has also been pointed out previously that coordinate singularities necessarily occur in the regions II and III that contain the approaching waves.
The character and significance of these singularities must also be considered in this chapter.
8.1 Singularities
According to the general theory of relativity, space-time is represented by a connected C ∞ Hausdorff manifold M together with a locally Lorentz metric g .
A singularity in the space-time is indicated by incomplete geodesics or incomplete curves of bounded acceleration (Hawking and Ellis, 1973).
By definition, space-time is smooth and does not contain any irregular points.
It follows that a singularity may normally be considered as occurring only at a boundary of space-time.
Unfortunately, no single definition of a singularity has yet been found which is applicable to all situations.
One of the more useful ways of attaching a boundary to a singular space-time is by a b (bundle) -boundary construction.
The b -boundary  is the projection into a space-time of a natural boundary attached to a higher-dimensional Riemannian manifold.
In the standard b -boundary construction, the Riemannian manifold is the bundle of frames over space-time having a positive definite metric induced by the affine connection.
Boundary points of the frame bundle are determined by giving end points to all Cauchy sequences which do not converge in the frame bundle.
The bundle boundary is then projected down to make a boundary for the space-time.
According to the classification scheme devised by Ellis and Schmidt (1977), singularities in maximal, four-dimensional space-times can be divided into three basic types: quasiregular, non-scalar curvature and scalar curvature.
This scheme describes the singularity structure of a space-time  on which the Riemann tensor is C k  .
It uses a b -boundary construction to determine the location of singular points.
If the b -boundary is non-empty, there are only two possibilities.
Either a point q in the b -boundary may be a  regular boundary point if the space-time  can be embedded in a larger space-time  such that the Riemann tensor is C r and q is an interior point in , or it may be a  singular boundary point if the space-time  is not extendable through q in a  way.
A singular boundary point q can then be classified according to this scheme.
It may be a C k  (or C k-  )quasiregular singularity if all components of the Riemann tensor and its first k derivatives evaluated in an orthonormal frame parallel propagated along an incomplete geodesic ending at q are C (or C 0- ).
Such frames are called PPON frames.
It may alternatively be a C k  (or C k-  ) curvature singularity if this is not true.
In this case it may either be categorized as a C k  (or C k-  )non-scalar curvature singularity if all scalars in the metric tensor , the alternating symbol , the Riemann tensor and its first k derivatives are bounded, that is, tend to a C (or C -) function.
Alternatively, it may be a C k  (or C k-  )scalar curvature singularity or a scalar polynomial curvature singularity if some scalar does not tend to a C (or C -) function.
The most familiar class of singularities are the scalar curvature singularities.
These include the ‘big bang’ and ‘black hole’types of singularity which closely correspond to one's intuitive concept of a real physical singularity.
As such a singularity is approached, some physical quantities diverge and all observers feel unbounded tidal forces.
The non-scalar curvature and quasiregular singularities are much less well understood and have been less fully investigated.
Consider, for example, a space-time with a non-scalar curvature singularity.
No curvature scalars diverge in this case, yet some components of the Riemann tensor evaluated in a PPON frame along an incomplete curve do not tend to  finite limits as the singularity is approached.
The physical effect of this is that all test particles which fall into the non-scalar curvature singularity feel infinite tidal forces, but observers can move arbitrarily close to the singularity on other curves and feel no untoward effects.
Finally, consider a space-time with a quasiregular singularity.
In all reasonable frames the Riemann tensor is completely finite.
In this case, observers near a quasiregular singularity, including those who fall into the singularity itself, do not feel unbounded tidal forces.
All three types of singularity are found in colliding plane wave solutions.
In the following sections and chapters the singularity and global structure of particular solutions will be analysed in more detail.
The singularity in region IV
In the exact solution of Khan and Penrose (1971) described in Chapter 3, there is a scalar curvature singularity in region IV on the hypersurface .
However, it is not clear whether or not this type of singularity will occur in other solutions, particularly as the Khan-Penrose solution contains impulsive gravitational waves.
This question has been considered by Szekeres (1972), who found that, for colliding gravitational waves with aligned linear polarization, a curvature singularity is inevitable.
This work was generalized by Sbytov (1976) to plane gravitational waves with arbitrary polarization, with the same result.
However, more recently, counterexamples to these conclusions have been obtained, in the non-aligned case by Chandrasekhar and Xanthopoulos (1986c), and in the aligned case by a degenerate solution of Ferrari and Ibañez (1987b) and by the algebraically general solutions of Feinstein and Ibañez (1989).
In these cases, the curvature scalars remain bounded on the hypersurface , and scalar polynomial curvature singularities occur in the extensions of the solution through the focusing singularity.
These exceptional cases will be considered in detail later on.
For the present, it may simply be observed that Szekeres and Sbytov had omitted to include these cases.
Another counterexample proposed by Stoyanov (1979) has proved to be incorrect as it does not satisfy the required boundary conditions (see Section 10.2).
The same question applied to colliding electromagnetic waves is more complicated, and the answers are less conclusive.
Generally, one may expect that, for a combination of gravitational and electromagnetic waves, a curvature singularity in region IV will usually occur.
However, for purely electromagnetic waves it is less clear.
In the first exact solution of this  type, given by Bell and Szekeres (1974), the singularity on the hypersurface  was shown to be only a coordinate singularity that could easily be removed by a coordinate transformation.
This solution, which is conformally flat in the interaction region, will be described in Chapter 14 together with the full analysis of its singularity structure as given by Clarke and Hayward (1989).
Other type D electrovac solutions have been obtained by Chandrasekhar and Xanthopoulos (1987a) and Papacostas and Xanthopoulos (1988).
Further algebraically general solutions without curvature singularities can easily be constructed as will be indicated in Section 17.2.
All these have quasiregular singularities that are interpreted as Cauchy horizons on the surface .
These will be described later.
We may conclude that, in all cases, the opposing waves mutually focus each other onto the hypersurface , on which the contraction of the waves is unbounded and the line element (6.20) is singular.
Usually this will be a scalar polynomial curvature singularity, but a large class of  significant exceptions occurs.
It is convenient to point out at this stage that, for colliding gravitational and electromagnetic waves, two of the scalar polynomial invariants (Penrose and Rindler, 1986) are given by  (8.2) It follows from this that, in order to prove the existence of a scalar polynomial curvature singularity, it is sufficient merely to show that the component 2 is unbounded.
In this case either I or J must be unbounded, and a curvature singularity occurs.
It would, of course, be useful to have a number of general theorems that could be used to determine the singularity structure of particular classes of solutions.
Apart from the earlier results of Szekeres (1972) and Sbytov (1976), the only general theorem to date is that of Tipler (1980).
This is in fact a straightforward generalization of a theorem of Penrose (1965b)(see also Hawking and Ellis 1973, p.263).
Quoting it directly:
Theorem 8.1 (Tipler)Let (M, g) be a space-time with g at least C 2 , and suppose (M, g) has two globally defined commuting space-like Killing vector fields δ x  and δ y  which together generate plane symmetry.
If,(1) the null convergence condition holds;(2) at least one of the six quantities  is non-zero at some point p in (M, g); and (3) through the point p there is a space-like partial Cauchy surface S, which is everywhere tangent to δ x  and δ y , and S is non-compact in the space-like direction normal to δ x  and δ y ; then (M, g) is null incomplete.
This is an interesting theorem which seems to prove the existence of singularities for a large class of colliding plane waves.
However, it requires that the metric be at least C 2 everywhere.
It thus excludes situations involving impulsive gravitational waves.
It does not apply therefore to the solutions of Khan and Penrose (1971), Ferrari and Ibañez (1987 b ), and the exceptional solution of Chandrasekhar and Xanthopoulos (1986 b ).
Nor does it apply to the colliding electromagnetic wave solution of Bell and Szekeres (1974) in which impulsive gravitational waves are generated by the collision.
In addition, it proves only geodesic incompleteness and says nothing about curvature singularities.
There exists, however, a very large class of exceptional solutions in which curvature singularities do not occur.
For gravitational waves these include a degenerate Ferrari-Ibañez (1987b) solution and the solution of Chandrasekhar and Xanthopoulos (1986b), which are respectively parts of the Schwarzschild and Kerr space-times.
These have been described in more detail by Ferrari and Ibañez (1988), and will be described in Sections 10.5 and 13.3.
They contain impulsive wave components, and therefore do not satisfy the conditions of Tipler's theorem.
In all these solutions, the singularity that occurs when  corresponds to a Cauchy horizon.
This may be followed by either a space-like, or a time-like curvature singularity.
The latter case would indicate that, if it were possible for real observers to pass through the horizon, then most would miss this singularity.
A further class of exceptional vacuum solutions in which the curvature singularity is replaced by a Cauchy horizon has been obtained by Feinstein and Ibañez (1989).
These solutions contain a subclass in which the approaching waves have smooth wave fronts and the metric is everywhere at least C 2 .
They thus satisfy the conditions of Tipler's theorem.
They are geodesically incomplete, but the focusing hypersurface in this case is only a quasiregular singularity.
These solutions thus illustrate the fact that a proof of null incompleteness does not necessarily imply the existence of a scalar polynomial curvature singularity.
The Killing-Cauchy horizons that occur in these solutions have particular significance as the caustics formed by the mutual  focusing of the opposing waves.
They have also been further investigated by Yurtsever (1987), who has shown that they are unstable against plane-symmetric perturbations.
It is therefore reasonable to conclude that the existence of space-like singularities is likely to be a generic feature of colliding plane wave solutions.
This conclusion is also supported by the work of Chandrasekhar and Xanthopoulos (1987 b ), who have shown that the presence of an arbitrarily small amount of dust will change a horizon into a curvature singularity.
In these exceptional cases, it is necessary for the approaching waves to take very specific forms in order to achieve the appropriate solution in region IV.
The instability of the horizons in these solutions can easily be demonstrated in that they require very specific forms for the initial functions f(u) and g(v) .
Any slight variation in these functions would change the Cauchy horizon into a curvature singularity.
Most of the exceptional solutions that have been explicitly obtained are of algebraic type D, although the solutions of Feinstein and Ibañez are algebraically general.
Perhaps it should also be remarked that algebraic type D solutions do not necessarily have horizons rather than singularities, a counterexample being one of the degenerate Ferrari-Ibañez (1987 b ) solutions.
An alternative proof of Tipler's Theorem 8.1 has been given by Yurtsever (1988 b ).
This emphasizes the role and necessity of the assumption of a strict plane symmetry.
In this approach, the exceptional solutions that have Killing-Cauchy horizons in the interaction region do not satisfy the condition of strict plane symmetry as defined by Yurtsever.
The structure of the singularity in the interaction region has been further analysed by Yurtsever (1988 c , 1989 a ), who has shown that the metric is asymptotic to an inhomogeneous Kasner solution as the singularity is approached.
Initially (Yurtsever 1988 c ), he considered the case when the approaching waves have constant aligned polarization and obtained explicit expressions which relate the asymptotic Kasner exponents along the singularity to the initial data posed along the wave fronts of the approaching waves.
From these expressions it is clear that, for specific choices of initial data, the curvature singularity formed by the interacting waves degenerates to a coordinate singularity.
It can also be concluded that these Killing-Cauchy horizons are unstable against small but generic perturbations of the initial data and that, in a very precise sense, ‘generic’ initial data always produce all-embracing space-like curvature singularities.
In the subsequent paper (Yurtsever, 1989 a ), he has shown that these same conclusions are also reached in the case when the polarization of the approaching waves is arbitrary.
The Khan-Penrose solution
The solution of Khan and Penrose (1971) which has already been discussed in detail in Chapter 3, may now be reconsidered.
It was shown there in particular, that the scalar invariants are unbounded on the hypersurface  in region IV, where  and .
This clearly demonstrates the existence of a scalar curvature singularity on this hypersurface.
In addition to this, there are apparent coordinate singularities  extending from it into regions II and III.
The naive singularity structure of this solution is thus as represented in Figure 3.2.
It is now necessary to consider in more detail the character of the apparent singularities in these initial regions II and III.
As described in Section 3.3, if it is possible for real particles to pass through them, then it will be possible for those particles to subsequently look back and observe the naked singularity in region IV.
If correct, this would provide a counterexample to the cosmic censorship hypothesis.
It is more likely, however, that these singularities will prove to be more than artificial coordinate singularities that particles can pass through.
Figure 8.1 Sections through surfaces v = constant,y = 0, when u = 0, for three different (negative) values of v .
Figure 8.2 Sections through the surface v = constant,y = 0, for three different values of u .
This question has been discussed in an interesting paper by Matzner and Tipler (1984).
Because of the obvious symmetry, we may concentrate on the singularity in region II.
The first point to note is that, since the initial waves are impulsive, the interiors of both regions I and II are flat.
For , curvature only occurs on the null boundary .
The line elements for regions I and II are respectively  (8.3).
(8.4)
That these both describe flat space-time can be demonstrated by transforming (8.4) to the form (8.3) by putting .
(8.5)
It may be observed that the coordinate singularity  is effectively removed by this transformation, and there appears no a priori reason preventing the continuation of the coordinates  through it.
Figure 8.3 Surfaces v = constant,y = 0,, for different (negative) values of v .
Notice that the line  is common to all surfaces.
Matzner and Tipler proceed to investigate the properties of the null hypersurfaces v = constant, working with the null Minkowski coordinates .
Projections of these hypersurfaces are illustrated in Figures 8.1, 8.2 and 8.3.
It can be seen that as  the curvature of these hypersurfaces diverges.
It should also be noticed that the surfaces v = constant, considered as embedded in the three-space , consist of nested two-surfaces all having the line  in common.
It is then possible show that the hypersurface  is not merely a coordinate singularity, but is actually a singularity of space-time in the sense that there does not exist a C 1 extension from region II to this surface.
This can not be a curvature singularity, since the curvature tensor on it is zero.
Matzner and Tipler accordingly describe it as a ‘fold singularity’.
With this interpretation, the structure of the Khan-Penrose solution is thus as described in Figure 8.4.
This result raises another problem.
In the absence of the second wave, the entire space-time may be described by (8.3) for , and by (8.4) for , for all values of v .
In this case, is merely a coordinate singularity.
It has no physical significance and can be removed by a coordinate transformation.
However, once the second wave is present, with wavefront , the above result states that  becomes a space-time singularity even for .
This seems to violate our familiar concept of causality.
The presence of the second wave seems to change the character of the prior singularity.
Figure 8.4 The singularity structure of the Khan-Penrose solution.
The resolution of this problem can be demonstrated using Figure 8.3.
The family of surfaces for v = constant can be continued up to.
However, there is a curvature singularity at .
The final surface , which forms a bound for the prior surfaces, therefore contains a singularity on the line .
In fact, this line  is actually common to the entire family of surfaces for which .
Thus the line  must be considered as a singularity of space-time, which is identified with the point .
In the Khan-Penrose solution, the singularities in regions II and III are topological singularities that are identified with the curvature singularity in region IV by the particular choice of coordinates.
This point may be further clarified by considering a family of null geodesics that are initially parallel in region I, and enter region II.
The null geodesic ,v = constant, starts in region I, passes through the gravitational wave and apparently ends at the  singularity.
This may be contrasted, however, with a neighbouring geodesic which is given using  the null Minkowski coordinates defined by (8.5), by .
This geodesic is given by .
(8.6) From this it is clear that v increases indefinitely as  even for arbitrarily small values of ε.
Thus, although the geodesic with   approaches the ‘fold singularity’ apparently at a finite distance from the curvature singularity in region IV, an arbitrarily close geodesic that is initially parallel to it in region II diverges from it and crosses into region IV before it reaches the hypersurface .
This geodesic subsequently terminates in the curvature singularity in region IV.
The projection of these two geodesics onto the plane  is illustrated in Figure 8.5.
Figure 8.5 Projections of two neighbouring null geodesics onto the plane .
The geodesics are parallel and arbitrarily close in region II, which is flat.
It has thus been argued that the singularities  and  in regions II and III are essentially extensions of the singularity  in region IV.
The apparent non-causality that appears in the introduction of these singularities is a consequence of the projection of the space-time onto the plane .
Such a projection does not in general preserve causal relations.
Although Figure 8.4 is very useful in formulating the colliding plane wave problem by dividing the space-time up into appropriate regions, in many ways it is misleading.
In particular, it does not adequately describe the singularity structure of the solution, which appears to be non-causal.
The problem arises from the attempt to represent space-time on a two-dimensional diagram.
In many ways it would be preferable to attempt to picture a three-dimensional structure as in Figure 8.3.
Such a picture has been drawn by Penrose, and was included in the paper of Matzner and Tipler (1984).
This structure is illustrated in Figure 8.6 where the four regions are separately represented.
Since curvature occurs only on the boundaries of regions I, II and III, the differently shaped boundaries of these regions have to be identified artificially.
Region IV is curved and no adequate representation of it can be given.
Using the classification scheme of Ellis and Schmidt (1977), it can be seen that the singularity in region IV of the Khan-Penrose solution is  clearly a scalar polynomial curvature singularity.
Also the fold singularities in regions II and III that have a topological character, are quasiregular singularities since on them the curvature tensor is zero.
Figure 8.6 A three-dimensional picture of the Khan-Penrose solution with .
The interiors of regions I, II and III are flat, but the boundaries have intrinsically different geometry.
Points on opposite sides of the wavefronts  and  must be identified.
Region IV is curved, so its representation should be considered no more than schematic.
The structure of other solutions
In the previous section the singularity structure of the Khan-Penrose solution has been analysed in some detail.
This has been possible because the interiors of regions I, II and III are all flat.
In the general problem, however, it is only the background region I that is taken to be flat, and regions II and III, as well as IV, are curved.
Consequently it is not possible in general to analyse the singularity structure in such detail.
It is reasonable to assume, however, that most colliding plane wave solutions will have the same general singularity structure as that of the Khan Penrose solution.
This in fact turns out to be the case, as will be shown here and in the following chapters.
In almost all cases a curvature singularity develops in region IV on the hypersurface , although there is a large class of exceptional solutions in which the singularity is replaced by a Cauchy horizon.
These exceptional solutions provide the  only significant variation of the general singularity structure described above.
The structure of these solutions will be described as they are derived in the following chapters.
It has also been shown that, for all colliding plane wave solutions, coordinate singularities necessarily occur in regions II and III.
For vacuum solutions, in these regions at most one component, either 4 or 0, of the curvature tensor is non-zero.
Scalar polynomial curvature singularities therefore cannot occur.
The coordinate singularities on the hypersurfaces  and  may thus either be quasiregular singularities if the curvature tensor on these surfaces is bounded, or they must be non-scalar curvature singularities if the curvature components become unbounded.
It will now be argued that the topological ‘fold’ singularities of regions II and III in the Khan-Penrose solution, are also general features of all colliding plane wave solutions.
Figure 8.7 The singularity structure for colliding sandwich gravitational waves.
The shaded regions have non-zero curvature.
If the approaching waves are ‘sandwich’ gravitational waves, then the regions behind the waves are flat.
These flat regions must be described by metrics that are equivalent to those of the Khan-Penrose solution for regions II and III.
After all, the impulsive waves considered by Khan and Penrose may be regarded as idealizations of such waves.
In these cases similar ‘fold’ singularities will occur, as described in Figure 8.7.
These singularities in regions II and III have been more thoroughly investigated by Konkowski and Helliwell (1989).
By concentrating on the Szekeres (1972) family of solutions, they have shown that these are quasiregular singularities in the classification scheme of Ellis and Schmidt (1977) in the cases of impulsive and sandwich waves.
In the alternative case of thick gravitational waves, they are non-scalar curvature singularities.
In addition, by considering scalar wave perturbations in the impulsive  wave case, they have also shown that the quasiregular singularities are unstable and convert to scalar curvature singularities.
To consider further the general character of these coordinate singularities in regions II and III we may concentrate on region II.
The metric in this region may be taken to be of the form (6.20), but with the metric functions U ,V ,W and M all depending on u only.
These functions may be obtained from those in region I simply by replacing g by ½, or v by 0.
Considering the geodesics in this region, it is clear that there exist three conserved momentum components p x  ,p y  and p v  besides the energy integral.
These are given by  (8.7) where ε may be taken to be 0 on null geodesics and 1 on time-like geodesics.
Using (8.7), we obtain the equation  (8.8) Expressions for U and M in region II can be obtained from (7.2) and (7.8) in the form  (8.9) With these,(8.8) may be integrated to give  (8.10)
It may immediately be seen from this that no time-like or null geodesics with either p x  or p y  non-zero can avoid crossing the surface  into  region IV before reaching the surface on which .
The only exception occurs when .
This clearly manifests the character of the fold singularity as described in the previous section.
In colliding plane wave problems, what is essentially a coordinate singularity for a single wave is transformed into a fold singularity prior to the collision by the presence of curvature singularities at the points  and .
Generally these are associated with a space-like singularity on , but as described above, there are exceptional cases in which this singularity is replaced by a horizon.
However, even in these cases, it is found that there exist at least distribution valued singularities just at these points.
From this, it may be argued that the presence of fold singularities in regions II and III appears to be a general feature of colliding plane wave problems.
It has thus been argued that the general structure of all colliding plane wave solutions is as illustrated in Figure 8.6 with  with the possible exception that, for some solutions, the curvature singularity in region IV is replaced by a Cauchy horizon.
Figure 8.8 The general structure of colliding plane wave solutions related to the initial hypersurface on which initial Cauchy data is set.
It is also appropriate to attempt to relate this general singularity structure to some initial hypersurface on which the initial Cauchy data for the colliding wave problem is specified.
To do this it is necessary to incorporate the properties of plane waves that have been described in Section 4.4 and illustrated in Figure 4.1.
In particular, it must be noted that no global space-like hypersurface exists on which initial Cauchy data for the problem can be set.
The existence of the topological ‘fold’ singularities in regions II and III implies bounds for the initial Cauchy  hypersurface in both of the directions from which the waves emerge.
This property is illustrated in Figure 8.8.
It can immediately be deduced from Figure 8.8 that, for solutions in which the curvature singularity in region IV is replaced by a Cauchy horizon, any possible extension through this horizon must be non-unique.
Any extended space-time beyond this singularity will depend on extra initial data in addition to that specified on the initial Cauchy hypersurface for the colliding wave problem.
The above arguments lead to the conclusion that the usual initial data for colliding plane waves leads to a unique solution only up to the topological singularities  and  in regions II and III, and to the ‘focusing’ singularity  in the interaction region.
This focusing singularity is normally a curvature singularity, but this may be replaced by a Cauchy horizon.
In this case, any future extension through the horizon is non-unique.
THE SZEKERES CLASS OF VACUUM SOLUTIONS
The first exact solution to be published which describes a collision between plane waves was in fact that of Szekeres (1970).
This describes the collision of plane gravitational waves with step wavefronts.
The solution discussed in Chapter 3, which describes the collision between impulsive gravitational waves, was published a little later by Khan and Penrose (1971).
Following this, a substantial paper in which the subject is analysed in detail was produced by Szekeres (1972).
This paper includes a derivation of the field equations in the form given in Chapter 6, a general class of exact solutions which includes the two mentioned above as special cases, and a discussion of the singularities that arise.
The purpose of this chapter is to discuss the properties of this general class of solutions.
The solution in region IV
The vacuum field equations appropriate to region IV of the colliding plane wave problem may be taken here in the form of equations (6.22a-f).
These are second order differential equations for the four metric functions .
Equation (6.22a) may immediately be integrated as in (6.24) to give  (9.1) where  and  are arbitrary decreasing functions which, according to the appropriate boundary conditions (7.3), are required to satisfy  and .
In the Szekeres class of solutions, the approaching waves have constant aligned polarization.
In these solutions therefore  (9.2) and the main equations (6.22d, e) reduce to the single equation  (9.3) For this, Szekeres has obtained the solution  (9.4) which contains two arbitrary constants k 1 and k 2 .
The expression (9.4) may also be written in the alternative form  (9.5)
With this expression for V , the remaining equations in (6.22) may be integrated to give  (9.6) where c is a constant.
As anticipated in the discussion in Section 7.2, it may be observed that this expression contains the necessary multiples of  and  that are required to cancel the effects of the unbounded term on the boundary.
If the leading terms in the expansions for f and g are  (9.7) where , then e -M  is continuous across the boundaries if ,(9.8)
It may thus be observed that the constants k 1 and k 2 are restricted to the range satisfying  (9.9) It is also appropriate to choose  (9.10) to achieve the usual flat metric (3.6) in region I.
When evaluating the components of the Weyl tensor, it is convenient to introduce the new function  (9.11)
With this, it can be seen that  (9.12) and the non-zero Weyl tensor components are .
(9.13)
In his paper, Szekeres chooses  and  (9.14) exactly.
In this case, the terms  and  in (9.6) exactly cancel the term , and M is given by  (9.15)
This form is still completely general since it has, in effect, simply used the coordinate freedom (6.7).
However, it is sometimes convenient to retain this freedom, so this restriction will not be made in the following section.
It may now be pointed out that, with the restriction (9.14), the above solution includes the Khan-Penrose (1971) solution for colliding impulsive waves when .
It also includes the Szekeres (1970) solution for colliding step waves when .
The approaching waves
Having obtained an exact solution in region IV, the question now is to find the initial conditions which give rise to it.
In fact, it is quite simple to use the method described in Section 7.2 to extend any solution in region IV back into regions II, III and I. We obtain the corresponding solutions in regions II and III simply by replacing g by ½ and f by ½ alternately.
In this section we will concentrate on region II, and put .
The equivalent solution in region III can be obtained from this by replacing f by g , and by interchanging u and v .
Using the suggested method, it can be seen that the solution in region II must have the line element  (9.16) where, retaining the coordinate freedom in u ,(9.17)
In order to interpret this solution as a plane wave, it is appropriate to transform the metric to the Brinkmann form  (9.18) by putting  (9.19)
The wave profile in equation (9.18) now takes either of the forms  (9.20) or  (9.21) Particular cases in which  and  are illustrated in Figure 9.1 for .
Figure 9. l Some wave profiles for the approaching waves in the Szekeres solution with .
The wavefront is unbounded if .
It contains a step if , and is smooth if .
All profiles become unbounded as u approaches 1.
It may be recalled from (4.5) that .
Thus, it can be clearly seen that the approaching gravitational wave in region II is an impulsive wave if , has an unbounded wavefront if , has a step wavefront if , has a continuous wavefront if , and has a smooth wavefront if .
It may also be observed that, if , is monotonically increasing.
The singularity structure
In this family of solutions, there is always a scalar polynomial curvature singularity in region IV on the surface on which .
This can be seen by computing the scalar invariant given here by  (9.22) Using (9.6) and (9.13), I can be seen to be unbounded when  for all values of k 1 and k 2 in the required range (9.9).
This is similar to the singularity in region IV of the Khan-Penrose solution which, of course, it includes as a special case.
Another singularity occurs in cases in which a wave with an unbounded wave front moves in a region where the opposing wave is non-zero.
For example, if  and  so that then I is unbounded on the boundary  between regions III and IV.
Similarly, the boundary  is singular if  and  so that Apart from cases containing impulsive waves, where  or , the boundaries of region IV are therefore only regular if  for , which implies the further restriction  on (9.9).
These singularities, however, are distribution-valued and their physical significance requires further investigation.
The coordinate singularities in regions II and III, however, are not so obviously similar to the fold singularities of the Khan-Penrose solution.
The Szekeres solutions are only flat behind the wave front in the special case when .
In the general case, regions II and III are curved and the analysis given in Section 8.2 cannot be applied.
However, we may notice that in all cases with , 4 becomes unbounded as  in region II.
This clearly indicates that, in these cases, the singularity in this region is a non-scalar curvature singularity.
This has been confirmed in rigorous calculations by Konkowski and Helliwell (1989).
It has also been argued in the previous chapter that these singularities have similar properties to the fold singularities that occur for colliding impulsive waves as described in Section 8.2 in terms of the behaviour of neighbouring geodesics.
A similar non-scalar curvature singularity also occurs in region III if , as  then becomes unbounded as .
OTHER VACUUM SOLUTIONS WITH ALIGNED POLARIZATION
The solutions of Khan and Penrose (1971) and of Szekeres (1970, 1972), discussed in Chapters 3 (and Section 8.2) and 9, describe the collision of plane gravitational waves with aligned linear polarization.
It is convenient to consider separately in this chapter a number of other exact solutions that satisfy this same condition.
A general method
In situations in which the approaching waves are linearly polarized, and their polarization vectors are aligned, it is possible to put  globally.
In this case the line element (6.20), and the field equations (6.22a-f) take a particularly simple form.
Equation (6.22a) can immediately be integrated to give (6.24) and there is only one main equation, namely (9.3), which is a linear equation in V .
For any given solution of this equation, a function M can always be found satisfying the remaining equations (6.22b, c, f), although such a function may not satisfy the required boundary conditions.
The integral (6.24) involves two continuous functions  and  that are monotonically decreasing for positive arguments.
As suggested by Szekeres (1972), it is therefore possible to use these as coordinates in region IV, although care has to be taken at the boundaries and it is not possible to extend these coordinates into the prior regions II and III.
Using (7.8), the line element in the interaction region can thus be written in the form  (10.1) and the main equation (9.3) becomes .
(10.2) which is the well-known Euler-Poisson-Darboux equation.
For any particular solution of (10.2), the new function S can be found by integrating equations (7.9), which now become  (10.3) In order for any particular solution to be appropriate to describe colliding plane waves, the function S must satisfy the conditions described in equations (7.10) to (7.13).
Using this notation, the components of the Weyl tensor are given by the expressions  (10.4) It can thus be seen that, although (10.2) is linear so that different solutions for V can be superposed, the associated gravitational waves cannot be simply superposed.
In addition, the scale factors A and B satisfying (6.13) and (6.14) must contain components of S , and from (10.3) it can be seen that these components are also non-linear in V .
Once a solution of (10.2) and (10.3) describing the interaction region IV is obtained, the approaching waves in regions II and III can immediately be deduced.
For example, in region II, we simply put  and assume that f takes the form .
Then, removing the constant from S , it is convenient to put  (10.5) and the approaching wave is then given by  (10.6) The approaching wave in region III is obtained in exactly the same way in terms of the function .
In order to obtain exact solutions, the first step is to obtain a general class of solutions of (10.2).
Szekeres (1972) has indicated how to integrate  this equation using Riemann's method, and has given a general solution expressed as a line integral involving a Legendre function of order -½.
This will be described in Chapter 14.
However, because it is very difficult in practice to evaluate the integrals which this method involves, this does not turn out to be a convenient method for obtaining explicit solutions.
As an alternative approach, it may be observed that attempting to solve equation (10.2) by separating the variables leads to the solution  (10.7) where A and J are arbitrary constants.
Thus a general class of solutions can be obtained by considering  (10.8) for arbitrary sequences of constants σsub i  and A i  .
The particular decomposition (10.8), however, does not turn out to be particularly convenient in the construction of explicit solutions.
We will therefore proceed by changing the coordinates.
Before introducing a new set of coordinates, it may be noted in passing that Feinstein and Ibañez (1989) have considered an alternative coordinate system and have expanded a general solution in a different way involving Bessel and Neumann functions of zero order.
Their approach will be described in Section 10.7.
The appropriate technique is to consider transformations of the basic functions f and g which are here treated as coordinates.
It turns out to be convenient to put  (10.9) where ψ and λ are considered as time-like and space-like coordinates, which may then be rescaled by putting ,.
(10.10) With this, it may be noted that  (10.11) and t and z can be expressed in terms of f and g by  (10.12) The boundaries of region IV are now the hypersurfaces on which , and the focusing hypersurface in this region occurs when .
Thus, to correspond to the interaction region, the coordinates must satisfy the inequality .
Using these coordinates, the main equation (10.2) becomes  (10.13)
A general class of solutions of (10.13) can now be obtained by considering variable separable solutions of the form .
(10.14) With this,(10.13) reduces to the pair of Legendre equations  (10.15) and a class of solutions of (10.13) can be expressed as a sum of products  (10.16) where  and  are Legendre functions of the first and second kinds respectively, and a n  ,q n  ,Pn and b n  are series of arbitrary constants.
In general, of course , Legendre functions of non-integer order may also be included.
The Legendre functions of integer order are well known, but it may still be appropriate to note just the first few.
(10.17)
It may easily be shown that the solutions of Khan and Penrose, and of Szekeres are included in this class.
The Khan-Penrose solution uses ,(10.18) and the Szekeres solution (9.4) generalizes this to  (10.19)
It may be noted that the Legendre functions of the second kind  are all singular when .
The singularity  occurs when , and thus can be seen to be associated with the focusing singularity in region IV.
In fact, in order to satisfy the boundary conditions, at least one Legendre function of the second kind must be included in the solution of (10.13).
This may easily be demonstrated by substituting only the products of Legendre functions of the first kind into the condition (7.15), which can not then be satisfied.
Another solution of (10.13) can be obtained by considering separable solutions involving a sum rather than the product (10.14).
This leads to the solution  (10.20) where a is an arbitrary constant.
This can immediately be seen to be the obvious solution  which, on its own, gives rise to the Kasner metrics as will be shown in the next section.
This term may be added to the sum (10.16).
A further solution of (10.2), or (10.13) is given by  (10.21) where c and d are arbitrary constants.
In fact a series of solutions of this type can be used having different values of c and d .
Thus a different representation of the solution of (10.13) can be written in the form  (10.22)
Alternatively terms from the sum (10.22) may also be added to those of (10.16).
However, as will be shown in (10.68), some of these terms may also be expressed in terms of products of Legendre functions, and so are already included in (10.16).
It may be noted in passing that particular terms of this type have been included by Feinstein and Ibañez (1989) in the class of solutions that will be described in Section 10.7.
Having obtained an expression for V as any combination of the terms (10.16),(10.20) and (10.22), it is then necessary to integrate (10.3) to  obtain S .
These equations may conveniently be rewritten in terms of the coordinates and defined by (10.9) in the form .
(10.23) However,V is now so general that no complete integral for S has yet been found.
Instead, we proceed by discussing the particular cases that have been obtained.
The non-singular ‘solution’ of Stoyanov
We may now consider a paper of Stoyanov (1979) in which he claimed to have obtained a solution without singularities.
His method was to look for a regular solution of the field equations in region IV, and then to obtain the global solution simply by requiring that the metric coefficients be continuous across the boundaries.
The solution he presented for region IV has the line element  (10.24) where a is an arbitrary constant.
This clearly uses  (10.25) which does not satisfy the boundary conditions (7.3) which require that f and g must be smooth functions.
In fact, it has been shown by Nutku (1981) that the discontinuities in the derivatives of f and g on the boundaries of region IV indicate the presence of an infinite discontinuity in the Ricci tensor on these hypersurfaces.
Thus, although (10.24) is a vacuum solution inside region IV, it cannot be a global vacuum solution describing the collision of purely gravitational waves.
It may also be observed that, with the positive signs in (10.24) and (10.25),f and g are increasing functions that are inconsistent with (7.13).
Such a possibility can only arise if the impulsive components of the matter tensor  occurring on the boundary of region IV have negative energy density.
It is in this way that the singularity has been removed.
It is only with the possibility of the presence of matter with negative energy density that the focusing effect of colliding waves can be avoided.
Nutku (1981) also pointed out that the line element (10.24) is the well known cosmological solution of Kasner (1921).
He gave the explicit coordinate transformation by which the line element (10.24) becomes ,(10.26) where the coordinate t is not the same as that used elsewhere in this chapter, and  (10.27) which clearly satisfies the necessary conditions .
(10.28)
The Stoyanov solution has been obtained with the solution of (9.3) given by  (10.29) which is the solution (10.20).
With this, the remaining equations in (6.22) may be integrated to give  (10.30) which clearly cannot be continuous across the boundaries of region IV if the junction conditions (7.3) are satisfied.
It must be concluded that the above solution cannot be interpreted in terms of an interaction between plane gravitational waves.
Certainly, it is not a counterexample of a solution for colliding waves without singularity.
However, in region IV, it is the well known Kasner solution which features regularly in discussions of solution generating techniques.
In fact, it turns out that this solution can be used as a ‘seed’ from which other physically acceptable solutions may be derived.
It will therefore be referred to again in later sections.
This solution in the case when  has been further investigated by Taub (1988 a ), looking particularly at the properties of the distribution valued curvature tensor.
The solution of Ferrari and Ibañez and Griffiths
Now consider the case with the solution of (10.11) given by  (10.31) This solution was first presented by Ferrari and Ibañez (1986,1987 a ) in the case when  and .
The solution with general parameters was published by Griffiths (1987).
The Ferrari-Ibañez (1986,1987 a ) solution can be seen to be a modification of the Khan-Penrose solution, while the more general case is a generalization of the Szekeres solution (10.19) with .
With the solution (10.31), the remaining equations (10.23) may be integrated to give .
(10.32)
It may be noticed that S contains the term  (10.33) which includes the terms (7.10) that, with (7.8), are required to ensure that  is continuous across the boundaries of region IV.
If the leading terms in the power series for f and g take the form ,(10.34) then the required boundary conditions are satisfied if .
(10.35)
Figure 10.1 Wave profiles of approaching waves in the Ferrari Ibañez-Griffiths solution with .
These have been obtained from (10.6), but the scale factor contained in the bounded part of S has been removed.
Profiles are shown for the special cases in which  or , when the wave front is continuous.
The more general situation is represented by the cases in which b takes the values 1 and -2.
By extending this solution into regions II and III and putting , it can be seen from (10.6) that the approaching waves contain an impulsive wave component  only if  and .
This case includes the Khan-Penrose solution for which  and the Ferrari-Ibañez (1987 a ) solution in which ,.
However, with , the impulsive wave is followed by another wave component.
Some profiles for approaching waves of this type are illustrated in Figure 10.1.
It can also be shown using (10.6) that the wave front of the approaching wave in region II behaves as  (10.36) Thus, unless , the wave front may have a distributional amplitude.
It is unbounded if  and has a step if .
The wave front is smooth if .
Scaled profiles for the approaching waves are illustrated in Figure 10.2 for some particular values of a and b with n equal to 4, 6 and 8.
In all cases the approaching waves become unbounded as  in region II, and as  in region III.
Figure 10.2 Scaled wave profiles of approaching waves in the Ferrari-Ibañez-Griffiths solution for various values of a and b , and with n taking the values 4, 6 and 8.
It can also be shown that this family of solutions has the same singularity structure as the class of Szekeres solutions as described in Section 9.3 and to which it reduces when .
In region IV, there is a scalar polynomial curvature singularity on the space-like surface  on which  and .
It may be noted that when , the initial boundaries  and  of region IV contain a distribution-valued singularity.
These initial boundaries are regular when .
As in all other solutions, it may also be noted that there are non-scalar curvature  singularities in the initial regions II and III on the hypersurfaces on which  and  respectively
The soliton solution of Ferrari and Ibañez
Ferrari and Ibañez (1987 b ) have also used a generating that is familiar in the study of solitons to obtain a solution of (10.2) in which  (10.37) where  and a is an arbitrary constant.
This was initially obtained using the inverse scattering technique in which the initial ‘seed’ solution is taken to be the Kasner or Stoyanov solution given by (10.20) or (10.29).
This solution can immediately be seen to be a generalization of the Khan-Penrose solution (10.18) by the addition of the solution (10.20).
It necessarily contains impulsive wave components.
It was pointed out by Griffiths (1987), however, that this solution may easily be generalized by treating the parameter k in (10.36) as another arbitrary constant.
In this way, this family of solutions may also be considered to be a generalization of the Szekeres solutions with .
As in the previous example, this generalization then permits the approaching waves to have a continuous wave front for appropriate values of k and a .
It is this more general class of solutions that is considered in this section.
It is possible immediately to integrate equations (10.23) to obtain .
(10.38)
This contains the term  which, as in (10.33), is required to ensure that e -M  is continuous across the boundaries of region IV.
If the leading terms in the power series for f and g take the form ,(10.39) then the required boundary conditions are satisfied if .
(10.40) In this case it is remarkable that the junction conditions place no constraint on the parameter a .
This feature is, in fact, related to a general result that will be described in Section 12.1.
When evaluating expressions for the Weyl tensor, it is convenient to use the coordinates and defined by (10.10)(it may be noticed that these differ from those used by Ferrari and Ibañez).
The scale-invariant components of the Weyl tensor are given by  (10.41) For the sake of later discussion, it is found to be appropriate to choose the scale functions A and B defined by (6.2) and (6.14) to be  (10.42) The negative signs are due to the signs of f' and g' .
From (10.41) it can be seen that, in general, this solution has the same singularity structure as the Szekeres solution.
There is a curvature singularity on the hypersurface given by  or .
There are, however, exceptional cases which occur when  and  .
In these cases  (10.43) which satisfies the condition  (10.44) which implies that the space-time is of algebraic type D (see Kramer et a .
1980, or Chandrasekhar and Xanthopoulos 1986 b ).
These particular degenerate cases will be analysed in more detail in the next section.
When  and , the approaching waves contain an impulsive component.
For ,, the null boundaries of region IV contain distribution-valued singularities.
These boundaries are regular when ,.
The approaching waves have a step wavefront if , and the wavefront is continuous if .
Also, as in the Szekeres solutions, there are non-scalar curvature singularities in regions II and III when  and  respectively, for all values of a and all permissible values of k .
A generalization of the class of solutions described in this section has been obtained by Tsoubelis and Wang (1989).
This has been obtained by putting .
(10.45) By a comparison with (10.37) and (10.19), this can be seen to be a generalization both of the above Ferrari Ibañez solution and also of the Szekeres class of solutions described in Chapter 9.
Its properties can reasonably be inferred from those of these two subclasses, as has been confirmed by Tsoubelis and Wang.
The degenerate Ferrari-Ibañez solutions
Consider now the special cases of the above Ferrari-Ibañez solution in which  and , in which the Weyl tensor components are given by (10.43).
The properties of these cases have been further described by Ferrari and Ibañez (1988).
In the case when ,, there is again a curvature singularity when .
However, when  and , the space-time appears to be regular for all , and the singularity caused by the mutual focusing of the two waves appears to have been removed.
It is, therefore, appropriate to consider this particular case in more detail.
Since  in these cases, it is possible to scale the null coordinates such that.
(10.46)
When , the metric functions in region IV are then given by  (10.47) and the Weyl tensor components are then given by  (10.48) As expected, these indicate that the approaching waves are impulses followed by continuous components.
Of greater significance, however, is the fact that in this case there are two point singularities at the points , and ,.
The existence of the singularities at these points implies that the lines  and  in regions II and III act as ‘fold singularities’ like those described in Section 8.2.
These lines therefore form boundaries to the space-time in these regions.
It is convenient now to return to the time-like and space-like coordinates ψ and λ.
In the degenerate case when  the line element in the interaction region takes the form .
(10.49)
To analyse this particular case further, consider the change of variables .
(10.50)
With this, the line element (10.49) takes the form  (10.51) which may immediately be recognized as the Schwarzschild metric with .,
With , however, we have  which is normally understood as the region inside the horizon.
In addition, since increases from zero in the interaction region, this region must correspond to the part of the Schwarzschild space-time indicated in Figure 10.3(b) which is inside the initial horizon.
However, it may also be noticed that the coordinate which represents the axial coordinate in the Schwarzschild solution covers the entire range  in this case.
Figure 10.3 The interaction region of the degenerate solution viewed in two different coordinate planes.
The plane (a) is the u ,v or  plane as in previous figures.
Diagram (b) represents the  plane and is equivalent to the familiar Kruskal-Szekeres diagram for the Schwarzschild space-time.
From Figure 10.3, it appears that the approaching waves collide at the surface  and reach a horizon at .
There is, however, no a priori reason why the coordinate should not be continued beyond π/2.; If such a continuation is possible, this would indicate that the waves would continue through the horizon until they finally end in a curvature singularity at .
The other degenerate case in which  can also be transformed to a Schwarzschild space-time but, in this case, the interaction region corresponds to the upper region inside the horizon and all trajectories end in the future singularity.
This case, together with the above transformation, has also been described by Yurtsever (1988 a ).
It is instructive also to express the metric in Kruskal-Szekeres form.
This can be achieved from (10.49) using the transformation  (10.52) where u and v are null coordinates in the  plane.
With this, the line element becomes  (10.53) where ψ is given by .
(10.54)
In these coordinates the structure of the solution in the vicinity of the horizon is clearly shown to be regular.
It is also convenient to consider this solution in terms of alternative null coordinates u' and v' such that, in the interaction region  (10.55) where the new constants a and b are the strengths of the approaching gravitational shock waves.
With these coordinates it can be seen that the Schwarzschild mass parameter, which is unity in the line elements (10.51) and (10.53), is here related to the amplitudes of the approaching waves by .
(10.56)
It follows from this that stronger approaching gravitational waves would produce a shorter proper time between the collision and the subsequent horizon.
They would also give rise to a smaller Schwarzschild mass parameter, and hence greater curvature on the horizon.
When trying to relate the global structure of this solution to part of the Schwarzschild space-time, it should be emphasised that for this class of colliding plane waves the coordinate is not periodic but covers the full range .
Topological singularities occur on the lines  and  on the horizon  (or ).
This global structure of the solution has been determined by Hayward (1989 a ).
He has noted that the above solution also forms a covering space of part of the Schwarzschild white hole with a quasiregular covering space singularity along the polar axis around which the space-time is wound.
He has also suggested an alternative extension of the Schwarzschild exterior inside the black hole.
In addition, he has suggested some possible extensions for the non-unique region beyond the horizon including one that is time symmetric.
 Referring to Figure 10.3(b), the opposing waves in this case collide on the hypersurface .
The interaction region is then that part of the Schwarzschild space-time inside the initial horizon as indicated, which extends to the horizon as the focusing hypersurface.
An extension through this surface may be taken to be the familiar two parts of the exterior Schwarzschild space-time.
This can be continued to the subsequent horizon.
A further extension through this horizon is then possible up to the next surface on which  or  at which the space-time again splits into two separating gravitational waves which are the time reverse of the initial approaching waves.
At the conclusion of this section, it may be noted that Ferrari and Ibañez (1988) have shown that the shear-free principal null congruences associated with this type D space-time do not focus on the horizon.
However, these congruences are in different planes from the congruences on which the two wave components propagate, and for which the contraction and shear clearly become unbounded as .
An odd order solution
All of the solutions considered so far have involved only Legendre  functions of even order.
A solution with odd order functions has been presented by Griffiths (1987).
This has .
(10.57) With this function, equations (10.23) can immediately be integrated to give .
(10.58)
As in (10.32–34), it can be clearly seen that this expression contains terms of the form (7.10).
It may thus be concluded that, if the leading terms in the expansions for the functions f and g are given by (10.34), then the boundary conditions that are required for the solution to describe colliding plane waves are satisfied if .
(10.59)
As in previous examples, it can be shown that the approaching waves have an impulsive component if .
Also the wavefront is unbounded if , has a step if , is continuous but not smooth if , and is smooth if .
The expressions for the Weyl tensor components are rather complicated, and there is nothing particularly remarkable about this solution.
In the previous examples discussed in this chapter, the two waves approaching each other are identical.
The component 0 in region III has an identical form to 4 in region II but with the null coordinate v replacing.
Similarly, the expressions for V in the two regions can be related by the same replacement.
In this case, however, since odd functions are being used, a change of sign is also included.
Thus, and  in region II are replaced by  and  in region III.
The approaching waves still have colinear polarization but, in this case, their amplitudes are opposite rather than the same.
The second Yurtsever and the Feinstein-Ibañez solutions
For colliding plane wave solutions, we are considering space-times with two space-like Killing vectors.
Such space-times have also been considered in the context of cosmology, where certain vacuum inhomogeneous cosmologies satisfy the same field equations as the interaction region for colliding colinear gravitational waves (Gowdy 1971), although different boundary conditions are appropriate.
In fact the vacuum Gowdy cosmologies can be considered to represent closed universes built from opposing plane gravitational waves.
The similarity between these solutions  has been noted by Feinstein and Ibañez (1989), who have used known cosmological solutions to obtain a new class of colliding plane wave solutions.
In this section, the Feinstein Ibañez solutions are presented.
The electromagnetic Gowdy cosmologies will be described in Section 17.3.
It is appropriate at this point to consider the alternative system of coordinates defined by .
(10.60) It may be noted that the new coordinate t is a decreasing, or past pointing, time-like coordinate, and that the singularity in region IV occurs when .
These coordinates have also been used by Yurtsever (1988 c ).
In this case, the line element (10.1) for colliding waves with aligned constant polarization can be rewritten in the diagonal form  (10.61) and the main vacuum field equation (9.3),(10.2) or (10.13) becomes  (10.62) and the subsidiary equations (10.3) become  (10.63) where the dot and prime denote derivatives with respect to t and z respectively.
The above equations (10.62,63) are exactly those for the vacuum Gowdy cosmologies that have been considered by many authors.
The general solution of (10.62) can be expressed as a line integral.
However, for the class of Gowdy cosmologies, it is found to be convenient to consider the class of solutions given by  (10.64) where  and  are arbitrary linear combinations of the terms in curly brackets, including the Fourier-Bessel integrals of the form  (10.65) and  are Bessel functions of the first and second kinds of zero order, and  and  are sets of arbitrary constants.
The first term in (10.64) is clearly identical to the solution (10.20).
It is the term that, on its own, gives rise to the Kasner solutions.
The set of terms included in L 1 have regular behaviour as .
It may be noted that this property is also shared by the combination of terms  that are contained in (10.16).
The set of terms included in L 2 , however, are badly behaved as .
These are the terms that are considered to induce chaotic behaviour in these cosmological models.
The last term in (10.64) is identical to (10.31).
This contains the so-called gravitational soliton components.
Yurtsever (1988 c ) has considered the asymptotic structure of those solutions which only contain the combinations  and , i.e. in which .
He has shown that these solutions are asymptotic to the inhomogeneous Kasner solutions as the singularity  is approached.
He has also given explicit expressions which relate the asymptotic Kasner exponents along the singularity to the initial data specified along the wave fronts of the incoming colliding plane waves.
It follows from this analysis that the focusing hypersurface  is a curvature singularity except in the special case in which one of the Kasner exponents is zero.
This special case of the degenerate Kasner solution is flat and, in this case, the focusing hypersurface is a Killing-Cauchy horizon across which space-time can be extended.
It is reasonable to conclude from this that, although there are colliding plane wave space-times which contain a Killing-Cauchy horizon rather than a space-like curvature singularity, these space-times are unstable against small perturbations of the initial data and that ‘generic’ initial data always produce space-like curvature singularities.
Feinstein and Ibañez (1989) have considered the family of solutions for which the combination L 2 is zero.
They have shown that, for this case, a curvature singularity does not develop in region IV as  provided that .
(10.66) They have also shown that, in this case, the necessary boundary conditions (7.15) are satisfied provided there are at least two solitonic terms  with constants satisfying  (10.67) using the notation of (7.11).
(The unfortunate repeated use of constants c 1 and c 2 in this equation should not cause confusion.)
It may thus be noted that these two solitonic terms provide the conditions for continuity on the two different null boundaries of region IV.
For continuity it is also required that  and , so d 1 and d 2 are constrained to the range .
(10.68) It follows from this and (10.66) that , and so the first term in (10.64) must necessarily be included in these solutions.
It may also be noted that the solutions given in the notation of previous sections by  (10.69) where c 1 and c 2 are given by (10.67), similarly do not contain curvature singularities on the hypersurface  provided the constants d i and a are constrained by (10.66) and (10.68).
It is also of interest to note that the two solitonic terms that provide the continuity across the boundaries of the interaction region are in fact identical to the two separate terms in the Szekeres solution (9.4).
This may be observed by noting that  (10.70) and similarly .
(10.71)
It follows from this that even the Szekeres solution, which is everywhere at least C 2 , can be adapted by the inclusion of a suitable multiple of the term (10.20) to provide a solution without a curvature singularity in the interaction region.
Thus, the occurrence of a quasiregular singularity in region IV can have nothing to do with the relaxation of the continuity conditions across the boundaries.
The class of solutions included here contain an arbitrary number of parameters.
It can be shown that they are algebraically general in the interaction region.
They contain the usual coordinate singularity on the hypersurface  but, for this class, this is not a curvature singularity.
Feinstein and Ibañez have shown that the solution is extendable across this surface.
However, the extension is not unique.
The first Yurtsever solutions
For colliding plane waves with aligned linear polarization, it has been seen that the main field equation (10.2) is linear.
Various classes of solutions have already been obtained by separating the variables of this equation in a number of different ways.
A further class of solutions in which the main equation is separated in yet another way has been given by Yurtsever (1988 a ).
These solutions were originally obtained indirectly by first considering the Weyl solutions for stationary axisymmetric space-times.
However, they will be presented here in a more general way that is also more appropriate in considering colliding wave solutions.
It is appropriate here to start with the main equation in the form (10.62) using the variables t and z defined by (10.60), and then transforming it by putting  (10.72) where the parameters v and η are not necessarily real.
Indeed, real values of these variables only cover part of the interaction region as will be clarified later.
With these parameters, the main equation (10.62) becomes  (10.73) and this has a series of separable solutions of the form  (10.74) where  and  are Legendre functions of the first and second kinds.
Figure 10.4 In the interaction region IV for the Yurtsever solutions, the variables v and cosh η are imaginary in the initial region marked A that immediately follows the collision.
This region is followed by the regions marked B in which these variables are real.
We must now reconsider the parameters of these solutions.
As defined by (10.72),z and  are imaginary when the product fg is positive.
Since both f and g decrease from ½ towards -½ in the interaction region, it is appropriate to divide this region into the subregions A and B in which the product fg is positive and negative respectively as indicated in Figure 10.4.
Explicitly we may put  (10.75)
It is clear that v is zero midway along the two boundaries between region IV and regions II and III.
The inverse functions of v that appear in (10.74) must therefore be excluded for colliding plane wave solutions since they must be regular along these boundaries.
It is therefore appropriate to express general solutions in the form  (10.76) This solution will from now on simply be quoted in the second form since either equation formally includes the other.
It may be noted that these solutions are continuous on the boundaries between the subregions A and B. Also, the terms involving the Legendre functions of the first kind are regular on the focusing hypersurface , while those involving the Legendre functions of the second kind are singular on this surface.
To be precise, in the original class of solutions given by Yurtsever (1988 a ),V is taken in the form  (10.77) which can be seen to be generalizations of the degenerate Ferrari-Ibañez solution described in Section 10.5.
They are therefore distortions of the Schwarzschild black hole solution in the interaction region, and correspond to interior Weyl solutions for static axisymmetric space-times.
In terms of colliding plane waves, these solutions all involve approaching waves with initial impulsive components.
Some particular examples have been described explicitly by Yurtsever (1988 a ).
Clearly these solutions can easily be generalised by modifying the coefficients of the first terms of (10.77).
By choosing these appropriately, it is possible to remove the impulsive components from the approaching waves.
Further explicit solutions
To obtain solutions describing the collision and interaction of plane waves with aligned linear polarization it is necessary first to solve the main field equation, which may be expressed in terms of different coordinates in any of the forms (9.3),(10.2),(10.13),(10.62) or (10.73).
Any number of further explicit solutions may easily be generated using the methods described in the previous sections of this chapter with different combinations of particular solutions of the main equation (9.3),(10.2),(10.13),(10.62) or (10.73).
It is appropriate here simply to list the various possibilities.
First there are the solutions (10.16) which have been obtained by separating the variables in (10.13).
These involve Legendre functions of the first and second kinds  (10.78) where a n  ,q n  ,Pn and b n  are series of arbitrary constants.
It may be noted, of course, that non-integer values of n may also be included.
There are also the particular solutions (10.20),(10.8) and (10.22) that can be re-expressed in the form  (10.79) where  are arbitrary constants.
Then there are the solutions of (10.62) that are contained in (10.64) and have previously been included in Gowdy cosmologies, namely  (10.80) where  and ) are Bessel functions of the first and second kinds of zero order,,, and  are sets of arbitrary constants.
It may be noted that the solutions (10.80) have been obtained by separating the variables in (10.62), taking only solutions that are periodic in z .
This constraint is not required for colliding plane waves and an additional set of aperiodic solutions is given by  (10.81) where  and  are modified Bessel functions of the first and second kinds of zero order.
Finally, there are the separable solutions of (10.73) which are non-singular on the initial boundaries, namely  (10.82) which again involve Legendre functions of the first and second kind.
When considered as infinite series, these different forms may simply be regarded as different representations of the same class of solutions.
However, when looking for particular explicit solutions it is necessary to consider only a few terms.
In this way, further exact solutions for colliding plane waves may be obtained by combining particular components from  any of the series V1, V2, V3, V4 and V5 and by choosing the arbitrary constants such that(10.83) where k 1 and k 2 are constrained to the range (7.13).
If this condition is satisfied, then it remains only to integrate the subsidiary equations in the form (10.3) or (10.63) to obtain the remaining metric function S or M .
ERNST EQUATION FOR COLLIDING GRAVITATIONAL WAVES
The solutions being considered here for colliding plane waves all have a pair of commuting Killing vectors that are assumed to exist globally.
It may therefore be expected that the solutions obtained may be related to known cylindrically symmetric solutions, or to stationary axisymmetric solutions, which similarly have a pair of Killing vectors.
Such a relation was first pointed out by Kinnersley (1975), and by Fisher (1980).
The exact relation between these solutions has been established more recently by Chandrasekhar and Ferrari (1984), and Chandrasekhar and Xanthopoulos (1985 a ), and exploited by these authors and their colleagues.
In this chapter we will present an analysis of the colliding wave problem using a method that has become familiar in the study of stationary axisymmetric space-times.
In this case the field is described in terms of a complex potential function that is referred to as the Ernst potential (see Ernst 1968 a ).
This approach leads directly to various methods for generating further exact solutions.
A derivation of the Ernst equation
First it may be recalled that, of the vacuum field equations (6.22a-f) considered in previous chapters,(6.22a) may immediately be integrated to give ,(11.1) and (6.22d, e) are integrability conditions for the remaining equations.
Attention is thus focused on these main equations for the metric functions  and .
It is now appropriate to consider a different combination of these functions, by putting  (11.2) or, inversely .
(11.3) This modifies the form of the line element (6.20), which now becomes .
(11.4)
It is also convenient to introduce the complex function .
(11.5) With this, the line element (11.4) can be written in the form  (11.6) and the two main equations (6.22d, e) can be written as the single complex equation  (11.7) It may be seen that this is in fact Ernst's equation, which can be written in the coordinate-invariant form  (11.8) where  is the square of the gradient of an arbitrary scalar field which, in this case, is a function of the two (null) coordinates only.
Similarly, v2 is the 3+1-dimensional Laplacian operator (or the generalized d'Alembertian) given by .
(11.9)
Using the above notation, the non-zero components of the Weyl tensor given by (6.23) can be written as  (11 10)
When considering Ernst's equation, it is frequently found to be useful also to introduce an associated function Ε, defined by  (11.11) With this, the line element (11.4) or (11.6) can be written in the alternative form  (11.12) and the main equations (6.22d, e), or alternatively (11.7), become .
(11.13) This is the alternative form of the Ernst equation and may be rewritten in the coordinate-invariant form .
(11.14)
Using this function, the non-zero components of the Weyl tensor (11.10) can be written as  (11.1)
The problem now involves finding appropriate solutions of (11.7) or (11.13).
These equations, however, contain the derivatives of U , and hence they depend on the arbitrary functions f(u) and g(v) that are specified by the incoming waves.
This apparently explicit dependence on initial conditions may in fact be removed by adapting the coordinate system of Chandrasekhar and Ferrari (1984).
Here we again use (10.9–12) and put  (11.16) where ψ and λ are considered as time-like and space-like coordinates, which may then be rescaled by putting .
(11.17) In this coordinate system, equation (11.7) takes the more familiar explicit form of Ernst's equation:(11.18) and (11.13) similarly becomes  (11.19) The intermediate steps in the derivation of these equations may be deduced from (16.6) and (16.11).
See also (12.30–31).
It may be noticed that, in this case, the solution of these equations immediately determines some of the metric functions.
This is in marked contrast to their application in stationary axisymmetric space-times, where the Ernst equation only determines potentials for the fields.
The original metric functions, as considered in previous chapters, are now given by  (11.20)
Boundary conditions
When looking for solutions of the Ernst equation for stationary axisymmetric space-times, it is appropriate to require that solutions be asymptotically flat.
However, for colliding plane waves very different boundary conditions apply.
For colliding plane waves it is necessary to choose Z or Ε, and hence V and W , such that the solution of (6.22b, c, f) for M is continuous across the boundaries of region IV.
For vacuum solutions, it is appropriate to use (7.8) and equations (7.9) may then be written in the form .
To ensure that the boundary conditions are satisfied, it is then essential that the solution of these equations should include the necessary components (7.10).
In this approach, solutions in the interaction region for  or  are related to the functions  and , and hence S may be obtained as a function of f and g .
The boundary conditions described in Chapter 7 may then be considered to place restrictions on the structure of these functions, which characterize the approaching waves.
In practice, these boundary conditions are difficult to apply, basically because the condition that M be continuous is only indirectly applied to the functions V and W , or Z , or E , that feature in the main equations.
It is therefore often convenient to apply the boundary condition in the form (7.15) or (7.16).
Writing , this becomes  This form is particularly convenient when , which occurs when impulsive waves are present.
The boundary conditions in this limited case only, have been discussed by Ernst, García-Díaz and Hauser (1987 b ).
In terms of the functions f and g , the conditions (11.22) become  where k 1 and k 2 must satisfy the inequalities (7.13).
Alternatively, writing , the boundary conditions require that   which, in terms of the functions f and g become  (11.26)
Finally, it is convenient to express the boundary conditions in terms of the variables t and z .
These become, for ,(11.27) where k 1 and k 2 satisfy (7.13).
Colinear solutions
In the next chapter, the approach described above will be used to derive new solutions for colliding gravitational waves whose polarization vectors are not aligned.
Such solutions essentially have W non-zero, and hence Z and Ε are complex.
However, before moving on to consider such cases, it is appropriate first to review the colinear solutions described in previous chapters.
These solutions have Z and Ε real.
(i)The solution of Khan and Penrose (1971), discussed in Chapter 3 and Section 8.2, which describes the collision of aligned impulsive gravitational waves, is given by .
(11.28) In this case  and .
It may be observed that, for stationary axisymmetric space-times,(11.28) is the Ernst potential which leads to the Schwarzschild solution.
(ii)The Szekeres (1972) class of solutions, described in Chapter 9, is given by .
(11.29) In this case  and , with  for  and .
(iii)The ‘solution’ of Stoyanov (1979) given by (10.24) uses .
(11.30) In Section 10.2 it has been argued that this solution must be considered to be unphysical on its own, but it may be included as a factor in more general solutions.
It does not satisfy the boundary conditions (11.26).
(iv)The solution of Ferrari and Ibañez (1987 a ) and Griffiths (1987), which is described in Section 10.3, is characterized by  where  (11.31) In this case  and , where  and .
It may be observed that, when ,(11.31) is the Ernst potential which, for stationary axisymmetric solutions, leads to the solution of Erez and Rosen (1959) which describes the external field of a non-rotating body with a quadrupole moment.
(v)The generalized solution of Ferrari and Ibañez (1987 b ), described in Section 10.4, is characterized by .
(11.32) This can be seen to include the Stoyanov factor (11.30), and to reduce to a Szekeres solution with  when .
Again  and  where  and .
The degenerate cases occur when .
(vi)The solution of Tsoubelis and Wang (1989) given by (10.44) has  (11.33) This can be seen to be a generalization of (11.29) and (11.32), and its properties can immediately be deduced.
(vii)The odd order solution of Griffiths (1987) described in Section 10.6 uses the Ernst potential , where  (11.34) Again  and , where  and .
It is not difficult to see how further solutions of this type can be generated.
SOLUTION-GENERATING TECHNIQUES
For stationary axisymmetric space-times many solution-generating techniques are known.
These are associated with the two Killing vectors, and with the internal symmetries of the Ernst equation.
Colliding plane wave solutions also have two Killing vectors, and the main field equations can be transformed exactly to the Ernst equation.
The main difference is that the solutions of the Ernst equation now contain the metric functions explicitly rather than the field potentials as in the stationary axisymmetric case.
It is therefore to be expected that many of the familiar solution generating techniques can be used to obtain new colliding plane wave solutions from already known, or ‘seed’, solutions.
In this chapter we will consider only vacuum solutions.
This will enable us to continue to concentrate on the collision of gravitational waves.
Various techniques will be discussed here, and the main solutions that have been obtained using them will be described in the next chapter.
Many techniques are also known by which solutions of the Einstein-Maxwell equations, and other non-vacuum solutions, can be generated from known vacuum solutions.
These will be discussed later in Chapter 15.
The colinear case
Consider first the case when the approaching waves have colinear polarization.
The metric can be taken in the form of the line element (6.20) with .
In this case, given any solution  of the field equations (6.22), then another solution of the same equations again with  is given by U ,V and M , where  (12.1) where a is an arbitrary constant.
This transformation is well known (Halilsoy, 1985).
It can clearly be seen that, if the initial solution satisfies the boundary conditions appropriate for colliding waves, then so does the new solution.
It can also  be seen that the transformation (12.1) is equivalent to adding to V the Stoyanov solution (10.29).
It may also be observed that the transformation (12.1) can be used to obtain the soliton solution of Ferrari and Ibañez (1987 b ) described in Section 10.4, using as seed the Khan Penrose solution.
Ferrari and Ibañez, however, originally obtained their solution using the soliton techniques mentioned in Section 12.6.
Another transformation which maps one colinear solution of (6.22) on another, whether or not they satisfy the boundary conditions, is given by  (12.2) where b is an arbitrary constant and .
When , it can be seen that the transformation (12.2) is singular on the boundaries of the interaction region where  and .
It follows that the necessary boundary conditions cannot be satisfied for both solutions, if the same expressions for f and g are used.
If the seed solution satisfies the boundary conditions as described in Chapter 7, with  and M containing the terms  (12.3) with  (12.4) then the new solution containing the terms (7.10) will also satisfy the boundary conditions if f and g are replaced by  (12.5) where  (12.6) provided  and .
These equations give the new expression for U in terms of the null coordinates u and v .
It may be noted that the inequalities (12.6) provide strong constraints on the range of permissible values of the parameter b in (12.2).
It can thus be seen that this transformation with  may be used to change the profile of the approaching waves.
For example, it could  be used to derive the Szekeres solution described in Chapter 9 from the Khan-Penrose solution.
The two transformations (12.1) and (12.2) may also be used in conjunction.
It may also be noted that the transformations for V in (12.1) and (12.2) may be restated in the form that, if a real Z is a solution of Ernst's equation (11.18), then  (12.7) and  (12.8) are also real solutions with arbitrary constants a and b , though as explained above, the possible values of b are constrained by the boundary conditions.
These results are, of course, implicitly contained in the general approach to colinear solutions described in Section 10.1.
The point to note is that, when the approaching waves have constant aligned polarization so that Z and Ε are real and , the main field equations can be linearized.
In this case a general superposition of solutions is possible, as illustrated in (10.16) together with (10.20).
Further generating techniques for this case have been described by Kitchingham (1984).
In the more general case, however,Z and Ε are complex, and the field equations are essentially non-linear.
In this situation, the generating techniques described in the remainder of this chapter are particularly significant.
Rotations and Ehlers transformations
Consider first the well known result that, if E is a solution of Ernst's equation (11.14), then  (12.9) where c is a constant, is also a solution.
In terms of the alternative function Z the equivalent result is that, if Z is a solution of (11.8), then another solution is given by  (12.10)
By applying the coordinate rotation  (12.11) to the line element (11.12), it may be shown that this rotation is exactly equivalent to the transformation (12.9), indicating that this transformation may be simply interpreted as a global rotation of coordinates.
In terms of the metric functions of the line element (6.20), this rotation can be shown to be equivalent to the result that, if U ,V ,W and M are solutions of (6.22), then another solution is given by  (12.12)
It may be noted that, in (12.12), the function M is unaltered.
Thus the boundary conditions are not affected, and so neither are the functions f(u) and g(v) .
In fact, it is clear that (12.12) does not generate a new solution, but merely a rotation of the original.
It can also be shown that, if the seed solution is colinear so that we can put , then the transformation (12.12) reduces to the transformation suggested by Ray (1980) as corrected by Halilsoy (1981).
Another well known result is that, if Z is a solution of Ernst's equation (11.8), then  (12.13) where c is a real constant, is also a solution.
This is loosely referred to as an Ehlers transformation (Ehlers, 1957).
Equivalently, if Ε is a solution of (11.14), then another solution is given by .
(12.14)
In terms of the metric functions in (6.20), we may start with the solutions U ,V ,W and M of (6.22).
After integrating (11.21), it can then be shown that another solution is given by  (12.15)
Since the metric function M is unchanged, it follows that the boundary conditions for the new solution are satisfied if, and only if, they are satisfied for the seed solution.
The above transformation is also related to the well known result that, if Z is a solution of Ernst's equation (11.8), then another solution is given by  (12.16) where b is a real constant.
Equivalently, if Ε is a solution of (11.14), then another solution is given by  (12.17)
In terms of the metric functions in (6.20), this leads to the transformation that, if U ,V ,W and M are solutions of (6.22), then another solution is given by  (12.18) This can clearly be seen to be identical to (12.15) but with the sign of V interchanged.
All of the above transformations can be shown to be obtainable from a general rotation and rescaling of the coordinates in the  plane.
This can be described by subjecting the Killing vectors  to any  transformation , where .
(12.19)
This leaves U and M invariant but, by considering the line element (11.6), the Ernst function Z can be shown to transform as  (12.20)
The transformation (12.20) clearly incorporates (12.10),(12.13) and (12.16) which include both pure rotations and those referred to as Ehlers transformations.
When applied to metric functions on its own this transformation clearly has little physical significance.
It follows that these transformations on their own can not be used to generate genuinely non-colinear solutions from colinear ones.
However, they may be combined with some other method to obtain such solutions.
In particular these transformations may be applied to the potentials for the metric functions that will be described in Section 12.4.
Strictly speaking it is only these transformations, applied in the potential space, that should be referred to as Ehlers transformations (Ehlers, 1957).
It is then possible that a sequence both of coordinate transformations (12.19) and Ehlers transformations (12.20) in the potential space can be applied alternately to generate a further class of solutions with an infinite number of parameters.
Geroch transformations
Geroch (1971) has presented a general technique for generating solutions of Einstein's source-free equations from known solutions which possess a Killing vector.
As originally presented, the method is to consider a vacuum space-time with metric , and to solve the equations  (12.21) for G ,P and Q subject to the following conditions:.
(12.22)(A solution of these equations is known to exist.)
Then, the basic result is that a new solution of the source-free equations, depending on an arbitrary real parameter x , is given by  (12.23) where  (12.24) It can be seen that f and g are respectively the norm and twist potential of the Killing field.
This technique determines a new solution with one extra parameter α.
A second application of the method simply yields another member of the same one-parameter family of solutions.
It may be observed that the new space-times also have the same Killing vector as the seed solution.
It may also be shown that these transformations include both the Ehlers transformation and the rotation described in previous sections.
The case when there exist two commuting Killing vectors, which is the case for colliding plane waves, has also been considered (Geroch, 1972).
Clearly, the above technique may be applied using any linear combination of the Killing vectors.
Successive applications of the method using different combinations of the Killing vectors yield metrics which depend on the order of the vectors used.
The resulting class of solutions depends on two arbitrary functions, and retains the same pair of commuting Killing vectors.
The algebraic structure of these transformations has been analysed by Geroch (1972).
The Geroch transformations, which relate one vacuum solution to another, in fact form an infinite-dimensional group.
The first really useful realization of the Lie algebra of the Geroch group was formulated by Kinnersley and Chitre (1977, 1978 a , b), who demonstrated the action of the infinitesimal elements of the group in terms of an infinite hierarchy of potentials.
Kinnersley and Chitre, and also Hoenselaers, Kinnersley and Xanthopoulos (1979), exploited this approach to derive new stationary axisymmetric solutions.
This formalism has been extended to space-times with two space-like Killing vectors by Kitchingham (1984), although he initially applied it only in the cosmological context.
Hauser and Ernst (1979, 1980) introduced a realization of the finite elements of the Geroch group.
They also showed that the Kinnersley-Chitre transformations can be carried out by solving an appropriate homogeneous Hilbert problem.
A simpler realization  of the Geroch group of transformations which is specifically applied to colliding wave solutions has been found by Ernst, García-Díaz and Hauser (1987 b ).
With this, colliding wave solutions with any desired number of parameters may be constructed.
When applying the original transformation (12.23) to colliding plane waves, it is convenient to start first with the Szekeres line element (6.20), in which the two Killing vectors are  and .
It is then appropriate to consider a general Killing vector  (12.25) where a and b are arbitrary constants.
It follows immediately that .
(12.26) It is then possible to put two of the components of  each equal to zero.
Putting  (12.27) the remaining components of  must then satisfy the equations .
(12.28)
These equations are automatically integrable in view of(6.22).
It is then possible to put  (12.29) and to choose the components of  such that .
(12.30) Equations (12.21) are then satisfied.
The new metric is then given by (12.23).
The expressions for the new functions are rather involved.
However, it is clear that  (12.31) which indicates that the boundary conditions are satisfied for the new solution, if they were satisfied for the seed solution.
In the case when the initial solution has colinear polarization, this method can be considerably simplified.
Such a situation was considered by Panov (1979 b ), and will be discussed further in Section 13.2.
The Neugebauer-Kramer involution
Chandrasekhar and Ferrari (1984) have shown that the main field equations for colliding plane waves can be written in the form of Ernst's equation (11.18) involving the complex function Z .
In this case, the real and imaginary parts of this function, denoted by , are the metric coefficients given by (11.2–4).
Using these components, the main field equations can be written as  (12.32) and .
(12.33) These are respectively the real and imaginary parts of (11.18).
The second of these equations immediately implies that there exists a function Φ such that.
(12.34) It follows that must satisfy the equation  (12.35)
At this point, it is convenient to introduce a new function Ψdefined by  (12.36) From (11.1) and (10.11), it may be seen that -Ψ is the coefficient of dx 2 in the line element (11.4).
With this definition and (12.34), the equations (12.32) and (12.35) can now be rewritten in the form  (12.37) and  (12.38)
These equations may be seen to be identical to (12.32) and (12.33) with Ψ and Φ replacing X and w .
Thus, if  is a solution of (11.18), then another solution is given by  (12.39) where Ψ is given by (12.36), and Φ is chosen to satisfy (12.34).
This correspondence is known as the Neugebauer-Kramer involution.
It is known to map real metrics to real metrics only for space-times with two space-like Killing vectors.
In modern terminology, it is clear that the equations (12.34) provide an auto-Bäcklund transformation for the Ernst equation (11.18).
In order to obtain the remaining metric function M it is necessary to integrate equations (7.9), which may be rewritten in the form  (12.40) which is equivalent to (11.21).
In terms of the alternative functions Ψ and Φ these become  (12.41)
It follows from this that, for any solution with  and M there exists another solution with  and M where .
(12.42) This immediately indicates that, if the initial solution satisfies the boundary conditions for colliding plane waves, then so also does the new solution, provided .
(12.43)
A second application of this technique only leads back to the original solution, apart from an arbitrary complex constant.
The presence of such a constant has already been considered in Section 12.2 following equation (12.16).
It may be noted in passing that, in the colinear case in which  and , this generation technique is equivalent to putting  which is effectively contained in (12.1) but with a change in the sign of V .
This, for example, would generate the Ferrari-Ibañez solution from the Khan-Penrose solution.
It is of interest to observe that, for stationary axisymmetric space-times, the main field equations can be written in the form of Ernst's equation (11.8), whose solution  is considered as a complex potential for the metric functions X and that are obtained from (12.36) and (12.34).
In contrast, for colliding plane waves, both the potential (12.39) and the metric function (11.5) satisfy the same equation.
Thus, in this case, the Neugebauer-Kramer involution is equivalent to a generation  technique in which any solution has a dual solution in which the metric functions and the associated potentials are interchanged.
A combined transformation
In a recent paper, Halilsoy (1988 b ) has considered a technique which he applied initially in the context of colliding shock electromagnetic waves (Halilsoy, 1988 a ).
This can be described as follows.
If V is a solution of the vacuum equations (9.3),(10.2) or (10.13) corresponding to a collision of colinear gravitational waves (with ), then a non-colinear solution is given in terms of the function Ε satisfying (11.14) by  (12.44) where  (12.45) where α is an arbitrary constant.
The original solution is obtained when  and .
In terms of the alternative function Z , the original solution may be described by a real function Z and the new solution satisfying (11.8) is then given by  (12.46) This can thus be seen to be a transformation of the type (12.2) followed by an Ehlers transformation in a slightly more general form than (12.13).
In terms of the metric functions of the Szekeres line element (6.20), the original solution is described by the three functions U ,V and M which are each functions of f and g where, as in (7.8), it is convenient to put  (12.47) and, as in (12.4),(12.48)
The new solution (12.44) is given by .
(12.49)
With this, equations (7.7) can be integrated to give  (12.50) which is similar to (12.2).
Now, using the same arguments as in Section 12.1, the new solution will only satisfy the appropriate boundary conditions if the forms of the functions f and g are modified.
Accordingly we now put .
(12.51)
The parameters f and g are now expressed in terms of the null coordinates u and v in the form  (12.52) where .
(12.53) With this restriction, the boundary conditions are satisfied, and .
(12.54)
If, in the original solution, the functions f ,g and M have been chosen such that the terms  in (12.47) have already cancelled the terms  and  in S , then the new solution for M will be given by .
(12.55)
The method described in this section has been used by Halilsoy (1988 b ) to obtain a class of solutions which appears to generalize the Szekeres solutions.
However, since it has been obtained by a real transformation followed by an Ehlers transformation, as described at the end of Section 12.2 it is essentially simply a rotation and rescaling of the Szekeres solutions.
It does not therefore describe the collision of genuinely non-aligned gravitational waves.
Other methods
Within the context of stationary axisymmetric space-times, many techniques have been developed in recent years by which new solutions may  be obtained from initial vacuum solutions.
Most of these methods can be applied also to the colliding plane wave situation.
The main difference being that, in this case, the solutions of Ernst's equation may themselves either be metric functions or potentials for those functions as described in Section 12.4.
The other difference relates to the change of boundary conditions.
For stationary axisymmetric solutions, it is usual to impose the condition that the space-times are asymptotically flat, and techniques for generating new solutions of Ernst's equation in which the space-time satisfies this condition have been developed.
One of the most general of these is that of Cosgrove (1977), which generalizes the Tomimatsu-Sato solutions to arbitrary continuous deformation parameter s .
However, for colliding plane waves, the boundary conditions are of a totally different character, and many of the solutions of Ernst's equation that are appropriate for axisymmetric fields, such as the Tomimatsu-Sato solutions, are now found to be inconsistent with the boundary conditions for colliding plane waves.
Hassan, Feinstein and Manko (1990) have adapted a generating technique of Gutsunaev and Manko (1988) for stationary axisymmetric space-times to derive solutions which describe the interaction following the collision of plane gravitational waves.
This technique generates solutions in which the approaching waves have variable polarization from a ‘seed’ solution V of the equation (10.13) for the colinear case.
A solution of the Ernst equation (11.17) is then given by  (12.56) where α is a constant and the functions  and  are obtained by integrating the equations  (12.57) The boundary conditions then have to be applied.
One particularly important technique that has been developed in recent years is the inverse scattering method of Belinskii and Zakharov (1978, 1979) which had previously been developed as a soliton technique.
This method has been applied by Carr and Verdaguer (1983) to plane-symmetric space-times, and their results have been interpreted in terms of cosmological gravitational waves.
The relation between this and other techniques has been analysed by Letelier (1987).
The first solution for colliding plane gravitational waves that was obtained using the inverse scattering method was that of Ferrari and Ibañez (1987 b ), who obtained the solution described in Section 10.4 using the method in the form developed by Carr and Verdaguer (1983).
In this paper they took as seed metric the Kasner solution (10.26) which is equivalent to the Stoyanov solution (10.29).
It may therefore be noted that, although the new solution satisfies the boundary conditions for colliding plane waves, the seed solution in this case does not.
Non-aligned solutions have also been obtained using this method by Ferrari, Ibañez and Bruni (1987 b ).
Another solution-generating technique that has been developed in recent years is that associated with Bäcklund transformations.
These were first applied to general relativity independently by Harrison (1978) and Neugebauer (1979).
Bäcklund transformations can also be described as double-Harrison transformations, or as quadruple-Neugebauer transformations.
The explicit relation between this technique and other methods has been discussed by Cosgrove (1980, 1982).
The effect of a double-Harrison transformation can be deduced by any number of competing techniques.
Hauser and Ernst (1979, 1980) developed a method which involves solving a homogeneous Hilbert problem.
Cosgrove (1981) has shown how Bäcklund transformations can be conveniently expressed in this formalism.
The method has been applied to colliding wave problems by Ernst, García-Díaz and Hauser (1988)(see also Ernst, 1988), and a class of new colliding wave solutions has been obtained.
It has been observed by Witten (1979) that Einstein's vacuum equations for stationary, axisymmetric space-times are equivalent to a form of the self-dual Yang-Mills equations.
He therefore suggested that it should be possible to generate solutions of Einstein's equations by using twistor methods to construct self-dual Yang-Mills fields with appropriate symmetries.
Such an approach to stationary axisymmetric space-times has subsequently been developed by Ward (1983), Woodhouse (1987) and also by Woodhouse and Mason (1988), who showed how this approach relates to the other solution-generating techniques mentioned above.
It follows that this approach may also be applied for other types of space-times  which contain two commuting Killing vectors.
Woodhouse (1989) has applied these techniques to generate cylindrical gravitational waves.
Twistor techniques may also be developed to generate colliding plane wave solutions.
Any of the above techniques may be used to generate new solutions of Ernst's equation.
Most have been applied mainly to stationary axisymmetric space-times.
They may, however, also be used to generate solutions of Ernst's equation that can be considered as possible to colliding plane wave solutions.
The difficulty is then to find under what circumstances the appropriate boundary conditions are satisfied.
Whether or not a new solution in region IV satisfies these conditions will generally depend both on the particular technique that is employed and also on the initial seed solution.
VACUUM SOLUTIONS WITH NON-ALIGNED POLARIZATION
The purpose of this chapter is to describe the known exact solutions for colliding gravitational waves in which the polarization of the approaching waves is not aligned.
The first solution of this type was obtained by Nutku and Halil (1977).
A further generalization of this solution was attempted by Halil (1979), but this has subsequently been found to be incorrect and so will not be considered here.
The Nutku-Halil solution
The Khan-Penrose solution discussed in Chapter 3 describes the collision of impulsive waves whose polarization vectors are aligned.
Nutku and Halil (1977) have generalized this solution to give one which describes the collision of impulsive gravitational waves with non-colinear polarization.
This is the most simple solution of this type.
In terms of the Szekeres line element (6.20), the metric functions of this solution can be written in the form  (13.1) where  (13.2) and α and β are constants such that(α -β) is the angle between the polarization vectors of the approaching waves.
This solution can be seen to reduce to the Khan-Penrose solution (3.9) when .
It may also be observed that the functions f and g are given by  and .
This solution has been analysed in great detail by Chandrasekhar and Ferrari (1984).
Their approach commences by rewriting the field equations in the form of Ernst's equation as described in Chapter 11.
It can then be seen from (11.20) that Ε is the associated Ernst function.
Chandrasekhar and Ferrari were then able to show that the Nutku-Halil solution is obtained by the simple choice of Ernst function given by  (13.3) where p and q are real constants which satisfy the condition .
It is always possible to use a rotation of the type (12.9) to put , and in this case  and .
It can easily be shown that the Ernst function Z associated with this solution is given by  (13.4)
It may be observed that (13.3) is in fact the Ernst potential which leads to the Kerr solution for stationary axisymmetric space-times.
This reduces to the potential for the Schwarzschild solution when  or .
Thus the difference in the polarization of the approaching waves in this situation can be seen to be equivalent to the rotational parameter in the Kerr solution.
Taking the Ernst functions as (13.3) or (13.4), it can be shown that the boundary conditions described in Section 7.2 can only be satisfied if  and  It is then convenient to transform the null coordinates such that and .
Thus the form (13.2) is obtained uniquely from the Ernst function (13.3).
It also follows from this that the approaching waves necessarily contain impulsive components.
Expressions for the components of the Weyl tensor 0, 2 and 4 describing the wave and interaction components have been given by Chandrasekhar and Ferrari (1984), though in a notation which differs slightly from that adopted here.
However, it can still be clearly seen that this solution is a generalization of the Khan-Penrose solution in which the approaching impulsive waves have different polarization.
Apart from the initial impulsive waves on the boundaries  and , the interiors of regions II and III are flat.
It can also be seen that the singularity structure of this solution is the same as that of the Khan-Penrose solution.
There is a curvature singularity on the space-like surface  in region IV, and there  are fold singularities in regions II and III which are identical to those described in Section 8.3.
It may also be pointed out that Ernst (1986) has shown that  the Nutku-Halil solution can also be obtained using a double-Harrison (Bäcklund) transformation, with the seed metric being the isotropic Kasner metric.
The Panov solution
Panov (1979 b ) has applied the generation method of Geroch (1971), described in Section 12.3, to obtain a non-colinear solution from a colinear one.
In terms of the metric functions in (6.20), Panov started with a colinear solution U ,V , and M of (6.22) with .
He then worked with the Killing vector  which is (12.25) with  and .
This enabled him to put , and hence , and also from (12.30), and , where .
With these expressions, the metric components may be derived from (12.23), giving  (13.5) where, from (12.28),P 3 must satisfy  (13.6) or, more conveniently,.
(13.7)
It is worth pointing out that, if the initial Killing vector had been taken to be , which is (12.25) with  and , an equivalent transformation would have been obtained with  and .
This would have given an identical set of equations, but with V being replaced by -V , and P 3 by P 2 .
In terms of the Ernst formulation of the problem described in Chapter 11, the above transformation implies that, if Z is a real solution of (11.18), then a new complex solution is given by  (13.8) where  must satisfy the equations  (13.9)
Panov then took the initial solution to be the totally general solution of Szekeres (1972), which can be considered to be equivalent to the general solution given here by (10.16).
He has thus determined a general class of non-colinear solutions, and he was able to show that, when the appropriate boundary conditions have been applied, the approaching waves necessarily have variable polarization.
It has already been shown that the new solution obtained using a Geroch transformation will automatically satisfy the required boundary conditions if these are satisfied by the initial solution.
In this case, it can also be seen that the new and initial solutions have the same singularity structure.
The Chandrasekhar-Xanthopoulos solution
Chandrasekhar and Ferrari (1984) have shown that the associated Ernst function which is contained in the Nutku-Halil solution can be written as  (13.3), where .
Now, it is well known (see Chandrasekhar, 1983) that this is the Ernst potential that leads to the Kerr solution for stationary axisymmetric space-times.
However, as described in Section 12.4, Chandrasekhar and Ferrari have also shown that, for the colliding plane wave situation, the Ernst function may be regarded either (a) as containing the metric functions, or (b) as a potential for those functions.
When the Ernst function (13.3) is considered as containing the metric functions, it leads to the Nutku-Halil solution described above.
However, when the same function is considered as a potential, it then leads to the Kerr solution.
Thus part of the  Kerr space-time must also be considered as a solution of the colliding plane wave equations, though in this situation the coordinates have a different interpretation.
This alternative interpretation of part of the Kerr space-time has been described in detail by Chandrasekhar and Xanthopoulos (1986 b ).
Essentially it may be considered to have been derived from the Nutku-Halil solution using the Neugebauer-Kramer involution described in Section 12.4.
We start here with the Ernst potential given by , so that(13.10) where .
According to(12.36), the first metric function is then given by  (13.11) and, from (12.34),w is given by  (13.12) where  (13.13) With this,(13.12) becomes  (13. 14) which can immediately be integrated to give  (13.15) where c is an arbitrary constant.
Chandrasekhar and Xanthopoulos have chosen the constant of integration in (13.15) such that when .
The reason for this choice is associated with the convenience of aligning the coordinate directions with the shear axes on the surface  on which the two waves mutually focus each other.
Accordingly we set .
(13.16)
A variation of this constant is equivalent to making an Ehlers transformation as described in (12.16–18).
With (13.16), may now be written in either of the forms  (13.17)
For purposes of simplification, it is convenient to introduce the terms  (13.18)
In view of(12.43) and (13.1), in this case we must have .
(13.19)
The metric function M can also be obtained from (12.42) and (13.1), giving .
(13.20)
These expressions now complete all the metric functions contained in the line element (11.4), which may now be written as .
(13.21)
After some rearrangement, this may be written in the more convenient form .
(13.22) in which Y does not appear in a denominator.
In order to show that this is indeed the Kerr solution, we first relabel the parameters by putting  (13.23) which satisfies the condition  for arbitrary constants M and α.
It is also appropriate to introduce the new coordinates r and θ instead of t and z given by  (13.24) where it may be noticed that, using the previous notation,.
The remaining coordinates may also be transformed by putting  (13 25) It is also convenient to introduce the definitions .
(13.26) With these substitutions the line element (13.22) may then be written in the form  (13.27) which after rescaling d s is the standard form of the Kerr solution.
For this solution to describe the interaction region of colliding waves, the coordinates must satisfy the inequality .
With (13.24), this implies that  (13.28) which is satisfied only by the region of the Kerr space-time that is inside the ergo-sphere.
This is not unexpected, as this is the only region of Kerr space-time in which the Killing vectors are both space-like.
The plane on which the two waves collide is given by , or by  which is between the two horizons.
The hypersurface on which they mutually focus each other, which is given by  or , is here given by  which determines the horizons of the  Kerr solution.
Thus, the curvature singularity which usually occurs when , in this case, is replaced by a coordinate singularity which is normally interpreted as a horizon of the Kerr solution.
The components of the Weyl tensor inside region IV can be derived using (11.10) and have been evaluated by Chandrasekhar and Xanthopoulos.
The space-time is of algebraic type D and, in particular, it may be noted that  (13.29) The curvature is clearly non-singular as  except in the aligned case  (or ).
In this case only, the surface  corresponds to a curvature singularity.
In the interaction region t is a future pointing time-like coordinate.
It thus follows from (13.24) that r is also a future pointing time-like coordinate which increases from the collision at  to the outer horizon at .
In this case a possible further extension beyond the horizon would present no problems.
It may be noted, however, that if the signs of the expressions for t ,p and q in (13.24) and (13.23) are changed, the Kerr metric (13.27) is still obtained but the orientation of r is altered.
In this case, the collision at  is followed by the inner horizon at  and any extension would lead to a future time-like curvature singularity at .
The difference between these two solution has been further analysed by Hoenselaers and Ernst (1990).
It is the latter case that has been described by Chandrasekhar and Xanthopoulos (1986 b ) in which there is an extension beyond the horizon at  which contains a time-like singularity analogous to the ring singularity of the Kerr solution at .
Since this singularity is time-like, it would be missed by most observers.
In the other case, which has been given explicitly above, there is an analytic extension which is the asymptotically flat exterior Kerr solution.
It may be pointed out, however, that in both cases the extension beyond the horizon is not unique.
When considering the question of the character of the coordinate singularity at , Chandrasekhar and Xanthopoulos (1986 b ) have given a transformation by which it can be removed.
They have found it convenient to introduce a decreasing time-like coordinate given by .
The transformation  (13.30) then removes the coordinate singularity at , or .
This provides an analytic extension beyond the Cauchy horizon which is another part of Kerr space-time.
This extension, in one case, is followed by a time-like curvature singularity which corresponds to the source of the Kerr solution.
It may be seen that the singularity structure of this solution is very similar to that of the degenerate Ferrari-Ibañez solution described in detail in Section 10.5.
In fact this solution reduces to either of the two cases of the degenerate Ferrari-Ibañez solution in the limit as  which is the limit as the polarization of the approaching waves become aligned.
The non-singular case occurs when .
It may be noted that in this limit , the rotation of the Kerr solution vanishes, and the solution reduces to the same part of the Schwarzschild space-time as the degenerate Ferrari-Ibañez solution.
It is now appropriate to consider the extension of the solution into the prior regions I, II and III which describe the approaching waves that give rise to this particular interaction.
The metric (13.21) may easily be extended into region II simply by replacing both t and z by u .
It turns out to be convenient to make the coordinate transformation .
(13.31) With this, the line-element in region II takes the form  (13.32) where .
The line-element for region III is identical to (13.32) except that v replaces u .
Both these line-elements are then continuous with the Minkowski space (3.6) in region I.
The plane wave metric given by (13.32) has the single component of the curvature tensor given by .
(13.33) It may immediately be observed that the approaching waves have variable polarization except in the aligned limit .
They include an impulsive component and a step component.
As in the degenerate Ferrari-Ibañez solution, the singularity structure is thus complicated by the fact that the solution contains impulsive waves on the wave fronts  and  which form the boundaries of the interaction region.
The presence of these wave components introduces  additional distribution valued singularities at the points , and ,.
As described in Chapter 8, these point singularities ensure the existence of fold singularities on the surfaces  and  in regions II and III respectively.
The profiles for the approaching waves in both cases have been described in more detail by Hoenselaers and Ernst (1990).
They have shown that, in the case where the Cauchy horizon corresponds to the inner Kerr horizon, the amplitude diverges towards the fold singularity which is thus a non-scalar curvature singularity.
On the other hand, when the Cauchy horizon corresponds to the outer Kerr horizon, the amplitude decays towards a quasiregular fold singularity.
Other solutions
It may be noticed that the solutions presented in the previous two sections have been obtained using the generating techniques described in Sections 12.3 and 12.4 respectively.
Other techniques may also be used, both in isolation and in various combinations.
Since they involve the same Ernst equation, it is clear that all the solution generating techniques that have been developed for stationary axisymmetric space-times in recent years can also be applied to colliding plane wave situations.
A number of papers have recently been published which present new colliding wave solutions using some of these techniques, and it is likely that many more such papers will appear.
Most of these concentrate on a description of a particular technique and how it may be adapted to the colliding wave situation.
At present, however, there is less emphasis on the physical significance of the particular solution generated.
Nevertheless, solutions with a number of parameters have been obtained, and general classes of solutions have been defined.
Ideally, one would like to be able to specify the particular solution corresponding to an arbitrary set of initial conditions.
Such techniques are available in the axisymmetric case, and may soon be extended to the colliding wave situation.
The initial attempts at the solution of this problem are mentioned in the next chapter.
So far most of the explicit solutions that have been presented have involved impulsive wave components.
In the notation of (7.11), they have used .
Much less attention has been given to smooth-fronted waves of finite duration.
Some further general aspects of cases involving impulsive components have been clarified by Ferrari (1988).
In particular, it has been shown that the proper time between the collision and the subsequent singularity is  inversely proportional to the square root of the amplitudes of the impulsive components of the approaching waves.
This time is also affected by their relative polarization and is a minimum when the approaching waves are colinear.
This result also applies to solutions which contain a Cauchy horizon rather than a curvature singularity.
In addition, Ferrari has also shown that the shock waves which accompany the impulsive waves only affect the rate at which the Weyl scalars diverge on the singularity.
Having made these general remarks, we may now briefly review the new exact solutions that have been presented.
The generation techniques themselves will not be described in detail here.
First, there is the important class of solutions that has been obtained by Ferrari, Ibañez and Bruni (1987 a , b) using the inverse scattering method developed by Belinskii and Zakharov (1978, 1979) and Carr and Verdaguer (1983).
Using this method, they have obtained a two-parameter class of colliding wave solutions with non-aligned polarization.
This in fact is a generalization of the soliton solution of Ferrari and Ibañez (1987 b ) described in Sections 10.4 and 10.5.
The Ferrari-Ibañez-Bruni solution has been obtained using as seed the Kasner metric.
They utilize the Belinskii-Zakharov soliton technique with two real poles.
The resulting metric for region IV is singular on the space-like surface , except in a particular limiting case.
By extending the solution back into regions II and III, it can be seen that the approaching waves must have both an impulsive component and a step component with variable polarization.
The limiting case of the Ferrari-Ibañez-Bruni solution is particularly interesting.
It is of type D, and can be shown to be part of the Taub-NUT solution in the Taub region where there are two space-like Killing vectors.
The line element can be written in the form  (13.34) where p and q are constants satisfying .
It can immediately be seen that, when  and , this further reduces to the two colinear degenerate Ferrari-Ibañez solutions that have already been considered in Section 10.5.
The structure of this solution has been further examined by Ferrari and Ibañez (1988).
Ernst, García-Díaz and Hauser (1987 a ) have shown that an Ehlers transformation (12.13) applied to the Ernst function of the Nutku-Halil solution (13.3), together with a simple coordinate transformation, yields a non-colinear generalization of the Ferrari Ibañez soliton solution that was described in Section 10.4 but only with even integer values of the parameter α.
This generalization is in fact contained in the solution of Ferrari, Ibañez and Bruni (1987 a , b).
A further generalization extending the Ferrari-Ibañez-Bruni solution was reported by Ernst, García-Díaz and Hauser (1987 a , b), with a full derivation given in Ernst, García-Díaz and Hauser (1988).
This solution contains three arbitrary parameters.
In stating this solution, it is convenient first to define the function  (13.35) where a , α and β are the arbitrary parameters, and where .
(13.36) With this definition, the Ernst function for this new solution may be written as  (13.37)
When , this reduces to the Nutku-Halil solution.
With , one obtains the Kerr-NUT solution with α being the NUT parameter.
The subcase with  and  becomes the Schwarzschild-NUT space-time.
Transforming (13.37) using the Neugebauer Kramer involution produces another three-parameter family of solutions with the alternative Ernst function given by  (13.38) With , this reduces to the Chandrasekhar-Xanthopoulos solution.
Ernst, García-Díaz and Hauser (1987 b ) have also found a simpler realization  of the Geroch group of transformations relating colliding wave solutions.
With this, they have obtained a generalization of the  above solution in the case when .
A further generalization of the  solution is also obtained using a Neugebauer-Kramer involution.
It was pointed out by Ernst (1986) that the Nutku Halil solution can be derived from the isotropic () Kasner metric by applying a double-Harrison (Bäcklund) transformation.
The Kerr space-time of the Chandrasekhar-Xanthopoulos solution can also be derived from Minkowski space using a double-Harrison transformation.
It therefore seemed reasonable that other colliding wave solutions may be generated by applying double-Harrison transformations to other Kasner metrics.
This procedure has indeed been successful.
It was used by Ernst, García-Díaz and Hauser (1988) to determine the solution described above in (13.35) to (13.38).
The effect of a double-Harrison transformation can be deduced by any number of competing techniques.
Naturally, however, Ernst, García-Díaz and Hauser preferred to use the so-called Hauser-Ernst homogeneous Hilbert problem approach (see also Ernst 1988).
Finally, it may be mentioned that Hassan, Feinstein and Manko (1990) have recently obtained another particular solution describing the non-colinear case using the generating technique of Gutsunaev and Manko (1988) as described here in (12.56) and (15.57).
Further solutions could easily be obtained using this method.
THE INITIAL-VALUE PROBLEM
The approach to finding exact solutions that has been taken so far has involved initially solving the field equations in the interaction region IV and then investigating the conditions under which these solutions can be considered as the result of collisions of plane waves.
In this way, resulting solutions are found first and the initial conditions are obtained subsequently.
In this chapter it is appropriate to return to the original problem of specifying the initial data and then attempting to find the solution that determines the subsequent development.
The initial data
The problem that is under consideration is the collision of two plane waves in a flat background.
It is assumed that the two approaching waves are both known, and it is required to find the exact solution which describes the interaction following the collision.
This problem has been formulated in earlier chapters.
It has been found convenient to divide space-time into the four regions as illustrated in Figure 3.1.
It has also been demonstrated that the metric in the interaction region IV may be taken in the form of the Szekeres line element (6.20) which involves the four functions ,, and  satisfying equations (6.22).
One of these equations can be integrated to give .
(14.1)
In this approach, it is assumed that the initial conditions are determined by the functions  and  which represents the wave in region II as it reaches the boundary , and by  which represents the wave in region III as it reaches the boundary .
This is now a typical case of the characteristic initial-value problem.
In practice, however, things are a little more complicated since it is normal to make use of the transformation (6.7) to put  in these initial regions.
In this case the approaching waves are each described by three functions either of u or of v satisfying a single equation which is either (6.22c) or (6.22b).
The difficulty arises because, as described in previous chapters, it is convenient to use f and g , or transformations of them, as coordinates in  the interaction region.
Accordingly, it is therefore more convenient to use the transformation (6.7) in the initial regions to put  (14.2) where the constants  and  are essential in order to retain the continuity properties of the functions f and g across the boundaries  and .
These constants feature prominently in the junction conditions as described in Section 7.2.
They are determined by the character of the wavefronts of the approaching waves.
In this case, the data specifying the initial waves is now given by  on , and by  on .
In addition, since the function M is essentially determined up to a removable constant for any V and W by equations (6.22b, c), the initial data is effectively described by specifying only the metric functions V and W on the boundaries  and .
It is also appropriate to re-express these as functions of f and g .
The remaining problem is now to integrate the main field equations to determine the functions V and W in the interaction region subject to their specification on the initial null boundaries.
The colinear case
For the case when the approaching waves have aligned linear polarization it is possible to put  everywhere, and the main field equation for V may be expressed in terms of different coordinates in any of the forms (9.3),(10.2),(10.11),(10.60) or (10.71).
At this point we may take f and g as coordinates and consider the equation in the form (10.2) which may be rewritten as .
(14.3) This equation must now be solved for  with initial data defining the approaching waves given by  and .
It is also possible to scale the approaching waves such that at the point of collision , and .
Equation (14.3) is an Euler-Poisson Darboux equation whose solution may be expressed as a line integral.
As originally pointed out in this context by Szekeres (1972) and later repeated by Yurtsever (1988 c ), since (14.3) is a linear hyperbolic equation, it may also be solved explicitly using Riemann's method.
According to this method, we consider the adjoint equation  (14,4) where R is a Riemann-Green function satisfying the boundary conditions .
(14.5)
Figure 14.1 The interaction region IV is represented in f ,g coordinates by the region inside the triangle shown.
The sides  and  are the II-IV and III-IV boundaries respectively, and the focusing singularity occurs on the line .
The solution for  may be obtained at any point P by integrating round the rectangle PNML.
By using Green's theorem the integral of  over the rectangle PNML indicated in Figure 14.1 can be related to its line integral around the boundary.
In this way it can be shown that, for any arbitrary point  within the interaction region, the function V is given by  (14.6) provided that R satisfies (14.4) and (14.5) and that .
A specific Riemann Green function which satisfies (14.4) and (14.5) is given by  (14.7) where  is the Legendre function of order -½.
By substituting this and the initial expressions for V on the boundaries ML and MN into (14.6), an explicit integral for V in the interaction region is obtained.
This approach of using Riemann's method has been generalized by Xanthopoulos (1986) to include the collision of null fluids coupled with plane gravitational waves.
This particular situation will be discussed later in Section 20.2.
At this point, we may simply note that the method involved is essentially the same.
Although the method described above does give an explicit integral expression for V , in practice it is extremely difficult to evaluate this integral for arbitrary initial data.
Thus, it does not really provide a viable method for generating analytic solutions for any given analytic description of the approaching waves.
Another problem with the method of Riemann is that it is not practically possible to generalize it to the case for non-colinear collisions.
The method only applies to linear hyperbolic equations and, if the polarization of the approaching waves is not aligned, the field equations describing the resulting interaction are non-linear.
In view of this, Hauser and Ernst (1989 a , b, 1990) have developed an alternative method which can be generalized to the non-colinear situation.
The method employed by Hauser and Ernst (1989 a ) is first to find a one-parameter family of basic solutions by means of a suitable separation of variables and then to express the  final solution as a linear super-position of these basic solutions.
In fact their approach is based on the solution (10.8), which may be re-expressed in the form  (14.8) for suitable functions  and  which must depend on the initial data.
An interesting feature of the method is that the functions  and  are obtained in terms of the prescribed initial data by solving generalized versions of Abel's integral equation for the tautochrone problem of classical particle mechanics.
Generalized versions of Abel's integral equation are required because f' (u)and g' (v)are zero on the boundaries  and  respectively.
Full details of the method have been described by Hauser and Ernst (1989 a ).
However, the techniques are still difficult to use in practice for arbitrary initial data.
Hauser and Ernst (1989 b ) have also reformulated the initial-value problem for the colinear case as a Hilbert problem in a complex plane in two different ways.
They have presented solutions of both forms of the Hilbert problem and shown that each of these agrees with the solution that is obtained by the method referred to above (Hauser and Ernst, 1989 a ).
The non-colinear case
Hauser and Ernst (1989 a , b, 1990) have developed the techniques mentioned at the end of the previous section to deal specifically with the case when the polarization of the approaching waves is not aligned.
The initial data have already been described in Section 14.1.
It was also pointed out that, for the colinear case, it was convenient to rescale the approaching waves such that at the point of collision.
For the non-colinear case, Hauser and Ernst have found it convenient to work with the complex function Z defined by (11.5) and to use the transformation (12.20) which consists of a rotation and rescaling to put  at the point of collision when  and .
For the colinear case the main field equation (14.3) is linear.
However, for the non-colinear case this is replaced by two non-linear equations, or by the complex Ernst equation.
The non-linearity of this equation introduces considerable difficulty into any attempt at solving the general problem.
Hauser and Ernst (1990) have developed a method for considering the initial-value problem for general colliding plane gravitational waves.
They have achieved this by replacing the usual initial-value problem in terms of the Ernst equation by an equivalent 2 × 2 matrix homogeneous Hilbert problem in the complex plane.
In the case when the polarization of the approaching waves is colinear, this approach reduces to the relatively simple one-dimensional Hilbert problem that was previously considered (Hauser and Ernst, 1989 b ).
A detailed description of the method developed, however, is beyond the scope of this book and interested readers are directed to the original papers.
In spite of these advances, there is strong evidence that the general solution of the initial-value problem for the non-colinear case is not expressible in a finite closed form.
In addition, practical methods for solving the matrix homogeneous Hilbert problem for particular non-colinear cases still need to be developed.
Clearly this is an area where considerable further work is required.
COLLIDING ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES: THE BELL-SZEKERES SOLUTION
In an important paper, Bell and Szekeres (1974) gave an exact solution which describes the collision and subsequent interaction of two electromagnetic plane waves.
This solution, which appears to be remarkably simple, will be described in this chapter.
Other exact solutions describing colliding electromagnetic waves will be described in Chapters 16 and 17, after more powerful techniques have been developed.
The Bell-Szekeres solution
Bell and Szekeres have considered a very simple situation involving a collision of two step electromagnetic waves.
Prior to the collision, the waves may be described by the familiar line element (4.15).
In regions I and II, this takes the form  (15.1) and the step wave is given by .
The opposing wave with  may be described in an identical way with the null coordinate u replaced by v , and a different space-like coordinate replacing r .
The two electromagnetic field components in the initial regions I, II and III are taken to be .
(15.2) The fact that both of these expressions are real simultaneously indicates that the polarization of the two electromagnetic waves is aligned.
In addition, they have identical step profiles.
The relative amplitudes a and b may, of course, both be equated to unity when convenient.
The components of the Weyl tensor are initially all zero.
By this stage, we are familiar with the fact that it is appropriate to transform the metrics in all regions into Rosen form.
Accordingly, the line elements in the initial regions may be taken in the forms of (4.19) and (4.20), namely  (15.3) The initial-value problem is now well set, and it remains to find the unique solution in the interaction region.
The field equations for colliding electromagnetic waves have already been obtained in Chapter 6.
In terms of the metric functions of the Szekeres line element (6.20), the gravitational field equations for the interaction region take the form (6.22), and Maxwell's equations are given by (6.21).
The appropriate boundary conditions for this situation have been described in Chapter 7.
As usual, it may be noted that (6.22a) can immediately be integrated to give  (15 4) where f and g are arbitrary decreasing functions in the interaction region.
From the junction conditions it can be seen that, in this case, these functions necessarily take the forms:.
(15.5) The solution of the complete set of equations (6.21,22) given by Bell and Szekeres is .
(15.6)
It can be seen that these functions satisfy the required O'Brien-Synge boundary conditions.
Thus the line element in the interaction region IV is .
(15.7)
This line element is in fact one form of the Bertotti-Robinson solution (Bertotti 1959, Robinson 1959), which is known to be conformally flat.
The coordinate transformation  (15.8) transforms the line element (15.7) into the more familiar form .
(15 9)
Halilsoy (1987) has considered an application of the transformation  to the above solution.
However, this does not lead to any new results that are of physical significance.
The structure of the solution
The above solution describes the collision of two step electromagnetic waves whose polarization vectors are aligned.
This follows from the fact that  is real, and .
As has been pointed out above, the solution inside the interaction region IV is conformally flat.
However, as Bell and Szekeres have shown, there are necessarily discontinuities in the derivatives of the metric function V across the initial boundaries of this region.
These manifest themselves as the impulsive gravitational waves  (15.10) which may be considered to be generated by the collision.
It is in fact a general feature of colliding electromagnetic plane waves that gravitational waves are always generated by the collision.
This can easily be demonstrated by considering the field equations (6.22d, e).
In the interaction region, and  are necessarily both non-zero.
It follows that V and W can not both remain constant.
Thus, the congruences tangent to both waves must begin to shear, and it can be seen from (6.23) that the components of the Weyl tensor  and , and possibly  will necessarily appear.
In this case, the discontinuity in the electromagnetic components causes impulsive gravitational waves to be generated.
It can also be shown that smooth-fronted electromagnetic waves would generate smooth-fronted or step gravitational waves that  would persist through the interaction region.
It may also be observed from (15.10) that difficulties occur at the points .
At first sight, it would appear that curvature singularities occur at these points (Matzner and Tipler, 1984).
However, curvature tensors of this type can be interpreted as distributions (see Geroch and Traschen, 1987) and, in this case, the standard definition of a curvature singularity in terms of unboundedness in a  parallelly propagated frame is inapplicable.
The global structure of this solution has been analysed in detail by Clarke and Hayward (1989).
They have confirmed that, in regions II and III, the surfaces on which  and  respectively behave as ‘fold’ singularities similar to those of the Khan-Penrose solution described in Section 8.2.
Initially, the most surprising feature of the Bell-Szekeres solution was that a space-like curvature singularity does not occur in region IV.
In this case, the surface on which , which is here given by , turns out to be merely a coordinate singularity since the curvature tensor is clearly bounded.
Bell and Szekeres have demonstrated how this singularity can be removed by considering the following coordinate transformation:(15.11) where .
With this, the line element (15.6) becomes  (15.12) which is clearly regular when .
In order to retain the one-to-one correspondence, it is appropriate initially to restrict the Bell-Szekeres coordinate x to the range .
The coordinates X and Y are restricted by , where the boundary  contains the space-like plane on which the collision occurs.
It has been shown by Clarke and Hayward (1989) that region IV is part of a space-time that is regular apart from two covering-space singularities that occur when .
These are points on the boundary of region IV where it joins with the limits of regions II and III.
At these points, which are on the polar axis  and  in the Bertotti-Robinson form of the metric (15.9),.
With the above transformation, each interval of the coordinate x of length 2 π/; c corresponds to a circular region in the X ,Y plane with the origin removed and cut along the line .
Neighbouring regions of x are joined together along these cuts to form a surface which continuously winds around the origin.
The origin of the X ,Y plane thus corresponds to a singularity of a quasiregular covering-space type.
It is also sometimes convenient (Clarke and Hayward, 1989) to make the further coordinate transformation  (15.13) With this, the line element (15.12) takes the alternative form of the Bertotti-Robinson line element  (15.14) Region IV is now described by the line element (15.14) with the coordinate ranges given by  (15.15) This is joined to regions II and III across the surfaces .
(15.16)
Clarke and Hayward (1989) have also shown that the Bell-Szekeres solution is extendable to the future through the surface , but the extension is not unique because of the presence of the singularities.
They have further suggested two possible extensions which will be described in the next section.
It is also somewhat remarkable that the global structure of the Bell-Szekeres solution, as described by Clarke and Hayward (1989), is very similar to that of the collision of an impulsive gravitational wave with a null shell of matter, as described by Babala (1987).
This will be discussed in Section 19.3.
Chandrasekhar and Xanthopoulos (1988) have conducted a thorough perturbation analysis of this particular solution.
Throughout the interaction region subsequent to the collision they have obtained a complete set  of bounded normal modes that are expressed in terms of spin-weighted spherical harmonics.
These modes exhibit a behaviour of ever-increasing frequency as the Cauchy horizon is approached.
Chandrasekhar and Xanthopoulos (1988) have also considered perturbations in the initial regions which contain the approaching waves.
For the approaching wave in region II which propagates along the null line ,, they have shown that v -independent perturbations are not permitted to all orders, while all the v -dependent perturbations exhibit strong divergences along the ‘fold’ singularity.
Unfortunately, these perturbations can not be joined continuously to those of the interaction region.
It is therefore not possible to consider the effects of these perturbations subsequent to the collision.
Extensions of the solution
In the Bell-Szekeres solution, it has been shown that the hypersurface  on which the opposing waves mutually focus each other is a Cauchy horizon rather than a curvature singularity.
It is therefore appropriate to consider possible extensions to this solution through the horizon, even though any such extension will not be unique.
Two possible extensions have been given by Clarke and Hayward (1989).
One natural extension of region IV is simply the future extension of the region as described by the line element (15.14).
This is achieved by extending the coordinate range to  (15.17) where .
In this extension, the waves cross and focus.
The subsequent space-time is unchanging.
Another equally natural extension of region IV is obtained by noting that the line element (15.14) admits a reflection symmetry  about the hyperplane  (or  about ).
Thus, there is an extension in which region IV is extended as far as  and is then followed by the time reverse of the entire solution.
In this extension, the waves cross, mutually focus each other, re-expand and then separate leaving Minkowski space between them to the future.
This situation is illustrated in Figure 15.1 in terms of the original null coordinates and the line elements (15.3) and (15.7).
Other apparent extensions of the Bell-Szekeres solution have been suggested by Gürses and Halilsoy (1982) in which the approaching electromagnetic waves consist of a sequence of steps.
The step lengths, however, have to be double the distance to the fold singularities.
Thus, these  solutions necessarily extend the space-time through the covering space singularities and can not, therefore, be considered as appropriate solutions for colliding plane waves.
In all these solutions the space-time can only be extended uniquely up to the fold singularities in regions II and III and the surface in region IV on which .
It must therefore be concluded that the Gürses-Halilsoy extensions are not physically significant.
Figure 15.1 An extension of the Bell-Szekeres space-time.
Regions marked I are flat.
Regions marked II and III contain electromagnetic waves with , and  respectively, having metrics given by (15.3).
There are impulsive gravitational waves along the boundaries of region IV, which has metric (15.7).
A non-colinear collision
In the Bell-Szekeres solution, the polarization of the approaching electromagnetic waves is aligned.
It is appropriate now to consider how this solution may be generalized to include the case when the polarization is not aligned.
In the approaching waves a rotation of the polarization is expressed by a rotation of the components Φ 2 or Φ in the complex plane.
The metrics in both regions are unaltered, since a null electromagnetic field  is defined by the metric only up to a constant duality rotation.
Thus, to extend the Bell-Szekeres solution, the same initial conditions are given except that the component  becomes complex and, from (6.22e),W must become non-zero in the interaction region.
A solution presented by Griffiths (1985) satisfying this condition may be written in the form  (15.18) where  (15.19) The relative polarization angle of the two waves prior to the collision is given by α.
It may be noticed that the expression for U here is equivalent to those of (15.4,5) and (15.6).
The common multiple 2 has been inserted so that this solution can be more directly related to the Bell-Szekeres solution to which it reduces when .
It can be shown that this solution has exactly the same properties as the aligned Bell-Szekeres solution.
It is conformally flat everywhere except at the boundaries of the interaction region where there are impulsive gravitational waves that may be considered to be generated by the collision.
These are given by  (15.20)
According to a theorem of Tariq and Tupper (1974), this new solution must as be the Bertotti-Robinson space-time in a different coordinate system.
In fact it can be obtained from the Bell-Szekeres line element (15.7) by the simple rotation  (15.21)
Thus, the gravitational field in this case is identical to that of the Bell-Szekeres solution, as may have been expected.
In the collision of plane  electromagnetic waves with non-aligned polarization, it must therefore be concluded that the dynamics remains unaltered.
It is only the form of the metric in the interaction region that needs to be modified to that given in this section.