

Words, Deeds, and Doubts: Interpretation
The institutions of Roman civil law were bound up with the rigid observance of strict form; trusts were not, the textbooks say.
Legacies had to be disposed in set words; trusts on the other hand were entirely free of form, they could be established in any words in any language, and they could even be created by gestures (nutus ).
This stark contrast is not invention, but it is none the less unhistorical.
It is worth seeing whether a historical development can be detected.
While later law, for example, once familiar with trusts may have practised great toleration, if we look back to the origins of Roman trusts and their tentative beginnings with the rise of a consular jurisdiction, it does not seem at all plausible that absolutely any expression or gesture would immediately have been accepted.
Although the sources are not profligate with information, it is possible to reach a more differentiated picture.
That is the first aim of this chapter.
The second is to place the interpretation of trusts in the context of Roman legal interpretation as a whole.
Verba and voluntas are words of dread in writing of interpretation in Roman private law: how far did the Roman jurists interpret according to the letter, how far according to the spirit, and how far according to the spirit as embodied in the letter?
These questions are difficult, but they are not vain and cannot be avoided.
So to begin with some remarks on the words which created trusts in Roman law.
DIRECT DISPOSITIONS: WORDING
If trusts, as is often said, depended on the testator's intention and little else, then to launch into a discussion of the wordings they employed may well seem perverse.
There is, however, a good deal of information in the texts about the wordings suitable for trusts.
Why do words receive so much consideration in dispositions widely held to be free of form?
As often, the proper place to begin is with a text of Gaius.
These appear to be the valid wordings for trusts which are in most common use: ‘I request’, ‘I ask’, ‘I wish’, and ‘I entrust’, which are individually just as effective as if they were all used together.
Gaius claims no more than that these four expressions are typical; his list is not exhaustive.
The expressions have certain things in common.
Clearly, they are all in the form ‘I, A, ask you, B, to give something to C’.
The first and perhaps most important point is that these words do not attribute property directly either to the trustee (B) or to the beneficiary (C).
They are not direct dispositions in favour of anybody.
The point applies as much to B as to C. An example may help: A has a farm, B is his heir, and C is the beneficiary of a trust of the farm; that is, B is asked to give it to C. The trust disposition makes neither B nor C owner of the farm.
B has acquired ownership through a different disposition (institution as heir; although a legacy would have done just as well).
His right in rem has been created outside the trust relationship.
C, on the other hand, has no right in rem at all.
At civil law, in fact, he has no right in personam either.
But the special procedure under which trusts are enforced gives him a right against B. The second point is that the words take the form of a request to the trustee to transfer property to the beneficiary.
Evidence earlier than Gaius is not extensive.
Yet what remains of first-century jurists in the form of quotations from their works fits well with Gaius' account.
Only the four terms he  mentions are found, and rogo is distinctly the most popular.
No other wordings are found at all.
Is this significant?
There is good reason to argue that it is.
The reaction to arguments from silence is usually noisy vituperation, and rightly so.
Yet the trust was a new legal institution, developed only in Augustus' reign.
It is not likely that it was at once allowed to develop in complete freedom, when that was a characteristic foreign to the Roman legal tradition.
A more tentative evolution towards greater breadth and flexibility would be expected.
And this is not just an a priori supposition but finds support in the texts.
Gaius' list was not exhaustive, and another source too provides confirmation that by his day other wordings were regarded as setting up trusts.
A trust left in the form ‘I demand’ or ‘I desire that you give’is also valid; and so is one ‘I wish my estate to be Titius'’or ‘I know that you will make over my estate to Titius’.
Neratius was writing in the reign of Trajan, in the early second century.
He notes that the wordings he cites also (et ) constitute trusts.
Presumably he means in addition to the words already widely accepted.
There is just one problem: did Neratius write this text?
The most recent study of Neratius' regulae has argued that while this passage is unobjectionable, the work as a whole was not written by Neratius, but rather excerpted principally from his works and probably published in the early fourth century.
There is substance in this argument; and it is  particularly revealing (as already noted by Voigt) that the work follows the scheme used by Gaius, which otherwise does not feature in juristic writings.
We cannot therefore be sure that the passage reflects the law at Neratius' time.
It is worth looking more closely at the expressions he cites.
The status of the text is unclear: is it providing only arbitrary examples?
Or rulings on doubtful cases?
There seems to be no particular difficulty with exigo , unless it is that it takes the form not of a request (like the wordings in Gaius) but of an instruction.
Two of the expressions cited, however, are more problematic: ‘I wish my estate to be Titius'’, no doubt on the ground that it contains no words of transfer such as restituere ; scio , because it is not a request to pass on property, but an assertion of a conviction (and who is to say whether that is justified?).
Neratius admits it none the less.
These two expressions leave doubts as to the testator's intentions.
As for desidero , it is hard to see any difficulty, for it means quite simply ‘I desire’, and is in exactly the same mould as traditional expressions such as volo , ‘I wish’.
This looks like a case of a random example; for the only problem it could create would be by failing to fall within a category of admissible wordings.
That, however, is not possible, for too much convincing evidence opposes the suggestion that there was any such category.
The question recurs in a text of Ulpian.
But first comes Scaevola.
‘I wish one hundred to be given to my freedman Pamphilus, in addition to what I have left him in codicils.
I know, Pamphilus, that everything  I leave you will pass to my sons, since I have noted well your affection towards them.’
I ask whether with the above words he has entrusted to Pamphilus that after his death he should make over a hundred to the sons of the deceased.
He replied that on the facts as stated it did not appear, at least so far as the testator's words were concerned, that it was entrusted to Pamphilus that he should make over a hundred.
But since it is quite unfair that the intention of the deceased should be deceived by a freedman, he ought to make over to the testator's sons the hundred left to him, as in a similar case our late Emperor Marcus also made this ruling.
This is a curious case.
The testator has made various bequests (of what kind we are not told) in favour of Pamphilus.
In the words cited he then establishes a trust of one hundred in his favour.
This is followed by the statement that the testator ‘knows’ that everything Pamphilus receives from him will pass to the testator's sons at Pamphilus' death.
The curiosity is this: the question put is whether there is a trust on Pamphilus to make over the hundred after his death.
Since the relevant words are ‘I know, Pamphilus, that everything I leave you will pass to my sons…’, the question can be broken down into two parts: do these words amount to a trust at all?
Do they amount to a trust of the hundred?
The oddity is that the jurist seems to deal only with the second question, which is of much less complexity than the first.
The answer to the second question must surely be that if there is a trust at all(which is the first question), then because of the word omnia it is a trust of everything Pamphilus receives.
The real difficulty is surely whether scio raises a trust at all.
This oddity seems most readily explicable in practical terms: probably the heirs of Pamphilus were holding back only on making over the hundred; as a result only the hundred came into issue; and because of Scaevola's proclivity to answering questions concisely (a point to which we will return) and ‘on the facts as stated’, the circumstances of the rest of the property were simply left aside.
The real problem here, then, is the use of the word scio .
Does the expression of the testator's conviction that property will be passed to his sons amount to the creation of a trust in their favour?
The difficulty resides in the fact that the expression chosen does not satisfy the standard pattern of a request that the  trustee benefit the beneficiary.
Quite what is decided in this case is obscure.
The text pronounces that so far as the words are concerned no trust is created, but then goes on to give a moral reason for holding one to have been created; it ends by referring to a similar decision of Marcus Aurelius.
Interpolation has frequently been asserted here.
It is true that the text departs from the normal format of Scaevola's digesta , in which his favourite expression secundum ea quae proponerentur is regularly followed by only a couple of words.
The text does, however, refer to a rescript, and it has been pointed out that oddities in the structure and language may be due to incorporating that.
All the same, the text makes no claim to be citing this rescript, and it is very curious that the jurist should first limit his remarks to the facts as stated and then go on to limit them to the words quoted; especially since the facts stated amount to little more than those words.
These considerations make it likely that the words quidem quantum ad verba testatoris pertinet are interpolated.
What about the moralizing?
Evidently there is something odd about the expression imperator noster divus Marcus , for noster is generally used of the current emperor, and divus of course only of a deceased one.
The best explanation of their incompatibility still seems to be Mommsen's:divus Marcus is a later gloss.
But difficulties in the last sentence go deeper than this.
The beginning of the text is evidently concerned with interpreting the testator's intention: when he said scio did he really mean to bind his freedman to perform a trust?
The last sentence, however, sets out from the presumption that the testator's intention is clear, but might be defeated because he has used inadequate words.
In this respect it is incompatible both with what precedes it and more generally with other evidence of classical interpretation.
Since there is no motive for Justinian to have inspired the addition of these words, it seems best to suppose that the whole sentence is a later addition inspired  by a rescript of Marcus Aurelius.
If scio was not thought adequate at classical law, the reason can be only that it did not make sufficiently clear that the testator intended a trustee to be legally obliged to make property over to a beneficiary.
The trustee could with good reason contest the beneficiary's claim, and might stand a chance of success.
This suggests that to the criteria for trust wording a further one should be added: that the words be not only ‘mediate’(in the sense that they do not attribute property directly to the beneficiary) but that they should also unequivocally attest the testator's intention that a trustee should be under a legal obligation to a beneficiary.
This qualification is important: it was not enough for the testator to have a general intention that certain property should pass to a certain person.
Instead the jurists look for evidence that he intended a legal obligation to arise and a legal sanction to secure the carrying-out of his intention.
Other texts confirm this.
Similarly Emperor Marcus answered by rescript that the words in which a testator had provided that ‘he did not doubt that whatever his wife had received she would restore to his children’ should be treated as a trust.
The rescript is of great utility in ensuring that the honour of a happily concluded marriage and indeed the faith of common children should not deceive a father who had thought better of the mother: therefore the emperor, most provident and most devoted to the cause of law, when he observed that the words of a trust were lacking, ruled by rescript that this expression should be treated as a trust.
‘I do not doubt’ are the words that cause the problem here.
It is decided that they should be treated as creating a trust; the liberality of interpretation is due to a rescript.
It is essential to note that there are no words constitutive of a trust, as the text explicitly states: instead they must be construed.
This tells us two things: there is a conception of what amounts to trust wording; but there is a willingness to depart from it in certain circumstances.
Once again the problem is that it is not evident that the testator intended a legal obligation to be created.
Papinian, like Scaevola, is concerned about the lack of clarity in the words.
But the imperial rescript tramples such considerations under foot.
The question is in what circumstances this liberality might be appropriate.
It is striking that Papinian (if it is he) emphasizes the value of the decision only in terms of its effect on the family expectations of father and children as to how mother will behave.
He does not say anything about its being most helpful to be allowed to create trusts using the words ‘I do not doubt’.
Both the cases of Scaevola and Papinian, it is fair to assume, were problematic.
The emperor, however, was not inclined to intervene for his own amusement, but to take cases which came to him through the hierarchy of appeal.
If words such as scio and non dubito in the second half of the second century were not regarded as showing clear intention to set up trusts, might they have been after these cases?
On the whole this does not seem likely.
The most persuasive piece of evidence here is the language used by Papinian in discussing the rescript.
Rescripts were often penned for a case, and not for the world at large.
Of course they had some value, in an informal way, as precedents, but the precedent here might easily be not that non dubito is now admissible, but that some relaxation of wording is allowed where family property expectations are involved.
The remaining evidence is all later than this, ranging from late classical law (Ulpian) to the fourth century, the early post-classical period of the Epitome of Ulpian and the sententiae of Paul.
A trust is set up even in this way: ‘I want you to give’‘I desire you to give’‘I believe you will give’.
The wordings used for trusts are essentially these: ‘I entrust’, ‘I request’, ‘I wish to be given’, and so on.
We can establish a trust in these words: ‘I ask’, ‘I request’, ‘I wish’, ‘I commit’, ‘I beseech’‘I want’, ‘I enjoin’.
‘I desire’ and ‘I order’also create a valid trust.
‘I leave’, however, and ‘I commend’ give rise to no action for a trust.
The text of Ulpian raises two points.
It is easy to see why credo , ‘I believe’, should be a dubious case: belief does seem to leave something to the discretion of a trustee, and there may well be doubt whether a rather tentative expression of belief sufficiently expresses a testator's intention that a trust should be set up.
But, as with Neratius, it is again surprising that words like cupio or opto , which are both entirely in the traditional mould of requesting the trustee to do something, should have to be mentioned at all.
They raise no interpretative difficulties of the kind that credo may do.
It seems likely that here, and in the text of Neratius, abbreviation has caused the problems by obscuring the context.
Ulpian's work —institutiones — is for beginners; Neratius' is a collection of legal rules.
Both, perhaps, have selected more or less random examples to illustrate the flexibility of trust wordings.
The interest of UE is simply that it follows Gaius, and keeps to the basic wordings.
PS is an altogether more elaborate case.
It appears to establish three categories: the first contains wordings generally agreed to be acceptable, the second wordings which appear to have been at some time problematic but are now acceptable, and the third wordings which remain inadmissible.
Yet there are some oddities about the words which fall within each category.
To start with, it is worth noting that the list is  not exhaustive, in spite of its superficial comprehensiveness: the word fideicommitto is not listed.
Two other oddities are worth noting: first, the list does not confine itself to words of ‘request’, but includes imperative words such as impero (evidently a doubtful case) as well as mando , which is placed in the ‘normal’ category, and does in fact turn up in several other texts; second,relinquo and commendo are excluded: why?
Both of these words which are said to be inadequate fail to satisfy one or other of the criteria outlined for a wording to establish a trust.
Commendo is not clearly intended as a disposition at law, and the texts are clear on its inadequacy to set up a trust.
The reason for this is traditional: Roman friends were often called on to look after property or to care for members of a family.
In this case one might ‘commend’ something to somebody's care.
The idea was, quite simply, that a person or property should be protected; so that if one commended a slave or a piece of property no transfer of ownership was intended.
The probable origin of the trust in the commendatio made it important to continue to distinguish clearly between cases where it was intended to confer a benefit and cases where the intention was merely to ask the favour of safe-keeping.
For this reason it was simplest to have a rule that commendo did not raise a trust.
Relinquo is a different matter.
It fails to establish a trust not because it is unclear, but because it does not conform to the pattern for a trust: it is a direct not a mediate wording.
To say ‘I leave’(relinquo ) is to attribute property immediately to the person of whom it is said, rather than to vest it in a trustee.
If a direct word is suitable to establish a legacy, it will do so.
If not, it amounts only to an invalid legacy.
In no case can it set up a trust.
These are the only texts which list the words suitable to  establish trusts.
They are surprisingly tentative.
It is clear that there was a steady expansion of the words used for trusts, from the basic four expressions used in the first century to the ten or so in use by the end of the third century.
It is curious, however, that jurists seem to have been slow and cautious in proposing new wordings.
The bolder innovation comes direct by rescript from the emperor or else is a result of his influence.
Apart from these texts there are a few which are revealing for the opposite reason: they deny the existence of a trust where it might have been expected.
There are three of these.
A mother had instituted her sons heirs and added: ‘Let them not for any reason alienate the lands which will come to them from my estate, but let them conserve them for their successors and give each other reciprocal guarantees to that effect.’
It was asked on these words whether the lands should be regarded as left by trust.
He replied that nothing had been put forward concerning a trust.
The words quoted from the will have nothing to do with a trust, according to Scaevola.
As often we are at the mercy of his laconic whim: why is it that no trust is involved?
The testatrix has made it amply clear that she wishes the land to pass from her sons to their descendants.
But by what means?
We are not told who the petitioner is.
But it seems most likely that it is either a potential beneficiary of this disposition, or one of the testatrix's sons who is attempting to clarify his rights with respect to the land.
The question is whether the prohibition on alienating the land followed by the exhortation to keep it for descendants amounts to a trust.
Scaevola refuses to interpret it in this way.
Apparently the intention of the testatrix to bind her sons to performance of a trust in favour of their descendants is not sufficiently clear.
A similar case is cited by Ulpian.
A trust cannot be claimed on the basis of the words ‘See that you look after the fields, and so it will come about that my son may give you your sons.’
The disposition appears to be in favour of freedmen whose sons are still slaves.
The testator hints that if they do a good job they may expect as their reward that their sons will be made over into their power.
Ulpian says a trust cannot be claimed.
It is necessary to distinguish two issues here: whether a trust has been created; whether it is actionable.
It is up to the testator's son to decide whether he is sufficiently satisfied to do what his father suggested.
So his discretion is involved.
Yet in Roman law discretion is regularly interpreted not on the subjective criterion of an individual's own opinion but on the objective standard of what a good man would think in the circumstances.
On those grounds it ought to be possible to argue that, if a trust has been created, it is actionable if the standard of care shown by the fathers was adequate in the judgment of a good man.
Ulpian does not make this point.
It seems necessary to conclude that in his view the words set up no trust.
What is wrong with them?
They express the giving of the sons as a consequence of the satisfactory tending of the land.
We can see what the testator had in mind.
But that is far from saying that the testator's son is to be legally obliged to carry it out.
The words ‘I ask you, son, to care for the lands which will come to you with your usual diligence and look after them so that they may come to your sons’, although they do not sufficiently express a trust but advice rather than obligation to leave the lands, are none the less regarded as having the force of a trust in favour of the grandsons after the death of their father.
The same point occurs in this text of Ulpian.
The words are inadequate:consilium makes it plain enough what the testator's own wishes would be, but there is no trust unless he has made his intention that a legal obligation should arise equally clear.
This principle is clear and absolutely fundamental.
How then can it have been maintained in the previous example, from the later responsa , yet abandoned by Ulpian in this text?
Almost certainly because the breach of principle is interpolated, by the insertion of the concessive licet…tamen .
No doubt Ulpian wrote simply that the words created no trust but merely expressed advice.
None the less a development can be seen in later classical law:.
there is increased liberality in interpretation in several texts, but they can mostly be traced back to the increasing imperial intervention in trust cases from the time of Marcus Aurelius.
Yet the cases which fail to set up trusts all fail for the same good reason: because they do not make clear an intention on the part of the settlor that a trustee should be legally obliged to a beneficiary.
There is some unevenness in the treatment of individual cases, and this is most easily explained by the varying degree in which the testator's intention could be determined.
It seems at first sight strange that in a disposition essentially formless so much time should be spent by the jurists on questions of wording.
But the fact is that there might be persons eager to  oppose the operation of the trust, and vested interests in declaring that no legal intention could be seen in the words used by the testator.
In these circumstances there was much to be said for sticking to forms that were known and accepted; and in spite of the great list of possible wordings in PS , the Digest does not give the impression that the more obscure terms were much used.
It is not surprising that the initial four expressions retained their popularity.
The difference between the words for trusts and those for legacies was that the list for legacies was closed: there were set wordings, well established by long tradition.
If they were not employed, that did not mean that the legacy was at once void; but if it was to be saved, all depended on construing the necessary verba sollemnia .
In trusts the interpretative problem was different.
The system was ‘open’; the field of admissible wordings was not static.
So the question, where a wording which was not accepted by tradition was used, was always whether it was intended by the testator to give rise to a relationship at law; and the words were examined for an intention to set up a trust.
This was the one constraint on the expressions which could be used to set up trusts; and it is this which explains their unexpected prominence  in the discussions of the jurists.
Clear words were a matter of practical rather than juridical significance; they were not the essential constitutive element in trusts but invaluable evidence as to the intentions at law of the settlor.
That this is the correct interpretation of the role of words in trusts emerges more clearly in the next section.
INDIRECT DISPOSITIONS
The last section considered how the jurists interpreted the wordings of dispositions and determined whether they constituted trusts.
But it dealt only with wordings addressed to trustees, requesting them or otherwise encouraging them to pass property on to beneficiaries.
There are cases, however, in which the trustee is not addressed with a request, or in which no words purporting to constitute a trust are used at all.
The question arises how these would be interpreted.
This section examines cases which use indirect words, words directed to someone other than the trustee, which are none the less held to give rise to an obligation under trust in the trustee.
Paul's sententiae provide a convenient starting point.
A settlor can even address the beneficiary of the trust, for example‘I ask, Gaius Seius, that you should be content with that thing’ or ‘I wish that to be given to you,.
According to PS, a settlor can establish a trust by addressing the intended beneficiary rather than following the normal course of addressing the trustee.
Two types of wording are cited and it is suggested that they are of similar effect.
Closer inspection does not confirm this impression.
To begin with the second example cited: ‘I wish something to be given to you’.
Once accepted as setting up a trust, this no doubt gives the beneficiary, who is also the addressee, an action against the heir, or against whatever other beneficiary of the estate is in possession of the object in question.
No other interpretation seems possible.
Matters are quite different in the case of the first wording ‘I  ask that you be content with that thing’.
Even at first sight the connotations of this expression are distinct, for it seems to rest on the assumption that in other circumstances the addressee would actually be entitled to more.
This is quite correct, as examination of a text of Papinian illustrates.
‘I ask, Lucius Titius, that you be content with 100 gold pieces.’
It has been accepted and constitutions issued to the effect that the trust is valid.
But what if, when the testator had instituted an heir to a share, he then wrote ‘I ask, Lucius Titius, that for your share you be content with 100 gold pieces’?
The coheirs will be able to claim the share of the estate, with Titius retaining or taking in advance the amount with which the testator wanted him to be content.
There is no doubt that it is easier to prove this case than the previous one, since in it the trust is claimed by persons whom the testator did not address.
We shall say the same if, when the testator had instituted a sole heir, for the sake of the person who would be heir on intestacy he wrote ‘I ask in place of the estate which I left to you, which would pass on intestacy to my brother, that you be content with 100 gold pieces.'
It is the second example cited in this text which provides the key to these dispositions of contentment.
The addressee is Titius, heir to a share of the testator's estate.
He is requested to make do with a sum of money.
This request gives rise to an action for the coheirs to obtain Titius’ share of the estate in so far as it exceeds that sum.
The words addressed to Titius are therefore construed as setting up a trust in favour of others; and the others happen to be the coheirs who stand to benefit from the resulting reduction in the share intended to fall to Titius.
This then provides the background for the next comment made in the text, about the difficulty of proof: the case just  discussed is a relatively easy one, since the testator has at any rate made it clear that the coheirs are intended to benefit under his will.
In the first example, however, there was no talk of heirs, and so it is more difficult to establish a trust in favour of somebody because it is not at all clear who its beneficiaries are supposed to be.
The third example is like the second, since the testator has made the intended beneficiary explicit.
He has mentioned his intestate heir, and this is sufficient to allow him to claim a trust exists in his favour.
An action can therefore be brought against the testamentary heir for the excess over 100 aurei .
All these cases are ones in which the addressee of the words ‘I ask you to be content’ has already benefited under another disposition, and is now suffering the indignity of having that testamentary largesse curtailed.
The fateful words do not establish a trust in favour of him, but instead a trust at his expense in favour of another person.
The same is found in other texts in the Digest .
Ulpian also cites another equivalent wording, ‘the vineyards or farm are enough for you’(sufficiunt tibi vineae vel fundus ).
The important point is that the words are directed at the trustee.
All this makes it evident and indisputable that the compiler of PS did not understand the finer points of trust wordings: for he announces that the wordings he quotes are ones in which the settlor addresses the beneficiary.
And that is quite wrong, for in all these cases the addressee is instead the trustee.
The errors of PS are not the main point.
More important is that this is the first example of a case in which a trust is set up using indirect words: the words are addressed to the trustee; and they make the testator's intentions plain enough, although they do not express any request for a transfer of property.
Words such as peto contentus sis seem to have been used so widely that they soon raised no doubts or difficulties of interpretation.
In a way they form a borderline between the cases discussed in the  last section and those that follow.
Their similarity to the preceding cases is that they seem to fall within an accepted canon of traditional wordings (one, incidentally, which as Ulpian shows is also subject to extension by analogy).
Yet they are like the cases which follow in that they do not directly ask the trustee to do anything, but none the less cause an obligation under trust to arise in him.
This indirect quality of trusts is one of their most versatile features.
A good example is provided by Africanus.
It is not to be wondered at if, when a request is made of one person, another is obliged by a trust: for if the following is written in a will ‘I ask you, Titius, having received a hundred to manumit that slave’ or ‘to give something to Sempronius’, certainly it is not adequately expressed, but a trust must all the same be understood to be charged on the heir to pay the money to Titius: and so Titius himself will sue the heir, and will be compelled to give freedom to the slave or to Sempronius what he was asked to.
A trust has been charged on Titius.
It makes no difference whether it is for manumission or its content is pecuniary.
Trust dispositions are valid only if the trustee has received a benefit under the testator's will.
In this case the testator has provided for that, but only with the words acceptis centum .
How are these to be construed?
Plainly they do not satisfy the formal requirements for any civil-law disposition.
Africanus admits that they are hardly adequate, but allows them to be interpreted as a trust in favour of Titius.
Here there are no words which could be said to amount to a request for property to be made over to Titius.
Two points are relevant.
First, that it is evidently the testator's intention that Titius should obtain a hundred.
The role of intention is important in trusts, and will be dealt with more fully below.
Second, it seems unlikely that Africanus is making a bid for the words acceptis centum to be construed as establishing a trust in all circumstances.
This is a special case, for the validity of further  dispositions turns on the validity of a disposition in favour of Titius.
Africanus is following the principle of interpreting so as to favour the validity of the dispositions in the will.
In this case it is wrong to speak of the wording of the trust as being free; the point is instead that it is possible to construe a trust in order to validate a disposition, for their existence or non-existence is not attested purely by the use or non-use of certain forms.
This is one of the many advantages of an ‘open’ system.
In this text Africanus was making a general point.
Previously he had been discussing the case of charging a trust on a debtor.
The details of this are complex and will not be discussed here; it is enough to give an account of this so-called fideicommissum a debitore relictum in the context of indirect words.
Under a trust of this kind, a debtor was asked by his creditor (the settlor) to repay the money not to him (or rather his heir) but to a third party.
How was this to be construed?
The problem was with the principle of benefit, since the debtor had received no benefit mortis causa , and arguably no benefit at all.
Africanus' answer (no doubt, as often, he was following Julian) was to construe the trust as being charged on the heir: he was being requested to abandon his claim against the debtor and cede it to the third-party beneficiary.
It is an ingenious construction, which disposes of all the problems of the principle of benefit.
And it depended entirely on the admissibility of indirect words.
This we may now follow in a text of Scaevola.
A testator instituted Seia heir to three-quarters and Maevius to one-quarter of his estate, and charged on Seia a trust in these words: ‘I ask you, and entrust to you, to make over whatever comes to you from my estate to your son, retaining my gardens for yourself.’
It was asked, since the testator had in a general clause charged a trust relating to all dispositions on whoever should be his heir, to pay whatever legacies he had left or had ordered to be paid or done, whether, when Seia made over the three-quarters of the estate, she should vindicate the gardens in full.
He replied that it appeared that there was a trust on the coheir too to make over to Seia the quarter which he had in the gardens.
The case clearly has something in common with the preceding one.
The main difference is that in Africanus' case Titius is a trustee and construed also as the beneficiary of a further trust, while in Scaevola's Seia is coheir, trustee of one trust, and beneficiary of another.
Since Seia is coheir, and therefore already in receipt of a benefit under the testator's will, the trust with which she is burdened is valid, and does not (as in the previous case) depend on construing a further disposition of which she is the beneficiary.
The trust of which Seia is trustee is effectively ‘I ask you to make over to your son everything except the gardens’.
The difficulty is simply that as a co-heir Seia is owner of an undivided share of the whole estate, and the question is on what basis she can recover from her coheir the quarter of the gardens which she does not own qua heir.
The petitioner asks whether Seia can vindicate.
The answer to this must be: ‘No, for she does not own the last quarter of the gardens.’
The text goes on to refer to a general trust clause providing that the heir should pay the legacies and carry out the instructions in the will.
Since there is no plain disposition in favour of Seia in addition to the share to which she is instituted, it is to this clause that the jurist resorts in his interpretation.
On the basis of the provision that ‘whoever should be heir’ should act as  instructed, Scaevola is prepared to construe a trust on the coheir to make over his quarter in the gardens to Seia.
This is a bold interpretation, for a trust on Maevius is construed from words addressed to Seia which are anyway not evidently constitutive of a trust.
Nor, as we have seen, is there a broader topos which need incline the jurist to this interpretation.
It is therefore doubtful whether he would have reached this result in the absence of a general trust clause, for it is precisely that which transforms the words retentis tibi hortis meis into a trust.
Even then, however, the problem remains that there is no instruction to Maevius in favour of Seia.
A further example appears in another text of Scaevola:
A testator instituted heirs his mother and his wife and provided: ‘I ask you, dearest wife, to leave nothing after your death to your brothers.
You have your sisters’ sons to whom you may leave property.
You know that your brother killed our son in the course of robbing him: but another brother has done me worse harm.’
I ask, when the wife died intestate and her estate was to pass on intestacy to her brother, whether the sister's sons can claim a trust from him.
I replied that it could be argued that the trust was due.
The question here is whether a trust is established by the words cited.
The testator is eager that his wife should leave nothing to her brother.
Does his eagerness amount to setting up a trust to that effect?
Even if it does, on whom can the trust be charged?
The difficulty is that the wife has died intestate, and her intestate heir is precisely the person she was asked to ward off from her property.
The only way the trust can be given effect is by construing it as charged on the intestate heir in favour of some other person.
In this case the most obvious other persons available are the sons of the wife's sisters, whom the testator had suggested as possible beneficiaries.
But surely he did no more than suggest?
It is a case of mere consilium , one would think.
Scaevola is less than enthusiastic, but he does state that a case can be made for a trust's having been established.
If this is so, then it is the most remarkable of all the cases we have considered.
The intention of the testator that his brother-in-law should not profit is quite clear, but there is no evidence of any more specifically juridical intention.
For that reason Scaevola's decision cannot be commended as legally sound.
His uncertainty is comprehensible, but he appears to have jumped the wrong way.
No doubt he was prompted by extra-legal considerations.
This case is at an extreme of its own: fortunately, for it is an unwelcome departure from clear principles and clear thinking.
The last case concerned an implied trust at the expense of the intestate heir.
The next two are concerned with trusts implied in their favour.
‘I instruct my daughter out of concern for her safety that until such time as she raises children she should make no will: in this way she will be able to live without danger.’
It was plain that this could not be regarded as a trust of the estate in favour of her sister, who was coheir, since the testator wanted not to dispose of his own money but on the pretext of advice to derogate from her rights by prohibiting her from making a will.
What is the effect of a testator instructing his daughter to make no will?
His intention, quite clearly, must be that on her death she should be succeeded by her intestate heir.
Since a woman can have no sui heredes , the intestate heir will be the  nearest agnate, who is in this case her sister and coheir.
The testator allows for the fact that his daughter will want to benefit her own children if she has any, and therefore restricts his limitation until such time as they are born.
What then followed appears to have been this: the daughter died childless and her sister, inspired by father's words, attempted to recover the estate from the heir who had been instituted.
Her plea was of course that a trust had been set up in her favour.
In other words the jurist is being asked to treat the words addressed to one daughter as indirectly establishing a trust in favour of the other.
Papinian rejects the argument.
The words used by the testator did not set up a trust, for they represented not testation with respect to his own property (which would, of course, have been legitimate) but an attempt to deprive one of his daughters of her right to free testation.
Papinian's doubts, therefore, are not about the validity of setting up trusts in indirect words, but about the use to which the testator is putting these words.
His refusal to construe a trust appears to rest solely on the fact that he deprecates interference of this kind in the rights of another.
Matters, however, did not rest where Papinian left them.
There is another possible approach to the problem, as is shown in a text of Paul.
A testator who had a son and daughter made a will and provided for his daughter as follows: ‘I instruct you not to make a will until you have children.’
The emperor pronounced that a trust was due on these words as if , by prohibiting her from making a will, he had requested that she should make her brother heir: the wording is to be treated as if he had asked her to make over his estate.
Here the intestate heir is again the nearest agnate, who is in this case a brother.
The testator's intention once again appears to be that his daughter's whole estate should devolve according to the rules of intestacy, and so end in her brother's eager hands.
Here too negative arguments can be adduced: it is hard to see  on what basis the testator can legitimately attempt to limit his daughter's right of testation; it is improper to dictate the terms of the will of another person.
The trust should therefore fail.
At this point the emperor intervenes.
The means of salvaging something of the disposition is to recognize that so far as the daughter has benefited under her father's will she may be obliged by a trust.
Evidently in this case she has benefited, although that is left unstated.
The imperial ruling is that a trust in favour of her brother (as intestate heir) must be construed.
This can apply only to the property which has been received by the daughter from her father's estate.
All other property which may have come into her possession can be disposed of freely by her.
In both of these cases the intended object of the trust has failed.
It falls foul of one of the cardinal principles of the law of trusts: the principle of benefit, which states that a person can be validly appointed a trustee only so far as he has received benefits intended by the settlor under the settlor's will.
The emperor's approach is to adhere to that principle and hold the trust to be valid in so far as it does not conflict with it: that is, as far as the daughter benefited under her father's will.
Papinian's divergent decision seems to rest on more implacable opposition to infringing freedom of testation.
There is one last type of trust to discuss here: the fideicommissum nutu , or trust established by a nod.
For this there is little evidence, and what there is is all rather late: a text from Paul's sententiae , one from Ulpian's Epitome , and a constitution of Diocletian.
A fideicommissum nutu is quite simply a trust established without the use of words by the settlor, but merely by a nod, which is taken to indicate the settlor's intention.
The concept is not a difficult one, for the last two sections have made it clear that what really mattered in setting up a trust was not the use of specific words, but the use of words or deeds which plainly expressed an intention to bind a trustee under a trust in favour of a beneficiary.
There is no doubt that this could be done by a nod.
None the less, some curious questions arise.
Why is the settlor merely nodding?
It is generally supposed that  this is because he is on his death-bed, and his gift of making conversation has already ebbed away.
To what is he nodding?
Presumably to a question.
Two types are conceivable.
His concerned heir, standing by the death-bed, may ask ‘Did you say you wanted Mother to have the country estate?’
A nod, and the deed is done.
Or ‘You wanted me to have the Tuscan villa, did you not?’
A nod, and the deed is done.
These questions, particularly the second, raise grave doubts about the fideicommissum nutu .
On death-beds it may be thought that a soon-to-be-deceased settlor is susceptible to giving either involuntary nods or nods to propositions imperfectly understood, or both.
The doctrine is a dangerous one.
Since nodding can be described only as a formless act, clearly the civil law had no interest in it.
Trusts, however, offered the potential for developing nodding into a legal act.
What was needed was that intention to make a legal act should be expressed; this then had to be taken to be charged on the heir as trustee, since in that way the principle of benefit could be satisfied.
(It might also be possible on intestacy.)
In the interests of security, the law would be well advised to adopt a rigorous standard of proof of intention where the only evidence was a nod.
Although dangerous, then, as a doctrine in practice, the admission of nodding is a logical extension of principle.
In this sense, while its practical effects would demand close supervision, and while the evidence for it is all late, there does not seem to be any particular reason why the classical jurists should not have admitted it.
All the cases discussed in this section have been ones in which words addressed to one person were held to make another person a trustee either for the first person or for a third party.
A trust  was construed ‘on the facts’, in the absence of a regular wording.
The same applies mutatis mutandis to the wordless establishment of a fideicommissum nutu .
In all cases discussed here (except one) the testator had none the less made a juridical intention quite clear.
This does not mean that he himself thought a trust the ideal way to realize his intentions.
What it does mean is that he had made it plain that he intended a legal relationship to exist between two persons (soon to become trustee and beneficiary).
That, as always, is the key to the validity of a trust.
The jurists embody this legal intention in a trust.
That is their only option.
For if the words of a civil-law disposition have not been used, then none exists.
But the open system of the law of trusts is different.
A trust, since not restricted to set form, can be construed where the law allows and the testator's intentions demand it.
BASIC QUESTIONS OF INTERPRETATION
This section is concerned with general problems of testamentary interpretation.
The previous sections have dealt more specifically with wording, and the next section will do the same for intention.
But before doing so there are some broader questions to consider.
Dispositions mortis causa are afflicted by one great difficulty in interpretation: the testator who disposed of them is not available to advise on their meaning.
Since the will is usually the only evidence the testator has left of his intentions, where doubts and ambivalences occur they must be resolved without recourse to the person who would have been best qualified to explain them.
Legacies and trusts offer equal scope for this sort of interpretative difficulty.
The question is whether the jurists thought it appropriate to proceed differently in either case.
An obvious place to begin is with problems arising from the omission of the proper words for a testamentary disposition.
For legacies and institutions as heir there were of course set wordings:do lego or damnas esto dare for legacies per vindicationem and per damnationem respectively;heres esto for institutions.
But it is not true to say that a legacy or institution made in terms other than these was unquestionably void.
The jurists were already prepared to supplement such wordings in order to render the disposition valid.
This is not a late development, since already Alfenus Varus can be found in the late Republic arguing that a legacy per damnationem in which the testator has written only damnas esto ought to be valid.
The case of trusts is similar, even though the evidence is late; a constitution of Gordian allows the addition of the word volo where it fits with the words actually written.
The same readiness to supplement the wording of an institution is also found, although not as early as the Republic: Ulpian discusses cases in which the esto of heres esto has been left out, or even the whole expression.
He cites Julian as well as a rescript of Antoninus Pius.
The most revealing example of this type, however, is supplied by Papinian.
If the wording of a trust has been omitted and the other provisions accord with what ought to have been written, by analogy with institution as heir and with legacies a trust will be understood to be duly given and insufficiently expressed in writing.
Our excellent emperor Severus also followed this opinion.
Papinian does not give the details of this defective disposition.
Evidently there was no wording for a civil-law disposition, or that would have been mentioned.
The only question which arises is whether it is possible to construe a trust wording.
Several revelations result.
The first is that there was a concept of what constituted a trust wording.
This is no longer surprising after the discussion in Section I. The second, which is more remarkable, is that the liberal interpretation put forward is reached precisely  by analogy with the institutions of the civil law.
A method had already been developed for salvaging institutions and legacies which were defective: the principle plus nuncupatum minus scriptum was applied.
This recalled the nuncupatio , the oral recital which in principle still lay behind every written will, and which gave validity to the dispositions recorded.
That principle was enlisted where a disposition was defective, and rested on the fiction that the nuncupatio had been correctly performed but the copyist who had noted it down had left something out.
Papinian suggests that this fiction may be employed to salvage the trust in this case.
That could have been done anyway if the disposition were in a will, but it may well be that it is in a codicil or other document to which the nuncupatio did not apply.
However that may be, the striking point is that it is not the law of trusts which is leading the way to generous interpretation here, but instead the civil law.
It is notable too that this liberal interpretation is proposed by the jurist, and merely adopted from him by the emperor.
Elsewhere Papinian shows that where a disposition was defective the same interpretative principles were applied whether it was a trust or a legacy.
But failure to use the time-honoured formula was not the only difficulty; defects of another kind could arise, where, for example, the testator had failed to make clear the content of his disposition.
There are many examples of this, but it will be enough to mention two.
In one case Valens discusses a trust worded ‘Let Stichus be free: and I request that my heir teach him a skill by which he can look after himself; in another Ulpian deals with a bequest of an annual sum in which the amount has been left out.
In each of these cases there is a disposition whose content is not made clear by the words in the  will, and the question for the jurist is whether that means the disposition is void or that it ought somehow to be supplemented.
These two texts present a complex picture of development in the interpretation of trusts for uncertain objects.
In the first case Pegasus, a first-century Proculian, denies that the disposition can be valid, because the type of skill goes unstated.
He is contradicted by Valens, a second-century Sabinian, who says that the praetor or arbiter will decide what skill should be taught according to the age, state, nature, and ability of the beneficiary.
Contrast the following case, in which it is Mela, an Augustan jurist of uncertain leanings, who is opposed to the validity of the disposition, arguing that if the amount is unstated then the amount is zero, while Nerva, a first-century Proculian, is in favour of it; Ulpian follows him in suggesting that the amount the testator usually gave is payable, failing which it can be determined according to status.
Since Pegasus was head of the Proculian school after Nerva, but Valens was later than both, we cannot extract from the evidence a pattern based on chronology; nor, since we find members of the same school on opposite sides, does it seem to be a matter of school dogma.
It does seem likely, however, that after Valens jurists would not have reverted to a negative interpretation, for various interpretative principles were settled in the course of the development of the Roman law of succession, and many of them were aimed at determining the meaning of dispositions in which the testator had left an important point undetermined.
For example, Ulpian mentions the case of a legacy of a number of coins, where the denomination of the coins had not been stated.
To decide what was intended, Ulpian says that first the habits of the testator and then the region in which he lived must be considered, but in addition his intention and the status or intimacy of the beneficiary as well as the dispositions adjacent in the will.
In another text Ulpian states that, if it cannot be discovered from the testator's habits, his domicile, or the context in the will which denomination was intended, then the smaller denomination is to be understood.
Both these texts apply to legacies.
If we turn to trusts we find Valens stating that if maintenance has been left by trust to  freedmen without a sum being stated, then first of all the amounts usually paid by the deceased are to be taken into account, then his bequests to those of the same class, and failing these his assets and intimacy with the beneficiaries are to be considered.
In general these texts give the impression that where interpretative principles had already been worked out for legacies, trusts followed them; and where they had not, much the same principles were adopted for both institutions.
This is not surprising, for there is little reason for disparity.
There are of course some cases in which the treatment of civil-law and trust dispositions cannot be parallel, since the civil law wholly fails to recognize dispositions of that type.
A clear but curious instance is discussed by both Marcian and Ulpian.
The case arose in practice whether B could be asked [by A]under trust to institute C heir.
The senate decreed that B could not be asked to institute C heir: yet it appeared that in this way A had asked that B should make over A's estate to C, that is to make over to him whatever B had obtained from A's estate.
Three parties are involved: testator (A), trustee (B), and beneficiary (C).
The oddity is that the testator has requested B to institute C as his own heir.
Is this allowed?
The answer is that it is not.
A can make his own will and dispose of his own property; but his intentions with regard to B's will are completely immaterial.
There is, however, one way in which A's intentions can be given validity at least in part, and it was this route which was followed: the senate ruled that a provision of this sort could be interpreted as a trust on B to make over A's estate to C. The wording A actually used would be along these lines:fidei tuae committo ut Titium heredem instituas .
This gives no action to Titius, but the SC allows it to be treated as if it read fidei tuae committo ut Titio hereditatem restituas .
In this case it is not a matter of constructing a trust ex nihilo , since one is already involved.
The use of the word rogari shows that B was entrusted with instituting C as his own heir.
Yet this is a ability rather than a benefit, and on these grounds the trust cannot be held to be valid.
If, on the other hand, B is already the heir of A, then he has received a benefit under A's estate, and so far as that benefit extends he may be asked to make over property to C. If he does so, however, this is regarded as restitution of property from A's estate rather than as an institution to B's own estate.
The interpretation is liberal: one might well have said that the trust failed, and that was that.
In this case, however, only the content of the trust which conflicts with the principle of benefit is struck out, and the rest remains in force.
The oddity, however, is the involvement of the senate.
Interpretation so broad seems to have needed the sanction of the legislator.
There is justification therefore for treating this as a special case.
Not all cases, then, limited the jurists to advancing interpretations of trusts parallel to those of legacies, since trusts were not bound by all civil-law constraints.
Yet the point of this short section has been to establish that where the jurists did face similar problems in coping with defective trust dispositions, they proceeded in very much the same way as they had done with legacies.
There is no evidence that all jurists early practised toleration of defective trusts, for we have seen that up to the end of the first century at least there was opposition to allowing them validity.
With the development of the law standard principles for interpreting defective dispositions emerged, and they were applied as much to legacies as to trusts.
Yet one interpretative difference is continually stressed in modern works on Roman testamentary interpretation.
That is that the jurists gave far more consideration to the testator's intention where he had (or had tried to) set up a trust than they did where civil-law dispositions were involved.
This question is so important that it must be dealt with in a section of its own.
INTENTION
Intention is an ambiguous term.
That has not prevented assertions that it plays a particularly significant role in trusts.
But what does this mean?
First, to sum up the relevant conclusions so far.
Section i concluded that the interest shown in trust wordings was a reflection of the demand that, although formless, a trust should be phrased in words which demonstrated an unequivocal intention on the part of the deceased to bind a trustee to do something for a beneficiary.
In Section 2 the conclusion was reached that the jurists were prepared to dispense with direct words.
They were prepared to discover the intention to establish such a legal relationship in facts, to construe a trust where it was clear that this was necessary to validate the testator's intentions even though he had not realized this requirement himself.
Trusts were ideally suited for such treatment since they did not presuppose that certain words had been used by the testator, but merely that a certain intention had been manifested.
Intention of this sort matters in construction, which is one of several types of interpretation.
But we need to distinguish it from another type.
What might be called ‘external’ interpretation or construction was the subject of Section 2: jurists resort to construction, when there is evidently an intention on the part of a testator to achieve some object by means of some legal institution, in order to embody that intention in a legal framework.
In the cases of indirect wording, for example, the testator had not stated that he intended X to be a trustee for Y. None the less he had made his intention that there should be a legal relationship between them plain, and the jurists validated the disposition by construing it as a trust.
Despite the generous role played by the testator's intention in these cases, the texts never speak of voluntas here.
Most studies in this field in the past, however, have been chiefly interested in what might be called ‘internal’ interpretation.
It is interpretation carried out within an existing legal framework: where a trust has actually been set up by a settlor, and it is a matter for the jurist to interpret or elucidate details.
Which slave, for instance, did the testator mean to leave?
This kind of interpretation, not surprisingly, is the predominant type in civil-law institutions, because their formality offers little scope  for construction.
Particular importance has been attached to the question whether, where the testator's words appeared to conflict with his intention, his intention could none the less be given effect.
Attempts have been made to demonstrate an evolution from interpretation based on the letter (or verba ) to that based on the spirit (or intention or voluntas ).
Sometimes it has been argued that the evolution was the other way round; and more recently still it has been argued that no evolution in either direction took place.
In trusts, however, it has been widely maintained that intention always counted for a lot more than words.
Since construction has already been covered in Section 2, this section is limited largely to ‘internal’ interpretation and the cases regularly cited as instances in which the testator's intention triumphed over the words he had used.
One question of particular importance is whether trusts offered any interpretative advantages: were the jurists generally liable to cavil less and interpret more liberally when they came within sight of a trust?
The answer to this question depends on an understanding of the role that intention played in the interpretation of civil-law dispositions.
This is problematic, for the authenticity of many texts is suspect, and for good reason.
The ground is difficult, and the charges laid by the interpolationists are not easy to defuse.
Only two texts make sweeping pronouncements about the role of voluntas in trusts.
A trust is what is left not in the words of the civil law but as a request, and does not depend on the rigour of the civil law but on the intention of the settlor.
This passage is given pride of place at the start of the title on trusts in UE, but it is not a very laudable analysis of the notion of a trust.
The statement is blunt and unqualified; the consequence is that it is inaccurate.
It rests the distinctiveness of trusts on two  points: the words they use and the source of their authority.
The contrast implied is of course with legacies (and perhaps institution as heir).
The first of these points is not relevant here: as will be shown later, it does not contain the classical conception of trust wording.
The second distinguishes crudely between legal form and intention.
The assertion that a trust is valid because a testator wants it to be is misleading.
It leaves out of all account the various structural requirements which must be satisfied, and the various restrictions imposed by the law on the workings of trusts.
It is true that the cases of indirect wording and external interpretation considered earlier are cases in which the validity of a disposition rests on intention rather than form.
Yet if it is to this which the Epitome means to refer, it has suppressed too many qualifications to present an accurate view.
It is interesting too to note that the Epitome uses the term voluntas to describe intention as the source of the legal authority of a disposition.
That usage was not found in the classical texts, in which voluntas is not used to refer to the source of validity of a trust but as a criterion in assessing the content of a trust.
The other text in which the role of intention is loudly proclaimed comes from a work of Paul.
A trust can be charged on a brother's posthumous child: for intention alone is relevant in trusts, and the opinion of Gallus prevailed that the posthumous children of others can also be our own intestate heirs.
The text is plain: it asserts that a settlor can set up a trust with a posthumous child of his brother as trustee.
What follows clarifies: his brother's posthumous children are admissible as intestate heirs.
There has been some dispute about this text, based on the belief that only posthumous children of the deceased himself were admissible on succession.
However that is resolved (and opinion seems now to be in favour of the admissibility of others too) it does not affect the point at issue here.
If a trust  can be established with the posthumous child as trustee, then he must have received some benefit attributable to the intention of the deceased and arising from succession to him.
This may be either by a bequest or else as an agnate on intestate succession.
Whatever the origin of the benefit, it is its existence which validates the trust.
Paul's text, however, attributes the validity of the trust to ‘intention alone’.
For a classical lawyer this argument would be absurd: it is quite meaningless to state that a controversial disposition is valid because only intention is relevant.
Even if it is true that only intention is relevant, this is no argument whatsoever for the admissibility of such trusts.
The liber singularis of Paul from which this text is excerpted has long been suspected as being of post-classical origin.
This particular text supports that conclusion; especially since the only other text which makes a similar point is from UE, a compilation of early post-classical date.
Assertions that intention is the sole criterion of validity are few, suspect, and found only in post-classical texts.
There are cases, as we have seen, in which dispositions which lack the standard forms of wording are interpreted as trusts; the construal of a trust depends therefore not on form but intention.
Yet it is misleading to suggest that this means that legal authority depends on nothing more than the testator's intention, whatever it may be.
A proper understanding of the role of intention in trusts must therefore come from other texts.
They may conveniently be divided into those in which it is explicitly stated that intention matters particularly, and those in which that is a matter of how the text is interpreted.
(a)Explicit cases 
The first case to consider is D. 32.95 of Maecianus.
Full discussion of it is left to Section 5, where the main points it raises are more relevant.
But there is something to say about it here too.
Maecianus reports a case in which the interpretative question is whether when speaking of ‘sums’(summae ) the testator could also be held to have had in mind non-pecuniary dispositions.
He quotes the view of Aristo, who produces two  arguments: first, that by analogy with relegatio dotis and the stipulatio emptae hereditatis the word ‘sums’ should be held to include objects as well as money; second, that intention is particularly important in trusts, and it appears to be the testator's intention in first speaking generally of ‘sums’and then mentioning certain objects to include them in the expression too.
It is interesting that the jurist's first reaction is to appeal to analogies elsewhere in the law.
He goes on to support this with an appeal to the testator's intention, but it is a relatively modest one.
The concept of the testator's intention is used merely to establish the likely meaning attached by him to the words, and this is a technique applied as much in civil-law dispositions as in trusts.
Other cases are more striking.
The following had been written: ‘I entrust to my sons that if one should die before the other leaving no children he should make over his share to his surviving brother; but if both die childless I wish the whole estate to pass to my granddaughter Claudia.’
The first son had died leaving a son but the second died childless: on the face of it the granddaughter was not admitted because of the wording of the condition.
But since in trusts it is accepted that intention should be regarded, I replied that it was absurd, when the first substitution had not taken effect, that the granddaughter should be denied a claim for a share, since her grandfather wanted her to have the whole if the second brother had also received his brother's share.
The testator has instituted his sons heirs, and set up a trust: whichever dies first, if he dies childless, is to make over his share of the estate to his brother; if both die childless the whole is to pass to the testator's granddaughter.
But then the first son dies leaving a son and the second dies childless.
What happens to the trust?
The testator has not regulated the case of the death of the  second son childless: the condition on the trust in favour of his brother (or rather now that brother's heir) is not satisfied, since that applied only to the brother to die first, if childless; nor, since the first did not die childless, is the condition on the trust in favour of the granddaughter satisfied.
Papinian notes that the wording of the trust does not admit the granddaughter, for her claim is restricted to the eventuality that both sons have died childless, which is not the case.
Yet he goes on to say that since intention must be considered in trusts, it would be ridiculous to deny the granddaughter a claim for part, since the testator wanted her to have the whole if the last surviving brother had also obtained his brother's share.
Papinian does not say that intention alone is what matters, but only that it must be considered.
He uses this as an argument for departing from the consequences of the words the testator has used.
If departure from the wording depends on the testator's intention, then this involves the assumption that the settlor would prefer his granddaughter to obtain the estate rather than the heir (whoever that may be) of his last surviving son to do so.
Who would have been the heir?
Since the son died childless there can be no sui heredes .
His nearest agnates are at three removes from him: they are the son of his brother and the daughter of another brother or sister, the granddaughter who is the beneficiary of the trust.
We are told nothing about the heir he instituted.
It seems likely that it was neither of these nearest agnates, and that it was an heir from outside the family.
If that is so, then the reason Papinian admits the daughter may be that he is inclined to favour the immediate family.
There are other texts in which this appears to be a consideration.
Similarly if someone has left a certain amount to somebody and has added that the sum can quite easily be offset, since the beneficiary is his debtor on account of Gaius Seius' estate; yet the beneficiary does not wish to enter that estate but claims the trust: our emperor replied by rescript that he was claiming the trust against the intention of the testator, since in trusts the intention of the testator is particularly to be regarded and observed.
Apparently the intention of the testator is to remit a debt, so this is in effect a bequest of liberatio .
The only oddity is that the debt does not yet exist, and will only arise if the beneficiary enters Gaius Seius' estate and thus becomes liable to pay the testator a sum of money.
The beneficiary chooses not to enter that estate, so that the potential debt is not realized.
His claim for the trust can no longer be offset against that debt, since it is not owed.
The question for the emperor is whether it is reasonable for him to claim the trust.
Traditional civil-law interpretation would say that it is: the words amount to a demonstratio rather than a causa ; the testator is suggesting a means of satisfying the liability under trust rather than indicating that it is to arise only if the estate of Gaius Seius is entered.
The use of the word facilius , ‘rather easily’, lends support to this interpretation.
None the less the emperor decides against the hopeful beneficiary, and he asserts that his decision rests on the testator's intention.
Presumably he is taking the intention to be to charge the trust only if it is not an unduly great burden on the trustee.
In this case too it looks as if the decision is out of line with the most obvious interpretation of the words.
These are the main cases in which an explicit reference is made to the importance of intention in interpreting trusts.
The first is not very remarkable.
The two Severan examples are more telling, since in both the words of the disposition point to one interpretation so clearly that it is surprising to find another is being adopted.
This other interpretation rests, no doubt, on the specific intention of the testator.
(b)Implicit cases 
Several other instances are commonly cited to demonstrate the particular importance of intention in trusts.
In them there is no explicit appeal to intention.
Conclusions here must be more cautious.
It is easy but improper to assert, when no other convenient explanation presents itself, that the intentions of the testator are being given full rein.
Seius Saturninus, a chief helmsman of the British fleet, left in his will Captain Valerius Maximus as his trustee-heir, and requested of him that he should make over his [Seius']estate to his son, Seius Oceanus, when he had reached the age of sixteen.
Seius Oceanus died before reaching sixteen.
Now Mallius Seneca, who says he is the uncle of Seius Oceanus, is claiming the property on the ground of proximity, but Maximus claims it for himself since the person to whom he was asked to restore it has died.
I ask whether this property should belong to the trustee-heir, Captain Valerius Maximus, or to Mallius Seneca who says he is the uncle of the deceased boy.
I replied that if Seius Oceanus (to whom the estate ought to be made over when he reached the age of sixteen, under trust under the will of Seius Saturninus by the trustee-heir Valerius Maximus) died before he completed the set period of time, the estate under trust belongs to the person to whom the rest of his property will belong, since the trust vested during his lifetime, that is if by postponing the time for payment the testator would seem rather to have granted the trustee-heir custody than to  have imposed an uncertain term on the trust.
The testator institutes an heir charged with a trust to make over the estate when his son reaches the age of sixteen.
The son dies before that.
An uncle appears as nearest agnate, ready to claim the estate on intestacy; but the trustee claims the estate for his own, since the intended beneficiary has died.
The case has been cited as showing the power of intention in trusts, as Iavolenus allows the uncle the estate.
Since the uncle is the boy's heir, this shows that the jurist must regard a transmissible interest in the estate as having vested in the boy before his death; which means that he is taking dies cedens to have passed, although the boy has not lived until age sixteen; and that in turn means that he is interpreting the trust as subject not to a condition but to a term (dies ).
There is much to be said for interpreting a modality such as‘when he reaches the age of sixteen’ as a condition rather than a term.
It is the dies incertus an, certus quando of the glossators: it is not clear that the day will actually ever come, even though it is clear if it does when it will be.
None the less there is disagreement among the sources about the proper interpretation of a modality of this kind.
Pomponius is quite clear that this amounts to a condition, and the consequence of that is that the legacy does not vest and transmission is not possible until the relevant age has been reached.
In one text Paul appears to be of the same view; but in another Papinian takes the opposite line, on the basis that the testator had in mind not that payment should be made only if a condition of surviving to a certain age was met, but that payment should be deferred to that point in time.
Is the only explanation to be found in the liberal application of intention in interpreting trusts?
The answer to this is ‘yes and no,: it is a matter of intention, but it is not a matter of a special  law of trusts.
There is a good deal of evidence elsewhere in the Digest to show that in civil-law dispositions too intention was regarded as the key to application of a condition or a term; and this goes back as early as Pegasus.
The question for Iavolenus therefore is whether the period of sixteen years was supposed to be for the benefit of the trustee (so that he could enjoy the income from the estate in the meantime) or of the estate itself (so that it would fall into the hands of the testator's son only once he had reached the age of responsibility).
We know from another text that Iavolenus raised this very question; and he seems, broadly, to have been in favour of interpreting such modalities in legacies as terms rather than conditions.
This case is therefore best considered as an instance not of the role of intention in trusts, but of the general role it could play in the interpretation of testamentary dispositions.
My father related that, when he was in the panel advising the consul Ducenius Varus, his own view prevailed, when Otacilius Catulus had instituted his daughter sole heir, left a legacy of two hundred to a freedman, and requested that he should make that over to his concubine; and then the freedman had predeceased the testator, and the legacy to him had remained with the daughter; that the daughter should be compelled to make over the trust to the concubine.
Celsus deals with a testator who has instituted his daughter heir, and left a legacy in favour of one of his freedman who is charged with a trust to make property over to the testator's concubine.
The freedman dies before the testator, so the legacy is not due.
What about the trust?
Celsus reports that his father managed to persuade the consular consilium that it was still due.
It seems odd at first sight that Celsus senior should have been  of this view, and odder that he managed to persuade Ducenius Varus (consul in AD 95) and his colleagues that it was the correct one.
For the trust was charged on the legatee, and was valid since the legatee was to receive a benefit under the will.
When he died, the legacy had not yet vested, and so the trust too ought to be ineffective.
How might Celsus’ view be justified?
One possibility is that he took the view in this case that the trust inhered in specific property, and that it was payable by the person who had that property, so far as the other conditions for a valid trust were also met.
(The most important of these is of course that that person should as a result of the testator's intention have received a benefit under his will.)
Here the testator's daughter clearly was a beneficiary under his will, so it was legitimate to charge a trust on her.
The boldness of this interpretation lies in allowing the validity of the trust even though it had not been addressed to the daughter and had not been intended to be paid by her.
Since this is so, this case is not best interpreted as a liberality dependent on keen scrutiny of the testator's intention.
It seems most unlikely that the testator had any intention of this sort; and it is pointless to assert that such a decision would have been impossible in a legacy, since the whole context — a disposition charged on a non-heir — is one in which a legacy could not have functioned.
In fact the notion that the trust may follow the property appears to be followed by other aficionados of the law of trusts.
Scaevola presents a similar case in which there is a legacy of a sum of money to one man, Seius, who is charged with  payment of maintenance to freedmen; in codicils the legacy is adeemed and the sum made over to another man, Maevius: is the trust due?
Scaevola replies that, unless the testator is shown to have had other intentions, liability for maintenance is regarded as attaching to acquisition of the sum of money.
The disposition is interpreted as a trust of which the legatee is trustee.
Under the will clearly Seius would be the trustee, but after the codicils this is no longer possible, since he is no longer a beneficiary under the will.
The trust ought to fail.
But the jurist allows it to be treated as inhering in the legacy, charged on the sum of money which has now come to Maevius.
He can now be sued under the trust.
Scaevola's case resembles Celsus'; and there is a similar case in Ulpian.
The interpretation depends on the fact that trusts could be set up without addressing the trustee directly.
The jurist could consider holding a trust to be valid where the beneficiary was the same, although the trustee liable had in fact changed.
It is an example of construction: the liberality lies in finding a legal framework for an intention which could not work at civil law: that any acquirer of the money should be liable under the trust.
To sum up.
This section has reviewed the main texts which assert (or are said to assert) the importance of the testator's intention in trusts.
Two of them do reach results which appear to conflict with the wording, and for which no good reason can be found other than the one they give themselves: that this was the testator's intention.
The haul, however, is small, and only one of these cases is actually attributable to a jurist; for the other the emperor is responsible.
In two further cases the role intention plays is the same sort of interpretative role which it can so easily assume in legacies: to consider what meaning the testator attached to the words he used; or what his intention was in imposing a modality on a disposition.
The most interesting cases, however, are the last: those in which a trust imposed on a bequest which has failed is held to survive.
These cases lie on the borderline between construction  and interpretation of an established disposition: in them the trust is resurrected in a form which satisfies the testator's aims, where a civil-law disposition could only have failed.
It is among the most significant structural elements of the developed law of trusts that it can resort to bold construction to validate a testator's intentions.
The main conclusion which this section and the preceding one allow is that the true importance of intention in trusts lies not in the internal interpretation of the meaning or the details of a bequest, but in construction, in the ability to construe a trust on the basis of the testator's intention, and to use facts rather than words to do so.
TRUST CLAUSES
Both legal literature and the documentary evidence attest the use of what can be called trust clauses, as well as the practice of using for a single disposition the wording of both legacy and trust.
These practices are highly significant for attempts to assess the way in which trusts were interpreted.
In this chapter so far certain conclusions have been reached about the similarities and differences between trusts and legacies, and about the roles played by wording and by intention in the interpretation of trusts.
They will be of some use in working out what it was that testators hoped to achieve by adding on a trust disposition to provisions at civil law.
It will be necessary to run through the examples in the Digest to illustrate the contexts in which these practices are found and the way in which they are interpreted.
(a)Specific dispositions 
Both the documents and the Digest provide examples of bequests in wills which use the wording of legacy and trust together:do lego darique volo .
The words do lego are the correct form for a legacy per vindicationem ; and dari volo is of course an acceptable wording for establishing a trust.
But what is the point of having both together?
Would the disposition be interpreted as a legacy or as a trust?
Would an action for a legacy or for a trust be given, or a choice between them?
As will appear, it is not easy from the evidence to reach a clear conclusion.
The most  interesting instance occurs in Scaevola.
‘To the well-deserving Gaius Seius I leave and wish to be granted in addition that neither from him nor from his heirs should be claimed whatever he owes me on the basis of documents or accounts or has borrowed from me or I have guaranteed for him.’
I ask whether the legacy is only of what was owed at the time the will was made or if later increases in that sum by way of interest are also included.
He replied that on the facts stated it appeared that the testator wanted by trust to release Seius from all liability to that debt.
The legal question here is quite straightforward: the testator makes a bequest to his debtor, Gaius Seius, of all that Seius has borrowed from him as well as all the debts he has guaranteed for Seius.
Does this disposition discharge the debtor only from his liabilities at the time the will was made or also from interest accruing subsequently?
Scaevola replies that it appears to have been the testator's intention that Seius should be released by the trust from all his obligations.
The explanation for this cannot be sought in the tenses of the verbs that the testator has used, for they are all historic with respect to the time the will was made and ought on that basis to refer to no time later than that.
The solution seems to lie in the fact that the amounts which later become due (interest) are consequent on the debt that is being released.
The jurist is therefore able to suggest that the testator intended those sums also to be released.
This interpretation is supported by the different solution given by the same jurist in other cases where the debts newly contracted are not dependent on the existence of an old debt but are entirely new.
For present purposes, however, it is the use of language  relating to legacies and trusts which is relevant.
We are fortunate enough to have another version of the same text, the lex geminata from Scaevola's digesta .
There is one remarkable difference between the two texts, and that is that where the responsa version has the composite wording lego concedique volo the digesta text has only concedi volo .
The digesta text introduces the disposition as a legacy; apart from this, the texts are in accord: the petitioners speak of a legacy, and the jurist refers to it as a trust.
That is the obvious thing to do, when the wording is concedi volo .
But even where the additional word lego is used, there is no suggestion that Scaevola thinks the disposition should be treated as a legacy.
What of the omission of lego in the digesta text?
The digesta version, contrary to its usual practice, seems to have struck out more unnecessary detail than the responsa , such as the lengthy description of the debts and the circumlocution referring to the time the will was made.
Does this mean that the word lego was a similar irrelevant flourish?
The conclusion seems justified, but owing to the problems of transmission of these works of Scaevola, it is not possible to use it as a conclusion for classical law.
It need have been irrelevant only at the time the edition of the digesta was made, which according to Schulz was in the late third century.
All the same, Scaevola pays no attention even in the responsa version to the use of the word lego .
This is not because the necessary legal result could not have been achieved using a legacy, but presumably because the composite wording creates a presumption that a trust was intended.
Apart from this and another text of Scaevola, there are examples of these composite dispositions only in Maecianus and Marcellus.
None of these texts actually deals with the question what action becomes available as a result.
Nor are there many documentary examples: the words do lego darique volo are found in an inscription from Spain which dates from the end of the  second century.
The codicils of Popilius Heracla, whose dating is controversial but likely to be early third century, contain an odder expression:rogo iubeoque fideique vestrae committo .
What little evidence there is suggests that these dispositions were interpreted as trusts.
In certain circumstances it might have been preferable for a beneficiary to have a real action, in which case he would press for interpretation as a legacy.
But there is no example of this kind.
Fortunately the instances in which a general clause is used, to entrust the entire content of the will to the faith of the heirs, yield more exciting results.
They are the subject of the next part of this section.
(b)General dispositions 
‘Whoever will be my heir, let him be obliged to give, and I entrust to him that he should give, sums of the size which I shall dictate and give.’
Aristo says objects such as land, slaves, clothing, and silver are also included, because it is clear from legacy of dowry and promises on sale of an inheritance both that the word ‘size’ does not refer solely to cash, and that the term ‘sum’ought similarly to be understood, as in the arguments put forward.
[He says]moreover that the testator's intention, which is particularly important in trusts, supports this opinion, and that the testator would not, after this preamble, have added objects if he had wanted only cash to be paid.
This text, like those just discussed, makes use of the double wording damnas esto dare fideique eius committo .
Here, however, the clause does not just apply to one disposition, but confirms all the dispositions in the will.
The question which arises in this  case is how broadly the words quantas and summae can be interpreted, and whether they are restricted to cases involving money.
As noted above, Aristo argued, by analogy with the way in which the words were interpreted in the case of a legacy of dowry and in stipulations on sale of an inheritance, and bearing in mind the testator's intention, that the words should be taken to include non-pecuniary dispositions.
From this it can be concluded first that Aristo interprets the dispositions as trusts.
Since they are not quoted, however, it is not clear whether this is because they were initially worded in that way or because the general clause has converted them into trusts.
Second, the text shows that it was important to know whether the general clause applied or not.
Why was this?
There seem to be only two possible explanations.
Either the will had failed, so the trust clause was being enlisted to salvage civil-law dispositions, transforming them into trusts of which the intestate heir was trustee; or individual legacies had failed on formal grounds, and the intention was to try and salvage them as trusts of which the testamentary heir was trustee.
The first option is the more likely, since it appears that it is not just one but several dispositions which are at issue.
The clause therefore operates in a way very similar to the codicillary clause discussed in Chapter V.
A testator who had instituted Sempronia and Maevia heirs to a tenth each of his estate and a foster-child to the remainder appointed a curator for his foster-child since he thought he could rightly do so.
And he entrusted to the curator that he should not allow sale of certain land but [the foster-child]should enjoy its income together with his nurses, Sempronia and Maevia.
At the end of the will he added ‘I  entrust all my wishes to my heirs’.
It was asked whether the nurses could claim thirds of the usufruct of the land on the basis of a trust, although the curator, whom he could not rightly appoint for the foster-child, was not admitted.
He replied that on the facts as stated the testator had validly confirmed his wishes by a trust, and had therefore given the same to each so that the nurses should enjoy the income from the land together with the foster-child.
The testator appoints three heirs.
His foster-child comes off best, but in addition each of two nurses receives a tenth of his estate.
The testator also appoints a curator for the child, and directs that he and the two nurses should enjoy the income from certain land.
This statement is ambiguous: who is ‘he’, curator or foster-child?
The difficulty is that the grammar of the disposition suggests that it should be the curator, but the reference to ‘his, nurses can surely be meant to refer only to the foster-child; and the last sentence of the text confirms that it is the foster-child who is intended.
The bequest, then, is in favour of all three coheirs.
This bequest regarding the income from the land is like a prior legacy — except that it is worded as a trust.
All coheirs, regardless of the shares to which they are instituted, receive equal shares in prior legacies, and this is why the two nurses apply for a third each.
The problem, however, is that the appointment of a curator in a will is a nullity; and the bequest of the income from the land (it is not a usufruct, as the nurses think) is dependent on it.
To a layman no doubt it seems perfectly reasonable to charge the curator with a trust to supervise the land and the distribution of its income.
Unfortunately things are not quite as simple as that.
The trust is invalid on several counts: no property has been bequeathed to the curator so the principle of benefit is infringed; if the curator had been validly appointed, which he has not, then he would be able to exercise some control over the foster-child's use of the land; but even then, since he would not be owner, it would be a problem that it was he who was charged with the trust for distributing shares in the income from the land.
On all these grounds (although the text considers only one) this trust cannot take effect.
The question raised here is on behalf of the two nurses: are they entitled to a third each in the ‘usufruct’ of land?
Since the trust charged on the curator has failed, their entitlement may be in jeopardy.
It is here that Scaevola appeals to the trust clause; and it is on the basis of it that he allows their entitlement to stand.
They obtain third shares in the income.
This interpretation makes it quite clear that the disposition in the will has failed, and that it is only thanks to the trust clause that the nurses do obtain this additional income.
A father instituted his son and daughter heirs and left them each prior legacies of certain lands and loan books.
He then provided: ‘I wish whatever legacies I have left to be paid by you, my dear son, and if any debt shall emerge, if I had borrowed anything for a time and shall owe it, I wish it to be paid by you, so that what I have left your sister may pass to her undiminished.’
It was asked whether what the father owed on any account was to be paid by the son.
He replied that the daughter could sue under trust for relief so that the whole of what the testator had given her should come to her.
Son and daughter are instituted heirs and prior legacies are left to each.
Then follows the wording which is relevant here, a clause entrusting the son with the payment of all legacies and all debts owed by the testator.
The question is whether the clause is effective.
The jurist replies that it is: the daughter can sue under a trust for relief, so that the whole share left to her remains intact.
So far as the civil law was concerned, heirs inherited liability to pay debts in equal shares; the maxim nomina ipso iure divisa is familiar.
Equally, so far as the civil law was concerned, a  request phrased in terms of a trust to one of the heirs to pay all debts would be ineffective.
So far too as creditors were concerned, the daughter would be fair game until she had obtained a formal release from liability.
It is precisely this that she is seeking to obtain in this case.
Under the law of trusts, however, a request of this kind was significant, and amounted to creating an entitlement in the daughter to seek relief from liability.
Although the testator has addressed his son, it is his daughter here who can sue under trust for liberatio .
The clause cited from the will, however, is not a pure example of a trust clause, for its purpose is not purely to confirm in trust form what has already been said in civil-law terms.
Rather, it adds a new element, which is that the testator's son alone is to undertake liability.
In his will a testator had released his debtors from their debt.
Later having cut the ties and had a look at the will, he made another in which he repeated the legacy as follows: ‘All the legacies I have left to people in the will which I have opened I want to be valid, and whatever is written in it.’
It was asked, when the estate had been entered in accordance with the second will, whether the debtors who had been released in the first will could secure that they should be  released even from debt which they had begun to owe after the first will, and if, should the heirs try to sue for it, they could be debarred by a defence of bad faith.
He replied that they were not released.
(2) Titius left this legacy to his debtor, Seius: ‘I give and bequeath to Seius ten denarii , and I also give him whatever he owed me by way of capital and interest.’
He then generally obliged the heirs and entrusted to them that they should give and make over to each person whatever he had left them.
Later Seius borrowed additional money from Titius.
I ask whether this money too, which was given to him after the will was made, is understood to be included in the legacy.
He replied that since the words put forward related to the past the later debts ought not to be considered to be in the legacy.
In each of these cases the basic problem is the same: a will has been made, and in it a debtor is left a legacy of liberatio from what he owes the testator.
The question is, if he has subsequently borrowed more from the testator, up to what point he has been released from his debts.
It is best to begin with the second case.
Here there is a straightforward legacy to the debtor of a sum of money and also of the amount of his debt to the testator.
This is followed by a clause in which there is a general damnatio and also a general trust that the legacies in the will be paid.
The debtor goes on to borrow more money, and the question is whether that is taken to be included in the legacy too.
The response is that since the words relate to the past, later debts are not included.
The relevant words are of course quidquid…debebat .
The words of the legacy are unequivocal.
Does the trust clause make a difference?
There is no reason why it should, for it forms part of the same document, and appears to have been executed at the same time, as the legacy of liberatio .
It may well have been the intention of the petitioner to seek a broader interpretation by pleading the existence of the trust and presuming that a more generous standard of interpretation should be used.
But this does not succeed.
Nor should it.
The words are clear, and in trusts too there is good reason to take the meaning of the words seriously.
This is a case in which Paul's maxim might well apply.: where the words are not ambiguous there is no call to raise questions of intention.
The first case is slightly more complex.
The testator had made  a will, but then opened it to have a look at it.
No problem so far, for the will remains valid at civil law.
He then made a new will: this does have the effect of invalidating the previous one.
In the new will he inserted a trust clause, entrusting payment of all the legacies he had left in the now invalid first will.
Heirs entered in accordance with the second will.
The petitioners wanted to know whether a legacy of liberatio to them in the first will could now be held to include debts they had first contracted after the making of the first will; and whether, if the heirs were to sue them for that, they could be barred by an exceptio doli .
Scaevola disappoints them by informing them that they are not freed of liability.
The first problem here is that the brevity of Scaevola's response (even by his standards three words is modest) leaves it unclear whether he means that the debtors are not freed from any liability, or whether it is just that they are not freed from liabilities contracted after the first will was made.
The first of these would imply that Scaevola regarded the trust clause as ineffective; the second that it was effective but limited to legal events which took place before the first will.
Both linguistic and legal grounds make the second of these hypotheses the more plausible: the response seems to be tailored (drastically) to fit the preceding enquiry, in which only subsequent debts are considered; there is no reason why this trust clause should be thought invalid, as other texts confirm.
Here again there is no good reason why the debtors should be freed from debts contracted after the first will: for, although the trust clause is in a later document, what it confirms is the content of the first will.
The trust clause is not itself a disposition of release from a debt; what it is is a legal device which confirms the working of a release from debt which would otherwise be invalid.
But that release must be confirmed on its own terms and in its own modality.
So the debtors must be denied.
The last case is provided by Marcellus, who cites a lengthy and complicated will.
The main provisions are these: the  testator institutes to half his estate any posthumous children he may have, and Gaius Seius heir to the other half.
A trust is imposed on the heirs that they should manumit four slaves when the testator's children reach puberty.
Later in the will he provides that if no children are born or if they die within puberty then Mucius and Maevius are to be heirs.
This is followed by a trust clause providing for payment of the legacies in the ‘earlier will’(legata quae priore testamento quo filios et Seium heredes scripsi reliqui praestari volo ).
Still later there are codicils in which the testator addresses both the initial and substitute heirs, and entrusts them through another trust clause with payment of all dispositions: ‘Lucius Titius to his initial and substitute heirs: greetings.
I ask that you should pay what I have provided and legated and what I shall provide and legate in codicils.’
(Lucius Titius heredibus primis et substitutis salutem. peto ut ea quae testamento cavi legavi et ea quae codicillis cavero legavero praestetis .)
The question is whether, since no children were born to the testator, the slaves are due their freedom at once.
Marcellus replies that they are.
The situation is that Gaius Seius becomes heir to a half, and Mucius and Maevius to the other half: the logic of the problem makes clear that they are substitutes (both pupillary and vulgar) for the half originally destined for the children; and since Gaius Seius has not been disinherited his entitlement still stands, as the text confirms.
This is in spite of the text's reference to an ‘earlier will’, for there is no other will.
If there were, then the will cited would be invalid.
Marcellus says the condition on the manumission is not to be taken to be repeated in the case of the substitutes.
He goes on to say that it would be if it were a condition of another kind.
The reason why this specific condition is not regarded as repeated is that it is incompatible with the condition to which the substitution is subject: the substitutes are to be admitted if no children are born to the testator or if any born die before puberty, whereas the manumission is subject to the condition that there are children who are still alive at puberty.
Clearly if the substitutes are entitled to enter then the condition on the manumission can never be satisfied.
Consequently, since the substitutes too are expected to play a role in the manumission (owing to the general clause), it is reasonable to assume that the  testator did not intend it to apply to their case too.
In normal circumstances, where this incompatibility did not exist, if the testator had employed a trust clause he would be presumed to have intended the modality attaching to the institution to attach to the substitution as well.
The point of the trust clause here is to provide that substitutes should be liable for exactly the same as the instituted heirs, with the one exception of the problematic condition on the manumission.
In this respect this is not a ‘pure’ trust clause, for it does not merely confirm bequests but adds a new element to their payability.
In later law, however, a testator would have had no need to concern himself with this, since a rescript of Severus and Caracalla introduced the rule that, failing evidence to the contrary, dispositions charged on the heir were also to be understood to be payable by a substitute.
To sum up.
The cases which have been considered fall into several categories, but the most important distinction is between simple and complex cases.
Complex instances of the clause occur in the following cases discussed: D. 34.3.28.1, where it amounts to a repetitio of the provisions of an earlier will; D. 32.34.3, where it imposes the burden of paying dispositions on one of the heirs in particular; D. 40.5.56, where it amounts to a repetitio of dispositions from the substitute heirs.
What is meant by calling these ‘complex’ is that they serve a clear and distinct function which could already have been envisaged by the testator in making his will.
Simple instances, on the other hand, are those in which the clause seems to have been adopted to cover the eventuality that there may be some defect in the will so far as the civil law is concerned.
The formula has no necessary role in the will, but is employed simply to anticipate any difficulty which may arise.
This is the character of the remainder of the examples cited.
Of those it is worth singling out D. 32.95 and D. 33.2.34.1, in which the jurist indicates (in the first case implicitly, in the second explicitly) that the use of the clause has turned out to have crucial consequences for the effectiveness of the testator's  will: for without it his will or some of its dispositions would have been of no force.
It is the simple or formulaic use of the trust clause which is of the greater significance.
Once it was realized that dispositions could be salvaged by the mere addition of a trust clause, it is likely that the addition of one became a regular feature of testamentary practice.
In many wills it would not be needed; but some of the texts examined show it playing a more vital role.
Protective formulae of this kind tend to become fossilized.
There is a clear instance of this in Scaevola: one text contains the words generaliter damnavit heredes fideique eorum commisit .
These words make the formulaic character of the disposition especially clear, for not only is there a trust clause but there is also a general legacy per damnationem .
The point of a general damnatio was to impose on the heir a general obligation to pay the legacies left.
It might have advantages in the case of an invalid legacy per vindicationem .
For instance, if a testator had left per vindicationem a legacy of something which did not belong to him, that legacy was ineffective.
But it might be salvaged by the damnatio , to which that restriction did not apply, and which would impose on the heir an obligation to pay the object or its value.
The need for this clause was abrogated, however, with the passing of the SC Neronianum in AD 56, for it provided that a legacy which was on technical grounds (such as the one suggested) invalid should be treated according to the interpretation applying to the most favourable kind of legacy, namely that per damnationem .
From this point onwards it was entirely unnecessary for a testator to go to the trouble of writing a general damnatio in his will.
Although after Nero's reign the clause of damnatio had no effect, it continued to be used in practice, as this example and others in the Digest show; and as the documentary evidence confirms.
The well-known will of ‘Dasumius’, for instance, contains such a clause despite the fact that he lived and died  after the passing of Nero's SC, around AD 108.
What this illustrates is the tenacity of testators towards formulae which they believe increase the chances of their dispositions being observed.
Precisely the same can be observed in the case of the trust clause.
There is documentary evidence for the trust clause too.
Priority has been given to the juristic sources so far, since the concern here is with interpretation, and documents clearly do not attest how they were themselves interpreted.
Two cases among the jurists have shown that in certain circumstances the trust clause could make all the difference between the functioning and the failure of a testamentary disposition.
It is not surprising, then, to find that the clause has a long career in the documents.
There are few Western documents, but a series of inscriptions from the reign of Antoninus Pius records the will of Megonius Leo, which includes trust clauses in standard form, first in laconic, then in more expansive fashion:haec ita ut cavi fieri praestarique volo ; and also peto et rogo per salutem sacratissimi principis Antonini Augusti Pii liberorumque eius, hanc voluntatem meam et dispositionem ratam perpetuamque habeatis .
As for the East, it is a curiosity that Egypt, from which almost all of the rest of the evidence emanates, seems to have had a preference for using a joint clause of damnatio and fideicommissum .
The best-known instance is from the second century, the will of Longinus Castor (AD 189), which includes the words: ‘Whoever should be my heir, let him be obliged to give, do, and perform all that is written in this my will, and I entrust that to his faith.’
This is the most complete example, but there are also other Egyptian instances ranging from around AD 176 to AD 276.
It was in this context, and in almost no other, that Egyptian practice favoured the use of trusts: for Kreller, in his study of the law of the papyri, notes that with the exception of trust clauses there are very few  instances of trusts in the papyri at all.
To conclude.
The evidence for the use of trust clauses is impressive, and their purpose plain: where they do not add any other element, their sole purpose is to cover the eventuality that certain dispositions in the will fail.
The practical value of this is obvious.
Soldiers, after all, were ‘bad’ at making wills, but obtained concessions on political grounds; their civilian compatriots were surely just as likely to slip up but could expect no such special treatment: a trust clause could make all the difference to the success of their dying wishes.
Previous sections have shown that so far as the ‘internal’ interpretation of dispositions was concerned trusts differed only slightly from civil-law dispositions.
It was in construction that they performed their real service.
A testator would not set out to establish a trust, or to confirm his will in trust form, hoping that in details his intention would take precedence over his words: the civil law already coped with these problems, and the law of trusts was able to follow rather than lead.
A testator would do well, however, to set up a trust if he was concerned that his will might fail.
And he might bear in mind that muddled dispositions in his will could somehow be validated if the jurists were able to construe them as trusts.
Trust clauses made this easier; in time many testators would have employed them, as the proliferation of such clauses in the documents suggests.
Some of the documents contain several trust clauses in succession, which confirms the impression that their use began with the practical and ended with the formulaic.
There is one more conclusion.
Trust clauses are found in wills but their field of application is outside them.
They do not blur the distinction between testation and intestacy, but they mitigate it.
They provide a way for a testator to secure some of the dispositions in his will even if the will fails and intestate succession ensues.
In this respect they confirm the importance of the role of the trust on intestacy which was the theme of the previous chapter.
They prepare the way too for the later conception of the trust: for by post-classical times the trust had undergone a  profound development.
What began as a type of disposition within the will became in later law the extra-testamentary disposition par excellence.
The trust clause represented an essential moment in the evolution of the trust from its embryonic stages within the will to its developed state of independent existence.
In a broader perspective, however, the life of the trust within the will had been a short one; its dim Republican awakenings too had been extra-testamentary.
Perhaps this was not evolution but revolution.
POST-CLASSICAL DEVELOPMENTS
Two topics are dealt with in this section.
The first is uncontentious.
It is the abolition of formal requirements of wording in testamentary transactions in the fourth century.
The second is the issue of precatory words (verba precativa ) in setting up trusts, and is more contentious because it is not commonly accepted that it is a post-classical issue at all.
A series of constitutions in the Code disposes of all formality in the law of succession.
What is now a series was once a single law.
Dismembered, it now deals in separate titles of the Code with the abrogation of formality in wills, and in legacies and trusts.
The only controversy that has surrounded these measures is their date, for, most inconveniently, inscriptions and subscriptions do not match; or, to put the matter more clearly, the emperor to whom the constitutions are attributed was not reigning in the consular year in which it is dated.
Views have therefore differed on the question whether the inscriptions should be followed, and the laws dated to AD 320 or 326; or the subscriptions, resulting in a date of AD 339.
The result is to attribute the laws in the first case to Constantine, in the second to Constantius II.
Can the doubts be resolved?
The answer is ‘yes’: a recent article, drawing on Eusebius' Life of Constantine , seems to show  without doubt that it was Constantine who introduced this law: Eusebius describes measures implemented by Constantine which can only be understood as referring to this law.
And so it is possible in these few words to dismiss a controversy which has absorbed many pages.
To turn to the second issue.
The notion of precatory words (verba precativa or precaria ) has a history not altogether straightforward.
Paradoxical though it may seem, the problems it raises are best approached through English law.
In that system too there was no requirement that set words be used to establish a trust, but the law insisted that words be used which manifested an intention on the part of the settlor to impose the obligation of a trust on the donee.
In English law ‘precatory’ is treated as contrasting with ‘imperative’: a settlor is supposed to instruct a trustee to hold property under trust, and if his words are merely precatory, then the question is whether a trust has been set up.
At one time this requirement was construed broadly, so that words merely precatory were accepted as raising a trust.
Yet by 1871 the tide had turned; and in 1895 it could be said that ‘the court will not allow a precatory trust to be raised unless…it comes to the conclusion that it was the intention of the testator to create a trust’.
Here, then, the doubts about precatory words are reasonable doubts whether they clearly express an intention on the part of a testator.
As for Roman law, the discussion of wording in Section I of this chapter reached a similar conclusion.
There was not a set list of admissible wordings; there were wordings which were common, but that was all.
Otherwise the choice was open, and the restrictions few.
A settlor had only to make sure that he chose a word which made clear an intention on his part that a trust obligation should arise in the trustee.
How does this square with another proposition that is sometimes put forward, that in Roman law trusts had to be set up in precatory words?
For a start, this proposition would seem deeply alarming to a common lawyer, but that need not  trouble us here.
The issue here is purely logical: what is the purpose of the category ‘precatory words’ if the choice of words for trusts was open?
Roman law never did have a doctrine that trusts should be set up by imperative words.
Instead it was regular practice for a settlor to request a trustee to make property over to a third party.
So long as the request made the settlor's intention clear, no problem arose.
Most of the wordings initially used for trusts in Roman law are words that could be described as precatory.
Three of the initial four wordings mentioned by Gaius could be so described:rogo, peto , and volo all have the flavour of a wish of the deceased communicated to the trustee.
But wordings which did not take the shape of a request also soon came to be accepted.
Fidei committo itself does not have the basic sense of ‘request’.
And most of the other wordings discussed have no sense of ‘request’ about them at all.
Either they are imperative:exigo , mentioned by Neratius, and mando and (in particular)impero , mentioned by Paul, are examples; or else they are expressions of conviction (if that), such as scio , mentioned by Neratius, or credo , mentioned by Ulpian.
Even more strikingly, it is clear that classical law admitted indirect wordings in which a trust was held to exist, charged on a person who had never been addressed at all.
These words cannot in any way be regarded as precatory of the trustee.
The sources give no hint that the words for trusts had to be precatory: terms such as‘precatory’ are found only occasionally in late classical law to describe dispositions in the form of trusts.
Precatory words were one, but only one, category of words which would be accepted as setting up trusts if they made the testator's intention clear.
‘Precatory’ neither (as in English law) implied caution about the clarity of intention, nor was used as the touchstone for deciding whether a disposition was a trust.
A few cases have already been cited in which late classical jurists used the word ‘precatory’ as a shorthand for a trust  disposition, drawing attention to the request made by the settlor.
The trend becomes very marked in the epi-classical period.
The Code , for example, contains many more instances of the words precarius and precativus and their cognates.
There is one in Philip, one in Valerian, then eight in Diocletian; and finally, much later, one in Justinian.
The context of these cases is very often that a question has been asked about the validity of a disposition left in unconfirmed codicils.
Here it is of course crucial to know whether the disposition is a trust or not; for in those circumstances only a trust can be valid.
The use in the emperor's reply of the expression verba precaria is revealing, for it shows already a tendency to treat precatory words as characteristic of trusts, as something which sets them apart from the dispositions of the civil law.
These examples form a bridge between the classical conception of trust wording and the post-classical, for which ‘precatory, words became an article of faith in construing a disposition as a trust.
This is quite clear in the Epitome of Ulpian.
A legacy is what is left in a will by way of law (lex ), that is imperatively.
For dispositions left by way of request are called trusts.
A trust is what is left not in civil-law words but precatively, and is dependent not on the rigour of the civil law but on the intention or the settlor.
The two passages epitomized from Ulpian make different contrasts, first between dispositions left imperatively and those left precatively, then between those left in civil (-law) words and those left precatively.
Both are in accord in suggesting that the way to decide whether a disposition is a trust or not is to  look at the words it employs.
This stress on words is interesting, since Pseudo-Ulpian goes on to say that intention is so important in trusts.
Pseudo-Ulpian suggests that the distinction between civil-law dispositions and trusts is that the former are in direct and the latter in precatory words.
Civil-law bequests, however, were limited to a very small number of wordings:do lego for the legacy per vindicationem; damnas esto dare or dato for the legacy per damnationem , and so on.
The criterion for determining whether there was a valid legacy was not therefore whether direct words had been used but whether the right form had been used.
In these texts for the first time we find ‘precatory’ being used to describe the essential nature of trusts, and as the key to discovering what legal institution is involved.
That this is the sense in which the term is later used can be confirmed by another piece of evidence.
It is the interpretatio to Paul's sententiae .
In Section i of this chapter a text from Paul's sententiae was discussed.
It gave a list of admissible wordings for trusts; and also mentioned two (relinquo and commendo ) which gave no action for a trust.
Whenever a trust is left, it can be left in precatory words so that someone may ask, enjoin, seek, or hope that the trustee should cause what has been entrusted to him to pass to the person the testator wished, just as he enjoined.
For if he should say ‘I leave him this’ or ‘I commend’, because these are direct words, they cannot have the place of a trust.
The contrast between this text and the text on which it comments is instructive.
In PS itself nothing is said about the sorts of words that are admissible; there is merely a list of possible and impossible words.
IP , however, partially retains this  approach but superimposes on it a distinction between direct and precatory words.
Direct words are held to create no trust.
This position is not heterodox so far as relinquo (or, as it is here expressed,dimitto ) is concerned: Section i argued that the problem with it is precisely that it attributes property directly to a beneficiary rather than vesting it in a trustee.
As for commendo , the explanation given in IP is unacceptable, since the word is in no sense direct, and the difficulties it caused (as explained in Section I) were quite different.
Yet the interest lies in seeing the distinction between direct and precatory words being used as a test.
It was argued above that, while it in some way reflects the truth about the wordings which were used in classical law, it was not employed as the touchstone by which new wordings were tried.
In IP, by contrast, the distinction has been elevated into the fundamental test for determining whether wordings may be accepted as constitutive of a trust or not.
From now on this distinction was central to distinguishing between legacies and trusts; and it is the one that finds its way into Isidore's book of etymologies.
‘Precatory’ had become central; but not in the useful way in which it became defined in English law, to denote words where the testator's intention was a matter for dispute.
In post-classical times precatory character came to be the way to distinguish between trusts and civil-law institutions (said, in contrast, to be ‘direct’).
The position was illogical, both because classical law had allowed many wordings which were far from precatory, and because the simplest way of distinguishing civil-law institutions was to see whether they used the proper wording.
It is not altogether easy to explain this post-classical development.
On the one hand, it seems appropriate that the great days of verba precativa in imperial constitutions should end with Diocletian, for with Constantine came change: he disposed of formalities of language, and from this point on there was no sense in any test to which wordings should confirm.
On the other hand, the post-classical jurisprudential sources cited to  refer to precatory words.
They, however, are all Western, and there is no evidence of precatory concerns in their Eastern counterparts.
What seems to have happened is that the distinction, drawn perhaps from one of the few classical instances (of Ulpian or Papinian), was seized on by epi-classical law and later adopted as a post-classical touchstone.
In the West, no attention was paid to its irrelevance as a consequence of Constantine's legislation.
CONCLUSION
Words and intentions play different roles in the civil law and in the law of trusts.
In trusts, wording was by no means unimportant, yet its significance was not in satisfying formal requirements but in attesting the intention of the settlor to set up a trust.
Not all words would suffice for this, but the number of standard forms used gradually increased.
The role of the jurists was to determine whether a new wording should be interpreted as constituting a trust.
This relative flexibility is not primarily important because it allows a settlor freedom to choose a favourite expression.
It matters because it means that a trust can be construed even from words which look rather unpromising.
This opens the law to the possibility of radical development.
There are few cases in which the attention paid to intention (in the sense of the voluntas of the verba — voluntas dichotomy) seems particularly remarkable.
Often, when considering a trust, the jurist's interpretation regards intention no more than it would have in the case of a legacy.
Instead it is in construction that the trust is radical.
It is true that to search for a legal framework in which the ill-articulated wishes of a testator can be given effect is to regard the testator's intention.
Yet the striking developments of the law of trusts depend on much more than this: they are an integral part of the conception of a trust as opposed to a legacy.
The crucial difference is that a trust could be set up with a non-heir as trustee, whereas legacies remained always bound to the need for an heir to discharge them.
Once the notion of trust had become divorced from that of dependence on a testamentary heir (which seems very soon to have happened), the way was open to set up trusts charged on beneficiaries under  the will other than the heir, or even on persons who benefited where there was no will at all.
All this depended on the fact that the Romans were for the first time in the law of succession experiencing an ‘open’ system.
No longer need a search for set words be made; it was now a matter of seeking words, or even deeds, which need do no more than satisfy the minimal essential principles of the law of trusts.
The next step was to admit indirect words: a trust did not demand that the trustee should be addressed with a properly phrased request.
Consequently, a person holding property (as a result, of course, of receiving a benefit by way of succession to the deceased) could find himself a trustee for another on account of words addressed by the deceased either to the beneficiary or another person.
Since this became a standard feature of trusts it is not helpful to treat it as if it were dependent solely on an especially close regard for the testator's intention.
The indirect method was a natural though not inevitable growth from the fact that trustees could be selected from outside the class of heirs.
In turn this development led to another, which is illustrated in the examples in Celsus and Scaevola in Section 4.
Since it was of relatively minor importance to whom the words for setting up a trust were addressed, it was possible to conceive of the trust as inhering in certain property in the estate, and therefore of the recipient of that property as automatically in the position of trustee for the intended beneficiary.
Celsus senior may have been very advanced to arrive at this conception at the time he did.
But the way was prepared.
Almost the whole development of the law of trusts and its interpretation can be traced back to a combination of two factors: the slight respect of trusts for set legal form; their independence from an heir and from the will.
It was this that led testators to value them and to confirm their wills in trust form.
They hoped for no benefit of internal interpretation or the construal of favourable terms; rather, they hoped that a  disposition in dubious form might be admitted to be a disposition of legal force, or that a disposition in an invalid will might not sink into the oblivion of intestacy.
Once these points were fixed, the law of trusts advanced not by the chance observance of a testator's intention, but by the logical extension of first principles.
Internal interpretation was orthodox; but the first principles were radical enough to assure a development beyond the conventions of civil law.
Of Action and Execution: Procedure
INTRODUCTION
During the Republic trusts were not actionable.
With Augustus a jurisdiction was established, but this was not done within the formulary system or the existing structure of the civil courts.
Instead of entrusting the jurisdiction to the usual magistrates, the praetors, Augustus gave it to the consuls.
Once actionable, trusts must have come into popular use, i for already under Claudius a change in the jurisdictional scheme was introduced, and two special praetors were appointed.
This however did not mark the end of the consular jurisdiction, for various sources attest that the two jurisdictions coexisted.
The little evidence there is suggests a view which is anyway plausible, that the consuls dealt with cases involving the distinguished (clarissimae personae ) and large sums, although no limit is known.
Whether the action was heard by a consul or by one of the praetores fideicommissarii , in either case it was not an action of the formulary system but of a kind which lay beyond that system; the involvement of magistrates in assessing the cases was therefore known as cognitio extra ordinem .
The proper term for the remedy was not actio , which was the term of the ordinary procedure, but persecutio (or petitio ).
As an early creation of the  legal order of the Principate, the trust represents one of the clearest instances of the development of the imperial legal procedure which was yet to become the standard procedure of Rome.
The first aim of this chapter, however, is not to give an account of cognitio and its development.
It is instead to consider the significance for trusts that they were subject to a legal system of procedure other than the classical formulary ordo .
How might these procedural differences have affected the structure and historical development of trusts?
How, to put the question more broadly, might they have affected the shape of the Roman law of succession as a whole?
The second aim is to consider the procedural consequences of the legal structure of trusts.
It was pointed out in Chapter II that the standard procedure of Roman civil law had difficulty in recognizing trusts, for they fell into a mould which was not that of the civil law.
The problem was that they purported to benefit persons who at civil law could only be considered third parties.
Earlier chapters have drawn out some of the consequences of this peculiarity; this one turns to procedural matters, and to the way in which the involvement of third parties, once an obstacle to the legal recognition of trusts, was turned into a virtue and one of their greatest strengths in the legal enforcement of testamentary dispositions.
COGNITIO AND ITS EFFECTS
Trusts were dealt with under cognitio , but legacies and inheritances were the concern of the ordinary courts.
In the provinces of the empire, however, there was no choice of magistrates: the provincial governor (or a deputy appointed by him) heard all cases, whether they were based on the civil law or not; and we can hardly expect that he switched from one procedure to  another according to which kind of case he was hearing.
Consequently the questions of this section are questions largely of Roman practice alone.
They are questions about the procedural advantages which could be derived from the extraordinary procedure, and which might have influenced the use of trusts instead of the parallel institutions of the civil law.
Unfortunately the evidence is very difficult to assess; there is not much, and what there is cannot always be relied on as unimpeachably classical.
Some hints however emerge.
Brief sketches of the two types of procedure may first be helpful.
Formulary procedure was the classical procedure of Roman law.
In character it was private: the plaintiff summoned the defendant; the parties appeared before a magistrate to determine whether there was a cause of action; once that was established, they chose a judge to hear their case.
In the extraordinary procedure, however, the magistrate either dealt with the case himself or appointed a deputy (iudex pedaneus ).
If the last chapter dealt with the freedom of form of the trust, this one deals with its freedom from formulae : forms of action were not promulgated in advance, as had been done in the edict of the urban praetor.
The character of proceedings was inquisitorial; their force derived from the authority (imperium ) of the magistrate.
It was this process which provided the exemplar for the inquisitorial legal process of modern civil-law jurisdictions.
Formulary procedure was bound to the principle of condemnatio pecuniaria : whatever the action, in the last resort a judge could not order a remedy in specie , but only that a sum of money should be paid.
Where a plaintiff had brought an action in rem , however, his primary interest was in recovering his property, and in recognition of this the jurists devised the clausula arbitraria to assist him.
This too could not compel the defendant, condemned to restore, to do so, but it applied conspicuous Pressure: if he did so, well and good; if not, the plaintiff was allowed to make his own valuation of the property, and it was this which would become the damages awarded by the judge.
Since plaintiffs naturally inclined to value their lost property exorbitantly, defendants did have reason to think seriously about restoring it.
But they could not be compelled to do so.
Proceedings for execution of the judgment began thirty days after the case had ended; if no satisfaction had been given, the plaintiff returned to court to bring an action on the judgment (actio iudicati ).
So long as he was successful in that action too, a further thirty days later he was authorized to proceed to execution.
He might proceed against the judgment debtor in person; or against his property.
In the latter case, regardless of the overall solvency of the judgment debtor, bankruptcy proceedings were initiated, and his whole property sold up (bonorum venditio ).
Execution under the extraordinary procedure was not altogether different.
A plaintiff could proceed by means of the actio iudicati if he wished, although this was available only where the judgment had been given in a sum of money.
Execution would then follow the same pattern as formulary procedure.
What is more important is that cognitio also admitted other kinds of execution.
First, where judgment was in a sum of money, it was possible to proceed against individual items of the debtor's property.
Although this procedure (known as bonorum distractio ) was both fairer and more convenient than bonorum venditio , it had none the less been admitted only in exceptional cases under formulary procedure.
Pledges of items of the judgment debtor's property were taken, from which the plaintiff could satisfy himself.
This became for cognitio the standard form of execution where judgment had been given in a sum of money.
That still leaves cases in which the judgment was given in terms not of money but of performance.
Formulary procedure had known no judgment other than a money judgment, but the extraordinary procedure was free from this traditional restraint, for it was based on quite different principles.
So the notion was accepted that the magistrate should be responsible for execution of the sentence he, or the judge appointed by him, had pronounced.
He was not restricted to making an order of damages, but could actually order a defendant who had been condemned to perform what he had failed to do.
(Other legal systems too show that the nature of the court, ‘official’ or ‘private,, is inevitably reflected in the remedies which the court is competent to offer.)
Where a plaintiff had shown that he was the beneficiary of a trust, for example that some land should be conveyed to him, the judgment could be given in terms of performance: the trustee could be required to convey the land to him.
This was an advantage that was quite foreign to legacies, which were bound to their traditional procedural constraints.
It must remain true, however, that this potentially valuable ability to obtain execution in rem was limited to certain cases.
Since a sentence was the basis for execution, and the sentence was pronounced inter partes , execution too must have been similarly limited.
Thus, execution in rem can have been available only where the person sued was actually in possession of the object.
This would of course be the case in actions in rem , which were brought precisely against the possessors of disputed objects.
Trusts however depended on remedies in personam : the intended beneficiary could sue only the trustee, even if the trustee had long since ceased to be in possession of the object under trust.
It may well then be valuable for the beneficiary of a trust to know that he can obtain the property intended for him if he sues and prevails in cognitio against the trustee.
This is a privilege for which no legatee could hope, since if the heir took a fancy to property left by legacy, he could keep it on payment of a (no doubt inflated) valuation of its worth to the legatee.
Yet often it cannot have been the case that a recalcitrant trustee remained in possession of the property entrusted to him.
He might have pledged it to pay his debts, or sold it.
In these circumstances, if the trust had been validly set up, then judgment would have to be for the beneficiary.
But this fact alone would hardly entitle a beneficiary to execution in rem against a third party: to allow that would be to indulge in a breach of fundamental principle and equity.
What happened to a trust where the property had passed from the trustee to a third party is a matter for the next section.
But first, to sum up so far.
Trusts depended on actions in personam ; action could be brought only against the trustee.
It is true that judgment could be given in ipsam rem , but this is far from allowing that they had a ‘real’ effect.
It means merely that where the trustee was in possession of the property under trust, he could be ordered to make it over.
THE LIMITS OF PROTECTION
This section investigates the limits on the validity of trusts.
Since these limits show up most clearly when the property under trust has arrived in the hands of a third party, the questions dealt with here concern primarily sale of the trust property and  alienation by other means, such as when the property of the trustee has been sold up to pay his creditors.
A few introductory words on the rules of English law will help to set the scene.
The rule of equity on sale of property under trust is well known.
It allows the beneficiary under a trust to sue a third party in possession of the object under trust so long as he is not a ‘bona fide purchaser for value without notice’.
Equity requires, therefore, that the third party be in good faith, have paid a real price (acquisition by gift or for a derisory sum will not do), and be unaware of the existence of the trust.
Unless the trust beneficiary can show that this is not so, the alienee has acquired an unassailable title.
These are practical limits on the beneficiary's powers, for, although it will not usually be difficult to determine whether a real price was paid, it will regularly be very hard for a beneficiary to show that a buyer did know of the existence of a trust; and unless this can be shown, no action lies.
If no action lies for the actual object, none the less the doctrine of tracing allows the money or property received by the trustee on sale of the object under trust to be pursued, and for it to be regarded as subject to the trust in place of the original property intended.
To move back to Roman law.
The same two questions must be considered: how far did the law allow the beneficiary of a trust to assert his rights against third parties?
Where it did not, how far did it allow him to assert himself against the trustee and the property he had acquired in place of the object under trust?
It is simpler to begin with the second of these questions.
When someone has been asked to make over on death whatever  remains of an inheritance, and from the price of objects sold buys other objects, he is not regarded as having diminished [the estate]in respect of the objects sold…but the objects thus bought should be made over in place of the ownership which has changed….
The same will be held even if he has paid off his own creditors from that money, for what is retained in the body of the patrimony is not taken away.
This series of texts comes as close as Roman law ever did to suggesting a principle of tracing.
Yet in fact the principle at stake is quite a different one: these texts are dealing with a special type of trust of the residue of an estate, under which a trustee was requested on his death to hand over whatever was left of the estate he had inherited.
Naturally enough, this raised all sorts of questions as to how much of the estate could in good faith be consumed by him; and (the question here) in what circumstances the estate could be said to have been diminished.
How many transactions amount to diminution of an estate?
How many can be regarded merely as affecting the objects in which the estate is now held to consist (this is what the words permutatum dominium convey)?
The question which concerns the text is therefore not tracing, but valuing the property which may be held to be under trust.
There is nothing about a general right to follow the property over which the trust exists; the question is purely quantitative.
Since no other texts mention it, we are entitled to conclude that Roman law knew no principle of tracing trust property.
For this there is a simple explanation: the doctrine of tracing only makes sense where the beneficiary of the trust has a right in rem to the trust property.
If, as in English equity, the beneficiary can be said to have equitable ownership, there is reason in allowing that ownership to be asserted over objects which replace the original trust property in the hands of the trustee.
Without such a real right it is pointless.
So much for the matter of tracing.
The second question is this: if the trustee had sold (or otherwise alienated) the trust property, how far could the beneficiary pursue his rights against third parties?
The traditional view of a trust is that it was enforceable only in personam , that is against the trustee.
Where the trustee had alienated the trust property, the beneficiary could  not follow it.
This is the position attested in many texts, both classical and post-classical.
None the less, the law was not static, and this was not the last word on actionability.
There was also a novel, unique remedy, a missio in rem quite distinct from praetorian missiones .
Details are hard to elicit from the texts, since in AD 529 it was abolished by Justinian, who later brusquely referred to it as a tenebrosissimus error .
So far as possible, therefore, the compilation eliminated all reference to missio ; but, as often, traces survive, and these have been put together by Impallomeni.
The picture which emerges is not of a remedy in rem in the sense of an initial action granted against third parties in possession of the property under trust; instead the missio was a means of execution against third parties which was available following a normal action in personam .
The key question here (as in the case of modern law outlined earlier) is in precisely what circumstances this real execution was available.
The only text which makes an express statement on this is found in Paul's sententiae .
If the heir has sold an object under trust, and a person with knowledge [of the trust]has bought it, the beneficiary none the less rightly requests to be put in possession of it.
The interest of this text is that it makes clear both the availability of a remedy against a third party, and the fact that that party has notice of the existence of the trust; and it apparently limits the availability of the missio to cases where the buyer does have notice: cases, therefore, in which bad faith is involved.
This  is a post-classical text, and different views have been held about the extent to which it correctly represents classical law, or any stage of classical law.
For instance, Impallomeni was of the view that earlier classical law ignored whether a buyer had notice (scientia ) of a trust, but in later law jurists such as Papinian did not.
It is not possible or necessary to consider this question fully here, but a consideration of the texts of Scaevola shows that in fact he too took account of the scientia of buyers when considering the availability of missio .
This is not surprising.
There was a long tradition of regarding trusts as protected by actions in personam ; and it is not likely that jurists were early (or even late) prepared to abandon this and make available a real protection in all circumstances.
Not only would this have amounted to abandonment of a well-established principle (not a thing welcome to lawyers), but it would also have threatened the stability of contracts of sale.
A purchaser of land might well be uneasy if he knew that, even if he had no notice of a trust, the land could be recovered from him by a trustee.
On the other hand, if he had bought the land with notice, we might well and rationally say de se queri debet .
Considerations of rationality are not the same as considerations of historical reality.
All the same, the evidence strongly supports the view that missio was granted against a third party only in the event of his having notice of a trust.
It would be difficult to prove that a buyer had notice.
Although the practical significance of missio should not be minimized, this restriction makes it much less powerful a protection than an action in rem .
Was the lack of notice a sufficient condition to bar missio ?
Or might an innocent acquirer be assailed for failing to satisfy some other requirement?
The texts are not very clear on this, but the main question is whether a third party in good faith would be secure from the missio only if he had paid value for the object under trust.
Someone who has received an object in exchange is like a buyer; and so is someone who has received it in payment or retained it after settlement of a law suit or obtained it on the basis of a promise otherwise than as a gift.
This is apparently our only evidence.
But it is quite striking.
In book 6 of his work on trusts Ulpian was discussing procedural matters; and the compilers have placed the text in their title dealing with the grounds for being put in possession (missus in possessionem ) of property.
Ulpian is plainly talking about the missio in rem granted for objects under trust.
His concern in this text seems to be to explain which legal relationships are like sale: his list comprises receipt as a consequence of barter, of payment, of settlement (in court), and of contractual promise (so long as not gratuitous).
The preoccupations of this text are most readily explained on the view that, to bar missio , value had to have been paid for an object under trust.
It is likely too that the provision for value had originally been framed in relation to purchase for value, for otherwise there is no good reason why Ulpian should be concerned with fitting other legal relationships into the same pattern as sale.
Since Ulpian is the only source for this, conclusions must be limited to late classical law, although it is not unlikely that the same applied earlier.
To conclude.
The texts of Roman law bring us to the intriguing conclusion that by late classical times the only person who acquired property under trust and with it an unassailable title was the bona fide purchaser for value without notice.
The discovery that Roman law had anticipated the position in modern equity is of great interest.
So far as practical consequences are concerned, we need still to bear in mind how far this falls short of a general protection in rem ; difficulty, as always, would arise  in proving the bad faith of the possessor.
If proof was lacking, the trust beneficiary could turn only to his rights in personam against the trustee; nor, since there was no doctrine of tracing, could he lay claim to the property received by the trustee in place of the original trust property.
Instead he had to contend with the usual difficulty of those with rights in personam : if the trustee was insolvent, they would be worth little.
So far discussion has been limited to discussing the beneficiary's ability to recover the trust property where it had passed into the hands of a third party: in principle the beneficiary was able to follow it, but his claim could be barred depending on the nature of the acquisition by the third party.
The next question is the tenacity of a trust in the event of insolvency.
This issue too concerns third parties, although this time they are creditors rather than buyers.
In insolvency of the estate or trustee, various positions can be distinguished.
First, where the settlor is insolvent but sets up a trust over some or all of his property.
This is a straightforward case.
Ordinary bequests were not payable if an estate was indebted and dispositions in the form of trusts were also invalid.
If the assets of the testator's estate were not sufficient to pay both his creditors and all the bequests he had left, then first the creditors were satisfied in full, and afterwards the beneficiaries by legacy or trust were paid so far as the estate would allow.
Second, where the settlor is solvent but the trustee of the trust he has set up is not.
Here there are various possibilities.
In simple trusts for restitution of property, there are two options: either the trustee is in possession of the property under an obligation to make it over to the beneficiary at some point in the future; or else the beneficiary is already in possession.
The second of these cases raises no questions of interest, since the trust has come to an end and the beneficiary is owner absolutely.
The first is more difficult.
It is worth noting too that it can arise in different types of trust, either in a simple trust for restitution, for instance on death; or in a continuing trust such as the fideicommissa familiae relicta discussed in Chapter IV, in which each successive beneficiary is at the same time a trustee for other family members.
The case of an insolvent trustee is therefore both complicated and the test case for determining the validity of a trust.
There is a conflict of rights: the settlor has a right to have the trust he has set up observed, and the beneficiary a right to obtain his due; the creditors of the trustee have a right to obtain satisfaction from their debtor.
The legal question is how far the trust can be respected in the face of the onslaught of creditors.
There are two extremes: either it can be decided that the creditors are free to distrain on trust property as on any other; or else it may be decided that the trust property is exempt from such execution.
A few texts discuss the position in Roman law.
Two deserve consideration.
If a personal creditor of the heir has been sent into possession in order to protect his property, and has obtained an object left under trust to me, it is agreed that I ought not to be prejudiced by him in any way; no more than if he had received that object as a pledge from the heir himself.
The text considers two cases.
In both it is the trustee who has debts.
In the first case the creditor has obtained a grant from the praetor entitling him to take possession of certain property of the debtor in order to secure his loan.
In the second the situation is that the debtor has voluntarily parted with the property as security for a loan.
In each case the property obtained by the creditor is subject to a trust set up by the testator.
In each case the jurist decides that the beneficiary of the trust has a better claim to the object than the creditor.
Hermogenianus' case is one in which the beneficiary of the trust appears to have an immediate claim against the trustee.
Matters are different where the trustee is entitled to enjoyment of the property during his lifetime and required to make over the trust property only on his death.
The most notable and the clearest text on this is provided by Papinian.
He considers a trust in favour of the family fideicommissum familiae relictum ): a settlor has established it; a member of the family is benefiting from it, but he is at the same time bound by the trust to hand on the property on death to a further member of the family.
In the case of land left restricted to the name of the family, if no voluntary alienation takes place but the property of the heir is sold up, the buyer ought to retain the land as long as the debtor would have had it if his property had not been sold up, and after his [the debtor's]death he will not have it, because an heir outside the family would be compelled to make it over.
Papinian with his extreme laconicism makes matters difficult for the translator and the interpreter.
The position is that a trust has been set up in favour of the family.
The heir is insolvent, and the question arises how far the trust can be given effect.
First of all, it is notable that the land under trust has also passed to the bonorum emptor , so in this respect it is not being treated as subject to any special privilege.
Yet the next step is more intriguing: Papinian rules that the bonorum emptor is entitled to keep the land only during the lifetime of the indebted heir.
After this he will be required to make it over to a family member, just as any heir who succeeded him from outside the family would be required to do.
Papinian's solution is a compromise.
He respects the expectations of future beneficiaries; by allowing the bonorum emptor temporary possession of the trust property he also looks to the  interests of the creditors.
The value of the offer made by the bonorum emptor would certainly have taken into account the fact that the land was subject to trust; the consequence of the lower offer would be that creditors would receive rather less than if no trust existed.
To sum up.
In face of insolvency the following principles apply.
Where the settlor is himself insolvent, the trust is invalid, and creditors can execute against all the settlor's property including that over which he had purported to set up a trust.
Where the trustee is insolvent, the trust property in his possession is not subject to normal execution.
If the trust is due at once, the beneficiary can claim with priority over other creditors.
If it is due only on the trustee's death, a bonorum emptor is allowed to take possession and enjoy the profits of the trust property during the lifetime of the trustee (and debtor).
It is fair to say that this reconstruction is based on late classical texts, and it is unclear in particular how far Papinian's view may have been anticipated in earlier law.
These cases are ones involving insolvency, that is total net indebtedness; in them we have seen that either the trust was invalid because the testator's estate was insolvent, or the trust was valid in spite of the fact that the trustee was insolvent.
There is a further possibility.
This is that there was no insolvency, but the testator had given the object he later left under trust as a pledge to a creditor to secure a loan.
If the estate is solvent, and merely this object is held as security, what happens to the trust?
The question is discussed in several texts.
Alexander C. 6.42.6 (AD 224)
The heir ought to redeem pledged lands left by legacy or trust, especially when the testator knew of their condition or, had he known, would have bequeathed you something else of equal value.
(1) But if they have actually been sold by the creditor, the heir will be compelled to pay over their price, unless a contrary intention of the deceased should be shown by the heir.
In this case, it is quite clear that the testator's estate as a whole is solvent.
As a result the validity of the trust goes unquestioned.
The text sets out from the premiss that the beneficiary of the trust ought to obtain the actual land (rather than its value); the question therefore is who ought to pay off the creditor to whom the land is presently pledged.
The decision is that the heir should, especially in the event that (i) the testator knew the land was pledged or (ii) he would have left something else had he known.
This leaves us to assume that the beneficiary ought to pay in the event that (iii) it could not be shown that the testator, had he known the land was pledged, would have left something else or (iv) the testator did not know the land was pledged.
It is not at all clear how the testator's intentions are to be discovered; the force of the word maxime may be to suggest that there is a presumption that in normal circumstances the heir will redeem.
If the land has been sold by the creditor, no execution in rem is made available, and the heir is required to pay only the price of the land to the beneficiary.
Here then the trust remains valid, but since the passage of the actual trust object into the hands of a third person can be attributed directly to the testator and his debts, no execution in rem is allowed.
To conclude.
Settled land in Roman law was to a considerable degree free from the depredations of creditors.
Where a trust had validly been set up (which depended on the solvency of the settlor), the subsequent insolvency of trustees or beneficiaries was irrelevant to its continuance.
The prospects for creditors were not good, but at least by the end of the classical period they were mitigated by allowing settled land to pass, during the  lifetime of an indebted trustee or beneficiary, into the ‘beneficial possession’ of a bonorum emptor .
To understand the importance of these procedural developments, we can hardly do better than conclude with a comparison: Blackstone's graphic and dismaying picture of the damage being done in England by entails.
Children grew disobedient when they knew that they could not be set aside: farmers were ousted of their leases made by tenants in tail; for, if such leases had been valid, then under colour of long leases the issue might have been virtually disinherited: creditors were defrauded of their debts; for, if tenant in tail could have charged his estate with their payment, he might also have defeated his issue, by mortgaging it for as much as it was worth: innumerable latent entails were produced to deprive purchasers of the lands they had fairly bought; of suits in consequence of which our antient books are full: and treasons were encouraged; as estates-tail were not liable to forfeiture, longer than for the tenant's life.
So that they were justly branded, as the source of new contentions, and mischiefs unknown to the common law; and almost universally considered as the common grievance of the realm.
In comparison, Roman law had shown itself flexible and responsive to the interests of creditors.
This fact, and the limited spread of settled land suggested in Chapter IV, do much to explain the lack of vocal protest about settlements which was such a feature of the early modern counterpart of the Roman settlement.
THIRD PARTIES AND PURPOSES
Trusts went unrecognized within the traditional scheme of civil law.
The main reason for this was pointed out in Chapter I (: the beneficiary of a trust had a relationship with the property under trust, but it was one which did not fall neatly into a civil-law category.
This is clearly seen if we compare the rights which legatees obtained.
Once an estate had devolved to the heir, a legatee per vindicationem was immediately able to vindicate the object from the heir, for the legatee was himself owner.
In the case of legacy per damnationem , the legatee was not of course owner, but he was the beneficiary of a civil-law obligation imposed on the heir by the testator: the words used for such a legacy,damnas esto dare , generated a liability at civil law for the heir to make over the property to the legatee.
Matters were quite different in the case of trusts.
Here the trustee was the owner, but he was an owner who had been requested to hand the property over to the beneficiary.
Such a request fell far short of creating a civil-law obligation to do so.
The solution devised by the jurists is discussed in more detail in the next chapter: they appealed to fides ; decided that in good faith payment of such a request was required; and inspired the necessary procedural recognition of such requests.
There is another angle to this question.
Roman law had found difficulty in accommodating dispositions which aimed to benefit third parties or to serve abstract purposes.
The problem was the law's strict insistence on privity of relations in personam .
Alongside this went the nature of purpose (modus ) in Roman law.
Modus was a modality on a bequest which differed from a condition.
An example may help: property could be left to somebody on condition that he did something.
When he did do this, he satisfied the condition and the bequest became payable.
Under modus , however, property was left so that something could be done; since the bequest was not conditional on it, its payment was due independently of whether the intended thing was done or not.
Since ownership passed to the legatee without performance having taken place, it was much harder to see that he actually did do with the legacy what the testator had intended.
The solution to these two difficulties was provided by the  trust, which at a stroke solved both the problem of third-party involvement and that of enforcement.
A simple example will make the differences plain: suppose a testator wanted to arrange for the payment of a sum of money to a certain person.
He could choose between the civil law and the law of trusts, but there can be no doubt that the law of trusts was superior.
If he used a modal legacy, it would take the following form: ‘I leave A the sum of ten thousand denarii , so that he can make over five thousand to B’.
Under this form of words, the only person who acquires any rights is A, the legatee, and the only legal relationship created is between him and the heir.
How then to secure the performance of the purpose?
The jurists devised a method which required the legatee to promise (by giving a cautio ) that he would satisfy the purpose.
It was through this cautio alone that a legal relationship was established between the legatee and the intended beneficiary of the purpose.
If the legatee now failed to perform, he could be sued on his promise.
The heir had, of course, to make very sure that he extracted the cautio before parting with the property.
If a trust was set up, however, matters were much simpler.
There was no need to use a promise in order to establish a legal relationship between legatee and beneficiary under the purpose, for the trust device itself did this.
A trust in these circumstances would take the form ‘I ask you, A, to pay five thousand denarii to B’.
Here (as in the previous case) A is the owner of whatever sum he has been left (a legacy, for instance, of ten thousand denarii ), but B has a claim in trust against A: he can sue A for performance.
So much for the third-party element.
The other problem which arose in modus was that ownership passed to A before he need even dream of performance, and by the time he was reminded it was relatively hard to get him, as owner, to think of his duties towards B. It is, however, a very intractable question how purposes were enforced in Roman law.
It is necessary here to distinguish between public and private dispositions, and within those two categories between legacies sub modo and trusts.
To begin with the distinction between public and private.
There are in effect only two types of private purpose which might be imposed on a beneficiary.
First, to make property over to another individual.
Second, to free a slave.
What, one might ask, about bequests in favour of corporations or instructions to build the testator a monument?
The fact is that these are not truly private dispositions, and as a consequence they raise questions which are not exclusively those of private law.
They are discussed later.
Let us start with the case of manumission.
It was possible for a person to be given a legacy on the understanding that he would manumit a slave.
Julian mentions a case of exactly this kind: ‘I bequeath Stichus to Titius’ or ‘let my heir give [Stichus]so that Titius may manumit him’(Stichum Titio lego vel heres meus dato ita ut eum Titius manumittat ).
The question, as ever, is how to ensure that Titius does what he is intended to.
Julian's answer is that when Titius sues for the legacy he can be opposed with an exceptio doli unless he has given a guarantee that he will manumit Stichus.
This is the classic method of safeguarding a modus .
But it is not a very good one, since it is available only until the moment that Titius brings suit.
Dissatisfaction with this highly indirect method of attempting to secure a modus must have been considerable.
There are two more points to make.
The first is that later texts suggest that the modus might be enforced directly.
The second is that Severus apparently introduced the interpretation of a modal disposition in a will as a trust precisely in this context, of manumission of slaves.
This brings us on to comparing the trust remedies with those discussed before.
There is in fact no question but that the trust remedy was superior.
In cases of manumission, the slave in the first place had a dispensation from the normal prohibition on bringing suit against his master; furthermore, after the Trajanic  SC Rubrianum the tendency of the whole process before the praetor fideicommissarius was towards a declaration by the judge, and if the declaration was in favour of freedom then it was given effect by means of a fiction that the slave had actually been given direct freedom under the testator's will.
The effects of the trust were therefore direct.
If we turn to the other true private context, dispositions for restitution of property to another individual, we can move more quickly.
For Section 2 has already argued that in trusts judgment and execution could be given in ipsam rem .
The beneficiary under a trust had a fair prospect of recovering the object the settlor had intended for him.
By contrast, where there was a legacy sub modo this was impossible.
Here too the legatee would be asked to give a guarantee that he would make over the property as requested.
The guarantee, however, generated only an action in personam , and admitted only judgment in terms of money.
To sum up on private dispositions.
In each case there can be no doubt that the advantages offered by the trust over the civil-law method were significant: performance in specie was a real possibility in each case; that this was so depended entirely on the fact that trusts were subject to a different procedural order.
Public dispositions raise additional questions, for where there is a public interest we need not suppose that all was left to regulation by the remedies of private law.
The first question is whether a disposition sub modo in favour of a public or religious purpose might be subject to special protection, and might therefore be enforced directly.
The second is whether a trust for a similar purpose might be enforced in specie .
In order to deal with the first question, we need to begin with considering in what circumstances a modus of any kind, public or private, might be enforced.
Justinian did believe in the direct enforcement of modus .
His enthusiasm for this has led  to the interpolation of several texts.
In one case Julian discusses a manumission ‘let Pamphilus be free, so that he may give account to my sons’(Pamphilus liber esto, ita ut filiis meis rationem reddat ).
Julian is asked whether this is a condition; his reply is that the freedom is unconditional.
To this is added the remark that since the testator's intention is clear, the slave must be compelled to hand over the accounts.
This assertion that the modus should be enforced directly not only fits badly in the context, but also seems to contradict a text of Julian discussed earlier, in which he proposed using the traditional cautio method to secure performance.
A text of Modestinus also ends abruptly with the remark that the judge will ensure that the testator's instructions are enforced.
Both these texts deal with private dispositions.
Both, it seems, are interpolated.
There is no reason to believe in enforcement of a modus in private circumstances in classical law.
Matters are somewhat different when we come to dispositions where the modus is in the public interest.
Could it be enforced?
The view most favoured is that it could, by the intervention of an official and by means of his coercion.
There is regrettably little evidence to support or to challenge this.
The principal difficulty is that it is quite clear that the texts of the classical jurists have not been left as they were written; and since it is clear that Justinian was keen on enforcement in all circumstances, it is hard to decide whether we should take all reference to it to be a product of his ardour, or the more extreme cases of public interest to be acceptable classical examples.
There are only two juristic texts and one letter basic to this discussion.
One text comes from Pomponius' commentary on the work of Q. Mucius.
In it Pomponius reflects on the difficulty of enforcing modal legacies, and the fact that very often the obligation they generate is merely moral rather than legal.
At the end of this discussion appear the words ‘but by the judge's intervention all these things, unless they lead to immoral results, ought to be brought into effect’(sed interventu iudicis haec omnia debent, si non ad turpem causam feruntur, ad effectum perduci ).
There is no doubt that this is an interpolation: it conflicts with what goes before, and its inspiration in the legislation of Justinian is evident.
It is clear, too, that the text is concerned with public as well as private matters: Pomponius specifically gives as an example of an obligation which is purely moral (and, as he puts it, rests on the auctoritas scribentis ) the case of a bequest for statues to be put up in a municipality.
This pessimistic view as to enforcement is supported by a letter of Pliny, in which he laments the fact that the monument to Verginius Rufus, who died in AD 97, was still incomplete ten years after his death, not because of construction difficulties, but purely because of the inertia of the person supposed to build it.
At any rate the pontiffs of that region, Etruria, were not exerting strong pressure.
The second juristic text to consider, however, does point towards enforcement.
Papinian is discussing whether, if a non-heir builds a monument, this can be regarded as a negotium gestum and the costs charged to the heir.
The text ends with the words ‘for although at strict law the heirs should be held by no action to build a monument, none the less they are compelled by pontifical or imperial authority to observance of the last wishes [of the deceased]’.
Are we to conclude both that Papinian wrote this text and that it enunciates a general rule?
There is no reason to suspect Tribonian of pontifical predilections, so it is hard to suppose that this is an interpolation.
On the other hand, there is no other acceptable evidence for the enforcement of modus until Justinian.
Shortage of sources compels tentative conclusions.
Given that(i) no other sources support this view;(ii) the view is none the less generally reasonable;(iii) evidence from Pomponius (and perhaps also Julian) seems to speak against it for the second century; and (iv) a Justinianic interpolation seems unlikely, it seems most probable that the text represents the genuine view of Papinian.
It is also likely that this view is a departure from earlier law, in which it is not attested.
Finally, it seems most plausible to suppose that this enforcement operated within very strict limits, so that we should not speak of a general power of enforcement of modus for public purposes.
In turning to trusts we are faced with a similar problem, and similarly desperate evidence.
Would a trust, for example to construct a public building or to set up a private monument, actually be enforced as such?
It is already clear that trusts to hand over objects or to free slaves could be enforced in specie under the auspices of the magistrate whose cognitio was involved.
Yet it is a harder question whether judgment could actually be given for performance of an act.
Why not?
Cognitio was an official procedure, and a judgment given in it was based on magisterial authority.
This, coupled with the notion of the magistrate as being responsible for enforcement of the judgments handed down by himself or his deputy, would surely suggest that he could give judgment for performance and enforce it specifically.
Generally, however, it is supposed that this was not possible.
Yet there are a few hints that the possibility of specific performance even of these judgments should not be dismissed  out of hand.
It is useful to begin with examining one piece of negative evidence, for the conviction that judgments could not consist in performance depends in good part on a text of Celsus.
If someone has promised that he will prevent the promisee suffering any loss, and he does cause that no such loss arises from that matter, he does what he promised; but if he does not, because he does not do what he promised, he is condemned in a sum of money, as happens in all obligations for performance.
Celsus is concerned with a case in which somebody has promised that he will ensure no loss is incurred by another person.
If loss is incurred, then the promisor is condemned in a sum of money.
Two points are worthy of notice.
First, that Celsus is quite plainly discussing obligations which are subject to the formulary system of procedure.
Second, that this obligation ‘to prevent loss’ is rather a strange one.
It is not quite the same as a promise of indemnity, since it suggests that the primary content is prevention rather than payment.
Yet if prevention has not taken place, then surely it is too late to speak of performance?
It is not open to the promisor to go back and undo the loss; he is able only to make it good, and this can be done only by an award of damages in the amount of the promisee's interest.
This then is not a true obligation for performance, because once the promise becomes actionable performance is no longer possible.
As such, it is not a very useful example of the principle that obligations for performance admit only of monetary judgments.
It is of course quite plausible that the principle of monetary judgments applied in formulary procedure.
The only thing is that this text gives no reason to suppose that it also applied in cognitio .
What of positive evidence?
This is both regrettably limited and frustratingly hard to interpret.
There is one apposite text which may be worth a closer look.
If something has been left for construction of a building for a town, the late emperor Marcus and Lucius Verus replied to Procula by rescript that each heir was liable for the whole.
They set a time, however, within which the coheir should set to construction, and after which they wished Procula alone to construct, imputing costs to her coheir for his share.
(24) So also in the case of a statue, a servitude, and other indivisible things, the late emperor Marcus gave the same ruling.
(25) If someone who has been instructed to construct a building is prepared to give the money to the town for it to do so itself, since the testator wished this to be done by that person himself, his plea will not be heard: so ruled the late emperor Marcus in a rescript.
Not all of this text is directly relevant, but the whole has been cited to demonstrate the connections that exist between the beginning and the end.
The texts are from Ulpian's work on trusts, and the immediate context some constitutions of Marcus Aurelius.
The whole sequence, therefore, appears to be concerned with rescripts of Marcus Aurelius on the subject of trusts for public building.
The argument is straightforward.
This entire case depends on the assumption that the trust to set up a building in the town will be enforced in specie , The plea that payment should be allowed instead is ignored: the town has a greater interest in acquiring a ready-made building than in constructing or commissioning one itself.
It might be thought that the word ‘ordered’(iussus ) rules out the possibility of interpreting this as a case involving a trust.
That is not so.
Instead iussus , as often, refers to judgment handed down by an official, whether magistrate or deputy judge.
The term emphasizes the official character of the judgment.
Here, evidently, one party has been ordered to perform, and is appealing against this award to an unsympathetic emperor.
It would be foolish to pretend that the evidence in favour of enforcing trusts for performance directly is very strong.
Many other cases raise only hints, come from uncertain contexts, or are doubtful for other reasons.
As a result it is not worth discussing them fully here.
One example may suffice: Ulpian, in discussing the duty on parents to maintain their children (and vice versa) uses of the consuls the words ali iubebunt , ‘they will order maintenance’.
The order for maintenance sounds as if it is something which will be enforced in specie ; yet in fact there is neither good reason to believe this, nor any need for that to be done.
Since alimenta are clearly fungible objects, it is quite enough for judgment to be given in a sum of money, and no doubt this (as the simpler course) was what was done.
While the evidence is not conclusive, there are therefore some grounds for believing that trusts for performance would be enforced directly and in specie .
It may be that this was done only where there was a public interest, but we have already seen that in the two areas in which trusts involved purely private interests, restitution of property and manumission, the remedies of cognitio were in any case adequate to secure specific performance.
The last point to consider is the advent of the interpretation of modus as trust.
The key text is a constitution of Gordian.
The emperor is confronted with the case of a modal legacy, the modus being restitution of some property to another individual.
Previously, he says, the intended individual could claim neither for a legacy nor a trust.
Severus, however, allowed a claim where the object was freedom of a slave.
Gordian goes on to provide that the same is now to apply in pecuniary cases: an action for trust is to be available in all circumstances.
This constitution is clear enough.
The only difficulty that arises is that there are several texts of Scaevola which seem to anticipate the interpretation of a pecuniary modus as a trust.
It is not necessary to examine each of these cases here, but sufficient to note that in each there is a disposition which is plainly a  legacy sub modo yet which is subsequently described by the jurist as a trust.
For the purposes of this chapter, this question of chronology makes only one difference, and that is in assessing how long the two separate procedural regimes lasted; how long therefore the use of a trust brought with it a distinct advantage compared with the use of a modal legacy.
The most systematic study of legacies sub modo , while drawing attention to the Scaevolan cases in which trusts are construed, points out that this amounted to no more than an isolated and sporadic tendency.
The systematic treatment of modus as trust is a feature first of the Severan period, a movement which began, as Gordian describes, with trusts of freedom but which gained momentum and spread to other types of trust as well.
To sum up.
Trusts marked a great advance in the enforcement of obligations in favour of third parties.
They not only allowed the third party an action which would have been impossible at civil law, but also permitted specific performance.
In private cases this was progress of a substantial order.
For public cases conclusions are more problematic.
The evidence is finely balanced, both regarding whether a modus in the public interest might be enforced, and regarding whether a trust would be.
The solution turns on delicate questions of the textual criticism of a few texts.
Perhaps it is unwise to draw a final conclusion, but the balance seems to be against systematic enforcement of modus for public purposes, and for enforcement of trusts of that kind.
The rationale of the difference lies in the differing potential of two diverse procedural systems.
A final point: the assimilation of modal legacy to trust implies that the trust had shown itself to be a more useful, perhaps more flexible legal institution.
It could therefore be allowed to absorb the modus .
This is one more argument in favour of the general thesis of this chapter: that the trust justified its existence and forged its path in legal practice by the procedural advantages which it was able to offer.
POST-CLASSICAL DEVELOPMENTS
Post-classical change in the law of procedure applying to trusts was very modest.
Unlike almost the whole of the rest of Roman law, trusts had by the end of the classical period been actionable in cognitio for centuries.
While other institutions needed to accommodate themselves to the decline of formulary procedure and the new predominance of cognitio , trusts were in need of no adjustment.
One of the major Western post-classical sources, Paul's sententiae , illustrates that little change had occurred.
The sententiae are still firmly attached to the view that trusts operate in personam , but they still know of the restricted real protection allowed by the missio .
It also seems to be the character of the trust in personam to which a later source, the fourth-century paraphrase of Gaius from Autun, means to refer in speaking of the beneficiary of a trust of a whole estate as having no right to take possession of the estate himself but having to claim it from the heir.
The workings of cognitio seem to have continued much as before, so the beneficiary of a trust would remain able to obtain specific performance.
The evidence is so thin that it is really not possible to say more than this.
Justinian, however, entirely transformed the procedural regime applying to trusts.
A series of constitutions from AD 529 to 531 brought in new and radical reform.
The premiss of the reform was that there was no longer a need to distinguish between legacies and trusts.
Missio in rem was an early casualty:quis in  rem missionis scrupulosis utatur ambagibus ?(‘who would use the pedantic detours of missio in rem?’).
The rhetorical question rightly goes unanswered, and the following paragraph consigns the missio unmourned to the shades.
Positive reform consisted first in introducing an actio in rem for the benefit of all legatees and beneficiaries of trusts; and second in introducing a tacit hypothec over the entire property left to them.
In case of doubt, Justinian ruled that these provisions applied not just to dispositions charged on the heir, but also to trusts charged on legatees and trust beneficiaries.
The classical days of trusts could hardly be more remote from this new system.
Its most striking characteristic is the abandonment of the notion that trusts are actionable essentially in personam .
That notion had a long history, and had by no means been deserted by post-classical law.
Change of such magnitude brought other consequences with it.
There was of course no longer need for missio , a remedy which had been designed for equitable reasons to allow a trust beneficiary to triumph over the constraints imposed by the limitation of trust protection to remedies in personam .
Almost as significant was the tacit hypothec now introduced.
Justinian comes close to saying that this was one of his favourite legal devices.
In the constitution he goes on to elaborate: the hypothec tacitly covered all property received by the heir or trustee from the estate of the deceased; the action for the hypothec lay for the same amount as the original actio in personam ; it extended only over property received from the estate and not over any personal property of the heir or trustee.
These reforms of Justinian in AD 529 proclaim that they are ‘imposing a single nature’ on trusts and legacies (or, to be more precise, imposing it on legatees and trust beneficiaries).
In fact  this sweeping assertion seems rather too broad: what they did was impose a single procedural regime.
Further legislation followed, which could more reasonably be said to have united the hitherto disparate regimes of legacy and trust.
In AD 531 it was ruled that any words, direct or precatory, would suffice for a bequest; that legacies should also have the nature of trusts and vice versa; and that each disposition was also the other.
A more complete unification would not be possible.
Soon afterwards, a prohibition on alienation was introduced: property under bequest was not to be alienated.
The rationale is interesting, and as so often with Justinian it has a moralistic flavour: ‘because it is quite ridiculous and unreasonable that an object which someone does not absolutely possess among his property he should be able to transfer to others or charge as a hypothec or pledge or manumit and deceive the hopes of others.’
These rules were to apply to property bequeathed unconditionally or else under a term (dies ).
Adopting a paternal tone, however, Justinian went on to point out that in the case of bequests under conditions or uncertain terms it would also be best to refrain from alienation to avoid the possibility of  grave expense arising from ensuing eviction.
Any such sale was, if the condition was realized, to be void ab initio , and time would not run against the legatee or trust beneficiary for the purposes of positive prescription.
Consequently an action in rem was available to the beneficiary in all circumstances.
Justinian concluded by regulating the position for the alienees of property bequeathed.
Buyers in good faith were left with their normal contractual remedies; creditors were allowed their actio pigneraticia ; but buyers in bad faith were deprived of all remedy except for return of the price, and no damages could be sought.
The considerations here are not so much juridical as ethical.
Justinian had a stronger sense than most of the propriety of the deceased's obtaining fulfilment of fond hopes; and he gives explicitly as his motive ut ultima elogia defunctorum legitimum finem sortiantur .
To summarize these far-reaching changes.
In all circumstances the beneficiary now had an action in rem in addition to his original protection in personam , and it could be enforced against any possessor.
The issue of the buyer's good or bad faith was relevant only to the damages he could claim from the seller in contract; the beneficiary himself was above such concerns.
Turning to the point of view of the trustee (or heir): all property received from the testator was subject to a tacit hypothec in favour of the beneficiary.
(In Justinian's law it might of course be subject to a number of hypothecs of that sort.)
An action in rem now lay against the trustee, where earlier law had allowed only an action in personam .
If we attempt to sum up the character of these innovations, we must say that they are practical but unprincipled.
No doubt the missio , with its insistence on proving bad faith, had not been a wholly satisfactory remedy.
A more practical way of securing the interests of trust beneficiaries against alienation by the trustee was needed.
Yet if there was one principle to which classical (and even post-classical) law had held fast, it was that trusts were actionable only in personam .
With Justinian this principle fell:missio was abandoned, and actions in rem and hypothecary actions were introduced.
His solution would have been unthinkable in classical times.
It is at once the strength and the weakness of Justinian's law that its grasp of principle is slack: a powerful command of principle had led the classical lawyers to develop a finely worked system; yet, that done, they were entrapped in it and helpless against its inadequacies.
With Justinian came the potential for drastic change.
His attachment to classical principle was not so great as to deter him from practical innovation.
If the cost of a practical system was the abandonment of the guiding principle of the law of trusts, so be it.
CONCLUSION
Roman law concentrates intently on actions rather than rights.
Perhaps then it is not surprising that the procedural differences between the law of trusts and the civil law emerge as so significant.
The flexibility of the substantive law of trusts is reflected in its procedural versatility.
This versatility rested on two bases: first, the structure of the rights set up by trusts; second, the procedural system by which they could be enforced.
Trusts for the first time made it easy to create a right in a person who would have been a third party at civil law.
This structure had for long been partially responsible for delay in their legal recognition, since the civil law had not yet come to express it in terms it could comprehend.
The advent of the new political regime changed this; for the first time it was possible to conceive of a legal order which rested on a basis different from that of the civil law.
This done, it was not long before the advantages of trusts in creating rights in third parties came to be seen and to be put to good use.
Apart from structure, the procedural system offered great advantage.
Cognitio allowed another break with tradition: the  rule that all judgments must be in money was abandoned.
Trusts for manumission were enforced.
Trusts for restitution of property were executed in ipsam rem .
Trusts for performance seem also to have been enforced, at any rate where there was a public interest.
In certain circumstances the trust could also be enforced against third parties in possession of the trust property; while in the event of insolvency of the trustee the trust beneficiary had a claim for the trust property itself, rather than a personal claim for a share in the debts recovered from the trustee.
These advantages of the procedural system are the advantages of classical times.
In post-classical law the traditional procedural scheme of the civil law evaporated, and all claims were heard under the cognitio procedure.
From that point on, legacies too enjoyed the benefits of execution in ipsam rem .
Yet the development of the law of trusts had taken place within a period in which it alone could offer these advantages; to them its rise owed much.
From Morals to Obligations: Evolution
FUSION
Per omnia exaequata sunt legata fideicommissis : ‘In all respects legacies have been made equivalent to trusts’.
With these words begins book 30 of the Digest , the first of several which cover the detail and complexity of the law applying to legacies and trusts.
The words are attributed to Ulpian.
But did he write them?
The first section of this chapter sums up the differences which have emerged between legacies and trusts in the course of this book, and goes on to consider whether or how far or in what sense classical law can be said to have reached a fusion of legacy and trust.
Capacity to receive benefits at civil law and under the law of trusts was the topic of Chapters II and III.
They came to the conclusion that trusts offered a significant advantage only in their Republican days; in that period it may well be that peregrines and other disadvantaged classes made good use of them.
But the advent of actionability brought change; and the culmination of that change was reached with Hadrian.
By his day the classes who could receive benefits were the same under both systems.
Disqualified persons had to rely on secrecy.
Chapters IV to VII all illustrated the consequences of certain principles of the law of trusts.
(i) Trusts could be charged on persons other than a testamentary heir; on anyone in fact who received a benefit under succession to the deceased.
This had immense implications.
Not only did it make it possible to conceive of the settlement, a succession of trusts, where a trust was set up in favour of a beneficiary who was himself charged with a trust in favour of a further beneficiary, but it also allowed  trusts to be set up on intestacy, which led to the growth of an advanced system of property disposition on death which had absolutely no connection with a will.
(ii) Trusts were not bound to a set form.
The consequence was that they were able to expand in a way not open to the civil law.
They did not demand a search for set words; they demanded instead that a disposition be scrutinized to see if it satisfied the law of trusts (the principles of benefit and intention were the minimal requirements).
The significance was not that a testator's intentions were allowed to play more freely, but that for the first time the law was dealing with an open rather than a closed system, a system that offered unlimited possibilities for expansion.
An obvious instance of expansion is the admissibility of setting up a trust indirectly, without addressing the trustee.
(iii) Trusts were actionable under a distinct procedural system,cognitio .
It was a free system with none of the formalism of the ordinary civil procedure.
It also allowed execution against the trust property itself, instead of being bound to condemnation in a sum of money.
The procedural structure of trusts also lent them great advantages in setting up dispositions in favour of third parties, and enhanced the chances of those dispositions being observed and enforced.
The advantages compared with ordinary civil procedure were largely limited to Rome, since each province had only one jurisdictional magistrate.
In sum: the classical law of trusts had already lost the advantage of capacity, but it retained the advantages of being bound to neither testamentary heir, nor form, nor formulary procedure.
There was post-classical change.
The procedural advantages persisted even at Rome only so long as there were two procedural systems, which at the end of the third century ceased to be the case.
The advantages of form disappeared in the first quarter of the fourth century, when Constantine abolished the formal requirements of the civil law.
Yet even the post-classical trust retained its independence of a testamentary heir.
And this was put to particularly good service in the context of intestacy.
Post-classical law associated trusts above all with non-testamentary dispositions.
Even in post-classical law, then, some differences of significance between legacies and trusts persisted.
All the more in classical law, when the formal and procedural differences still applied.
Of course the two regimes, of legacy and trust, were assimilated to each other in certain relatively minor respects; but Gaius was still able in the mid-second century to state that there were many differences between legacies and trusts (multum autem differunt ), and this was after the rules on capacity had finally been brought into line by Hadrian.
It seems unlikely that, seventy years later, Ulpian thought that all difference between the two institutions had been eliminated.
Two questions arise.
First, what might Ulpian have meant?
Second, how to explain other (earlier) classical evidence which seems imprecise in using the terms fideicommissum and legatum ?
Returning indirectly to Ulpian, it may be useful to contrast a statement made by Paul: ‘Both trust and gift upon death are included in the term ‘legacy'’.'
This is startling stuff until its context is taken into account: the source of this passage is Paul's work on the lex Iulia et Papia , and it is quite evident from that that Paul intended no general statement, and could with justice complain about his remarks being taken out of context.
What he was actually talking about was the application of the lex Iulia et Papia ; and what he meant no doubt was that, for the purposes of those statutes, the rules expressed for legacies apply to trusts and gifts upon death too.
His text, then, is an instance of statutory interpretation rather than substantive and wholesale innovation.
If, as Paul suggests, attention to the context is a way of resolving problems, we may return to the text of Ulpian.
His remark comes from book 67 of his commentary on the edict, and palingenesia shows that he was discussing an interdict, most  likely the interdict quod legatorum which was available to the bonorum possessor to recover property which a possessor was purporting to hold under a legacy.
Was the interdict extended to apply to trusts as well?
A case might be made for this (although there is no other evidence for it) and so substantive interference in Ulpian's text could be taken to be limited to generalization or to the addition of per omnia .
But a serious difficulty remains.
Ulpian's words do not at all suggest that a remedy available for legacies was extended to cover trusts as well, but the reverse.
The consequence is that we cannot just suppose that the text has been wrenched from its interdictal context and left unchanged, except for the addition of per omnia .
Since it is hard to see how in any respect, in the context of interdicts, legacies could have been brought into line with trusts, at the very least we must suppose that the compilers have turned the text around, writing of making legacies equivalent to trusts where Ulpian had written of making trusts equivalent to legacies.
As Ferrini laments, this is a case in which we must be content to practise the ars nesciendi .
What about other texts?
There are many cases in the Digest in which there is a confusion between legacy and trust.
Might this suggest that the difference was no longer regarded as very important?
Or ought it rather to suggest that the texts do not record the words of the classical jurists very precisely?
Or is there perhaps some other more attractive explanation?
It is useful to begin by considering in what circumstances there would be no significant difference between legacy and trust.
The following criteria would have to be satisfied:(i) the disposition would have to be contained in a will and be charged on the heir under that will; and either (ii) involve a sum of money, or (iii) involve property but be heard by a provincial  court.
Only these circumstances are adequate to eliminate the substantive and procedural advantages which trusts could offer.
Cases of this kind might not be altogether uncommon; in a reasonable proportion of cases the distinction between legacy and trust might not be essential to the resolution of the dispute.
Yet surely no jurist worth his salt would be tempted to abandon a distinction between two quite disparate legal institutions purely because in the case at hand it was not crucial.
There is another point.
Testators sometimes confirmed their civil-law dispositions in the form of a trust.
This has rightly been seen as an impetus towards the fusion of legacy and trust.
But so far as the confusions about to be examined are concerned, it does not solve the difficulty.
They are cases in which only one type of disposition is involved, but it is then misdescribed as the other.
The solution to the difficulty demands instead a review of all the cases in which legacy and trust are confused.
There are sixty.
But it will emerge that there is little reason to believe that much of the confusion is classical.
The great bulk of the cases come from the work of Q. Cervidius Scaevola.
It is reasonable to suppose that this fact is significant, even allowing for the fact that Scaevola is disproportionately well represented in the Digest by cases on the law of succession.
Many of the cases are responsa , in which the jurist is answering a legal enquiry.
It is true enough that not all responsa can be regarded as arising from actual cases, and some are purely hypothetical, but realistic detail often allows us to suppose that an actual case is in question.
Muddles in language often occur (as is only to be expected) in the petitioner's question rather than in the jurist's answer.
These cases may be discounted for the present purpose, which is not to see what lay people believed or imagined about the law, but what distinctions and doctrines the jurists who developed it were employing.
The cases fall into two categories: those in which the disposition described in the problem is evidently a legacy, yet the  petitioners describe it as a trust; and the opposite case, where the petitioners describe as a legacy what is really a trust.
There are actually also instances in which the petitioners describe a disposition as both.
It is far more difficult to account for a further type of confusion.
Here the account of the legal problem itself refers to a disposition as a legacy or a trust, and then goes on to quote words of the other type.
Plainly this confusion cannot be laid at the door of the petitioner.
A typical example is a problem in which the relevant clause quoted from the will is introduced with the words ita legavit , and the words quoted from the will are in the form dari volo , an expression absolutely standard for trusts.
Essentially the same point arises where the legal problem is introduced by the monstrous expression per fideicommissum legavit .
Worse still are cases in which only the jurist seems to be in doubt as to what kind of disposition is involved.
It is rarely possible to explain this as a matter of mere incompetent glossing.
Cases cover the whole spectrum from those in which the jurist treats a legacy as a trust to those where he treats a trust as a legacy, plus one in which he seems to treat the trust as both.
How might these difficulties be explained?
Two hypotheses are worth mentioning, either of which would account for a significant number of cases.
First, that the verb legare can be  used in a neutral sense meaning not ‘to leave property by legacy’ but quite simply ‘to leave’without presumption as to the kind of legal institution involved.
Second, that the phenomenon observed has something to do with Scaevola and with him alone.
Of the genuinely difficult cases, those in which the jurist appears to use unclear language, most can be explained on the linguistic argument.
There are two in which the use of the verb legare is generic, and could reasonably refer to any kind of bequest.
Three more use the verb legare in a sense which might be similar, although it is less clear.
Two are more difficult, because in the first the jurist uses the substantive legatum , which it is much less easy to take to refer to a trust; and in the second what is involved is a legacy per praeceptionem .
The linguistic explanation of legare as a general term helps, then, to explain some serious awkwardnesses, but it is not clear that it disposes of all entirely.
And it is still a curiosity that the broad sense seems to be practically confined to the work of Scaevola.
Of the cases in which confusion between legacy and trust occurs, forty-nine come from the work of Scaevola.
Nine of them may be attributed to petitioners.
Other jurists between them reach a grand total of eleven cases (none of which may be attributed to petitioners).
When indifference as to terminology is a recurrent feature in the work of only one jurist, and when 80 per cent of all instances of this indifference are found in his work, there is considerable difficulty in supposing that a general rapprochement between legacy and trust had taken place.
Yet before deciding on the implications of this it is worth examining the texts of the other jurists.
In his will Lucius Titius left to Publius Maevius his office or whatever sum could be realized from its sale together with its benefits.
But when Lucius Titius survived his will he sold his office, exacted a price, and gave it to the person to whom in his will he wished the office or its price to be given.
After the death of Lucius Titius, Publius Maevius again demanded from the heirs of Lucius Titius either the office or its price.
Celsus: I think the price of the office ought not to be paid unless the legatee has shown that the testator intended him to receive the price of the office again, even after payment had been made.
But if during his lifetime the testator gave the legatee not the whole but part of the price of the office, a claim for the remainder remains unless the heir has shown that the testator departed from this too.
For the burden of proof that the intention of the deceased changed is on the person who denies the trust.
The case is straightforward: the testator left his office (in the civil service, for example) or its value to a certain person, but  changed his plan before death, sold the office and gave its value to that person.
The will still contained the bequest of the office, or its value, and the beneficiary attempted to claim under it again.
Celsus refused him.
A complication is then discussed: if the testator had not paid the full value of the office as a lifetime gift, a claim for the excess would remain.
This disposition is framed as a trust, as the use of the words dari voluerit makes clear (the word fideicommissum also features at the end).
Celsus, however, twice refers to the beneficiary as a legatee.
The use of the term legatarius makes it much harder to rely on the explanation that legare has a broad sense; there was after all an accepted term,fideicommissarius , for the beneficiary of a trust.
The choice, then, is between supposing that Celsus was not much concerned about using his terms precisely, and supposing that these words are not all his.
Even those who support the view of a gradual assimilation of legacy and trust in the classical period in order to account for examples of loose language have some difficulty here: for nobody really wants to suppose that this process had got very far in Celsus' day.
It is altogether more likely that we are faced with an interpolation.
The most moderate view is that Celsus' discussion has been abbreviated.
This seems likely, to judge from the profusion and confusion of qualifications and subordinate clauses.
It is likely that Celsus discussed the matter at greater length, and with greater clarity.
The chaos then results from the compilers' eagerness to compress his discussion of several variants into one example burdened with exceptions and qualifications.
It is notable that the term legatarius occurs only in the qualifying clauses, and need not therefore be attributed to Celsus in this context.
If a testator has left a legacy of something belonging to him and has alienated it as a consequence of urgent necessity, the trust can be claimed unless it should be shown that the testator intended to adeem  it: moreover proof of changed intention is to be required from the heirs.
The abrupt change from legacy to trust is very striking.
Should we suppose that Ulpian has adopted the broad use of the verb legare , and therefore eliminate the difficulty by translating merely ‘left’(instead of‘left a legacy’)?
The answer is ‘no’.
There is no reason to suppose that Ulpian favoured this broad use, and the evidence is against it.
It is far better to follow the analysis of Riccobono (who was not by any means a radical interpolationist) and admit that the text as it stands is not how Ulpian left it.
Ulpian would no doubt have been uncomfortable with the harshness of the jump from legacy to trust.
It is likely that the passage has been abbreviated: the compilers have preserved the beginning and the end of his discussion of the effect of the alienation of an object bequeathed.
They have disposed of the different regimes relevant to the different kinds of legacies, and they have adopted for all of them the rule applying to trusts.
The confusions found in this text of Ulpian seem then to have been imported.
The remaining instances of confusion can be discussed briefly.
The reason is that they are laconically worded, and deal with problems other than the relation between legacies and trusts.
As a result, their analysis does not really advance our understanding of the problem.
There are nine cases to consider.
(i) Ulpian discusses the same problem as Celsus, a bequest of an office (militia ), but in Ulpian's case the beneficiary is a slave.
Is the bequest due?
The decision is that its value is due, so long as the testator was aware the beneficiary was a slave.
Otherwise the bequest is void.
The bequest is described as a legatum but the action as a fideicommissi persecutio .
It is clear that Ulpian discussed the topic of aestimatio more fully in this book; here too the most likely explanation of the oddity is abbreviation. (ii) Paul  mentions the case of a legacy left by a testator to his wife.
It is a legacy per vindicationem of property ‘provided [i.e. bought]for his wife’(uxoris causa parata ).
Paul speaks of suing for it before the praetor fideicommissarius .
How odd.
There is no reason why the mention of the praetor should have been interpolated.
It is possible that a trust clause may have been omitted.
But since the text does not consider the question, it is impossible to say.
At any rate this seems a very flimsy basis for the suggestion that the praetor fideicommissarius had jurisdiction over legacies too; and on procedural grounds one would rather resist that proposition.
(iii) In one text Ulpian quotes a rescript of Antoninus Pius.
Ulpian's own case is concerned with trusts, but at the end of his text, in the course of citing the rescript, mention of legacies is made.
Fortunately the rescript is preserved elsewhere in the Digest .
From this it is plain that Ulpian cited quite accurately, but that his version has been compressed, whether by himself or the compilers.
In the course of this compression of the rescript the mention of a legacy has crept in, although it is out of place.
(iv) Modestinus speaks of horses ‘legated by trust’(per fideicommissum legati ).
This appears to be an interpolation, and Krueger is probably right to suggest that the original had per damnationem legati .
It is worth comparing a text of Papinian in the same title which deals with the same question, but which employs the perfectly acceptable expression per fideicommissum relicti .
We are left with only five texts in which the linguistic confusion does not appear to be attributable to textual interference.
(v) Pomponius has one case which rather resembles those of Scaevola: a disposition is quoted which has the wording of a trust, but it is described as a legacy.
(vi) The same may be said for a passage of Paul.
(vii) In another passage  (immediately adjacent in the Palingenesia to the preceding one) Paul speaks of a bequest of land, and later of a claim in trust.
Here the verb used for the bequest is legare , which may be sufficient explanation, although it is not Paul's normal usage.
(viii) In another case Paul deals with property left to a beneficiary who is charged with trusts of freedom for slaves.
The beneficiary is twice described as a legatee, although at the beginning we are told that she acquired per fideicommissum .
(ix) For a final case of Paul, in which a discussion of secret trusts ends with the word legatum , no obvious explanation presents itself.
The evidence has been reviewed.
What conclusions does it allow?
First, that there are cases in which for no apparent reason legacy and trust seem to be used imprecisely.
We began with sixty cases, most of them Scaevolan.
Rather more than ten of Scaevola's cases may be explained by their origins in the words of laymen, or as possible glosses or interpolations: just under forty remain.
As for other jurists, six out of eleven cases seem to be interpolated, so we are left with five, one of Pomponius and four of Paul.
Before concluding, there is a little more to say about the Scaevolan evidence.
Several of the dubious cases of jurists such as Ulpian have been explained as the product of compilatorial abbreviation.
This explanation does not work so well for the majority of the texts of Scaevola, which are not excerpts from a dogmatic tract in which the jurist was discussing the disparate regimes of legacy and trust, but opinions given in practical cases.
They would have offered Scaevola little or no opportunity (especially considering his notorious brevity) to reflect on the workings of legacies if the case at hand was concerned with a trust.
If in the works of Scaevola there is genuine blurring of the borderline between legacies and trusts, why might this be?
The difficulties cannot plausibly be attributed to the compilers, who would hardly have confined themselves almost exclusively to interfering with the text of Scaevola.
The works of Scaevola apart, classical law seems to have continued to distinguish between legacy and trust.
The assimilation of legacy and trust is not, then, a general phenomenon but is related somehow to Scaevola in particular.
A choice still remains.
Is the cause a peculiarity of Scaevolan language, or a peculiarity of the transmission of Scaevola's works?
Or both?
The first option is not very attractive.
It involves supposing that Scaevola practised a healthy indifference to linguistic distinctions held valid and significant by his contemporaries and successors in Roman jurisprudence.
The differences between legacies and trusts persisted throughout classical law.
It is true that in some respects the two institutions were assimilated, but enough has been said to indicate that the most fundamental disparities, in structure and in procedure, remained unchanged.
The works of no jurist other than Scaevola give even a hint that the distinction had become unimportant, and works on trusts continued to be written separately from those on the civil law of succession.
Nor can we appeal for explanation to the notion of Scaevola as provincial practitioner.
Even if he did have a provincial practice (as his likely African origin may suggest), he also held office in Rome, probably had connections with Gaul, and is attested in the consilium of Marcus Aurelius.
Furthermore (and perhaps most convincingly), even in the provinces there were differences between legacies and trusts; not in procedure, it is true, but certainly in interpretation and in the event of intestacy.
What of the second option?
Has a pre-Justinianic source supplied the confusion for Scaevola?
The transmission of the works of Scaevola is highly complex.
There is reason to suppose that neither of his collections of legal opinions (digesta and responsa ) was published during his lifetime, and that they first appeared after the death of Ulpian, in the epi-classical  period.
By that time the level of legal culture had dropped, although the content of the law had not changed much.
Since in the epi-classical period the differences between legacies and trusts persisted there is no reason to suppose that the publisher of Scaevola's works would have used the terms interchangeably as a matter of deliberate policy.
On the other hand, it is conceivable that he would not have been in a position to appreciate the differences very clearly.
This explanation may not seem very attractive.
Yet how else do we explain that (i) differences remained between legacies and trusts;(ii) the distinction between them is maintained in practically all of the texts of all jurists other than Scaevola?
To suppose that Scaevola was in a linguistic world of his own is unappealing.
Since there are other reasons to believe that Scaevola did not himself publish his collections of opinions, it seems best to suppose that it was on later publication that difficulties arose.
This may find support in the fact that most of the confusions in terminology are found in what might be called the ‘editorial’ parts of the texts, in which the context is being briefly introduced before the decision of the master is quoted.
What, then, of the notion of a late classical fusion of legacy and trust?
The fact is, such a fusion did not take place.
The evidence falls into two categories: Scaevola and the rest.
The bulk, the Scaevolan cases, seem to be most readily accounted for by the textual transmission of his works.
About half of the instances in other jurists seem to be the work of the compilers.
Five cases or so remain, for which no explanation has been given.
Yet these will hardly bear the weight of a theory so grand as the fusion of legacy and trust.
The linguistic phenomena we see in the texts reflect not classical fusion of law but post-classical confusion of language.
Post-classical times brought change.
Procedure became uniform in the third century, while early in the fourth the differences of form were abolished by Constantine.
From that time onwards  there was reason still, but not so much reason, to distinguish between trusts and legacies.
Trusts, after all, could still feature in unconfirmed codicils, although with the post-classical application of formal requirements to all kinds of documents even this difference soon became nugatory.
The post-classical tradition is not altogether simple, and the word ‘fusion’ does not adequately convey the processes which went on.
In his account of the rumours surrounding Constantius will, Ammianus points out that the gossip had it that Julian had been instituted heir and friends had been left legacies and trusts.
The Epitome or Gaius' Institutes still distinguishes between legacies and trusts, and even goes to the trouble of explaining what the difference is.
Awareness of the distinction did not just disappear.
Yet it is true to say that the nuances of the legal institutions were imperfectly understood: if the epitomator of Gaius knew that there were differences between legacies and trusts, he still did not know that the word fideicommissarius should refer to the beneficiary of a trust and not to the trustee.
In a way what is most striking, however, is that there is so little evidence from post-classical times: Levy's Ergänzungsindex provides a fascinating illustration of just how many sources completely lack references to trusts.
But it would be bold to argue that these silences represent a legal change: the absorption of the trust into the legacy.
They represent much more a decline in the use of all classical legal categories.
The Theodosian Code too has little to say about trusts.
Mostly when they are mentioned they are mentioned in the same breath as legacies.
The reason for this, however, is that almost all the references are found in what are intended to be exhaustive lists of ways of acquiring property: heretics, for instance, are debarred from acquiring under any title including legacy and trust; curial property received in any way (including legacy and trust) is taxable.
The same applies to the cases in which trusts are  contrasted with inheritances: they are intended to stress the fact that the law applies to intestate as well as testamentary dispositions.
With Justinian matters become simple, as new rules are decisively promulgated.
Legacies and trusts are the same: if there is any deficiency in the law of legacies it is to be supplied from the law of trusts, and vice versa.
The deletion of differences:per omnia exaequata sunt legata fideicommissis .
The words are worth one last look.
The way they are phrased may make it hard for us to understand their origin.
But they provide an accurate picture of what had taken place under Justinian.
The words make no classical sense, but they  distil the essence of Justinian's reforms, and they are the most fitting introduction to his books on legacies and trusts.
Where there had been two legal institutions there was now only one; and the new composite institution was far more a trust than a legacy.