

THE ROMAN WAY OF LIFE.
The Roman conquest of Britain started in earnest in the year AD 43 and by about AD 120, the whole of Britain up to Hadrian's wall in the north became a Roman province.
Then, for more than 300 years until the legions left, the Romans ruled Britain, bringing their talent for organisation to the country, building roads which made travel easier, and all the time controlling the province through the administration of Roman law — backed up by the powerful legions of the Roman army.
The native Britons had lived in groups of round thatched houses whose walls were made of wattle and daub — mud plastered between woven branches.
Some of the settlements were surrounded by ditches and fences and could be fiercely defended against other warring tribes.
But the Romans soon built well-planned towns, with a formal market place and large public buildings at a number of sites spread about the country.
In East Anglia, Colchester became the Roman Army Headquarters and later an important civil town.
The whole of the region was soon affected by the Romans.
Agriculture was very important to the Romans in Britain, because without the food and clothing it provided, they could not survive.
The centre of agriculture was the villa, and many of these were built in Suffolk.
Although some of them were just small farms which had developed out of native settlements, others were country houses at the centres of large estates.
A few of the larger villas were occupied by Roman officials and others by native British landowners who adopted the Roman way of life.
As time passed the Roman officials and the new immigrants married Britons and had families so that the differences between the conquerors and the conquered began to disappear.
In a few generations, there was a new class of Britons who regarded themselves as part of the Roman empire and ‘Roman’ in a broad sense.
Many Roman villas were built in the form of a rectangle — buildings on three sides and a wall on the fourth.
The entrance was in the middle of the wall opposite the villa house where the owner and his family lived.
The courtyard in the centre was often laid out as a formal garden with sometimes a fountain and a statue to a Roman God.
The buildings on either side would have been for the slaves and workshops, the bath-house and latrines.
The villa complex was the heart of the estate.
Most of the work was done by the slaves who, provided they did not try to escape, were often reasonably treated although their quarters were cramped and poorly finished.
Apart from cultivating the land and herding animals, the villa provided all the needs of the estate in its own workshops.
There were often carpenters, blacksmiths and shoemakers, as well as people making clothes, pottery and basketwork.
The villa was run to support everyone who lived there, but as well as this, surplus products, especially wool and grain, were traded with other parts of Britain and with provinces all over the Roman Empire.
In exchange, many goods came into the country — some of them never seen in Britain before.
Roman Merchant Ship
Mosaic
Large, flat bricks
Brick piers
Hot air
Hypocaust
BUILDING THE VILLA
There were several types of plan used for villas, and the grandest were made in the form of an open square with the buildings forming four sides of an open courtyard.
In some less ambitious plans, the villa started as a simpler rectangular building but would sometimes be expanded with wings on either side as the family became more and more prosperous, or the property was sold to a richer owner.
Roof tiles
In some rooms, the space under the floor was heated by the hypocaust system.
A wood-burning furnace, stoked from outside the house, kept at least two slaves busy.
The materials used to build villas varied according to what was easily available nearby.
Stone, flint and tile were used, as well as wood.
In Suffolk, most villas had footings of stone or flint, with timer-framed or clay lump walls.
The inside walls were plastered and painted.
Roofs were made of thatch, or covered with pottery tiles which the Romans were the first to make in Britain.
Seeing a typical villa from a distance, it would have looked to us rather like a Tudor house.
Heavy beams were lifted into place using a wooden hoist, but a lot of the work was done by sheer muscle power and would have been carried out by slaves.
Hammer
Mattock
Chisel
THE DINING ROOM
Britons were soon enjoying new and exciting things to eat — Roman snails cooked in wine sauce, and even stuffed dormice prepared in many different ways.
Mealtimes were not just for eating, but were important social occasions.
Guests reclined on couches, observing strict rules as to their positions.
They reached over to a low table set between them, to take food from large dishes, with their fingers or a spoon, or smeared pieces of meat on the point of a knife.
Wine was carefully mixed with water, because drinking undiluted wine was considered barbaric.
A few people stayed loyal to the traditional beer, but they risked being scoffed at by their more fashionable friends.
While the diners laughed and chatted together, perhaps half-listening to music, the slaves were kept busy bringing in each new course and clearing away the empty dishes.
BEDROOMS
Yet another new idea the Romans brought to Britain was the private bedroom.
Some villas had several rooms set aside just for sleeping in, and in the larger houses there might even be spare rooms for guests.
Beds varied in their design and some were raised platforms made out of wood or stone.
In other houses, they used a wooden frame with leather straps or woven webbing fixed across it, in a similar way to a modern bed.
Mattresses were laid on top of the platform or frame, or sometimes simply on the floor.
Some had pillows and blankets but many people just wrapped themselves in their outdoor cloaks.
The slaves who usually lived in one of the separate wings of the villa, slept together in a dormitory.
THE BATH HOUSE
Although the idea of regular bathing was a new one to the Britons, it soon became fashionable and was another sign of being properly civilised.
Villa owners impressed their neighbours by having the largest and best bath houses they could afford.
Usually they consisted of a suite of three adjoining rooms — cold, warm and hot-heated by the hypocaust system under the floor.
Hot and cold plunge baths were provided and it was the custom to move from one room to another, sometimes bathing, sometimes playing games or exercising, or simply relaxing in the warmth and enjoying oneself.
Villa bath houses usually had carefully decorated interiors.
The walls were painted with rectangular panels and borders, and mosaic floors formed pictures.
The whole atmosphere was tastefulness and leisure.
Soap was unheard of at the time so to get clean the hot, sweaty skin was rubbed with oil and then scraped with a strigil — a scraper made of wood or bronze.
The Romans left Britain in the early fifth century and the fashion for bath houses gradually passed.
Like so much else the Romans had established, they and the villas were left to decay and collapse.
THE KITCHEN
After the Roman Conquest many new foods and spices became available.
Villa owners developed new eating habits and this affected the way in which their food was cooked and served.
Exotic dishes were sometimes prepared, and recipes were carefully followed to get the right results.
For formal meals, there would be a good many courses to arrange, so there was a lot of work to do.
One recipe suggested the cook should prepare a dish of snails in wine sauce.
The method was to feed the snails on milk until they were too fat to get back into their shells, then fry them.
The sauce, a mixture of many ingredients, was poured over the snails and the whole simmered for half an house.
For this dish alone, the ingredients included large snails, milk, salt, oil, black pepper, lovage, coriander , rue, honey, wine and liquamen — a fish sauce.
All the cooking would be done by slaves, and the kitchens must have been difficult to keep clean and mice and cockroaches a familiar sight.
The difference between the comfort of the villa owner's quarters and the room sin which his slaves worked and lived, tells us a good deal about the low standards slaves had to accept for themselves.
Cooking was done on an open, charcoal-burning stove, built at waist height, often in the corner of the kitchen.
Cooking pots were mostly made of fired clay.
Some foods were stored in covered jars, although meats and herbs would be hunt from the ceiling.
Using so many spices helped to disguise the fact that the food was often far from fresh.
Crossbow brooch
Brooch, with enamelled bow
Enamelled disc brooch
Enamel fantail brooch
JEWELLERY
Before the arrival of the Romans, the native Britons had been skilled at many kinds of crafts.
One of these was the making of jewellery.
After some years the designs from the Empire influenced fashionable people in their taste, and Roman style bronze brooches and bangles, some of them made in Britain, were worn by the men and women of prosperous families.
Bronze, an alloy of mainly copper and tin, could be polished until it looked almost like gold, and the technique of making it had been known in Britain for centuries.
DRESS
Like many other aspects of their lives, the way Britons dressed, especially the upper classes, was influenced by Roman taste.
A lady would usually wear a long, flowing tunic, fastened at the shoulders with brooches, tied under the bust, and bloused at the waist.
Her hair would have been worn in ringlets, or perhaps plaited and held in place with decorative pins.
On special occasions, she might add her best pieces of jewellery — rings set with gems and bracelets.
Although upper class men varied their clothing rather more, according to what they happened to be doing, for formal public appearances they sometimes wore the toga.
This was a large garment, about 5 metres wide and 2 metres in length.
It was wrapped around the body and over the left shoulder where it was draped in folds which nearly reached the floor.
Otherwise, out of doors, more practical hooded cloaks were worn over knee-length tunics.
Sandals in various styles, often designed to cover the ankles, were made out of leather.
Most clothes were of woven wool or linen, and the richest people even had silk garments.
FARMING
The Romans were great organisers, and as they needed to feed their legions to survive, they soon improved the way in which farming was done.
Gradually, agricultural tools improved as well.
Better ploughs meant more land could be planted.
Large two-handled scythes made harvesting easier and iron-shod spades allowed drainage ditches to be cut.
Most of the work on the land was done by the villa slaves under the eagle eye of the owner, and it was the way he organised his labourers which produced the better results.
Crops of corn and vegetables were cultivated, along with many herbs and plants not known in Britain before.
Cattle herds were also kept.
The flocks of sheep which grazed in the  pastures near the villa were similar to the Soay breed — hardy creatures which produced milk and hard-wearing wool.
One of the ideas the Romans brought to Britain was the fertilization of the soil by manuring.
Animal and human manure was spread over the land, and about twenty tons might be used on the single acre if root crops were being grown.
For the hardest work, like ploughing or dragging felled trees away, oxen were used.
To draw a heavy plough through wet clay soil, a pair of oxen, yoked together was used.
Both corn and cattle were exported from Britain under the Romans, which shows how successful their way of farming became.
DEATH AND BURIAL
For the first two hundred years of the Roman influence in Britain, the bodies of the dead were usually cremated, but by the third century they were burying them instead.
Religion was sometimes a mixture of Celtic, Roman and Christian beliefs and this affected the rites at death ceremonies.
Some graves have been found showing that bowls of food were buried with the body — this was to provide for the journey to the Underworld, which many people believed was made by a dead person's spirit.