

BIRD HABITATS IN SUSSEX
GEOLOGY AND LAND USE
By R. D. M. Edgar
ALTHOUGH THE landscape of Sussex has been substantially modified by man, the basic geology and soil types still have an important bearing on the vegetation and crops, and hence the habitats available for birds now found in the county.
Most of Sussex, except the coastal plain to the south of Chichester, lies within the central southern portion of the geological unit known as the Weald.
This extends westwards into Hampshire and Wiltshire, north and east into Surrey and Kent, and south-east under the Channel into northern France.
The Weald is an approximate oval with its long axis running west-north-west to south-east, measuring 140km. by 65km.
The whole was created beneath the sea and laid down as a series of overlying strata which emerged as an elevated dome, the cap being subsequently removed by erosion.
The strata are now much folded and appear on the surface as a series of concentric circles.
The oldest rocks are in the central part, the youngest on the periphery.
In descending order of deposition (i.e., from the outside towards the centre) the succession is as follows:
a
Chalk
b
Upper Greensand
c
Gault
d
Lower Greensand
e
Weald Clay
f
Hastings Beds
The Hastings Beds are further sub-divided, again in descending order, into:
Tunbridge Wells Sands
Wadhurst Clay
Ashdown Sands
Fig. 1 (p. 2) shows how these strata occur in Sussex and they are discussed in more detail under the headings which follow.
Chalk
The South Downs emerge from the sea in the south of the county as a wave-washed platform from which rise the cliffs from Brighton to Beachy Head, at 236 metres the highest chalk cliff in Britain.
From Beachy Head west to the Hampshire boundary their total length is 93km. and the greatest width 9km.
They are divided by four south-flowing rivers, the Arun, Adur, Ouse and Cuckmere, and are characteristically rolling or whale-backed in outline.
The entire north face is a very steep scarp which reaches in places to a height of over 240 metres, but to the south is a more gentle dip slope towards the sea.
A distinctive feature of the Downs are the coombes or dry valleys formed through erosion by water derived from the thawing of frozen land at the time of the last Ice Age.
Many of these coombes have thick deposits of sand and clay at their bases and woodland has often been allowed to develop here.
Generally, however, the soils are thin and very infertile.
In places the Downs are capped by clays supporting beech woods and sand supporting vegetation known as chalk heath, a mixture of species characteristic of both basic and acidic soils.
The Downs were one of the first areas of Sussex to be colonised by man and were probably quickly cleared of their original vegetation of scrubby woodland.
Most woodland is now found west of the River Arun, the downs further east being notably lacking in tree cover except for a few extensive forestry plantations, which now form a high proportion of all downland woodland.
With the lack of grazing pressure much of the scarp slope has developed scrub and is slowly reverting to woodland.
Grassland persists mainly on slopes that are too steep to be ploughed, but much of the downland is now under arable cultivation.
These changes in agricultural practice are discussed in the section on Farmland.
Upper Greensand and Gault Clay
At the foot of the scarp slope of the Downs are the two formations of the Upper Greensand and Gault Clay; both are very narrow, and the first is largely buried beneath the Chalk.
The Gault Clay gives rise to very heavy soils which are often waterlogged, and is primarily an area of woodland and grassland, cultivation being difficult.
Lower Greensand
The Lower Greensand forms a narrow ridge of some importance, particularly in the west of the county where it is up to 10km. wide.
The coarse sand produces soils which are very free-draining, and this zone includes one of the most important arable farming areas of the county.
Ornithologically important heaths occur on this formation, although many are declining in interest through lack of management and development of forestry plantations.
Weald Clay
Within the band of Lower Greensand is the low-lying Weald Clay, producing a flatter landscape up to 30km. wide with heavy soils and little natural drainage.
These soils are often cold and waterlogged and traditionally this is an area of deciduous woodland with small pasture fields.
Greater agricultural mechanisation has led to considerable modification of this landscape and larger arable fields now occur in the area.
This area is known as the Low Weald, and at the coast between Eastbourne and Bexhill the Weald Clay is covered by alluvium to form the extensive Pevensey levels.
Hastings Beds
The northern part of the county comprises the High Weald, consisting of a succession of clays and sandstones (Tunbridge Wells Sands, Wadhurst Clay, and Ashdown Sands) that have eroded differentially, giving a very dissected appearance.
Small streams have deeply incised the sands to form steep-sided valleys and well-wooded slopes known as ghylls.
Much of this land consists of small hilly grass fields divided by strips of woodland called shaws, intermixed with larger areas of woodland.
Within the main outcrop of Ashdown Sand lies Ashdown  Forest, a large tract of open heathland, reaching in places a height of nearly 220 metres, and surrounded by extensive woods.
The Hastings Beds emerge on the coast as a broken line of cliffs east of Hastings to Cliff End.
Here the ghyll valleys with their woods reach the cliff edge.
Alluvium
The most recent of all the deposits of Sussex are the alluvial soils.
Principally these occur on Pevensey Levels, part of the Low Weald, and on that part of Romney Marsh that lies within Sussex to the east of Rye.
All the Sussex rivers are bordered by alluvium, in some places in quantity, as shown on Fig. 4 (p. 31).
The Glynde and Adur Levels and Amberley/Pulborough Marshes along the River Arun are probably the most ornithologically important of the river levels today, but all these areas are increasingly threatened by drainage schemes.
Coastal Plain
In West Sussex an extensive low-lying, flat plain runs between the Downs and the sea.
Despite considerable urban development, particularly on the coast, most of this plain is agricultural land of the highest quality and intensively cultivated.
It is principally an area of London Clay with Brick Earths, a structureless loam to which the district owes much of its fertility.
There is little remaining woodland, but the area is well known for the ornithologically important areas of Chichester and Pagham Harbours.
Associated with both these harbours, and in fact reclaimed from them, are small but important areas of wet grassland, such as Sidlesham Ferry and around Thorney Deeps.
Around Chichester there is an area of gravel and gravel pits of considerable economic importance.
Land Use
Fig. 2 (p. 6) shows the major land uses in Sussex at the moment.
The most significant change in terms of land use, in recent times, has been the increase in the proportion of urban areas at the expense, principally, of agricultural land.
The largest urban areas are concentrated along the coast and major expansion is taking place inland at Burgess Hill, Crawley, Crowborough, Horsham, and north of Hastings.
There are no major heavy industries, but light manufacturing and service industries have become increasingly important, and the large leisure and tourist industry has considerable consequences for bird habitats.
Agriculture is the major industry of the county in terms of land use, nearly two-thirds of the county's land being devoted to agricultural production.
The heaths and commons are mainly small and fragmented except for the large area of Ashdown Forest.
Of particular interest is the extent of woodland cover, mainly concentrated in the High and Low Weald, this being one of the most heavily wooded areas in England.
It seems likely that changes in woodland management, the development of agriculture and the leisure and tourist industries will be the major factors affecting bird distribution in Sussex in the future.
Fig. 2.
Major land uses in Sussex
The following sections deal in some detail with these land uses and their relevance to the distribution of birds in Sussex.
COASTLAND
By R. D. M. Edgar
SUSSEX HAS A coastline of 140km. (not including the indentations of the harbours) of which 60 per cent.
is covered by built-up areas, earning the county the unenviable distinction of having one of the most developed coastlines in Britain.
Indeed from Pagham eastward to Brighton the development is almost continuous, apart from the river mouths and a 5km. strip west of Littlehampton.
In terms of habitats frequented by birds (apart from the urban areas) the coastlands can be divided into cliffs, estuaries, river mouths and tidal flats, shingle and dune areas, and coastal levels.
The latter are considered in the section on Freshwater Habitats, since their ornithological interest does not arise primarily from their geographical proximity to the coast.
The open sea is also an important habitat.
Cliffs
Two types of coastal cliff are found: the 15km. of chalk cliffs from Black Rock, Brighton, to Beachy Head, and the 8km. of sand and clay cliffs east of Hastings to Cliff End, Pett.
Neither formation provides ledges of any size or permanence, although small auk populations once nested on the chalk cliffs.
The chalk cliffs are mainly sheer with little vegetation, but the sandstone cliffs are more tumbled with an undercliff structure, and in places of sufficient stability to have allowed vegetation to form.
All these cliffs erode rapidly, retreating at a rate of up to 1.86 metres per year.
Large single falls are less common on the sandstone cliffs than on the chalk, the former tending to slump and yet recede the fastest.
The birds regularly recorded nesting on these cliffs are the Kestrel, Herring Gull, Jackdaw, Rock Pipit, Starling, House Sparrow and Stock Dove.
Lesser Black-backed Gulls nest on the cliffs periodically, as do Black Redstarts.
Fulmars have bred and have been present since at least the early 1950s.
House Martins have been recorded nesting on the cliffs occasionally.
Cormorants no longer breed, and the Raven has not nested since 1895, apart from a pair, one bird at least of which was an escaped pet, which nested between 1938 and 1945.
The Peregrine Falcon has not bred since 1957, although the chalk cliffs once held one of the highest densities of breeding pairs in Britain.
The cliff-nesting Kestrel population had probably declined by the late 1940s, and certainly did so after 1951.
A reduction in suitable nest sites has been suggested as a possible cause, and a breeding survey of cliff-nesting Herring Gulls and Rock Pipits conducted in 1965 tends to confirm this idea.
This survey showed three pairs of Rock Pipits nesting in the cliffs east of Hastings, and 42 pairs on the chalk cliffs.
Although no Herring Gulls were reported nesting on the Hastings cliffs up to 1935, a total of 371 pairs did so in 1965 compared with 395 pairs on the chalk cliffs.
However, Walpole-Bond in 1938 recorded ‘perhaps as many as 2,000 couples’ of Herring Gulls between Seaford and Beachy Head alone and, since it is doubtful whether there are suitable sites for this number at present, a change in cliff structure along the chalk is very likely.
Probably some of these birds moved east to the sandstone cliffs.
Tidal Basins and Mudflats, Estuaries and Saltings
Tidal mudflats occur at the mouths of nearly all Sussex rivers, along the coast principally at Pevensey Bay and from Pett to Rye Bay, and most notably in the tidal basins of Pagham and Chichester Harbours.
Chichester Harbour straddles the county boundary with Hampshire and the harbours of Langstone and Portsmouth (also Hampshire) are a part of the same ecological and physical unit.
Chichester Harbour alone has some 1,298 hectares of mudflats, 164 hectares of sand, 611 hectares of Spartina marsh, and 42 hectares of saltmarsh.
For  reasons of simplicity (and ornithological necessity) the whole of Chichester Harbour is considered as being within Sussex for the purpose of wildfowl and wader counts.
Breeding bird species of these largely intertidal habitats are, not surprisingly, few, although some, particularly Redshank and Meadow Pipit, nest on the drier parts of the saltings with a few Lapwings.–sizeable gull and tern colony exists on islands in Chichester Harbour.
The most important species nesting in close association with tidal areas is the Shelduck which nests around Chichester and Pagham Harbours, near the Cuckmere River, at Pett Level and in the Rye area.
No full census of the breeding numbers of this species has been carried out recently, but there are probably some 100 to 150 pairs.
The habitats dealt with here are primarily of importance for the numbers of wildfowl and waders present during the winter months and at times of passage.
Detailed counts have been conducted during these periods in Chichester and Pagham Harbours since 1964, once each winter for waders along the whole coastline from 1964 to 1969/70, and twice each winter from 1971/72 onwards.
Detailed results are given under individual species in the Systematic List and the numbers are very large.
Since 1971 Chichester Harbour has been shown to hold an annual winter peak of between 27,000 and 38,000 waders and 8,000 to 13,000 wildfowl.
Pagham Harbour holds 4,000 to 7,000 waders and approximately 1,500 wildfowl.
The entire Sussex coast including these Harbours holds between 35,000 and 57,000 waders, the numbers varying annually, perhaps mainly affected by the severity or otherwise of the winter.
The populations of some species are particularly important.
In 1975/76 Chichester Harbour held internationally important populations of Brent Goose, Shelduck, Ringed Plover, Grey Plover, Black-tailed Godwit, Dunlin, and Sanderling, that is, the population of each was more than one per cent .
of the West European wintering total.
Pagham Harbour also held internationally important numbers of Grey Plover, and the county as a whole attracted 7.25 per cent.
of the West European population of this species in addition to 3.8 per cent.
of its Ringed Plover, 3.9 per cent.
of its Sanderling, and 2.2 per cent.
of its Dunlin.
These figures emphasise the importance  of protecting these coastal habitats.
The saltings also provide winter feeding areas for flocks of finches and pipits, although the numbers are not large compared with the winter finch flocks of downland and shingle beaches.
Twite, however, are largely confined to saltings and the maximum number in recent years has been 335.
Sand and Shingle
Sand dunes and beaches are few in Sussex.
Dunes occur in the west of the county at East Head, to the west of the mouth of the River Arun at Climping, and in the east of the county at Camber.
Dunes are much disturbed in summer and of comparatively little ornithological value, much of the large dune system at Camber being occupied by a golf course.
Sandflats are found in the centre of Chichester Harbour, off Littlehampton, Worthing, Goring and Ferring, and at Camber in the east of the county.
All support wintering Sanderling, the population usually totalling less than 500 birds, with a peak of 825 in 1973.
The only species notably associated with the sand dunes, and adjacent saltings, is the Snow Bunting; the Camber area is the only regular wintering site in Sussex, flocks of 30 to 50 birds being quite usual.
Shingle is more widely distributed than sand, there being shingle islands in Chichester and Pagham Harbours and shingle beaches along much of the rest of the coast.
Long stretches of these beaches front seaside towns and are now of little ornithological interest; the most important are around the Selsey peninsular, particularly on both sides of the entrance to Pagham Harbour, Shoreham Beach, between Newhaven and Seaford (the Tidemills), at the mouth of the Cuckmere River, to the east of Eastbourne (the Crumbles), bordering Pevensey Levels, at Rye Harbour, and further east at the county boundary.
Even these are much disturbed by large numbers of tourists in the summer, those at Shoreham Beach, the mouth of the Cuckmere and Pevensey Bay particularly so.
The Tidemills and Crumbles are both used by industry, the former in the process of being converted to a lorry park, and the latter to provide housing and recreational areas.
The beaches at 
Pagham and Rye Harbours lie within Local Nature Reserves and receive a measure of protection.
Despite these problems the beaches still support a few breeding birds, notably Little Tern, Ringed Plover, Oystercatcher, and Wheatear.
The open shingle beaches also support a small winter population of waders, mainly Turnstone, with a few Purple Sandpipers and numbers may increase in really cold weather.
Some of the less trampled beaches have an interesting flora, the seeds of which now provide a food supply for some of the largest wintering finch flocks still  to be found in the county.
Open Sea
The sea off Sussex is shallow; only off the chalk cliffs and at Fairlight does the five-fathom line come nearer than one kilometre from the shore, and along most of the county it is three or more kilometres out from the shore.
Except in very calm and clear conditions flocks of birds are not easy to detect on the sea at any distance, and this, coupled with the shallowness of the water which may enable birds to feed well out to sea, probably results in many species being under recorded.
Even so, the sea is known to be an important habitat supporting in winter flocks of diving ducks, mainly Common Scoter, Eider and Red-breasted Merganser; grebes, mainly Great Crested and Slavonian; a few divers and auks, and considerable numbers of gulls.
In addition sizeable flocks of dabbling ducks, mainly Mallard and Wigeon, feed inland by night and rest on the open sea by day.
These birds are not evenly distributed along the coast.
For example, scoter are mainly confined to East Sussex and mergansers to West Sussex, and most dabbling ducks are noted in Rye Bay, off Cuckmere Haven, and the Church Norton/Selsey area.
Rye Bay is the most important locality for sea-ducks and divers, most Slavonian Grebes are found off Church Norton, mergansers off the Worthing area, and Great Crested Grebes off Brighton/Rottingdean and in Rye Bay.
These variations presumably reflect the nature of the sea-bed and availability of food.
All these species have been affected by oil pollution which, while not always severe, is nearly always  present and may have caused marked declines of some species in recent years.
During migration considerable numbers of divers, ducks, geese, waders, skuas, gulls, and terns pass through the Channel off Sussex, and some will rest and feed; terns also summer in varying numbers.
Gulls are present throughout the year although the populations have been poorly studied.
There are known to be sizeable roosts at Chichester and Pagham Harbours, Shoreham, Rottingdean, Hastings, and at Camber, besides the many birds which feed along the whole shore.
Being scavengers gulls have quickly exploited the possibilities of urban areas where they may now be more numerous than along the open shore.
WOODLAND
By R. D. M. Edgar
THE NATURAL CLIMAX vegetation of Southern Britain is deciduous woodland, and as late as 731 A.D. the Venerable Bede described the Wealden Forest as being ‘thick and impenetrable’.
Although the South Downs were cleared at a very early stage in man's history in Britain, the clearing of the Wealden forest was delayed until the medieval period, the height of the clearance being in the 13th and 14th centuries, although parts may have been cleared as early as the ninth century.
The early clearances were made to form agricultural settlements, but by the 13th century the production of charcoal, used in the making of iron, became very significant.
In later centuries the rate of clearance may have slowed, and in the 17th and 18th centuries a great deal of replanting was carried out in the formation of the large parklands.
The process of both clearance and replanting continues today, although different tree species are often involved.
It is unlikely that any of the Sussex woodlands remain in a natural state, although some areas may have a continuously wooded history.
This is particularly likely for some of the Low Weald oak woodlands and the shaws, which may be remnants of the original forest left when the early fields were carved from the Wealden forest.
With the considerable degree of replanting in the last few centuries it is possible that the Weald now exhibits a more wooded aspect than at any time since the early medieval period.
The latest Forestry Commission Survey, a sample census conducted in 1965–67, indicates some 68,000 hectares of woodland, about 18 per cent.
of the county, making it one of the most heavily-wooded areas in England.
Unfortunately, the census is not strictly comparable with the previous one of 1947, but, nevertheless, some revealing comparisons can be made.
From Table I (p. 15) it can be seen that while the amount of broad-leaved high forest has increased by some five per cent., the increase in coniferous high forest has been 18 per cent .
Much coppice is no longer managed as such, and the area has declined by 38 per cent., while the ‘other’ category has increased by 15 per cent .
A recent 10 per cent.
sample survey in the Rother District (the most eastern district of Sussex) has shown between 1960 and 1975 a net loss of 0.5 per cent.
of privately-managed woodland per year, but no change in the area of Forestry Commission woodland.
It is worth noting that Rother District has, approximately, 20 per cent.
greater woodland cover than the average for East Sussex.
But it is not clear whether this loss of privately-owned woodland applies to the whole county.
Recent changes in the form of capital taxation may accelerate it.
Much of the increase in coniferous woodland has resulted from the clearance and replanting of coppice, as well as the planting of unforested areas of heathland and downland.
Conifers are planted mainly on the lightest soils and large plantations are established on the western half of the Downs and at Friston.
Here the conifers are used as a nurse crop and are progressively being removed to reveal an extensive beech forest.
Other areas of conifers are found in the High Weald and on the Lower Greensand, but the heavy soils of the Low Weald are dominated by deciduous woodland.
The plantations are often considered of little value as bird habitats, but there can be no doubt of their importance at some stages of their development.
They have favoured the marked expansion of the Woodcock on the Downs in recent years, and also provide the Grasshopper Warbler and Yellowhammer with one of their principal nesting habitats.
Plantations also provide valuable habitat in their early stages for many Tree Pipits, Nightjars, and warblers, which the Woodland Survey (q.v.) suggests are not numerous in many Sussex woodlands.
It is true that individual plantations lose these species rapidly once the thicket stage is reached, but other species move in and large areas of plantation often exhibit a variety of growth stages  from clear fell to mature trees, which further increases the diversity of birds present.
TABLE I Sussex Woodlands (from Forestry Commission sample surveys)
Figures as percentage of total
Note.
—‘High forest’ refers to management aims rather than present condition, so that a young plantation is included in the ‘high forest’category.
Most of the downland woods are west of the Arun gap and, apart from plantations, beech (Fagus sylvatica ) is the dominant tree, although it rarely regenerates, and where no replanting takes place ash (Fraxinus excelsior ) quickly asserts itself.
The beech woods, especially, have little undergrowth, in which case they do not hold large bird populations and are often too young to support hole-nesting species such as woodpeckers.
The Woodland Survey indicates that there are no particular features of their bird populations, and certainly there are no characteristic species of beech woods in the way that Wood Warblers and Redstarts favour the open oak woods of the sand, or Nightingales the damp coppice of the clay.
Yew (Taxus baccata ) commonly occurs in the ash woods, and on the National Nature Reserve at Kingley Vale there are large stands of yew which support good populations of common species, particularly Great Tit, Coal Tit, Chaffinch and thrushes.
The sycamore (Acer pseudoplatanus ) is widespread, particularly so on the Downs near the coast where conditions are unsuitable for most other tree species, and it is much favoured by passage migrants.
In the extensive woodlands of the Low Weald the pedunculate oak (Quercus robur ) is the dominant tree, often with a secondary layer of holly (Ilex aquifolium ), field maple (Acer campestre ), crab apple (Malus sylvestris ), gean (Prunus avium ), Midland hawthorn (Crataegus laevigata ), and the occasional wild service tree (Sorbus torminalis ).
The oak supports more species of insects (at least 284) than any other British tree and these woodlands are noted for their communities of insectivorous birds, particularly tits, Blackcaps, Garden Warblers, Willow Warblers, Robins and thrushes.
Much Wealden woodland has been managed as coppice, often in combination with standard trees, principally oak.
In the Low Weald much of the coppice is hazel, which was used primarily for the construction of sheep hurdles and in the building industry, but is now of little economic value.
Many of these woods have been abandoned or grubbed up for agricultural use.
The hazel coppices are particularly favoured by the large Sussex Nightingale population.
The dominant tree in the High Weald where there are clay soils is also the pedunculate oak, but where sandy soils predominate the sessile oak (Quercus petraea ) is well represented.
Other tree species commonly growing in association with oak include beech, silver birch (Betula pendula ), mountain ash (Sorbus aucuparia ), ash, holly, yew and Scots pine (Pinus sylvestris ).
On the lighter soils the secondary layer is often sparse, but the Woodland Survey suggests that these open woodlands support a greater diversity of bird species than other deciduous woods in Sussex, although certain species may be less numerous.
In particular they are favoured by Wood Warblers and the dwindling Sussex population of Redstarts.
The densest high forest in the High Weald is associated with the ghyll valleys, narrow ravines created by streams that have cut through the lighter soils.
Much woodland in the High Weald again consists of coppice, in this instance sweet chestnut (Castanea sativa ) on the sandier soils, and hornbeam (Carpinus betula ) on the heavier soils, often grown in pure stands.
These trees were managed to provide poles for the hop industry, but hop-growing is in decline in Sussex, the area of hops having fallen over 40 per cent.
from 935 hectares in 1936 to 559  hectares in 1974.
The decline in the demand for wooden poles has been accelerated by the frequent use of metal poles.
Chestnut is still in demand for fencing, although the trees are often grown to a greater girth, and hornbeam is now little used.
These coppice woods have never been noted for their birds, even less when they are abandoned and become densely shaded, although hornbeam is a tree favoured by Hawfinches.
Commercial forestry operations have taken over many coppice woodlands and planted conifers extensively.
The alder (Alnus glutinosa ) is widespread on wet soils, although there are no large alder woods, and it usually grows in association with sallow (Salix cinerea ) and downy birch (Betula pubescens ).
These areas are much frequented by wintering flocks of Redpolls and Siskins, and Woodcock often feed in these sites.
Lesser Spotted Woodpeckers are of regular occurrence amongst these trees.
Many Sussex heathlands have become invaded by woodland, the silver birch and Scots pine predominating with rhododendron (Rhododendron ponticum ) being common, and at a later stage sessile oak becomes dominant.
The increase in this woodland may well have had a beneficial effect on the Woodcock and has provided the increasing breeding Redpoll population with an abundance of habitat.
The Woodland Survey by M. Shrubb 
Between 1963 and 1974 an attempt was made to measure the abundance and distribution of the common and widespread birds breeding in Sussex woodlands by a series of sample censuses.
The census method used was adapted by Dr. Michael Hollings from W. B. Yapp's Birds and Woods (Oxford University Press, 1962).
The observer was asked to move through the wood of his choice at a fixed speed, dividing the time spent into units of 10 minutes each and recording for each 10-minute period all the birds seen or heard, normally within a band of 50 yards (46 metres) from the observer.
Although the method has drawbacks, particularly that it is difficult to eliminate duplications from the results, it has the merits of being simple, and giving reasonably consistent results with a  number of observers and being readily repeated.
Counters were asked to make several visits in a season and, in a number of sites, counts were spread over several years.
In fact the survey was only a limited success because rather few observers took part.
Nevertheless, these counts do provide us with the best available source of information about the common birds of Sussex woodland.
Altogether a total of 23 sites was visited twice or more in at least one year, of which six were visited regularly in two years, and nine in three or more.
In addition a single visit was made to five sites, but these counts have been excluded from this analysis.
Perhaps, unfortunately, a fairly high proportion of the counts were made just after the 1962/63 winter when populations of many species were very low.
The figures obtained are used here to calculate three indices for the commoner species: the percentage frequency, relative abundance and contacts per hour.
The percentage frequency is the number of 10-minute samples in which a species was recorded, expressed as a percentage of the total number of samples, and is thus a measure of distribution.
The relative abundance records the percentage of the total population represented by each species.
Taken together these two indices yield much information about the abundance or scarcity of each bird, how widely or evenly it is distributed, and how numbers of any species compare with others, perhaps particularly with its near relations.
But changes in its relative abundance may not give an entirely accurate picture of population trends for any species, so the number of contacts per hour of counting for each species is added as an individual measure of abundance.
This expresses total numbers in terms of time spent watching instead of area covered.
The indices for rarer species, and the nocturnal ones such as owls, have been omitted from the tables because the figures give little useful information compared to those in the general records of the Society.
I have not tried to present the counts on a basis of woodland types as there seemed to be too few of most visited to give useful results.
I have therefore grouped them on a broad geological basis: sand, chalk, clay, and the gravels and loams of  the coastal plain which probably also enjoys a modest climatic advantage over the rest of the county.
In fact these groupings are shown by the survey as having fairly characteristic woodlands.
Thus six of the seven woods visited on sand soils were primarily mature mixed pine and beech/oak woods, often rather open.
On the clay the woods visited were predominantly mature mixed deciduous or coppice, and often damp.
On the coastal plain the sites were scattered fragments of oak wood, and on the chalk either young mixed plantations or mature deciduous, often beech.
Despite the limitations of the survey it did suggest some clear habitat preferences and population trends.
Comments on individual species are given in the Systematic List, but some more general observations seem worth making here.
There were quite marked differences in the overall structure of the bird populations.
Thus a greater variety of species, but often lower individual numbers, was recorded on sandy soils, and the fragmentary woodlands of the coastal plain were distinctly poor in species, although several common birds were very numerous.
The effects of the very cold winter of 1962/63 were abundantly clear in the steadily increasing numbers of some species such as Wrens in the following years.
The survey figures also suggest very clearly that the lack of really severe cold in any winter since has enabled many resident birds to maintain increased populations in woodland, although this may not be so in other habitats.
The counts also suggest that most Sussex woods have comparatively poor populations of many breeding summer visitors.
The tables show that these birds at best occupied only 25 per cent.
of the total populations recorded, and Willow Warblers occupied between a third and a half of this percentage.
It seems worth drawing the attention of conservation bodies to this point when they consider the acquisition and management of woodland nature reserves.
It is also worth repeating the observation by Hollings (1963) that the counts confirm many well-established habitat preferences.
Thus, for example, Coal Tits were associated with conifers, and Redstarts (not tabulated) and Wood Warblers with the more open woods of the sands, in contrast to Nightingales, Robins and thrushes, which were generally most numerous  in the denser, damper woods of the clay.
A habitat detail not very fully covered was the age of trees, which must have some bearing on the distribution and numbers of hole-nesting species such as woodpeckers, tits, Nuthatch and Starling.
But all these are shown to be birds of mature woodlands, while some warblers and Yellowhammer emerge as birds of scrub or young plantation and edge.
Obvious points, perhaps, but important, since an adaptation to a new habitat can have a profound effect on a species' fortunes.
But it should perhaps be stressed that the figures as recorded are most useful in outlining the overall status and distribution of birds in woodland, and I have therefore concentrated on this.
It would be valuable to repeat the counts in order to record any changes.
HEATHS AND COMMONS
By R. D. M Edgar
HEATHLAND IN Southern England results from the clearance of the original temperate forest on areas of somewhat acidic sandy soils with a poor humus layer.
The soils leach rapidly, and under a management regime of grazing and burning a characteristic vegetation develops of which ling (Calluna vulgaris ) is a principal constituent.
Commons may occur on any type of soil, the name referring to their type of use rather than ecological status.
However, since they are usually areas of low vegetation dominated by rough grasses frequently with bracken (Pteridium aquilinum),gorse (Ulex sp. ), and scattered trees, in ornithological terms it is convenient to consider the two together.
Sussex heathlands occur on the Lower Greensand in the west and north-west of the county, in the central area of the High Weald on the Hastings Beds, and in a few places on the Downs where there are superficial deposits of acidic soils.
The southern heathlands are generally considered as one of the most rapidly diminishing habitats, principally through conversion to forestry.
Even those heathlands which have not been reafforested are rapidly becoming covered with silver birch and self-sown Scots Pine, due to lack of grazing management.
Uncontrolled burning may damage the typical vegetation, and diminishes the bird population.
Fig. 3 (p. 25) shows the considerable decline in area of Lower Greensand heaths in north-west Sussex between 1822 and 1971.
Commons are scattered throughout the county, and although rights of common are fiercely defended they are rarely exercised, and many commons are returning to woodland.
Pressure from recreation on these open areas is usually considerable, with consequently much disturbance to birds    particularly in the breeding season.
No accurate assessment of the amount of heathland is available, although a survey by West Sussex County Council showed 1,500 hectares of heath in that administrative county.
The largest heath in East Sussex is Ashdown Forest, with 2,600 hectares being more or less open habitat.
This is the second largest of the southern heathlands remaining.
Nesting species particularly associated with this type of habitat in Sussex include Stonechat, Nightjar, and Tree Pipit.
The Hobby is often associated with heathland, and the Dartford Warbler is found on some heaths, but neither Woodlarks nor Red-backed Shrikes, both once typical heathland birds of Sussex, have bred in recent years.
All these species (except Woodlarks and Red-backed Shrikes) breed in other habitats, for example Stonechats in downland scrub, and Nightjars and Tree Pipits as commonly in young forestry plantations (many of which were once heathlands); but only on heathland do they form a distinct community, which is rapidly declining.
It is notable that in winter the bird population of heathlands and commons in Sussex is decidedly sparse.
FRESHWATER HABITATS
By R. D. M. Edgar
THESE IMPORTANT HABITATS may conveniently be considered under the headings of Rivers and Ponds, Levels, Reservoirs, and Gravel Pits.
Rivers and Ponds
The Sussex rivers mainly flow south, having risen in the sandstone areas of the county.
Here they have often incised deeply into the sandstone rocks, producing steep-sided ravines whose depth often belies the size of the stream that created it.
These small streams are often fast flowing until they reach the lower elevations of the Low Weald.
Here they become wider and slower and often carry considerable quantities of sand and silt.
They all have alluvial flood plains or levels of wet permanent pasture in which extensive flooding used to be of frequent occurrence, but many improvement schemes have been instituted in recent years with stretches of river being straightened and flood banks raised.
Extensive floods are now uncommon and short-lived, occurring only in times of heavy and prolonged rain.
The frequent attention given to the management of river banks has made many unsuitable for the nesting of Kingfishers, and the frequent clearance of marginal vegetation has been to the detriment of species such as the Reed Bunting, Sedge and Reed Warbler.
The latter two species have declined very considerably in the Arun valley and no doubt elsewhere in the county.
The upper streams are suitable for the creation of ponds, and many hammer and millponds were created in the past for industrial purposes.
These now have good marginal vegetation and their dams produce small waterfalls, the preferred  nesting sites for Grey Wagtails which are widely distributed in this limited habitat, some 193 pairs having been recorded in a survey in 1967–69, mainly in the Lower Greensand and High Weald areas.
The ponds hold the usual species associated with this type of habitat, with Great Crested Grebes and Tufted Ducks nesting on the larger ponds and lakes, and the small breeding population of Teal in the county largely restricted to this habitat or the smaller streams and marshes, rarely being found breeding on the river levels.
These ponds support a significant population of wintering wildfowl, principally Mallard, Tufted Duck and Pochard, with smaller numbers of other species.
Willows (of various species), sallows and alders are often associated with the ponds and attract wintering flocks of Redpolls and Siskins; some have breeding Lesser Spotted Woodpeckers, this being one of their main habitats in the county.
Levels
The Sussex Levels cover a considerable area, of the order of 160 square kilometres, and, except for Pevensey Levels, are associated with the flood plains of the main rivers.
These levels or brooks are now areas of flat low-lying grassland drained by a complex system of ditches, but lying wet in winter.
The network of ditches was in many cases originally designed to take advantage of the winter flooding of the rivers and enabled these areas to be managed as water meadows, a particular form of management which produced good quality hay crops, but is no longer practised or possible with the improvement of drainage and flood prevention.
Although most of the levels are freshwater, some are brackish in their more southerly parts.
The extensive Pevensey Levels of 36 square kilometres are largely a result of the enclosure or inning of a large bay studded with small clay islands called ‘eyes’.
By the eighth century the eastward drift of shingle along the coast had given natural protection to the spread of the salt marsh, and during the 12th and 13th centuries Pevensey Levels gradually changed from saltmarsh to reed and sedge meadows and ultimately pasture.
Much of this reclamation work was  undertaken by the great Abbeys, principally that at Battle.
The pattern of ditched fields is virtually unchanged from that time.
In many of the Sussex levels pumped drainage schemes are being installed to give greater control over the water levels so that the water table can be gradually lowered, permitting the permanent pasture to be improved by ploughing and re-seeding and allowing a longer grazing season; some will no doubt be converted to arable.
The approximate area of the various levels in Sussex is shown in Table V (p. 30) and their location on Fig. 4 (p. 31).
Extensive beds of the common reed (Phragmites australis ) are no longer found in these levels except in the Combe Haven valley where the reed bed of some 10 hectares is the largest remaining example of this habitat in Sussex.
Many drainage ditches are, however, fringed with reeds.
The importance of this wet grassland habitat, with its associated system of ditches, is considerable for Sussex birds.
It forms the primary nesting area for a number of specialised species, particularly Lapwing, Redshank, Snipe, and Yellow Wagtail, and probably Reed and Sedge Warblers.
The ditches may provide the principal feeding sites for the county's nesting Herons since all the major heronries are associated with levels.
Some scarcer species, such as Garganey, Shoveler and Water Rail also breed.
As an example of the value of this habitat a survey of Pevensey Levels in 1976 recorded 52 nesting species and included counts of 27 pairs of Snipe, 29 pairs of Redshank, 74 pairs of Reed Warbler, 196 pairs of Sedge Warbler, 165 pairs of Yellow Wagtail, 118 pairs of Meadow Pipit, and 262 pairs of Reed Bunting; Besides revealing rather more Snipe, Redshank and Yellow Wagtail than previously recorded (see Systematic List) these counts clearly indicate the value of the marginal vegetation of the ditches for Reed Buntings, Reed and Sedge Warbler.
Unfortunately, this vegetation is very vulnerable to major drainage works.
Pevensey Levels probably comprises the most important area of this habitat for nesting birds in Sussex, but the Arun valley, Combe Haven, with its reed beds, and some of the marshes around Rye are also particularly significant and every area is of value.
TABLE V Sussex Levels (Approximate areas)
Other similar areas, totalling about 38 sq.
km., occur in the valley of the Coombe Haven and in the Rye area.
The levels are also important for the wintering wildfowl they attract, particularly Teal and Wigeon.
For example, the average winter peaks for these two species at Amberley/Pulborough and Glynde Levels between 1964 and 1975 were 560 and 1,280, and 560 and 1,300 respectively, some 45 per cent .
of the total county population.
Formerly all these levels held greater totals of these birds than they do today, and in addition attracted numbers of Mallard, Pintail, Shoveler and, at Amberley, Pochard.
Although all still occur, the progressive lowering of water tables is making these areas less attractive and the reservoirs, gravel pits and estuaries of the county are becoming increasingly important wintering sites for them.
The Arun valley, Adur levels, and Glynde Levels are now probably the most important levels for wintering duck, and the Arun valley also attracts an increasing herd of Bewick's Swans.
In addition the levels hold large winter flocks of Lapwing, Snipe, and Golden Plover.
Pevensey Levels where 15,000-plus Lapwing, 1,200-plus Snipe, and 2,000-plus Golden Plover have been counted recently is perhaps the prime area, but five-figure flocks of Lapwing are not unusual elsewhere, and every suitable area will attract flocks of several hundred Snipe.
Golden Plover, however, are coastal birds in Sussex and inland flocks are usually small.
It cannot be over-emphasised that the future of many of these species of Sussex birds is closely tied to the management of these levels.
Most drainage schemes should have some regard for the importance to wildlife of these areas, and much can be achieved on quite small areas.
Thus at Glynde Levels the Sussex Ornithological Society annually flood fields covering some six hectares which is largely responsible for the wildfowl numbers that now occur in these levels.
Reservoirs
The following reservoirs are in Sussex:
Weir Wood Reservoir (114 hectares), constructed 1954.
Darwell Reservoir (69 hectares), constructed 1938–40 and 1946–50.
Arlington Reservoir (63 hectares), constructed 1971.
Powdermill Reservoir (23 hectares), constructed 1924–32.
Barcombe Mills Reservoir (16 hectares), constructed 1964–66; enlarged 1971.
A new reservoir at Bewl Bridge of 310 hectares (a small part in Kent) is nearly full, and a reservoir at Ardingly (70 hectares) is in the process of being flooded.
It is well known that any such sheet of water will attract birds, and these reservoirs' main importance is for the wintering wildfowl Table VI (p. 33) gives an indication of the ornithological importance of the four major reservoirs which attract about 30 per cent.
of the county's wintering Mallard, Wigeon, Tufted Duck, and Pochard.
The dabbling species use them as daytime refuges, the diving ducks also as feeding areas.
All the reservoirs receive a degree of disturbance from recreational activities primarily fishing, but on some more active forms of recreation take place.
The disturbance the latter causes is of constant concern to ornithologists as these artificial wetlands are an essential replacement for habitats lost through drainage, as are gravel pits discussed below.
Gravel Pits
Gravel pits exist in the Chichester and Pagham Harbour areas; at the Crumbles, Eastbourne; Rye Harbour, and  Northpoint Beach, Rye.
Soil has also been excavated at Pett Level (to provide material for the sea wall), leaving a series of lakes.
The pits at the Midrips and Wicks near the boundary with Kent no longer hold water.
The location of the major pits is shown in Fig. 4 (p. 31).
TABLE VI Sussex Reservoirs — Species Recorded and Most Important Wintering Wildfowl Numbers
The gravel pits at Pagham Harbour, known as the Severals, are largely covered in Phragmites reeds and hold large  populations of Reed and Sedge Warblers and some Water Rails.
The numerous gravel pits near Chichester support a good variety of breeding species, notably Great Crested Grebes for which this is the most important area in Sussex, as well as passage migrants and wintering wildfowl (for numbers,see Systematic List).
Until recently new pits were continually being excavated while others are being filled with refuse.
There is considerable pressure to use these waters for recreation, and they receive much disturbance.
The gravel pits at the Crumbles have never been noted for their ornithological interest, except for passage migrants, and when excavation is complete will be used for sailing.
Those at Rye Harbour and Northpoint Beach, Rye are  extensive and largely undisturbed, although again there is strong pressure for recreational use; that at Northpoint Beach is to be connected to the River Rother and used as a yacht basin.
Common Terns at present nest on an island in the pit, and it is to be hoped that when disturbance is too great for them they will move to the Local Nature Reserve at Rye Harbour, which includes a gravel pit with suitable islands.
The lakes at Pett Level hold rather small numbers of wintering wildfowl, but are particularly important during times of passage.
In recent years the Sussex Ornithological Society has lowered the water level of one of the smaller lakes in autumn and this has attracted good numbers of waders.
Wet gravel pits are generally recognised as important habitats for wildlife, particularly in view of the increasing drainage of wetlands.
In Sussex they are much more important for their breeding birds than reservoirs as they generally have much more marginal vegetation.
The pressure on these sites for leisure and recreation uses is becoming increasingly strong in the county.
FARMLAND
By R. D. M. Edgar and M. Shrubb
SINCE 1939 BRITISH agriculture has changed profoundly.
The main features of this revolution have been a great decline in the area of grassland, the increase of mechanisation with the consequence of reduced farm labour, the widespread use of chemicals as tools and the simplification of crop rotations, and the introduction of important new crops such as maize.
These changes have had a marked effect on farmland as an aggregation of bird habitats.
Thus grassland (especially wet) is an important habitat for many specialised bird species, and its loss has reduced and restricted their populations.
Other habitat losses have resulted from farm mechanisation which, requiring larger and more conveniently-shaped fields, has resulted in much hedge and scrub clearance.
The more satisfactory economic position of farming allied with Government policies have also encouraged these losses.
There have been dramatic declines of a few bird species as a result of using some chemicals, and perhaps more subtle and long-term changes as a result of the simplification of the plant community of farmland arising from cropping changes and the widespread use of increasingly sophisticated herbicides.
In Sussex about 250,000 out of a total of 380,000 hectares (some 65 per cent.) are devoted to agriculture (including small farm woodlands, agricultural buildings, etc.).
All the above changes have been noted in the past 25 years, although some have been more limited than others.
The clay soils of many farms north of the Downs, for example, do not lend themselves to intensive arable farming, and few farms here (or, for that matter, fields) are far from woodlands so that they are not wholly dependent on such features as patches of scrub or hedges for the presence of many common farmland species.
The changing pattern of agriculture in Sussex is shown by the Ministry of Agriculture Annual Returns and is outlined in Table VII (p. 37).
These show since 1939 a more than twofold increase in arable land and a corresponding decline in permanent pasture.
Further, there has been a decline of about 72 per cent.
in the area of rough grazings.
Some may have been ploughed, but much has probably been improved and is now recorded under permanent pasture, the more suitable permanent pasture having been turned to arable.
Within the arable area the greatest changes have been the increase of cereals and the decline of the one-year clover ley.
The latter change does not show in Table VII, being masked by changes in grassland management, but only 2,529 hectares of one-year clover leys were grown in Sussex in 1974, 1.8 per cent.
of the arable area, compared to probably the full 9,478 hectares noted for temporary leys for 1939 in Table VII, about 17 per cent.
of the arable area.
Altogether these changes have involved a loss of 60,400 hectares of grassland in Sussex since 1939, some 16 per cent.
of the county's total area.
It is interesting to note that the total agricultural area between 1939 and 1974 has declined by nearly seven per cent., largely as a result of the increase in urban development, mainly on arable land.
Sussex geology has imposed an extensive regional pattern on the agricultural crops.
About 25 per cent.
of the total grassland area occurs in large blocks in the main river valleys and levels, and perhaps nearly as much as a continuous band along the north scarp of the Downs which is too steep to plough.
There is also an important grassland element over much of the heavy land of the Weald, where farming is characteristically more mixed than on the Downs, the coastal plain, river valleys or levels.
Nearly half the arable area is concentrated along the Downs and the coastal plain to their south, with another important area aligned along the Greensand belt to their north.
In general terms grass predominates on the heaviest soils or in low-lying wet areas, and arable where the soil is free draining and easily worked.
The most important crops are clover and temporary grass (leys) 34 per cent.
of arable land, barley (rather more in East Sussex) 29 per cent., and wheat (mainly West Sussex) 20 per cent .
Altogether cereals account for 54 per cent.
of the total arable area.
The present agricultural pattern has clearly involved great changes and the loss of permanent pasture is of particular significance ornithologically.
This has largely occurred on the Downs, where perhaps the greatest changes likely to affect birds in Sussex have taken place.
Here a predominantly grassland habitat was converted to a predominantly arable one in a very limited period after 1945, primarily due to a Government policy of encouraging cereal growing.
Grants for ploughing grassland and cereal deficiency payments made barley more profitable than sheep, numbers of which fell by more than half between 1926 and 1954.
Although sheep numbers in Sussex have now risen to nearly pre-war numbers, comparatively few are to be found on permanent downland pasture.
At the same time as the conversion of downland pasture to arable many areas of scrub, particularly gorse, were destroyed.
The latter change is not entirely due to agriculture, as much building development has taken place on the Downs.
Although large areas of grassland still remain on unploughable slopes, particularly on the north-facing scarp, they have largely changed in character.
Lacking the grazing pressure of sheep and rabbits, the latter decimated by myxomatosis, they have become overgrown with long coarse grasses followed by scrub, and in some places are already becoming woodland.
These changes have caused marked declines in breeding Wheatears and Stone Curlews, the former being nearly extinct as a downland breeding bird, and the latter much rarer than in 1939.
The loss of much of the characteristic gorse scrub has reduced Stonechats and Dartford Warblers and possibly Grasshopper Warblers, although the latter have quickly exploited the new habitat afforded by young forestry plantations.
Some species have benefited from the change in the downland agricultural scene, and Corn Buntings and Skylarks are now  more numerous in these areas than elsewhere in the county and are the most characteristic birds of the downland.
Many common passerine species must also have increased their downland ranges as a result of the slow advance of scrub and woodland over the remaining grass, and probably the downland  avifauna is more varied today than in 1939 despite losing its characteristic and most interesting specialities.
Of the latter, the Cirl Bunting does not appear to have taken advantage of the increasing scrub, possibly because much of it is on north-facing slopes, and it has now declined in numbers.
Perhaps the other highly significant change in Sussex agriculture to have affected birds is the more recent and extensive drainage of the important areas of wet permanent pasture in the river valleys and levels, which amount to some 16,000 hectares.
The combination of drainage and improvement to pasture has greatly reduced the numbers of many characteristic and local species, either breeding, such as Garganey, Snipe, Redshank, and Yellow Wagtail, or wintering, such as Teal, Shoveler, and again Snipe.
Ornithologically nothing has been gained from these changes in habitat on which the Sussex populations of some species largely depend.
Drainage is now enabling some areas to be ploughed, which will advance the process further.
Elsewhere in Sussex the nature of the soils and the distribution of woodland have tended to limit the extent and effects of habitat changes caused by farming, but everywhere important changes in farming techniques have occurred.
While the arable area has increased at the expense of ornithologically more interesting permanent grassland, there has been a simultaneous reduction of the one-year ley, usually clover, within the arable system, combined with an increasing use of herbicides.
The effect of this process is not yet clear, although G. R. Potts has produced some valuable information during studies of the Grey Partridge on the Downs near Worthing.
The importance of the ley crop, particularly clover, in an arable system in this contest is that it not only provides diversity, but also a better opportunity for wildlife, particularly plants and insects, to complete its annual cycle than do crops which are cleared every year.
The use of herbicides is also reducing plant variety in fields, and therefore also insects present.
Both changes must eventually reduce the food supply, both animal and plant, available to birds in farmland habitats.
On the other hand the introduction of new crops such as maize, oilseed rape, tic beans, and the increased area of peas and mustard have provided  new food sources which some species, particularly pigeons, corvids and some seed eaters, have been quick to exploit.
But the basic changes towards a farming system dominated by a limited range of plants, most of which are cereals, can only have reduced variety in farmland wildlife, including birds.
The effects of these changes in agricultural techniques so far are by no means catastrophic for birds, perhaps because the limited availability of bushy nesting cover in predominantly arable areas has controlled the number of many common passerines below the levels the potential food supply could support.
The widespread use of pesticides, notably insecticides, in modem farming has probably also affected the food supply available to birds as well as sometimes causing widespread deaths among them.
These synthetic chemicals were first generally introduced in the late 1940s and early 1950s, and are mainly used in two stages in arable operations — as protection for seed at sowing, and as protection for the growing crop.
Early insecticides were crude, wide-spectrum contact killers, whereas modern ones are more often systemic in operation, that is, they make the crop temporarily poisonous to the pest and are increasingly specific.
In fact, the use of pesticides in cereal farming is largely limited to seed dressings and sometimes aphicides, but it was to the use of persistent organo-chlorine seed dressings that the decline in birds of prey in the late 1950s and early 1960s was convincingly attributed.
During this period the Peregrine Falcon disappeared from Sussex and a marked decline in the Sparrowhawk population occurred.
Other species such as the Kestrel and Barn Owl were probably also affected, and large ‘kills’ of seed-eating birds were reported; breeding numbers of some such as Greenfinches and Stock Doves certainly declined.
With the voluntary banning of organo-chlorines most of these species have recovered, but great care in the use of pesticides is necessary to prevent a repetition of these events.
Other changes arise from mechanisation which, amongst other things, has resulted in the complete disappearance of the corn rick and its attendant chaff heap.
These provided an important winter food source for many species, mainly seed eaters.
There is every likelihood that this, together with the  decline of undersown cereals, accounts for the marked decline of winter finch flocks from much of Sussex.
Mechanisation itself has, apart from the habitat changes it has induced, had little direct effect on birds in Sussex.
It is often stated that the greater speed of modern farming operations and the larger machines used cause increased losses in ground-nesting species such as the Lapwing.
This is probably so, but may be offset by the fact that the fields are left to the birds more quickly, enabling subsequent broods to be reared undisturbed.
Although a decline in hedgerow timber and the consequent loss of farmland bird habitat is a result of modern farming, the recent losses caused by Dutch Elm Disease are independent of farming practice.
The effect on the Sussex landscape of the disappearance of the elm has been very severe in some areas, notably the coastal plain, but the significance for birds is unclear.
In West Sussex the English elm (Ulmus procera ) is nearing extinction and it might be expected that the large numbers of standing dead trees will, at least temporarily, provide large amounts of insect food and sites for hole-nesting species.
In the comparatively small area of East Sussex in which the elm is common, mainly centred on the Cuckmere valley and Firle region, the disease control campaign of East Sussex County Council involves the felling of all infected trees.
Whilst this means no standing dead timber, the possible survival of the elm as a hedgerow tree must be more beneficial, particularly since in these areas the elm is the principal farmland tree.
It is interesting to note that the Rooks which use elms as a high proportion of their nest sites in this region quickly move to other tree species when elms are removed.
Another consequence of modern farming has been a change in the types of farm buildings, which may have affected Barn Owl and Swallow numbers by the loss of sites as traditional Sussex barns disappear.
Clearly the ornithologist must expect the evolution of agriculture to continue, and its most likely result will be to produce a much more uniform habitat with consequently a much less varied bird population than at present, composed of a comparatively few widespread and adaptable species.
It is impossible to say how far this process will go, as agriculture  is strongly influenced by a wide variety of external factors.
It is worth noting that many of the recent habitat changes caused by agriculture in Sussex, and elsewhere, partly result from the reversal of a long decline in farming prosperity between 1875 and 1940.
It seems likely that a similar decline will not be allowed to occur in a period of world food shortages, and continued changes along the present lines can be expected.
URBAN AREAS
By R. D. M. Edgar
URBAN AREAS comprise towns, villages and industrial sites.
The county has a population of approximately 1,270,000 (in 1974), and a population density of over 330 people per square kilometre.
The rise in population can be seen from Fig. 5 (p. 44), the greatest increase having been in West Sussex.
Recently the largest increases have occurred in the Burgess Hill, Crawley, Crowborough, Horsham, and Hastings areas.
Although these areas of expansion are mainly inland the largest towns are located along the coastline with an almost continuous ribbon of development from Pagham east to Seaford, with further major development at Eastbourne and the Bexhill/ Hastings area.
This has produced one of the most developed coastlines in Britain.
This extensive development has considerably affected the distribution of birds.
Downland breeding species such as the Dartford Warbler, Grasshopper Warbler, Stonechat, Wheatear, and Stone Curlew used to be found in areas now covered by residential and industrial development, and some species dependent on beaches have been severely reduced, such as the Little Tern and the Ringed Plover.
On the other hand many urban areas have sizable gardens and so may attract a greater number and/or diversity of common passerines than were once found here.
A small number of Black Redstarts inhabit some of the coastal towns and industrial sites, and Kestrels nest in many towns; three pairs were recorded nesting on Brighton churches in 1968, the same number recorded by Walpole-Bond.
Rather more unusual is the single pair of Herons that have nested in the centre of Westham village for many years.
With so many urban areas on the coast it is not surprising that Herring Gulls  nest on buildings in Sussex, and during the Operation Seafarer counts of 1969 between 106 and 131 pairs were found in the Hastings and St. Leonards district, and nests have more recently been recorded at Eastbourne, Brighton, and Worthing.
Refuse tips are frequented by large numbers of gulls and the few wintering Lesser Black-backed Gulls are usually found at these sites, often inland.
Fig. 5.
Population of Sussex 1949–1974
Another species much associated with urban areas is the Swift, and a 1969 survey recorded some 4,500 individuals  present in the breeding season in the county.
House Martins nest in many villages and some larger towns and in 1971 three pairs were found nesting 1.2km. from the site of a gas works that had closed a few months previously.
Ringed Plovers can also exploit industrial sites and, for example, breed in the vicinity of the power station at Southwick.
Although these urban areas support a surprisingly large variety of nesting birds they cannot be considered as a major nesting habitat for any except Swifts, Starlings, House Sparrows and hirundines.
Perhaps their most important contribution for Sussex birds in recent years has been the vast increase in the provision of food at bird-tables and feeding stations.
In severe winters this has certainly improved the chance of survival of many common birds and has perhaps raised their winter survival rate generally.
Not only town birds exploit this food source.
Recent records have shown Siskins and Reed Buntings moving into towns to use the same food source in winter, and Blackcaps are regular in winter in some towns.
Ringing evidence suggests that other birds from outside towns are doing the same.
CONSERVATION By R.D.M Edgar
THE CONSERVATION of birds is but part of the whole subject of wildlife conservation.
Although a habitat may be manipulated particularly to encourage a bird species or group of species, this would involve the conservation of other forms of wildlife essential to that bird's existence.
In Sussex most conservation work has been carried out to conserve particularly vulnerable habitats, in which birds are often an important element, and in a few cases the birds have been the main reason for the conservation work.
Some of the species involved are rare both in a national and local context which, of necessity, limits the possibilities for discussion here.
However, from the preceding sections it should be clear that habitats that are rapidly diminishing or becoming unsuitable for birds are particularly those associated with wetland, heathland, and on coastal and downland sites.
Co-ordinated efforts towards conservation have occurred almost entirely since 1950 and even individual efforts before that time are few.
The instances of large numbers of birds having been shot or trapped for food, or rare specimens collected, is well documented, and in Sussex was often carried out on a very considerable scale.
One example will suffice; Walpole-Bond records, with reference to Wheatears, that during the period from the final years of the 18th to the early ones of the 19th centuries an inhabitant of East Dean ‘once during that short time was thought to have taken nearly a hundred dozen’, and another ‘near Eastbourne procured eighty-four dozen in the same short space of time’.
Even up to 1902 Wheatears were sent to hotels in Brighton, up to two dozen birds being caught in a morning.
Obviously no species could withstand such  depredations for long, although the present losses of habitat may be considered even more serious.
An interesting example of early concern for bird conservation in Sussex is described by E. C. Arnold in his book Bird Reserves .
Arnold, at one time headmaster of Eastbourne College, purchased a number of sites with the expressed intention of improving them as bird habitats.
His earliest purchase, in about 1911, was of 1.5 hectares, including a brickyard pond, in the Eastbourne area, which he planted up in order to attract, amongst other birds, breeding Marsh Warblers.
His other purchases in the 1920s and 1930s included a 12 hectare woodland, also near Eastbourne, and 1.6 hectares on Pevensey Levels.
One of his most interesting acquisitions was of 36 hectares of levels in the Cuckmere valley, on part of which he constructed ponds, some of which have become a reed bed.
This reed bed is still maintained by working parties of the Sussex Ornithological Society.
For many people conservation is synonymous with nature reserves.
In Sussex the statutory nature reserves, that is National and Local Nature Reserves, total 1,429 hectares, the first being declared in 1952.
The reserves of the voluntary conservation organisations, the Sussex Trust for Nature Conservation and the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds, total 456 hectares.
This total of 1,885 hectares is almost exactly one half of one per cent.
of the county, so that although some of these sites are of great importance to birds, most birds are found in the other 99.5 per cent.
of the land.
Thus, although these reserves include many of the most vulnerable areas and species they must not be given undue importance in the consideration of a wildlife conservation policy.
However, it is fair to say that much would have been lost to the county if they did not exist.
There are many, often very large areas, that are publicly owned and of great value to wildlife but these sites are not primarily managed for wildlife, although this is often an important consideration and some suffer considerable disturbance.
Other major projects, primarily aimed at bird conservation, by the Sussex Ornithological Society include the regular winter flooding of six hectares of Glynde Levels which has attracted  sizable regular flocks of wildfowl, notably Teal and Wigeon; the lowering of water-levels in one of the Pett pools to attract migrating waders in autumn; and the placing of nesting islands in gravel pits and reservoirs.
East Sussex County Council has created a five hectare lake near the mouth of the Cuckmere River to attract wading birds, with nesting islands for Ringed Plovers.
Although these, and similar objects, are small in scale, this belies their importance to bird conservation in the county as a whole in view of the rapid decline of certain bird feeding can perhaps be mentioned as a considerable benefit to certain bird populations.
Although major disasters such as large oil pollution incidents and deaths from pesticides are few, both cause continuing problems.
The greatest conservation problems, however, are those associated with changes in land use, particularly agriculture, including the drainage of wetlands and loss of heathlands and the increase of urban areas with their attendant rise in population and expanding leisure and tourist industries.
There can be no doubt that future changes along these lines will continue and pose particular problems, most of which will be to the detriment of the birds of Sussex.
SYSTEMATIC LIST OF SPECIES
Please refer to the Introduction for definitions of terms used and explanations of the treatment of species in this Systematic List
RED-THROATED DIVER —Gavia stellata 
Status.— Common winter visitor and passage migrant.
No recent change in status is certain, but some decline in the wintering numbers is likely.
Red-throated Divers have been recorded in every month except July and are the most frequently recorded divers in the winter months.
However, the numbers seen varied from under 20 to over 200 in any one winter between 1962 and 1976.
Small parties are quite often noted and gatherings of 50 or more have been seen; the largest in recent years was of 200 off Pett Level on 7 February 1965.
Such parties are becoming rare, and the winter population has probably declined during the last decade.
Oiling incidents may be a contributory cause as sometimes as many as 10 per cent.
of the winter records are of oiled birds.
Extensive passage movements occur which are discussed under DIVER SPECIES .
BLACK-THROATED DIVER —Gavia arctica 
Status.— Scarce winter visitor; more numerous passage migrant, at least in Spring.
No recent change in status is apparent.
The exact status of all the diver species in Sussex is difficult to determine owing to problems of identifying birds in flight and in separating Black-throated and Great Northern Divers.
However, Black-throated Divers have occurred between 3 August and 22 May, and approximate monthly totals for the period 1962 to 1976 are as follows: Nearly all records were for tidal waters, but there were occasional reports for large areas of fresh water inland such as Chichester gravel pits or the larger reservoirs.
Except on spring passage the species is usually seen singly, but two or three are sometimes seen together, and a party of 13 was recorded seven miles offshore in Rye Bay on 11 February 1967.
A distressingly high proportion of the records from November to March relate to oiled birds, and the species may be more numerous offshore in the winter than our records indicate.
These show not more than 15 occurring in the county in any winter in the period 1962 to 1976; in many winters only one or two are seen.
More are seen on spring passage, as the table shows, but passage movements are discussed under DIVER SPECIES .
GREAT NORTHERN DIVER —Gavia immer 
Status.— Scarce winter visitor and passage migrant.
No recent change in status is apparent.
The information available shows this to be the scarcest of the three diver species recorded in Sussex.
It has occurred in each month from October to June, but is most usually found between December and May, either wintering or on spring passage.
Approximate monthly totals for the period 1962 to 1976 are as follows:
Nearly all records are for tidal waters, but birds very occasionally appear on large areas of freshwater inland, such as the main  reservoirs.
Birds are usually seen singly, but, as with Black-throated Divers, two or three are sometimes seen together.
No more than nine have been recorded in one winter, however, and in some years none is seen.
Birds are noted on passage, but passage movements of divers are discussed under DIVER SPECIES.
DIVER SPECIES —Gavia species 
With a high proportion of the divers observed in Sussex not specifically identified, the figures quoted under the specific headings only represent about a third of the divers seen.
To give a more accurate picture of the numerical status of the group in Sussex the table sets out the approximate total numbers of all divers seen in each month between 1962 and 1976.
A comparison of these figures with earlier data quoted by des Forges and Harber suggests a marked decline in the Channel during this century.
Such a comparison must be made with caution, however, as some early counts of large numbers were made from boats some way off shore, for example by E. T. Booth; similar data for recent years are not available.
Systematic sea-watching in spring and autumn has recorded considerable passage movements off the coast.
Autumn passage is difficult to disentangle from winter movements, which have been recorded immediately before severe weather, and the normal wanderings of birds wintering in the Channel.
However, in autumn until late December about 70 per cent.
of the birds noted are moving west.
There is a very marked passage from March to May, when 90 per cent.
of all divers seen have been moving east up the coast.
Most pass through in April and the peak movements are fairly consistently noted in the second half of this month, although they sometimes occur in late March or early May.
However, this pattern may be distorted by the pattern of observation.
Comparatively little time is spent sea-watching in the early months of the year in Sussex, but substantial easterly movements have been noted off Beachy Head as early as 31 January.
In studying these movements attempts have been made to assess the comparative abundance of each species.
The identification of divers in flight is always difficult, but experienced observers feel confident in naming a proportion of the birds seen.
Thus at Selsey Bill between 1960 and 1963 270 out of 800 passage divers were identified in spring, of which 55 per cent.
were considered to be arctica and 45 per cent.
stellata .
More recently at Beachy Head, out of a total of 1,670 passage divers noted in spring between 1971 and 1975, 18 per cent.
were identified as arctica , nine per cent.
as stellata , and 0.5 per cent.
as immer .
Thus it seems clear that arctica is the most numerous species on spring passage.
However, there is no doubt that stellata is the most numerous diver in winter, and Cooper (1975) has noted that virtually all the divers identified off Beachy Head during January to March have been stellata .
Thus it seems likely that the winter population and a substantial passage in February and March are largely composed of stellata ; passage of this species continues through April and May, and is then joined by a large movement of arctica; immer is always a scarce species.
LITTLE GREBE —Tachybaptus ruficollis 
Status.— Scarce and local breeding species; common winter visitor; probably regular passage migrant.
No recent change in status is definitely known, but a decline in the breeding population is suspected.
As breeding birds Little Grebes appear surprisingly scarce, the records for the years 1970 to 1976 indicate a population of less than 100 pairs.
But the species is inconspicuous, usually  nests on waters with dense marginal vegetation, and does so on quite small stretches of water besides lakes and large ponds, so pairs are probably overlooked.
The table lists the more important breeding sites noted from 1970 to 1976, and the numbers found.
In addition there were breeding records or casual breeding season reports from 25 other localities in the same period.
Nesting is not established at each site every year, but evidence of any decline is, at present, rather inconclusive.
In the winter most Little Grebes occur on sheltered waters at the coast, although they are rare on the open sea.
The most important winter sites are Chichester and Pagham Harbours, Newhaven Tidemills, and the Cuckmere estuary, each place holding gatherings of 20 to 50–60 fairly regularly.
Since 1965 the number recorded along the coast in any winter has not exceeded about 170 birds, and the largest count in one locality was of 101 birds.
Increasing numbers now winter inland, a change in habits similar to the Great Crested Grebe.
From 1951 des Forges and Harber recorded Little Grebes regularly wintering inland and, since 1965, up to 60 have done so annually.
Wintering birds first appear at the coast in August and September, and most have left by early April.
Some through passage also occurs and is probably regular, particularly in October and November, but the extent of such movements has not been determined accurately.
BLACK-NECKED GREBE —Podiceps nigricollis 
Status.— Regular winter visitors and passage migrant.
The numbers occurring have declined in recent years.
As a winter visitor this species' distribution is very similar to that of the Slavonian Grebe, but there is now no regular wintering locality, although most recent records have been from the western end of the county and Rye Harbour.
No party of more than three Black-necked Grebes has been noted since 1960, and most reports are now of single birds; these occur inland about as often as do Slavonian Grebes.
Monthly totals of Black-necked Grebes during the period 1960 to 1976 were:
These records involve a total of about 120 individuals and the species is now much scarcer than the Slavonian Grebe, although des Forges and Harber recorded approximately equal numbers of each species.
In fact analysis of the records shows a steady decline since about 1956.
Thus the average number recorded annually in each five-year period since 1947 was:
With the great increase in observer activity during the period there is no reason to doubt that the decline evident since 1956 is anything but real.
Almost certainly it has mainly affected wintering birds rather than passage migrants, particularly in Chichester Harbour, where parties of up to 10–15 once wintered fairly frequently.
The movements of wintering birds and passage migrants clearly overlap, but the records suggest that comparatively few of the birds recorded from August to October and in April stay for any length of time.
SLAVONIAN GREBE —Podiceps auritus 
Status.— Regular winter visitor; passage migrant, at least in spring.
An increase has probably occurred in recent years.
As a winter visitor the species occurs along the whole coast and occasionally on inland waters, but the most regular localities are Chichester Harbour and Church Norton, where gatherings of up to about 15 often winter.
Larger numbers have occurred off Church Norton in some recent winters, including a count of 50 on 11 December 1971, the largest party yet recorded in Sussex.
Birds are recorded inland, mainly at Chichester gravel pits, almost annually in winter.
Winter visitors probably arrive in November, sometimes October, and are most numerous in November and December.
Some through passage perhaps occurs in late autumn and is clearly discernable in late March and April.
There have been six recent records for May, and a bird in summer plumage was present at Chichester gravel pits and Chichester Harbour until 19 July 1970, and another was seen at Thorney Island on 25 July 1971.
These are the first summer records for the county.
Although there are no August records, the species has been recorded in September, the earliest report being for the seventh in 1951 and 1974.
These are the only September records since 1947 and are the earliest autumn dates for Sussex.
Monthly totals for the period 1960–1976 were:
A total of about 560 individuals is involved in these records and comparison with data given by des Forges and Harber suggests some increase, the average number recorded each year having risen from about 15 annually until 1961 to over 55 annually since 1967.
The increase in observer activity seems unlikely to account entirely for this change.
RED-NECKED GREBE —Podiceps griseigena 
Status.— Annual winter visitor; probably also scarce passage migrant.
No recent change in status is apparent.
Red-necked Grebes have been recorded in every month from August to May, but most are seen from October to February.
In the period 1961 to 1976 a total of about 83 were reported, numbers varying between one and 12 per year, and monthly totals were:
Few were noted as making prolonged stays and it is difficult to assign any particular record as a wintering or passage bird.
Although these figures suggest some recent increase, as des Forges and Harber record only about 40 for the period 1950 to 1960, this would easily be accounted for by the great increase in regular observations at the coast.
Nearly all records were for the sea or the immediate vicinity of the coast.
There have been eight recent inland records, however, from Weir Wood Reservoir (two), Darwell Reservoir (one), Chichester gravel pits (one), and Arlington Reservoir (four), making a total of 16 inland reports for the county altogether.
GREAT CRESTED GREBE —Podiceps cristatus 
Status.— Local resident; common winter visitor; probably passage migrant.
Little recent change in status is apparent, but the increase in the resident population noted by des Forges and Harber has probably continued.
The breeding population was surveyed annually from 1962 to 1965 and in 1975.
The results of these surveys are given in the table, and show that 18 sites held Great Crested Grebes regularly in the breeding season and five sites, which were not occupied in 1975, are probably occupied more often than not.
Breeding Season Population of Great Crested Grebes in Sussex, 1962–75
Note.
— Burton Ponds includes Chingford Pond; all map references are given in SxBR 1964 and 1975.
The winter of 1962/63 caused marked fluctuations in the first period.
In addition to the above sites three others held a total of six birds in one year between 1962 and 1965, and five held a total of 15 birds only in 1975; two of these new areas in 1975 were recently filled reservoirs.
This probably represents a fair picture of the more casual breeding season or breeding records, of which a few occur in most years.
Thus between 1966 and 1974 there were breeding season records from another 11 sites, of which three held birds in three years and four in two, making a grand total of 42 sites for which there were breeding season records between 1962 and 1975.
Quite possibly some of our  breeding birds use one or two alternative sites, perhaps particularly where they are breeding on rather small stretches of water.
However, the 1975 figures clearly give a very fair picture of the present breeding status, and Hughes (1975b), in discussing the results, notes that although the total summer population increased by 45 per cent.
between 1965 and 1975, the number actually nesting has remained static at rather under 50 pairs (96 birds).
Hughes listed industrial and agricultural pollutants and increased recreational activities, such as fishing, sailing and power boating, as factors affecting Great Crested Grebes' breeding distribution and success.
It is worth noting that the increase in the acreage of wet gravel pit and reservoirs available to the species for nesting since 1962, particularly at Chichester, has not resulted in any significant increase in nesting pairs.
A feature of modern management of both wet gravel pits and reservoirs is to encourage leisure activities of various sorts, and landscaping (which too often involves removing most of the marginal vegetation for tidiness).
Unfortunately conservation is not usually considered very much under this policy.
Nesting has started earlier in recent years, which appears to be associated with a trend for Great Crested Grebes to become resident at their nesting sites.
Walpole-Bond noted that eggs were only very exceptionally laid before the end of April, but in recent years nests with eggs have been found in February (the 26th, 1967), and have been noted fairly regularly in late March and early April.
In winter Great Crested Grebes are most common on the sea, particularly in Rye Bay, where up to 500 have been seen together (20 February 1949).
More recently the largest concentrations noted there were about 200 on 4 December 1967, and 30 December 1968, and concentrations of up to 150 have been seen off the coast between Brighton and Rottingdean.
Elsewhere the numbers seen together have rarely exceeded 10 to 30 birds.
Peak numbers are normally present between December and early February.
The species once wintered inland very rarely (Walpole-Bond), but des Forges and Harber recorded small numbers doing so regularly by 1961 and this trend has continued.
It seems most  likely that the breeding stock is becoming resident on its breeding waters.
Since 1962 counts of up to 60 have been made in winter at Chichester gravel pits, and of up to 30 at Weir Wood Reservoir, with small numbers regular elsewhere.
Prolonged frost will drive these birds on to the sea, but many return inland immediately there is a thaw.
There may be some through passage.
Although sea-watching has shown no significant coasting movements in either spring or autumn, small influxes have been noted on inland waters during March and April.
A few non-breeding birds are also recorded on the sea during June and July.
FULMAR —Fulmaris glacialis 
Status.— Summer visitor; probably passage migrant; winter vagrant.
Prior to 1945 a winter vagrant only, thus a considerable increase has occurred recently.
Birds were seen on the cliffs in East Sussex as early as 1950, but despite a considerable increase in numbers, breeding was not proved until 1976.
The largest summering group is found at Beachy Head, where up to five were noted prospecting in 1961, and numbers built up steadily to a maximum of 38 apparent pairs in 1972.
Since 1965 prospecting birds have also been noted regularly at other localities on the chalk and east of Hastings.
There were well over 100 birds summering in 1976.
The birds arrive on the cliffs in January and February and stay until June or July, and what are presumably the same birds are recorded right along the coast.
Curiously 90 per cent.
of all Fulmars recorded at Selsey Bill have been flying west.
The species is uncommon in August and September, although the numbers of records is increasing, and is distinctly rare from October through December, when only seven were recorded between 1961 and 1974.
However, in 1975 the Beachy Head population returned on 28 December, and this species pattern of occurrence is still changing rapidly.
BULWER'S PETREL —Bulweria bulwerii 
Status — One record.
One was found dead near Beachy Head on 3 February 1903.
CORY'S SHEARWATER —Calonectris diomedea 
Status.— Three records.
One was seen a few miles off Newhaven on 21 September 1936; one flew east off Langney Point on 15 October 1948; One flew east off Langney Point on 19 November 1950.
GREAT SHEARWATER —Puffinus gravis 
Status.— Two records.
The remains of one were found at Rye on 27 November 1938; one was seen off Langney Point on 4 June 1956.
SOOTY SHEARWATER —Puffinus griseus 
Status.— Rare passage migrant in autumn.
Until 1961 des Forges and Harber record four, and from then until 1976 27 were seen.
Birds have been recorded singly except for two together flying west off Selsey Bill on 28 August 1965, and three likewise off Langney Point on 12 September 1970.
Birds have been recorded in June (one), July (two), August (eight), September (14), and October (six).
MANX SHEARWATER —Puffinus puffinus 
Status.— Spring to autumn visitor.
The number occurring has apparently increased in recent years.
Two races of the Manx Shearwater occur in Sussex:Puffinus p. puffinus and Puffinus p. mauretanicus,and between 1948 and 1976 both were seen almost annually.
The table summarises the records by months and races and shows puffinus to be the most frequent.
However, there are seasonal variations, and mauretanicus is slightly more numerous in autumn, while puffinus is much more numerous from April to June.
Manx Shearwaters in Sussex, 1948 to 1976
There have been no January records.
All recent records are for the Channel and most relate to single birds.
But several parties have been seen, the largest of which was of 80 puffinus off Beachy head on 9 May 1975.
The May total includes some exceptional movements of puffinus off Beachy Head, on 28 May 1972, involving 84 birds, and 8 May 1975, involving 64 birds, and on the 9th with 126 birds.
These movements  account for 75 per cent.
of all the records of this race since 1948 and that in 1972 occurred in a severe south-westerly gale.
Thus although a marked increase is apparent in recent years it may prove to be due entirely to three freak movements.
The race mauretanicus, on the other hand, may now be appearing less frequently, and only one has been recorded since 1971.
STORM PETREL —Hydrobates pelagicus 
Status.— Rare visitor.
The numbers recorded appear to have declined in recent years.
Walpole-Bond refers to innumerable reports for both spring and autumn, but des Forges and Harber recorded only 19 between 1946 and 1960, and there were only three more up to 1976.
There are old records for every month except August and September, but the records since 1946 have been for April (one), May (one), June (two), October (four), November (13), and December (one).
All were of single birds except for three together off Langney Point on 1 November 1952.
There are no recent inland records, although storm-driven birds have been found inland in the past.
LEACH'S PETREL —Oceanodroma leucorrhoa 
Status.— Rare visitor.
Until 1961 des Forges and Harber recorded a total of about 75 birds.
From then until 1976 there were two reports: 31 December 1964, Langney Point; and 19 October 1966, Saltdean.
All the 15 records since 1948 have been of single birds and the most in any year was four in 1952.
There were records for four months: September (three), October (six), November (five), and December (one).
There are old records for January and one for May.
A third of the recent records relate to birds found dead or dying inland after severe gales.
Otherwise the species is strictly maritime.
GANNET —Sula bassana 
Status.-Common spring to autumn visitor offshore; scarce in winter.
No recent change in status is apparent.
Gannets are recorded offshore in every month, but are scarce or rare from December to March.
The table, summarising detailed observations at Selsey Bill between 1960 and 1970, still gives a fair indication of the pattern of occurrence and numbers involved.
Gannet Movements off Selsey Bill, 1960–1970
In addition feeding parties of up to 80 birds were seen offshore, mainly in early autumn, and 800 flew west off Beachy Head on 18 September 1976, the largest movement yet seen off Sussex.
As with some other seabirds westerly movements predominate, which makes defining status accurately very difficult.
Since there are now breeding colonies on the Channel Islands in comfortable feeding range of the Sussex coast, it is likely that both feeding and passage movements are involved.
Sick or dead birds are sometimes found inland.
CORMORANT —Phalacrocorax carbo 
Status.— Has bred; non-breeding birds present throughout the year; winter visitors; probably passage migrant.
No recent change in status is definitely known.
Although sometimes seen on the chalk cliffs in the summer, Cormorants have not bred in Sussex since 1938 or earlier.
Few accurate counts are available for this species, but the records since 1967 show it to be most numerous in the county from October to March, with peak numbers in October or November and February or March.
Totals for the whole county in this period have not been shown to exceed 200–300-birds, although 200 were recorded in Chichester Harbour alone in 1953.
This was probably an exceptional count, as not more than 50–60 have been noted there during estuary counts since 1967, but gatherings of 60 to 100 are regular now in several places along the coast, for example Bognor pier, and 150 were recorded in the Rye area in the winter of 1972/3.
Thus the total noted at present perhaps underestimates numbers.
Most are recorded at the coast, particularly in the western harbours and at Rye Harbour, but inland records are frequent from autumn to spring, and up to 65 have been seen at Chichester gravel pits.
Smaller numbers frequent the main reservoirs.
There is a regular roost in Arundel Park, and 120 were seen flying to roost there on 17 December 1973, the highest count so far.
There are two records of the race sinensis : 11 February 1936, which had been ringed in Germany; and 12 February 1938.
SHAG —Phalacrocorax aristotelis 
Status.— Occasional non-breeding summer visitor; winter visitor; probably passage migrant.
Has been recorded regularly in Sussex only since 1950, although this species may have been overlooked previously.
Between 1950 and 1976 from one to about 30 birds were seen  annually , except in 1960 when there were about 160, mainly in the spring.
Birds were recorded in every month, and approximate monthly totals during the period were:
All records were for the coast, except for one shot from a party of six at Weir Wood Reservoir on 18 March 1962 and a total of five at Arlington Reservoir between 1973 and 1975.
There is also a record for 26 November 1928 from Goodwood.
Birds ringed in Northumberland were recovered at Southwick in February 1954, and at Horsted Keynes on 25 March 1962, and one from the Isle of May, Forth, was recovered at Roedean on 18 January 1970.
All were dead and had been ringed as pulli the summer before recovery.
HERON —Ardea cinerea 
Status.— Resident and partial migrant; perhaps also passage migrant and winter visitor.
A decreasing breeding species.
Herons are reasonably common in Sussex at all seasons in suitable localities but, although up to 3 5 have been noted together in autumn and winter, gatherings of any size are rare away from breeding colonies.
Walpole-Bond gives a detailed account of all the Sussex heronries, active or extinct, known until 1938, when the total population was 321 pairs.
This represented a considerable decline during the previous 100 years, since one heronry alone contained about 400 pairs about 1840.
This long-term decrease has continued, although there have been fluctuations.
The table, based on counts of certainly occupied nests, summarises the breeding position since 1938.
Number of Breeding Herons in Sussex, 1938 to 1970
In 1973 there were 178 nests in 10 colonies; and there were 179 in 10 colonies in 1976, when two sites usually holding five to 10 pairs were not visited.
The colonies known from 1970 to 1976 and the numbers of certainly occupied nests they contained were:
Fishbourne, Old Park Wood
First recorded in 1872, although possibly a very ancient site.
The highest recorded count was 37 nests in 1960 and 1962; the 1970 figure was 25, and there were 33 in 1976.
Pagham
First recorded in 1960 and possibly an offshoot of the Fishbourne colony.
The highest recorded count was six nests from 1966 to 1969; the 1970 figure was four, but there were only two in 1976, and the colony may be dying out.
Parham, North Park Wood
Originally founded at Michelgrove in 1810, this colony moved to its present site between 1826 and 1832.
The highest recorded count was 90 to 120 nests in the 1870s, and since 1948 was 48 nests in 1959; the 1970 figure was 41, and there were 42 in 1976.
Henfield, Wyckham Wood
Probably founded in 1951, when it was first recorded.
The highest recorded count was 13 nests in 1959; the 1970 figure was nine, and there were four in 1976.
Glynde Place
First recorded about 1946, it was not known in 1939.
The highest recorded count was 24 nests in 1950; the 1970 figure was one.
There was none thereafter, and the colony is extinct.
Firle Decoy
Founded in 1917.
The highest recorded count was 41 nests in 1973; the 1970 figure was 30, and there were 35 in 1976.
Figures published for this colony between 1948 and 1966 were usually less than 10, and it seems likely that this site and Glynde are used by the same group of birds.
Glynleigh
Founded in 1937.
The highest recorded count was 34 nests in 1955.
There was none after 1969, and the colony is now extinct.
Priesthawes
First recorded in 1963 with two nests.
There were six nests in 1970 and eight in 1975.
This colony probably started as an offshoot of Glynleigh, being only about a mile away, and has not had more than eight nests.
A single pair at nearby Westham since 1963 derived from the same source.
Wartling
The present colony was first recorded in 1959 and has moved twice, occupying the present site in 1968.
The highest recorded count was nine nests in 1969; the 1970 figure was four, and there were four in 1976.
The Herstmonceux/Wartling area is a very old site, a large colony (150 pairs) being recorded at Windmill Hill in the mid-16th century, although detailed records for the colony only exist from 1835.
It apparently died out in 1948, and the present colony was first located at Boreham Street.
Eridge Park
Founded between 1885 and 1890.
The highest recorded count was 38 nests in 1950 and 1957.
There were only six nests in 1970, but 11 in 1976.
Leasam
There has been a substantial heronry in the triangle formed by Rye, Brede and Beckley since at least 1297.
Originally at Udimore, it moved to Great Sowdens Wood, Brede, between 1840 and 1845, then to Aldershaw, Beckley, between 1892 and 1896.
The present site was apparently first recorded about 1939 and Aldershaw was deserted in 1947.
The highest known count was about 400 nests in Great Sowdens Wood in about 1840, and in this century 119 nests at Aldershaw in 1930.
Since 1948 numbers at Leasam reached a peak of 63 nests in 1950, declined to an all-time low of five in 1963, but have since recovered steadily; the 1970 figure was 30, and there were 23 or more in 1975.
Since 1947 breeding has also occurred at the following sites: Itchenor, up to 18 nests from 1946 to 1951; Chichester gravel pits, one nest in 1960; Fynings Moor, Rogate, two nests in 1963 and 1964; Beauport Park, Hastings, four or five nests in 1950; Great Park Wood, Udimore (one of the original sites of the present Leasam colony), irregularly occupied until 1960 by up to nine pairs; Nuthurst, a pair in 1973; Knepp, eight pairs in 1976 Buxted Park, one pair in 1976.
There are a few records from the coast every year suggesting migration.
Records relate to coasting movements, which are difficult to evaluate and some of which may refer only to local movements, and both immigration and emigration in in spring and autumn.
Most movement is noted from June to September, and nestlings ringed in Sussex have been recovered on the Continent as early as June in the same year.
Thus of 40 ringed at Aldershaw in April 1928, six were recovered in Belgium, France and Spain between early June 1928 and 11 January 1929.
PURPLE HERON —Ardea purpurea 
Status.— Vagrant.
There are 18 records, 11 of them since 1957.
All are of single birds — 10 seen at the coast and eight in inland localities.
Records are for April (four), May (five), June (two), July (one), September (one), October (one), and November (two).
The old records are undated, but one was for autumn.
SQUACCO HERON —Ardeola ralloides 
Status.— Three records.
One was shot at Horsham in 1849, probably in July; one was shot between Steyning and Henfield about 30 September 1934; one was seen at Brighton on 29 April 1951.
CATTLE EGRET —Bubulcus ibis 
Status.— Four records.
On 27 April 1962 four together were found in fields just north of Pagham Harbour and one was seen there on the 29th.
On 28 April that year one was seen with cattle at Lancing.
One seen at Wittersham from 8–15 August 1974 was thought to be an escape from captivity.
LITTLE EGRET —Egretta garzetta 
Status.— Vagrant.
There are 13 records, all since 1952 and of single birds seen at the coast.
Nine were recorded from either Chichester or Pagham Harbours.
There are records for May (six), June (four), and July (three).
One bird remained in Chichester Harbour from 10 June to 1 September 1952, and another did so from 30 July to 23 August 1959.
NIGHT HERON —Nycticorax nycticorax 
Status.— Vagrant.
There are about nine records but only four for this century: an immature was seen near Lancing College on 12 December 1954, which may have been an escape; an immature was found dead at Rye on 29 September 1969; a sub-adult was seen at Sidlesham Ferry on 27 May 1970.
One was seen at Rye Harbour from 2–4 September 1975.
LITTLE BITTERN —Ixobrychus minutus 
Status.— Vagrant.
Until 1947 des Forges and Harber give about 17 records, and there have been six since 1964.
All records are of single birds and most are for the coast, or recently Chichester gravel pits.
There are four old records for built-up areas.
Records are for March (one), April (three), May (eight), June (one), July (one), August (two), September (one), and October (two).
Four old records are undated.
BITTERN —Botaurus stellaris 
Status.— Scarce winter visitor; occasional from spring to autumn.
No recent change in status is apparent.
Although up to eight have been seen in one year, Bitterns are not annual in Sussex.
In the period 1947 to 1976 about 73 were recorded, approximate monthly totals being:
There were two reports of two together, otherwise all were of single birds.
The species may be encountered in any suitable marsh or dense area of aquatic vegetation at the coast or inland.
AMERICAN BITTERN —Botaurus lentiginosus 
Status.— Three records.
One was shot on Pevensey Levels on 26 November 1867; one was shot on Amberley Wildbrooks on 30 November 1883; one was caught near Hollingbury Camp, Brighton, on 24 October 1909.
WHITE STORK —Ciconia ciconia 
Status.— Vagrant which is perhaps increasing.
Until 1929 des Forges and Harber give about 20 records involving about 27 birds.
Since 1965 there have been 11 reports involving 16 birds.
One overwintered near Adversane in 1974/75, but otherwise records were for April (three), May (one), June (three), July (two), and September (one).
The April records include one of a party of five at Polegate on the 25th in 1972.
BLACK STORK —Ciconia nigra 
Status.— One record.
One was seen at Iden from 9 August to 14 September 1958; it had been first seen at Stone Cliff, Kent, on 7 August.
GLOSSY IBIS —Plegadis falcinellus 
Status.— Vagrant.
The only recent record is of one at Pagham Harbour, on 22 and 23 April 1965.
There are a number of old records, mainly  of single birds, although parties of about 10 birds have been seen twice; des Forges and Harber give one or two for May, one for August, three for September, several for October, and two or three for November.
SPOONBILL —Platalea leucorodia 
Status.— Rare passage migrant or spring to autumn visitor; rare winter visitor.
Since 1947 Spoonbills have been recorded each year, except in 1959, 1960, 1962, 1963, 1969, 1973, and 1976, and there were records involving 82 birds.
Single birds are usually seen, but two or three together have been recorded several times, and a party of five flew west off Langney Point on 17 October 1947, and one of 20 did likewise on 1 September 1964.
Most records are for Chichester, Pagham or Rye Harbours, and all are for the coast, except for one at Amberley Wildbrooks from 31 December 1950 to 15 April 1951.
This is the longest stay recorded for any individual, but birds often remain for several weeks.
There are records for every month, monthly totals for the period 1947 to 1976 being:
GREATER FLAMINGO —Phoenicopterus ruber 
Status.— One record.
One shot near Jury's Gap on 1 August 1916 was possibly an escape.
MUTE SWAN —Cygnus olor 
Status.— Resident; possibly also winter visitor.
No recent change in status is apparent.
Mute Swans are fairly widely distributed breeding birds in Sussex, but little up-to-date information about numbers is available.
The most recent survey was that organised by the British Trust for Ornithology in 1955, which recorded c. 100 pairs; des Forges and Harber considered this to be an underestimate.
In winter sizable flocks occur in suitable localities along the coast, in the permanent grasslands of the river valleys and levels and on the reservoirs.
The largest such flock in recent winters was of 145 in the Amberley/Pulborough marshes on 17 December 1960, and gatherings of 40 to 70 are not infrequent.
About 100 are now found wintering fairly regularly in Bosham Creek.
WHOOPER SWAN —Cygnus cygnus 
Status.
Irregular winter visitor.
Now scarcer than Bewick's Swan and not recorded every year, although no change in the number occurring is apparent.
The numbers recorded have always been small, although quite marked influxes occurred in the three most recent severe winters, with about 42 in 1946/47, 40–50 in early 1956, and 60 in 1962/63.
Otherwise fewer than 20 have been seen in any year since 1947, except 1968, when 34 passed east up the coast off Pevensey on 7 March, the largest party noted in the county since 1938.
Whooper Swans are most usually seen in the permanent grasslands of the river valleys and levels or on reservoirs and estuaries.
Nearly all the records are for the period December to March with a distinct peak in February, but there have been two April records since 1947, one for May (2nd, 1956, Rye), one for October (16th, 1969, Pevensey), and one for  13 November 1971 in the Adur Levels; there are also two old records for November.
Approximate monthly totals for the period 1947 to 1976 were:
BEWICK'S SWAN —Cygnus bewickii 
Status.— Winter visitor; possibly also passage migrant.
A marked change in status has occurred in recent years and is now a regular winter visitor, although as recently as 1953 it was rarer than Whooper Swan.
Most Bewick's Swans are now recorded in wet grasslands or large areas of open water in the interior, although des Forges and Harber record none in the interior before 1940 and as recently as 1961 most were still seen at the coast.
However, in addition to increasing reports of transient parties inland, a wintering herd is now established in the Amberley/Pulborough marshes and groups regularly make prolonged stays elsewhere.
The first sign of the present pattern of occurrence is detectable as early as the winter of 1953/54, but an increase has been most marked since the winter of 1961/62.
The cold winter of early 1956 produced an exceptional influx, but neither of the winters of 1946/47 nor 1962/63 did so, in direct contrast to Whooper Swans.
The table summarises the records for Bewick's Swans for the period 1948–1975 by five-year periods:
The increase has been considerable.
Disregarding the influx of early 1956, which involved about 150 birds and appears quite exceptional, the average number seen per year rose from just over one to 14 between 1952 and 1962, jumped to 70 or more per year between 1963 and 1972, and rose to over 100 per year between 1973 and 1976.
January is the peak month, but winter visitors now start to arrive in October and November and depart in February and March, sometimes April.
There has been a fairly constant tendency since 1962 for Bewick's Swans to appear earlier in winter, and in 1972 the Amberley flock started to arrive in late October.
There have been two other recent October records, for the 27th, 1973, in the Cuckmere, and 30th, 1971, at Rye.
The number staying throughout the winter is still quite small, 92 in February 1976 being the highest count so far of the Amberley/Pulborough flock.
Thus many more birds have been recorded as making shorter visits or passing straight through.
But it is not clear if the latter records indicate passage or are merely wide-scale wanderings by birds with no permanent winter site.
Most records of movement have been to the west, which may not be significant.
PINK-FOOTED GOOSE — Anser fabalis  brachyrhnchus 
Status.-Scarce winter visitor and passage migrant.
No recent change in status is apparent.
Pink-footed Geese are not quite of annual occurrence in Sussex, but were noted in 20 of the 30 years between 1947 and 1976.
All records are for the river valleys, levels, or the coast.
The severe winters of 1955/56 (166 recorded) and 1962/63 (165 recorded) are the only winters in which substantial numbers have been seen.
Otherwise more than c. 20 in one winter is most exceptional, and single birds are quite usual.
These geese rarely stay for very long, except in severe weather.
Most of the records are for January (31 per cent.),
March (26 per cent.),
February (17 per cent.), and November (14 per cent. ), but there are records for the whole period September to May.
The May record is of a bird which remained at Piddinghoe until 13 May 1956.
Parties have been seen flying up the Channel, presumably on migration, twice in April (4th, 1961, and 7th, 1969), and once in March (30th, 1971).
BEAN GOOSE —Anser fabalis fabalis 
Status.— Irregular winter visitor.
No recent change in status is apparent.
Between 1919 and 1959 des Forges and Harber give five records comprising 27 birds.
Since then there have been 14 records comprising a total of c. 85 birds in six winters.
Most were seen in early 1963, with records from nine localities totalling at least 40 birds.
Between 25 December 1963 and 21 March 1964 a party of eight wintered in West Sussex, being seen in several places as far apart as Sidlesham and Wiston Park; there is no reason to suppose that more than one party was involved.
In addition 10 seen at Litlington on 14 October 1974 seem most likely to have been on migration, apparently the only such record for Sussex.
WHITE-FRONTED GOOSE —Anser albifrons 
Status.— Regular winter visitor or migrant.
Some recent increase in the numbers occurring is possible.
About 90 per cent.
of all grey geese identified in Sussex are of this species.
Although recorded annually there is no regular winter population, and birds rarely remain for more than a few days except in severe winters, when considerable  influxes occur.
Apart from birds flying over, which may be seen anywhere, these geese are nearly always found in the permanent grassland of the river valleys and levels or near the coast, where there are large areas of suitable grazing.
The numbers recorded each winter are very variable, ranging since 1947, for example, from three in the winter of 1960/61 to about 1,670 in the winter of 1962/63.
Parties are usually of up to about 50 birds, but flocks of up to 150 are not rare; the largest flock in recent years was of c. 400 birds in the Sidlesham area in early 1963.
Nearly all records are for the period November to March, but there is one October record (1885, Shoreham), and a few for April, May and June which probably refer to pricked birds or escapes from collections.
A marked peak occurs between mid-December and the end of January, and many records during this period, particularly since 1965, are of parties flying west or south-west.
In total these records strongly suggest a westerly winter movement through the county.
Possibly these birds are part of the flocks which winter in the valleys of the Hampshire Avon and/or Severn.
Some spring passage may occur in March, but involves few birds.
As far as is known all Sussex records refer to the race albifrons , except for a bird showing the characters of the race flavirostris at Wiggonholt on 27 January 1956.
GREY LAG GOOSE —Anser anser 
Status.— Irregular winter visitor; perhaps regular passage migrant.
Although this species has occurred more regularly in the past decade than formerly, no very significant change in status seems likely.
Introduced populations now feral in southern England probably account for some Sussex records, making the status of truly wild birds very difficult to assess.
However, the numbers recorded are always small, parties of more than 10 birds being exceptional; single birds are  frequently noted.
Except in 1953, when a party of 67 was seen, not more than about 25 birds have been seen in any year since 1947, and it is of interest that influxes have not occurred in recent severe winters.
Half of all the records since 1947 have been for the period mid-February to mid-April, particularly March, with 30 per cent., which suggests that there is a fairly regular, although small, spring movement through the county.
A return movement may occur in the autumn, although there are fewer records.
There are also a few records for January, but only two for the first half of February.
CANADA GOOSE —Branta canadensis 
Status.— An introduced resident which is increasing.
S. W. M. Hughes published a full account of the history and current status of the Canada Goose in Sussex in SxBR.1972; these notes summarise his findings.
The species was probably first introduced into Sussex  somewhen in the second half of the 19th century, and the largest flock in the county, at Petworth Park, was started  somewhen between 1918 and 1930.
Since 1947 breeding has been proved at a total of 22 sites, and some other sites have probably not been found; not every site is used, or at least recorded, each year.
Three attempts to census the total population have been made after the breeding season, in July 1953, January 1967 and 1968, and July 1971.
These counts recorded totals of 23–50 birds in 1953, about 290 in the period 1967–1968, and 326, including 98 young of the year, in 1971.
In 1976 the records indicated a population of at least 700 birds, and 45 pairs were reported in the breeding season.
The number found breeding successfully in any year is small compared to the total population, for example only 20–25 pairs in 1971.
Although some breeding sites are certainly not known, many pairs simply do not attempt to breed, and breeding success is low.
This suggests a dearth of suitable habitat.
In  north-west Sussex some culling is also carried out by agricultural interests.
Despite these significant checks on the population this species seems likely to increase further in the future.
BARNACLE GOOSE —Branta leucopsis 
Status.— Rare winter visitor, usually in severe weather.
No recent change in status is apparent.
Until 1961 des Forges and Harber gave about 14 records in addition to the small influx involving c. 5 5 birds in the frost of February 1956.
Since 1961 there have been nine records comprising 49 birds, 39 of them in the winter of 1962/63.
All records are for coastal grasslands except for a party of 27 on Glynde Levels on 26 February 1956.
Most birds have been seen in December, January or February, but there is one record for October (30th, 1949, Sidlesham), one for November, three for March, and one for April, of a bird which stayed at Pagham Harbour from 18 March to 3 April 1962.
Except for birds seen during severe winter weather, which have often associated with influxes of other geese, records of this species are open to the suspicion that the birds have escaped from captivity.
This was certainly so with a party of five present in East Sussex during much of 1972.
PALE-BREASTED BRENT GOOSE —Branta bernicla hrota 
Status.— Scarce winter visitor.
No recent change in status is apparent.
Pale-breasted Brent Geese were noted in 14 out of the 29 winters between 1947/48, and 1975/6, with a total of c. 130 birds in all.
Not more than 30 (in 1966/67) have been recorded in any winter.
Parties of more than five are unusual, but flocks of 10–20 have been noted on five occasions, and one of 30 was seen in Chichester Harbour on 25 February 1967, the largest yet recorded in the county.
This race has been seen most often in Chichester and Pagham Harbours (14 records comprising 67 birds), at Cuckmere Haven (four records comprising 17 birds) and at Pett Level (four records comprising 24 birds).
DARK-BREASTED BRENT GOOSE —Branta bernicla bernicla 
Status.— Locally common winter visitor; passage migrant.
A marked increase in numbers has occurred recently.
Prior to 1938 this goose wintered regularly in Chichester Harbour and possibly in Pagham Harbour, but little information about the numbers involved is available.
However, by 1950 regular wintering had ceased.
Today a substantial winter population has re-established itself in both harbours and is still increasing; there is little doubt that the numbers involved are now far greater than ever before.
The table sets out the peak counts in Chichester Harbour, where by far the largest flocks occur, in each winter since 1947, to show the extent and timing of the increase.
Peak Winter Counts of Brent Geese in Chichester Harbour from 1946/47 to 1975/76
In Pagham Harbour the winter peak did not exceed 200 birds until the winter of 1973/74, but there were 1,030 by 1975/76.
The establishment of the present winter population appears to date from the mid-1950s, and the increase has been very marked since 1960.
It has been  paralleled by a similar increase in Langstone Harbour in Hampshire, which is only separated from Chichester Harbour by Hayling Island; in fact, the two harbours join at the north end of Hayling.
All the information available shows that the Brent flocks in these two harbours remain largely separate, except to the north of Hayling Island, and counts of the entire Chichester/Langstone complex since 1972/73 have shown the peak populations to reach 10,000 to 12,000 birds.
Winter visitors start to arrive in October, occasionally September, and peak numbers usually occur in January or February.
But large flocks are now present from mid-November to mid-March every winter, and the winter mean in Chichester Harbour, calculated from monthly counts during this period, rose almost every winter from 720 in 1965/66 to 5,345 in 1975/76.
The flocks disperse very rapidly in the second half of March and sizable flocks are rare after the end of this month.
Although present in Langstone Harbour there are now no beds of Zostera species in either Sussex estuary, although these certainly existed in the early years of this century, and Z. angustifolia was recorded near the Hayling shore of Chichester Harbour as recently as 1963.
But substantial beds of green algae are present and appear to have spread in recent years; they are probably continuing to do so.
The Brent now appear to feed mainly on these plants.
However, the geese also fed extensively on grass marsh round Chichester Harbour after 1973/74, and Campbell (1946), during a study of the food of Wigeon and Brent Geese in Britain, recorded animal matter in the stomachs of three Brent from Essex and five from Ulster, out of a total of 28 stomachs examined.
Thus the feeding requirements of this bird may prove less inflexible than usually supposed.
Away from Chichester and Pagham Harbours these geese are scarce in Sussex, but small parties occur briefly in most winters in many coastal localities, particularly the Pett/Rye area.
They are rarely found on inland waters, although, since it is  established that some of our winter visitors migrate over the interior of the county, such records are likely from time to time.
There is a regular easterly passage along the coast in spring, between late February and late April, with peak numbers usually occurring in March.
The numbers recorded annually vary widely, ranging from under 100 to nearly 3,000 in recent springs.
A westerly return movement occurs between mid-October and December, but fewer birds are noticed.
The extent to which the Sussex population is involved in these movements is unknown, but at least some of our wintering birds move overland, and parties have been reported over Kingley Vale, Eartham, and West Chiltington recently, usually in spring.
The reports suggest that large numbers are sometimes involved.
RED-BREASTED GOOSE —Branta ruficollis 
Status.— One record.
One was seen in the Amberley/Pulborough marshes between 8 and 17 February 1958.
RUDDY SHELDUCK —Tadorna ferruginea 
Status.— Vagrant.
There have been no acceptable records since 1940 which have not been considered as most likely to have escaped from collections.
Among old records there is evidence of irruptions in September 1890, when single birds were obtained at Harting and Selsey; October 1892, when at least seven were seen or obtained  between Eastbourne and Selsey, and August and September 1940, when six were shot at Rye Harbour.
Walpole-Bond also records several on 8 September 1884 and during April 1885, two of which were shot.
SHELDUCK —Tadorna tadorna 
Status.— Locally common resident and winter visitor; a few on passage.
The wintering population has increased considerably in recent years, but little change at other seasons is apparent.
Shelduck first bred in Sussex in 1904 but, although numbers established themselves round Chichester and Pagham Harbours fairly quickly, colonisation of the rest of the county has been slow and the breeding population is still mainly concentrated around these two harbours.
However, single pairs breed regularly at the Cuckmere estuary and about 12 pairs do so between Rye and the Midrips.
Breeding has also occurred at a cliff-top site at Beachy Head, and the species is now colonising inland sites, with regular nesting at Chichester gravel pits, and birds present in other localities, particularly in the Arun valley, almost every season.
Nesting has been proved as far inland as Harting.
There are no recent counts of breeding pairs round either of the western harbours, but counts of young there indicate little change since 1947 and suggest a total population of rather under 100 pairs.
The county breeding population is therefore unlikely to exceed 100–150 pairs.
Breeding success, judging from a long series of reports from Rye, has also changed little since 1947; the Rye figures show an average brood size ranging from 5.7 to 9.7, and averaging 7.8.
A substantial non-breeding population also summers in the western harbours.
Again this has shown little significant change since 1947, and May and June counts show that 450 to 700 birds are regularly involved in Chichester Harbour and 50 to 180 in Pagham Harbour.
These breeding season data suggest a marked decrease since 1938, when Walpole-Bond quoted a figure of 500 pairs for south-west Sussex.
This figure was repeated by des Forges and Harber, and quoted by Parslow (1973), but I am reasonably certain that it was a considerable over-estimate.
Certainly there is no reason apparent for such a marked local decrease (of about 80 per cent.), which seems unlikely in view of the slow increase and spread in other areas.
Large winter concentrations only occur in Chichester and Pagham Harbours, where a series of counts, summarised in the table, have been made since 1966.
Total Number of Wintering Shelduck, Chichester and Pagham Harbours, 1966 to 1976
The largest winter flocks are in Chichester Harbour, where the winter peak was of 3,000 birds or more in each winter until 1974/75, and the highest count was of 4,900 birds on 10 March 1968.
Peak counts in Pagham Harbour ranged between 500 and 1,000 birds in the period.
Outside these harbours it is doubtful if the total winter population exceeds 200 birds, but up to 70 winter at Newhaven and between Rye and the Midrips.
A few also winter in the Cuckmere estuary, the Amberley/Pulborough marshes and Glynde Levels, but parties of more than 20 are rare.
The counts from the western harbours represent a considerable increase in the wintering population.
This is most clear in  Pagham Harbour, where the National Wildfowl Counts until 1963 recorded a normal winter peak of 100 birds, with up to 300 in severe weather (Atkinson-Willes 1963).
In Chichester Harbour the highest count recorded until 1961 was of 1,550 birds in February 1959, but it is doubtful if any counts covering the entire estuary were made before 1966.
The movements and moult migration of Shelduck in Sussex have been little studied.
But it is evident that the species is now a regular winter visitor on a large scale, although the data available to des Forges and Harber suggested that the winter flocks were made up of the breeding population, non-breeding birds and the young of the year, except in very cold weather; this cannot be so today, although cold weather influxes still occur.
Very few Shelduck are present in August and September, most of the resident adult population leaving to moult in July and a variable proportion of the young of the year following later; some September counts in Chichester Harbour have found as few as three present.
The return movement begins in October, but substantial numbers are not often present before November.
The highest winter numbers are present in January and February, occasionally early March, and there is a fairly rapid departure of winter visitors in late March and early April.
DUCKS
Table VIII sets out the range and means of the peak winter counts recorded in the period 1964/65 to 1974/75 for the commoner ducks, in the most important wintering sites in Sussex for which regular figures are available.
The table aims to provide a simple comparative index, both of numbers and the relative importance of areas, rather than definitive estimates of population.
Since it takes no account of possible movements between sites it probably contains some duplications.
For the same reason the population estimates given in the species accounts are meant only to indicate the order of size.
The table also indicates the increasing importance of the large areas of open water created by gravel extraction and for reservoirs to wintering surface-feeding species.
Much drainage work has been done, and is being done, in the grass marshes of the river valleys and Levels, greatly reducing the importance of one principal wildfowl habitat in the county.
The creation of artificial waters does much to replace this loss, and five of the 12 sites in the table are gravel pits or reservoirs and support about 30 per cent.
of the population listed.
Sussex is also well supplied with smaller lakes and ponds, of which Burton Ponds and Knepp Lake are two typical examples.
In total such ponds are clearly another potentially useful wintering ground for wildfowl, and more information is needed about such sites.
Severe winters greatly inflate the numbers of nearly all wintering wildfowl.
In the species accounts which follow the aim has been to describe the ‘normal’ pattern as far as possible.
Thus, while most winters produce short cold snaps which have been accepted as part of the normal pattern, the effects of the quite exceptionally severe winters of early 1947, 1956, and 1963 have been allowed for when making comparisons.
WIGEON —Anas penelope 
Status.— Common winter visitor and passage migrant.
No recent change in status is apparent.
The main winter concentrations now occur in Chichester and Pagham Harbours, the Amberley/Pulborough marshes, and Glynde Levels.
The winter populations in 12 major wildfowl localities in the county for the period 1964/65 to 1974/75 are summarised in the table on page 86.
A comparison of these figures with similar figures from the same areas between 1947 and 1964 indicates little overall change in status; a small increase is possible.
But the records suggest that large flocks of Wigeon have stayed for much shorter periods in many inland localities since 1964 as a result of the generally drier conditions.
The  species is inclined to graze dry grassland more readily than other dabbling ducks, however, so is somewhat less vulnerable to drainage operations.
Local changes of abundance have also occurred, with marked increases at Pagham Harbour and Glynde Levels and declines at Amberley/Pulborough, Darwell Reservoir and Rye Harbour.
In addition to the figures in the table sizable concentrations sometimes occur in the Adur valley (up to 400 birds), Pevensey Levels (up to 250 birds), Wet Level (up to 350 birds), and at Pett Level (up to 800 birds).
Very few are known to occur elsewhere.
Numbers everywhere greatly increase in very severe weather.
Although occasional birds, usually pricked, may summer, winter visitors have been recorded as early as late August, but first arrivals are more usual in September and October.
Peak numbers are usually found in January, but may occur locally in any month between December and early March, often depending on the water levels.
By the end of March the bulk of our winter visitors have departed.
Regular sea-watches have recorded small passage movements in autumn, mainly in November and again in spring, usually in March.
GADWALL —Anas strepera 
Status.— Scarce winter visitor and passage migrant.
The number occurring has increased steadily since 1938, although the population is still very small.
A feral population now breeds.
Until 1938 only about 25 had been recorded, and between 1938 and 1961 about 120 were seen, numbers varying from one to seven annually; none was seen in three years (des Forges and Harber).
Between 1962 and 1976 Gadwall were recorded annually, numbers ranging from seven to 55 in a winter.
During this period a regular wintering flock established itself at Chichester gravel pits, which reached a peak of 43 birds in December 1969  and accounted for about half the records for each winter.
However, numbers declined very sharply there after 1969, possibly as a result of the management of the fishery.
The population has now become much more dispersed, with birds occurring on many of the larger lakes, reservoirs and areas of gravel pits in the county.
Parties of up to 25 are not uncommon.
Gadwall are rare on the sea and infrequent in the river valleys.
Winter visitors probably start to arrive in September and October, earlier records referring to autumn passage, or to the one or two birds which now summer fairly regularly.
A small spring passage occurs between late March and the end of May.
In 1976, when three pairs reared 24 young, a feral population was established at Arundel as part of the Wildfowl Trust's collection.
The young were free flying, and the future status of this species in Sussex will be strongly influenced by this population.
TEAL —Anas crecca 
Status.— Scarce and local breeding species; common winter visitor and passage migrant.
The wintering population has declined considerably in recent years, but it is unlikely that breeding numbers have altered greatly since 1938.
Recent records indicate a breeding population of about 50 to 60 pairs, but almost certainly under-estimate the true position.
Teal are very inconspicuous when nesting, and no census has been attempted.
Most breeding records have been from lakes or ponds with good marginal vegetation, such as Shillinglee, Lurgashall, and Burton ponds, or from small, sometimes quite insignificant, streams and marshes in the interior.
The species rarely nests in extensive grass marshes, where, during much systematic study of other species, there have been only four recent summer records.
Breeding is also unusual near the coast, but has been recorded at five sites.
This distribution appears substantially similar to that described by Walpole-Bond and no marked change in the breeding position since 1938, when 75 to 150 pairs were thought to breed, seems likely.
As winter visitors most Teal now occur in Chichester and Pagham Harbours, the Arun valley, and Glynde Levels.
The winter populations in 12 major wildfowl localities in the county for the period 1964/65 to 1974/75 are summarised in the table on page 86.
The species has certainly declined in recent winters, with the improved drainage of many extensive areas of wet grassland, its primary winter habitat.
A comparison of the figures in the table with similar figures for the same areas between 1955 and 1964 shows an overall decline of about 35–45 per cent.
Locally, numbers have increased at Chichester Harbour, Glynde, and possibly Chichester gravel pits.
In addition to the figures tabulated concentrations of 100 or more are frequent in the Adur valley (max. 600), and Pevensey Levels (max. 260), and the species also occurs in smaller parties in many minor wetland areas.
From the information available it seems likely that the total winter population of the county now rarely exceeds 4,000 birds.
In 1960 and 1962 the Amberley/Pulborough marshes alone held a winter peak of about 3,000 birds.
Passage movements and the arrival and departure of winter visitors are difficult to separate.
The local breeding stock appears to disperse in July and August and winter visitors may start to arrive in September.
Peak numbers occur between December and February, and most winter visitors have departed by late March.
Some through passage takes place in spring, between March and early May, and in autumn up to the end of November, but recent records give little idea of the scale of these movements.
Birds showing the characters of the race carolinensis were seen at the Midrips between 19 and 22 March 1961, and in the Cuckmere Valley on 21 and 22 March 1975.
MALLARD —Anas platyrhynchos 
Status.— Common resident and winter visitor; probably passage migrant.
No recent change in status is apparent.
The Mallard population in Sussex is supported regularly by the release of hand-reared birds by wildfowlers.
The numbers of such birds shot annually is not known, but evidence that these introductions have increased the breeding or wintering stock is lacking.
As a breeding bird the Mallard is widely distributed throughout the county and not always confined to wet habitats; breeding has been established in several downland localities, for example Rewell Wood.
The most important breeding habitat is lakes or ponds with good marginal vegetation.
Quite small ponds may hold a number of pairs, for example, 11 pairs have been found at Patching Pond.
Elsewhere up to 40 pairs have been counted at Chichester and Rye Harbour gravel pits recently.
In grass marsh breeding densities are not apparently very high; even in very favourable areas counts have rarely exceeded 20–30 pairs per 2,500 acres (10 sq.km.), and are often less.
The winter populations of 12 important wildfowl localities in the county for the period 1964/65 to 1974/75 are summarised in the table on page 86.
However, this only represents a proportion of the total wintering population, as other localities are known to attract substantial flocks; for example, up to 250 have been recorded recently at Warnham Mill Pond and the Adur Levels, up to 300 at Pevensey Levels, up to 450 at Swanbourne Lake, and 500 in Lewes Brooks.
In addition many minor wetlands hold smaller groups.
No overall change in the winter status is apparent, although local changes have occurred, for example in the Amberley/Pulborough marshes, where numbers have declined with improved drainage.
Peak winter numbers normally occur between December and February, and birds disperse very rapidly in late February and March.
There is little recent evidence of a marked through passage.
PINTAIL —Anas acuta 
Status.— Has bred.
Regular winter visitor and passage migrant.
No very marked change in status has been noted recently.
Pintail bred in Sussex in 1925 and 1936, and a pair probably attempted to do so in 1970.
The number wintering in the county has always been quite small, and the main concentrations are now found in Chichester Harbour, mainly in Chichester Channel at Fishbourne, and the head of Bosham Channel, Pagham Harbour (since 1971), and sometimes still in the Amberley/Pulborough marshes.
The winter populations in 12 major wildfowl localities in the county for the period 1964/65 to 1974/75 are summarised in the table on page 86.
A comparison of these figures with similar figures for the same areas between 1947 and 1964 indicates no overall change in status.
A decline has occurred in the Amberley/Pulborough marshes, where flocks of more than 100 were regular before 1964, but are now infrequent, although 200 were present in 1974/75.
Such numbers are now much more usual in the western harbours.
The table includes all the regular winter localities, although birds may be reported from many other suitable sites.
Only exceptionally, however, does the present winter population exceed about 400 birds.
Although birds are noted regularly in August and September, winter visitors probably do not arrive until October, and some certainly stay into April.
Their arrival and departure overlap a small passage in spring and autumn.
This movement has been most clearly indicated by regular sea-watches, which have recorded small easterly movements between the late March and early May, and a westerly movement between October and December.
GARGANEY —Anas querquedula 
Status.— A few pairs breed; passage migrant.
The numbers breeding appear to have declined recently.
Otherwise no change in status is known.
Until 1961 up to 12 pairs bred annually (des Forges and Harber).
However, between 1962 and 1976 breeding was only  proved five times, although other breeding season records suggested a population of up to seven pairs; in some years none was found.
Most of the known or likely breeding localities were searched fairly thoroughly during the period, so a decline in the breeding population seems apparent.
Spring passage is most marked between mid-March and the end of April, with a fairly well-defined peak at the end of March.
Arrival had been noted as early as 27 February (1971), however, and some passage continues until mid-May.
Numbers vary but a total of 40 is the highest recorded in recent springs; parties of up to 10 together are sometimes seen.
Autumn passage begins in early July and continues until early October, although the latest recorded dates are 29 October 1966 and 11 November 1892.
Similar numbers to the spring are involved, and passage peaks in mid-August, particularly the second week of the month; up to 23 have been recorded together.
There are two winter records, of a pair seen near Horsham on 19 January 1947, and one shot at Langney Point on 21 February 1913.
The Langney bird may possibly have been a very early spring arrival.
BLUE-WINGED TEAL —Anas discors 
Status.— Two records.
One was obtained at Worth on 17 January 1922; one was seen at Church Norton and Chichester gravel pits from 12 to 14 May 1970.
Both these birds may have escaped from captivity.
SHOVELER —Anas clypeata 
Status.— A few pairs breed; winter visitor and passage migrant.
The winter population has declined in recent years, but little change at other seasons is apparent.
Breeding may not be annual, but between 1965 and 1976 it was proved in eight years, involving a total of 10 pairs.
Other  breeding season records, however, indicate that between five and 10 pairs probably breed in most years.
In winter the main localities for the species are Chichester gravel pits, the Amberley/Pulborough marshes and Glynde Levels, but sizable flocks are now most regular at Chichester gravel pits.
The winter populations in 12 major wildfowl localities in the county for the period 1964/65 to 1974/5 are summarised in the table on page 86, and a comparison of these figures with similar figures for the same areas between 1947 and 1964 indicates an overall decline of about 30 per cent.
until 1973.
Like the Teal, the Shoveler has undoubtedly suffered from the improved drainage of many inland marshes, and the present winter population does not often exceed 200–400 birds in a normal year.
But 400 were recorded in the Amberley/Pulborough marshes alone in 1974/75, an exceptionally wet winter when the species was unusually numerous.
There is a marked spring passage, often starting in late February and continuing into May; most movement occurs in March and April.
In some years a high proportion of the birds involved are adult males.
There is much annual variation in numbers, but regular sea-watches, which record the bulk of this movement in many years, have not reported more than about 200 birds in any spring.
Autumn passage appears to be slight and may be under-recorded, since many August and September records appear to relate to passage rather than resident birds.
Winter visitors probably begin to arrive in October.
RED-CRESTED POCHARD —Netta rufina 
Status.— Vagrant.
Between 1948 and 1961 des Forges and Harber gave eight records involving about nine birds, and there were 15 more records involving 17 birds up to 1976, besides a number of reports which have been considered to relate to escapes from  collections; in fact, some of the records included here must be open to this suspicion.
Birds have been seen in every month except June and August, and commonly make prolonged stays.
Taking the first reported date for each bird records have been distributed as follows: July (two), September (two), October (three), November (one), December (eight), January (one), February (two), March (three), April (one), and May (three).
Most have been seen at Chichester gravel pits, but the species may occur on any stretch of fresh water.
POCHARD —Aythya ferina 
Status.— A few summer and sometimes breed; common winter visitor; probably passage migrant.
There has been no marked change in status in recent years, but birds now summer more often.
A few have summered annually since 1966, but breeding is still very rare.
Until 1960 des Forges and Harber recorded eight cases and a pair may have bred in 1973.
The winter population in 12 major wildfowl localities in the county for the period 1964/65 to 1974/75 is summarised in the table on page 86.
The main concentrations occur at Chichester and Rye Harbour gravel pits, where flocks of up to 400 birds are regular and which, combined, hold about half the county population.
Flocks of 100 or more are also fairly frequent at Weir Wood Reservoir, but seem uncommon elsewhere, although the records for 1972/73, when numbers were unusually high, included a count of over 400 at Knepp.
Including the small flocks, totalling 100 birds or fewer, occurring on ponds other than those listed on page 86, the total wintering population of the county appears to be of the order of 1,000 to 1,400 birds.
A comparison of the present figures with similar ones for the same areas between 1947 and 1964 suggests little overall change; a slight increase is possible.
However, there has been  much change in the importance of individual waters, and the present concentration at Chichester and Rye seems of recent origin.
Prior to 1964 at least five areas, including the Amberley/ Pulborough marshes, normally held winter peaks of 100–200 birds, but as new reservoirs are flooded the pattern will doubtless change.
Pochard only occur in numbers on salt water in very cold weather.
There is little up-to-date information on movements; des Forges and Harber record autumn arrival occasionally from July, with the main arrivals in October and November; most depart by late March.
There is no recent evidence of any change.
Winter peaks fairly consistently occur in December or January.
FERRUGINOUS DUCK —Aythya nyroca 
Status.-Four records comprising nine birds.
Three were shot on the Crumbles on 15 August 1903; three were seen at Warnham Mill Pond on 20 March 1908; one was seen on Amberley Wildbrooks on 24 March 1926; two, one of which was eventually shot, were present in the Rye/Midrips area from 17 November 1946 to 22 February 1947.
It is not known if any of these birds had escaped from collections, but a number of more recent reports certainly relate to such birds and are, therefore, disregarded.
TUFTED DUCK —Aythya fuligula 
Status.— Common resident and winter visitor; passage migrant.
The breeding stock has increased steadily since 1958, and some increase has occurred in the number wintering.
Tufted Ducks were first proved to breed in Sussex in 1853, but have bred regularly only since about 1958.
The table  summarises the summer population based on records for late May and June and proven breeding records between 1958 and 1975.
Breeding was proved on a total of 36 waters in the period, most of which may be regularly occupied, although the records show annual fluctuations and breeding is not always proved at all known breeding sites each year.
About half the proven breeding population is concentrated at Chichester gravel pits (up to 31 pairs), and Rye Harbour gravel pits (up to 16 pairs), with six or seven pairs breeding in some years on each of Burton Ponds and Darwell Reservoir.
Elsewhere one or two pairs is the usual number.
Nearly all breeding sites are freshwater lakes or ponds and most suitable ones in the county are now, or will soon be, occupied.
One or two pairs also breed regularly on the tidal stream of Glynde Reach, and breeding has been proved on the Ouse below there, which is also tidal water.
.
Breeding success in the period under review was often poor and observers have frequently remarked on a high predation rate after hatching.
The average brood size noted ranged from 3.6 to 7.7, with a mean of 5.2, but the number finally reared was often much less; the few figures available indicate a predation rate of up to 40 per cent., sometimes more.
Pike are often suspected as responsible.
The Summer Population of Tufted Duck in Sussex, 1958–1976
Note.
— Total summering population includes the proven breeding population
The winter population in 12 major wildfowl localities in the county in the period 1964/65 to 1974/75 is summarised in the table on page 86.
By far the largest concentration is found at  Chichester gravel pits, and the only other area at which more than 100 birds have occurred annually is Weir Wood Reservoir; similar flocks seem now to be establishing themselves at Darwell Reservoir and Rye Harbour gravel pits.
In addition to the figures tabulated, a total of some 100–200 birds is usually recorded each winter on other ponds, and the present wintering population of Sussex seems to be of the order of 1,000–2,000 birds.
A comparison between the figures given in the table and similar figures for the period 1947–1964 suggests an increase of about 25 per cent., virtually confined to Chichester and Rye Harbour gravel pits and clearly correlated with the increase of water available as digging progressed.
Tufted Duck are unusual on salt water, except in severe winter weather.
The arrival and departure of winter visitors is difficult to determine accurately in the presence of a sizable resident population, but peak winter numbers are present between December and February.
Some passage appears to take place in March and April, when numbers on inland waters may increase temporarily, and a few have been noted passing during sea-watches.
Information on autumn movements is very scant, but they are believed to start about September.
SCAUP —Aythya marila 
Status.— Scarce winter visitor and passage migrant; occasional in summer.
No recent change in status is apparent.
Most Scaup winter at sea or on waters near the coast, mainly from Seaford Bay to the Midrips, but one or two are now quite regular inland, particularly at Chichester gravel pits and Weir Wood and Barcombe Reservoirs.
Except in very cold weather, however, the numbers wintering in Sussex are never very large.
Thus between 1964 and 1976 numbers varied between one bird in the winter of 1964/65 and c. 90 in the winter of 1969/70 and 1971/72.
The largest flock noted was of 60 birds, but parties of up to 20 are much  more usual and many records are of single birds.
In very cold weather much larger flocks appear.
Thus, up to 5,000 together were seen in Rye Bay in early 1947, and the winters of 1955/56 and 1962/63 produced flocks totalling several hundreds along the coast.
In recent years there have been records for every month as single birds have summered five or six times.
Most have been present in January and February.
The arrival and departure of winter visitors appears to overlap a small passage which has been most obvious in spring, when regular sea-watches have recorded small easterly movements, involving up to 25 birds annually, between early March and early May.
EIDER —Somateria mollissima 
Status.— A few summer in most years; regular winter visitor and passage migrant.
The increase noted by des Forges and Harber has continued.
A few now appear to summer fairly regularly.
There have been June or July records annually since 1960, except in 1971, 1972 and 1975, and up to 27 birds have been seen together, although smaller numbers are much more usual.
The main wintering concentrations in Sussex recently have been in the Pagham/Selsey area, with up to 60 regularly; Seaford Bay, with up to 30 regularly; and Rye Bay, with up to seventy.
However, Eiders may also be seen right along the coast, and the total numbers recorded wintering between 1960 and 1976 varied between 20 in the winter of 1960/61 and 250 in that of  on average about 70–80 are usually present.
The total in the 1962/63 winter is the highest yet noted and included 114 together off Selsey Bill on 27 January 19 63, the largest flock yet seen in the county.
Eiders are confined to salt water.
The arrival and departure of winter visitors overlaps passage, but peak winter numbers seem to be noted most consistently in January or February.
A fairly marked spring passage occurs  between March and May, when sea-watching has recorded up to 200 birds in one spring.
Autumn movements or arrival may start as early as August, but is most usual in late October; most autumn passage is observed in November.
LONG-TAILED DUCK —Clangula hyemalis 
Status.— Scarce winter visitor and passage migrant.
Some increase in the number occurring is likely.
Most Long-tailed Ducks are seen at sea or on tidal waters, but one or two are recorded on inland waters almost every year.
Single birds are most usual, but parties of up to five occur and one of nine was seen in Chichester Harbour on 26 January 1958.
The table summarises the records since 1948 and suggests some increase; duplications arise in the monthly totals when birds winter.
Long-tailed Ducks in Sussex, 1948–1976
There was a sharp increase in the number of records between 1956 and 1965, and an even greater increase between 1966 and 1973, but numbers since have been lower.
Without doubt these changes reflect changes in observer activity, but the figures suggest a genuine increase in numbers is also involved.
There are two records for July (10th, 1975, and 1 7th, 1960) and one for August (12th to 21st, 1976).
Otherwise the earliest autumn record was 15 October, and arrival was most usual at the end of this month or in November.
A large proportion of our birds are transient and sea-watches have shown westerly movements until late January and small easterly movements in March and April.
The latest spring record is for 6 May (1961 and 1971), but April records are now quite regular, although there was only one between 1948 and 1959.
COMMON SCOTER —Melanitta nigra 
Status.— Present throughout the year.
Common winter visitor and passage migrant.
The winter population has decreased in recent years.
The main Sussex wintering locality for this species is Rye Bay, where winter peaks between 1964 and 1976 ranged between 150 and 1,100 birds, averaging 530.
Elsewhere large flocks are rather irregular, but up to 400 were noted off Langney Point, 250 in Seaford Bay, and 150 in Pevensey Bay in the same period.
Off West Sussex the species is much scarcer, the only large winter flocks seen in the period being of 100 off Selsey Bill in early 1964 and 1965.
The species has declined considerably in winter since peak counts of 2,000–5,000 birds were noted regularly in Rye Bay between 1947 and 1956.
Although the peak winter counts are made fairly consistently in Rye Bay in January or February, the arrival and departure of winter visitors is impossible to determine as birds are present throughout the year.
Summering flocks of up to about 50 birds are probably regular, and about 3,000 summered in Rye Bay in 1956.
Common Scoter are virtually confined to the open sea, although oiled birds will visit fresh water near the coast.
But there are a few inland records; des Forges and Harber give about 14 until 1961, and there were 12, comprising 45 birds, between 1962 and 1972, including a party of 25 at Weir Wood Reservoir on 25 June 1972; there has been none since.
There is an extensive spring passage.
Typically this occurs between mid-March and late May, and involves several thousand birds.
Numbers and peak dates vary annually, the sighting of large movements being closely correlated with the occurrence of south-easterly winds; Cooper (1975), however, noted that the peak off Beachy Head usually occurred between 11 and 20 April.
Movements of over 1,000 birds in a day are noted almost every spring, however, and the largest single movement yet seen was of 12,000 flying east off Beachy Head on 7 April 1969.
Between 1965 and 1976 the total numbers recorded on spring passage varied between about 2,000 in 1967 and 25,000 in 1968.
In some years passage continues into June; for example, in June 1970, 640 were seen passing off Selsey Bill.
Large autumn movements are unusual.
The largest daily movement recorded in autumn at Selsey Bill between 1960 and 1970 was of 83 birds.
But the records after June showed a predominantly westerly movement and fairly clear peaks in July/August and October/November.
SURF SCOTER —Melanitta perspicillata 
Status.— One record.
A female was seen at Rye Harbour gravel pits on 3 December 1966.
VELVET SCOTER —Melanitta fusca 
Status.— Scarce winter visitor and passage migrant.
No recent change in status is apparent.
The numbers wintering off Sussex are always small, the largest winter totals noted since 1947 being 90 birds in 1958, and 102 in early 1974, when a flock of 100 was seen in Rye Bay on 23 February.
In many winters fewer than 20 are seen.
Most wintering reports come from the coast from Langney Point to the Midrips, particularly Rye Bay and, excepting passage birds, numbers further west have only exceeded about 10 birds in very cold weather.
Velvet Scoter are virtually confined to the sea or sometimes tidal waters, but oiled birds may visit fresh water near the coast; there are two very old inland records, and single birds were seen at Weir Wood Reservoir on 1 February 1970 and Darwell Reservoir on 12 November 1972.
Larger numbers occur on spring passage, when up to 300 have been recorded together (8 May 1951, Rye Bay).
Since 1965 spring sea-watches have recorded up to 290 (average 70) birds passing along the coast between early March and late May; the latest spring date was 30 May.
There are a few old June records, but none since 1947.
Autumn arrival has been noted as early as 10 July, but usually starts in late October, and passage has been noted in November.
GOLDENEYE —Bucephala clangula 
Status.— Common winter visitor; passage migrant.
No recent change in status is known.
The bulk of the Goldeneye wintering in Sussex do so in Chichester Harbour, where recent counts have shown a fairly consistent winter peak of about 100 birds; on 16 January 1971 225 were counted, and on 1 January 1974, 234, the largest concentrations so far recorded.
Both these very high counts were made from a boat rather than the shore, and experience suggests that counting from the shore in this harbour may often under-estimate numbers of Goldeneye.
Peak numbers are fairly consistently present in January and early February; numbers in December are often quite low, and the birds disperse rapidly in late February and March.
The recent figures suggest some increase when compared with des Forges and Harber's account, but more probably reflect the great increase in observer coverage of the Harbour since 1965.
However, there has possibly been some increase in the number of adult males wintering.
Walpole-Bond notes them as extremely rare, but between 20 and 30 per cent.
of the flocks in Chichester Harbour recently have been adult males.
Elsewhere numbers are quite small, but Goldeneye are noted annually at several places along the coast, and on most important inland waters.
The largest gathering away from Chichester Harbour appears to be of 19 at Rye Harbour in February 1968 and up to 13 together have been seen on inland waters, although single birds and parties of up to five are most usual.
They are not often seen on the open sea except on passage.
Since 1965 the species has been noted in each month between October (21st) and May (30th), but there are earlier records for July (31st, 1959), and September (27th-30th, 1958).
An injured bird also summered at Darwell Reservoir in 1958.
Birds have been noted regularly into April, and sea-watching has shown a passage in March and April, which is sometimes also reflected on inland waters.
Very little autumn passage has been observed, but there is obviously a steady arrival of winter visitors in November and December.
SMEW —Mergus albellus 
Status.— Scarce but regular winter visitor.
No recent change in status is apparent.
This species has been recorded in each month from November to March, but as with Goosander most are seen in January and February.
Extreme dates are 3 November (1974, Cuckmere), and 31 March (1963, Rye).
Since 1947 a total of about 485 Smew has been recorded, with exceptional numbers in 1954 (c. 50 birds), 1956 (c. 100 birds), and 1963 (c. 80 birds).
These influxes were all associated with severe weather and numbers otherwise ranged between one and 24 annually, averaging about nine.
Approximate monthly totals between 1947 and 1976 were:
The distribution of this species and Goosanders in Sussex is very similar, but Smew are even more infrequent on the open sea.
Although often seen singly, small parties are rather more often seen than with Goosanders; the largest recorded was of 22 at Manhood End in early February 1956.
RED-BREASTED MERGANSER —Mergus serrator 
Status.— Occasional in summer; common winter visitor and passage migrant.
No recent change in status is apparent.
There are a few records for June and July, when up to four have been seen together.
Sometimes these are disabled birds and summering is doubtfully of annual occurrence.
Substantial wintering flocks are virtually confined to West Sussex, from Shoreham west to Chichester Harbour.
The largest concentration occurs fairly consistently in Chichester Harbour, where flocks of 40 to 60 birds have been annual since 1947; 130 were seen there on 18 December 1954, the largest flock yet noted in the county, and there were 97 on 4 December 1971.
Elsewhere gatherings of 20 to 40 are noted frequently in the Pagham/Selsey area, off Climping and between Worthing and Shoreham; 100 were seen off Lancing on 26 January 1964, and about 65 wintered off Worthing in 1971/72.
East of Brighton the species seems remarkably scarce in winter.
Since 1947 the only records in the county files of sizable winter flocks were of 45 in Seaford Bay on 25 February 1956, and 30 off Langney Point on 17 January 1965; the other records are nearly all of single birds or small parties of five or so.
Although largely confined to salt water in Sussex, there are sufficient inland records to suggest that one or two mergansers can be found on inland waters every winter.
The arrival and departure of winter visitors overlaps passage, but peak winter counts are usually made in December or January.
Spring passage commonly extends from early March to late May, but sea-watching results from Selsey Bill since 1960 consistently show that the passage peaks in the first three  weeks of April, and off Beachy Head Cooper (1975) found a marked peak between 11 and 20 April.
Numbers vary, but up to 650 birds have been noted passing up the Channel in a spring, and movements of 50 to 100 birds in a day are an annual event; 234 flying east off Beachy Head on 15 April 1968 is the largest single movement noted.
The return movement rarely starts before October, although there are four records for August and four for September.
Peak passage normally occurs between mid-November and mid-December.
Fewer birds are involved than in spring, but up to 75 have been seen passing down the Channel in a day, and once 200 (19 November 1972, Selsey Bill).
Winter sea-watching at Selsey Bill has shown westerly movement to predominate during January and February in some years, suggesting some passage continues from October to February.
GOOSANDER —Mergus merganser 
Status.— Scarce but regular winter visitor; a very few may pass through on passage.
No recent change in status is apparent.
Apart from a wounded bird still present on Lurgashall Mill Pond on 22 July 1972, this species has been recorded in each month from October to May.
Most are seen between December and February, with a decided peak in January.
Extreme dates are 3 October (1948, Thorney Island), and 20 May (1961, Selsey Bill).
Since 1947 a total of about 570 has been recorded, about a third of them in the two severe winters of early 1956 (c. 44 birds), and 1962/63 (c. 154 birds).
Apart from such influxes up to c. 30 have been seen annually, with an average of about twelve.
Approximate monthly totals from 1947 to 1976 were:
Goosanders are found on both fresh and salt water, near the coast and well inland, but they are rather rare on the open sea  and are perhaps more likely to be seen c-n salt water in very cold weather.
Most are seen singly or in twos and threes, but up to 10 have been recorded together and, in 1963 a party of 50 was seen at Burpham on 30 January, and another, which finally totalled 29, was present at Weir Wood Reservoir in March.
OSPREY —Pandion haliaetus 
Status.— Regular passage migrant.
A recent increase in reports is assumed to be connected with the re-establishment of a British breeding population.
Ospreys have been recorded annually since 1947, except in 1948, but since 1961 numbers have almost doubled.
Most are seen on autumn passage, with a marked peak in September, but spring reports have become more numerous recently and have included several April records.
These were once considered very rare and most spring passage is noted in May.
Extreme dates are 16 April (1970, Pagham), and 16 November (1952, Darwell Reservoir).
Monthly totals for the period 1947 to 1976 were: April (eight), May (29), June (four), July (four), August 24, September (64), October (27), and November (two).
Almost any sizable stretch of water, inland or coastal, may attract an Osprey, but spring birds rarely make prolonged stays.
In autumn, however, it is not unusual for a bird to remain in one area for several weeks, and stays of more than six weeks have been recorded.
Most birds are seen singly, but two together are not very unusual, and three were seen together at Weir Wood Reservoir on 30 August 1976.
HONEY BUZZARD —Pernis apivorus 
Status.— Rare passage migrant.
Although the number recorded has greatly increased in recent years, no real change in status may have occurred.
There is no evidence that this species has ever nested in Sussex.
Until 1960 des Forges and Harber gave about 60 records  records for the period late May to early November; most reports were for June, September and October.
Between 1961 and 1976 there were 35 records for: May (four), June (three), August (five), September (21), and October (two).
Spring dates fell between 9 May (1971, Beachy Head, the earliest county record), and 10 June, and autumn dates between 16 August and 24 October.
All but seven of these birds were seen at or near Beachy Head, where watching for passage  raptores has been carried out regularly since 1965.
Probably Honey Buzzards are regular passage migrants there, at least in autumn.
BLACK KITE —Milvus migrans 
Status.— Two records.
One arrived from the south-east at Beachy Head on 12 April 1970, and departed west; one was seen near Herstmonceux on 13 November 1976.
KITE —Milvus milvus 
Status.— Vagrant.
Kites probably ceased to breed in Sussex about 1825, and des Forges and Harber give 21 records between 1863 and 1960, all for the period September to May as far as is known.
Between 1961 and 1976 there have been 14 records: in January (two), March (four), April (two), May (one), August (three), September (one), and November (one).
Two March records, which were for 1972, may have involved only one bird, as may two August records in 1973.
WHITE-TAILED EAGLE — Haliaeetus albicilla
Status.— Vagrant.
Although not infrequently recorded in the 19th century, when it was possibly a fairly regular winter visitor, only six were recorded between 1900 and 1929, and there has been only one since, at Selsey Bill on 30 July 1961.
Walpole-Bond connected the sudden decline in reports, which dated from about 1895, with the extermination of the Scottish breeding stock.
MARSH HARRIER —Circus aeruginosus 
Status.— Occasional in winter; rare but regular passage migrant.
No recent change in status is apparent.
Although once most usually seen in winter, nearly all records since 1938 have been of passage birds at the coast.
For example, between 1962 and 1976 there were 72 records: in January (one), March (one), April (nine), May (two), June (five), July (one), August (12), September (17), and October (six).
Only six were noted away from the coast, and birds sometimes made prolonged stays in favoured coastal marshes, for example 35 days in 1965.
Spring records fell between 24 March and 11 June, with a marked peak of c. 70 per cent.
between 19 April and 19 May, and autumn records fell between 23 August and 15 October.
There were two summer records: one was picked up dead in Houghton Forest on 14 June 1971, and one was seen at Bracklesham on 27 July 1972.
A comparison of this account with that given by des Forges and Harber indicates very little change in status since 1938.
HEN HARRIER —Circus cyaneus 
Status.— Regular winter visitor and passage migrant.
The number occurring has increased quite markedly since 1966.
Between 1947 and 1961 des Forges and Harber recorded an annual average of about 10, but noted that some decline was evident towards the end of this period.
However, between 1966 and 1976 the average doubled to about 20 per year, an increase which is unlikely to be merely a reflection of increased observer activity.
Altogether between 1962 and 1976 about 255 Hen Harriers were recorded, 220 of them between 1966 and 1976.
Monthly totals were:
These birds were largely ‘ring-tails’, but c. 60 adult males were recorded, 17 of them in 1971 and 1972, an unusually high proportion.
Most birds were seen on open downland, levels and coastal marshes, but Hen Harriers winter fairly regularly in Ashdown Forest, and some have recently wintered in large tracts of forestry plantations.
Extreme dates for this species are 4 August and 16 May, but not many are seen before the second half of October.
Some wintering birds remain until late March or early April and, in recent years, there has been a clear tendency for them to linger later in the year; all the May records have been since 1968.
Some through passage is also noted, particularly in November, March and April, and one was seen to fly in from the sea at Selsey Bill on 1 May 1968.
Most records are of single birds, but up to five have been recorded in one area at the same time and there is possibly a tendency for groups of up to four to appear more often.
MONTAGU'S HARRIER —Circus pygargus 
Status.— Formerly bred in small numbers and sporadic breeding may still occur; scarce passage migrant.
A recent decline in the numbers occurring is apparent.
Breeding has only been recorded once since 1938, although it was certainly more regular prior to that date.
The exact  numbers involved are obscure, but Walpole-Bond's account suggests a population of no more than five to 10 pairs at best, and breeding was not established as an annual occurrence.
As a passage migrant des Forges and Harber give an average of about five Montagu's Harriers a year between 1947 and 1961 but, with only about 55 recorded between 1962 and 1976, this annual average shows a decline of about 25 per cent.
Monthly totals between 1962 and 1976 were April one, May (25), June (seven), July (four), August (13), September (seven), and October (three).
All records were of single birds which rarely stayed for more than a day.
Like the other harriers this is a species of open country; the Downs, levels and coastal farmland thus provide most records.
Extreme dates are 17 April and 22 October, and, since 1962, there have been marked passage peaks in both periods, with 40 per cent.
of the spring records in the second half of May and a similar proportion of autumn reports in the second half of August.
GOSHAWK —Accipiter gentilis 
Status.— Winter vagrant; rare passage migrant.
Has bred.
Breeding took place in one area from certainly 1938, but perhaps 1926 or earlier, until 1951.
Otherwise between 1948 and 1976 there were 20 records relating to 21 birds: in January (two), February (one), March (two), April (one), May (one), September (six, relating to seven birds), October (three), and November (three).
All but two of these records were for the coast or its vicinity.
Three birds were recorded in early 1956, seven between 1961 and 1970, of which six were noted at Beachy Head between 3 and 17 September, and four in 1975.
SPARROWHAWK —Accipiter nisus 
Status.— Uncommon resident and passage migrant.
Formerly common, this species had declined drastically by 1960; some increase has occurred since.
Sparrowhawks are still widely distributed breeding birds in Sussex, the only major habitat type of the county in which they do not breed being the coastal plain.
Even the substantially open areas of the Downs hold pairs where small copses provide nest sites.
Rather few comparative data are available from which to assess recent status changes, but these appear to have been marked.
However, K. G. Ridgewell has supplied some records for the years 1929 to 1939 for roughly 64,000 acres (256 sq.
km.) of downland west of the Cuckmere, which then held at least 17 regularly-occupied sites.
Much of this area was thoroughly watched between 1965 and 1970, and the records obtained then indicated a marked decrease, with only eight or nine regularly-occupied sites.
Ridgewell considered that this decrease began about 1952 and it apparently reached its maximum about 1961, when no breeding Sparrowhawks were reported from anywhere in the county.
This certainly overstated the decline, but records for the whole county between 1965 and 1970 showed a general recovery, and during this period there were breeding season records from 97 sites relating to 44 pairs and 53 single birds.
A high proportion of the sites were found regularly occupied.
Although breeding was proved frequently, surprisingly few accurate records of brood size were made.
However, 59 young were recorded as reared, and there were only three complete failures out of 26 nests at which observations were made; one brood of three was shot after fledging.
Some further recovery was noted between 1970 and 1976.
It is difficult to give estimates of total population for this species, which is probably often overlooked.
Most records are also for west and central Sussex, which very possibly reflects the distribution of observers.
However, systematic records from areas totalling about 750 square kilometres of very varied habitat, which have been well searched for the  species, recently showed a breeding density of consistently less than one pair per 2,500 acres (10 sq.
km.), suggesting a county population of not more than 300 pairs.
Although des Forges and Harber recorded Sparrowhawks as probably regular winter visitors until 1961 there is little satisfactory evidence of this more recently.
Some are certainly seen each winter in areas where breeding has not been established, which may only indicate some local dispersal or that the species is easy to miss when breeding.
There is a regular passage, particularly in the autumn.
Thus between 1965 and 1971 there were 56 records from the coast of birds presumed to be on passage, between 9 August and 17 December, and 32 similar spring records between 23 February and 30 April.
There were very marked peaks in September and April, and both emigration and immigration was noted at each season.
More recently the scale of this passage has been masked by the presence of birds wintering along the coast.
The source of these birds is not known, but they may be present from late August until April.
BUZZARD —Buteo buteo 
Status.— Rare resident; possibly winter visitor; scarce passage migrant.
No change in status is apparent since about 1950.
The original breeding population of this  raptore in Sussex was exterminated in the interests of game preserving during the 19th century, breeding being last recorded in Ashdown Forest in 1882.
About 1950 a small breeding population re-established itself in central Sussex and breeding has been regular since, although little increase has occurred.
Thus, between 1965 and 1976 between one and seven pairs were found present annually, nearly all in West Sussex, compared with up to four pairs between 1950 and 1956.
Breeding is in fact more often suspected or assumed than proved at present, but six broods were recorded between 1964 and 1970.
However,
Buzzards are still persecuted by game preservers in some parts of the county, birds being found twice on gamekeepers' gibbets in 1971, for example.
It seems very likely that such persecution is the main reason for this species' continued lack of success in colonising the county.
The breeding population appears to be resident, but birds are recorded in other areas of the county in winter sufficiently frequently to suggest either some post-breeding dispersal within the county, or that a few visit the county from elsewhere in winter.
There is a small autumn passage.
This has been very clearly shown at Beachy Head where, between 1965 and 1976 a total of c. 70 Buzzards was recorded between 5 August and 27 October; some were observed to depart out to sea.
Forty per cent.
of the records were for the third week of September.
Although most obvious at Beachy Head, this movement is noted at other points along the coast.
A smaller passage also occurs in spring, when there are frequent reports of birds at the coast between early March and late May; often these birds have been reported as flying north.
ROUGH-LEGGED BUZZARD —Buteo lagopus 
Status.— Irregular winter visitor.
Numbers have fluctuated very markedly in recent years.
Rough-legged Buzzards were once probably annual winter visitors to the county, but des Forges and Harber recorded only two between 1938 and 1961, singles on 3 and 4 November 1956 and 10 to 16 November 1957.
Between 1962 and 1976, however, there were records in 11 winters involving about 90 birds.
All but 22 of these occurred during the exceptional influxes into England of the autumn and winter periods of 1966/67, 1973/74 and 1974/75.
In 1966/67 and 1973/74 six or more birds wintered in the county, but the autumn and winter of 1974/75 were quite remarkable, with a total of 45–50  birds altogether, of which at least 20 wintered; 15 or more arrived from the south at Beachy Head on 22 October 1974.
The majority of wintering birds favoured open downland with small woods for roosting, but there were records for open country from Chichester Harbour and Graffham to the Midrips.
This species is rarely seen before late October, and wintering birds have usually gone by late March or early April.
However, one, which subsequently wintered there, appeared near Rye on 11 September 1970.
LESSER KESTREL —Falco naumanni 
Status.— One record.
One was seen near Steyning on 4 November 1973.
KESTREL —Falco tinnunculus 
Status.— Common resident; possibly winter visitor; regular passage migrant.
Although some decrease has certainly occurred in recent years, its extent is difficult to assess accurately.
A survey of the breeding population was made from 1964 to 1967, which found the species to be generally distributed and reasonably numerous.
A total of 238 occupied breeding territories was found in just over half the county, and birds were found in another 71 localities in the breeding season, where evidence of a definitely occupied breeding territory was not obtained.
Breeding densities averaged two pairs per 2,500 acres (10 sq.
km.) on the coastal plain, 1.7 on the Downs, 1.3 in the Weald, and 3.9 in the permanent grasslands of the river valleys and levels.
The total county population was  estimated to be 600 pairs, and an increase was evident in some areas during the survey.
Comparisons with previous records showed an extensive decline along the chalk cliffs, where Walpole-Bond recorded never less than about 30 pairs, and nearly 100 in 1919, but the survey found only 10 pairs.
Other long-term changes could not be shown by this survey, but both des Forges and Harber and Prestt (1965) note a more general decline.
Since 1967 some local fluctuations have occurred, but such changes are perhaps to be expected.
Both Walpole-Bond and Parslow (1973) show that cyclic fluctuations in breeding populations are very likely.
Some details of breeding success were recorded by the survey, with an average of 2.4 young reared from 15 nests, in which 61 eggs were laid; three eggs were infertile and 17 stolen or destroyed by man, an important predator of this species.
In addition 120 other fledged broods were recorded, with an average of 2.1 young per brood.
These levels of breeding success were very similar to those found at the same time in the London area and Leicestershire.
A full account of the survey is given in SxBR 1968 and Bird Study , 17, 1–15.
The Kestrels breeding in Sussex are thought to be resident, but winter status needs further and more exact investigation; some changes may have occurred since 1938.
Small passage movements occur in both spring and autumn.
Immigration and emigration is noted at both seasons, but the former predominates in spring, with 76 per cent.
of the records, and the latter in autumn, with 60 per cent.
of the records.
Spring movements have been noted between 13 February and 3 June, but over 60 per cent.
of the passage is in April.
Autumn movements have been noted between 15 July and late November, with a very clear peak, accounting for 45 per cent.
of the records, in the first half of October.
Coasting movements also take place, but their exact scale is very difficult to determine in the presence of resident pairs at most coastal watching sites.
A comparison of these records with Walpole-Bond's account suggests a very marked decline of passage Kestrels in Sussex, which may be connected with declines in the breeding stock reported in other areas of Britain.
RED-FOOTED FALCON —Falco vespertinus 
Status.— Vagrant.
Until 1961 des Forges and Harber recorded 11 and there have been four since, at Sidlesham on 8 September 1968, and three in 1973; at Beachy Head on 10 May and 1 June and at Rye on 13 June.
As far as is known all the records have been for the period spring to autumn.
MERLIN —Falco columbarius 
Status.— Regular winter visitor and passage migrant.
No recent change in status is apparent.
Although recently extreme dates have been 14 August (1970, Rye), and 1 May (1968, Cuckmere), this species is most abundant from October to January.
Between 1961 and 1976 an average of about 12 birds was recorded each year, and monthly totals were:
Little change has occurred since the period covered by des Forges and Harber's account.
Arrival and departure at the coast is frequently noted in both spring and autumn, and especially in October.
Wintering birds favour coastal farmland and marshes and a high proportion of recent records have been for the Selsey peninsular, the Beachy Head area, and from Rye to the Midrips.
But Merlins are not infrequently recorded along the Downs and are seen very occasionally further inland.
They are most usually seen singly, but two together are sometimes met with.
HOBBY —Falco subbuteo 
Status.— Rare breeding summer visitor; passage migrant.
The breeding population may have increased since 1960.
Between 1962 and 1976 breeding was established, or probably took place, regularly in 17 areas holding between 20 and 25 pairs.
Breeding success varied very little during the period, when a total of 22 broods was noted, averaging rather more than two young per brood.
A recent increase in the breeding population is likely as the records for 1947 to 1960 suggest a maximum population of about 12 pairs and regular breeding in only six areas.
Hobbies occur each spring and autumn on passage at the coast.
Recently spring records have fallen between 16 April (1968, earliest county record) and mid-June, and autumn records between 12 July and 31 October (1965, Selsey Bill), but the species is very uncommon in October.
Records from Beachy Head, where systematic watching for passage  raptores has been carried out, show marked passage peaks, May accounting for 87 per cent.
of the spring records, and September, particularly the second half, accounting for 80 per cent.
of the autumn records.
GYR FALCON —Falco rusticolus 
Status.— Three records.
One was shot at Mayfield in January 1845, the first British record; one of the white ‘candicans’ type was shot near Balsdean on 26 September 1882, and a similar bird was seen on the Downs behind Worthing from 11 to 24 March 1972.
PEREGRINE —Falco peregrinus 
Status.— Formerly bred, but now only a rare winter visitor and passage migrant.
Until 1939 up to 12, but more usually about seven, pairs bred along the 15 miles of chalk cliffs.
This was one of the highest breeding densities known in the British Isles (Ratcliffe, 1963).
Pairs also bred occasionally on the sandstone cliffs and in disused chalk pits.
A decline occurred after 1939, and the post-war population never exceeded six pairs and was often less.
Peregrines last bred successfully in 1957, and are now only winter visitors and passage migrants.
Between 1962 and 1976 about 75 were recorded, monthly totals being: June (one), July (one), August (six), September (15), October (11), November (nine), December (11), January (13), February (six), March (12), April (10), and May (three).
Single birds wintered in the Cuckmere valley in 1963/64, at Glynde Levels in each winter between 1966 and 1971, and at Pevensey Levels in 1969/70.
Some other records between November and February may refer to wintering rather than wandering birds, but otherwise all reports were of birds apparently passing through.
RED-LEGGED PARTRIDGE —Alectoris rufa 
Status.— An introduced resident which apparently became firmly established about 1841.
Numbers appear to have declined in recent years.
Few reports about this species are received annually, but these suggest that it is some three to four times scarcer than the Common Partridge.
It is possibly most numerous on the coastal plain, where breeding densities of 10 pairs per 2,500 acres (10 sq.
km.) have been recorded, or on the Downs.
However, its status on the Downs is now obscured by large introductions of other species of the genus, namely A. graeca and a hybrid,A. graeca x A. rufa , known as an ‘Ogridge’.
North of the Downs Red-legged Partridges seem very scarce, but they are probably present in very small numbers in most open habitat types.
Despite the lack of comparative data marked decline in numbers since 1938 is assumed and likely, as Walpole-Bond described the species as ‘quite common’.
GREY PARTRIDGE —Perdix perdix 
Status.— Resident.
A considerable decline has occurred in recent years.
As with the previous species rather few reports are received annually.
However, Common Partridges are still widely distributed in open habitats throughout the county and are probably most numerous on the Downs and coastal plain, where breeding densities of up to 80 pairs per 2,500 acres (10 sq.
km.) have been recorded recently.
It should be noted that counts of breeding pairs of this species must be made early in the year to be accurate.
Despite the lack of comparative data demonstrating it, there is not much doubt that this species has declined markedly in Sussex, as in other parts of Britain.
The main causes of the decline are perhaps connected with contemporary and major changes in agricultural practice, but climatic factors have also contributed, with a series of cool damp summers, particularly in the 1950s, contributing to a high chick mortality on the coastal plain, for example.
QUAIL —Coturnix coturnix 
Status.— Scarce breeding summer visitor; occasional in winter; scarce passage migrant.
No recent change in status is apparent.
The numbers recorded annually vary widely; since 1960, for example, they have ranged from two in 1962 to about 40 in  1970.
Most records are for June and July, and Quail are recorded every year in suitable breeding habitat, particularly cornfields along the length of the Downs east of the river Arun.
Probably some always breed, although this is very infrequently proved, and the numbers of pairs involved is very difficult to estimate.
However, the records since 1960 have indicated no more than 20 pairs in any year, and usually less.
Quail occasionally occur in winter, and des Forges and Harber gave about 14 such records until 1960, although only four of these were after 1900.
There have been five more since 1960, at Winchelsea on 13 January 1966, Sidlesham on 6 and 7 February 1966, Shoreham on 8 March 1967, Earnley on 31 January 1968, and Southease on 8 February 1976.
Spring passage or arrival in recent years has been noted between 21 March (1973) and 22 May, but, in ‘Quail years’, arrival possibly continues well into June.
Autumn passage or departure has been noted between 3 August and 25 September.
PHEASANT —Phasianus colchicus 
Status.— A widely distributed and common resident, whose numbers are annually augmented by hand-reared birds on a very large scale.
CRANE —Grus grus 
Status.— Vagrant.
Apart from two old records, for May 1849 at Pevensey Levels and 18 October 1854 at Pagham, all records except one are for 1963.
In that year there was an extraordinary influx into southern England between 30 October and 4 November.
The  highest numbers were recorded in Sussex, where about 300, possibly more, were seen in parties of up to 100 birds.
The birds were seen in five general areas: Eastbourne to Lewes; the Adur and Arun valleys; round Midhurst and Harting; and the Selsey Peninsular.
One was seen near Crowborough on 16 April 1976.
WATER RAIL —Rallus aquaticus 
Status.— Scarce resident, winter visitor and passage migrant.
The breeding population may have declined in recent years.
An attempted census of the breeding population between 1962 and 1966 recorded only about 15 pairs.
This was certainly an underestimate, and altogether between 1962 and 1976 there were records for the breeding season from 35 sites involving a possible 38 pairs; breeding was proved in 12 sites.
These figures are based on records for May, June and July only, since winter visitors or passage birds are certainly present in the county from August to April.
Despite the difficulty in locating breeding Water Rails they are clearly scarce and irregularly distributed, and a decline since 1938, when Walpole-Bond estimated about 50 breeding pairs, is possible.
Not every known site appears to be occupied annually and, as a breeding bird, the species is now rare or absent from the permanent grasslands of the river valleys and levels, although Walpole-Bond recorded several regular breeding sites in such areas.
At present the regular sites are either fairly large lakes with dense marginal vegetation, such as Burton, Lurgashall, and Shillinglee ponds, or small patches of marsh in the interior of the county.
One or two pairs breed in coastal marshes.
Water Rails are more generally distributed in winter, when birds have recently been recorded in up to 20 inland localities in one winter, more than in any one breeding season.
They are also regular at most suitable localities along the coast.
Wintering birds are usually found singly, but gatherings of up to six are not very rare and about 15 wintered at Church Norton in 1968/69.
Most of these birds seem to be visitors from outside the county.
Some passage also occurs.
Autumn movements, whether passage or the arrival of winter visitors, have been noted between late August and mid-November and spring movements or departures between mid-March and 13 May.
Some winter visitors stay on until mid-April.
On passage, and sometimes in winter, Water Rails may occur in built-up areas.
CORNCRAKE —Crex crex 
Status.— Formerly bred; occasional in winter; scarce passage migrant.
No change in status is apparent since 1947.
There have been no breeding reports since 1945 although there have been five summer records of single birds in 1955, 1964,1966,1971 and 1972.
Between 1947 and 1976 a total of about 90 was noted, approximate monthly totals being:
Most were recorded in coastal districts, where Corncrakes may be found anywhere, including in built-up areas, but most usually in arable fields or rough grassland.
This distribution perhaps again largely reflects the distribution of observers at the migrations, and the species certainly occurs inland, usually in arable farmland.
Recently spring records have fallen between 9 April (1961, earliest county record) and 26 May, but 78 per cent.
of the records were for the last week of April and the first two of May.
Autumn records fell between 6 August and 17 October, with a marked peak in September involving about 60 per cent.
of the records.
There are a few old records for November, the  latest being for 27 November 1844 at Rottingdean, and there are about four winter records, but only two since 1900, one in 1908 and one at Cissbury on 9 December 1973.
LITTLE CRAKE —Porzana parva 
Status.— Vagrant.
There are 13 records.
Three are undated, otherwise there are four for March, four for April, one for June, and one for October.
The most recent record is of one caught and ringed at Beachy Head on 15 April 1968.
BAILLON'S CRAKE —Porzana pusilla 
Status.— Five records.
One was caught near Eastbourne on 6 August 1874; one was obtained near Brighton on 2 September 1894; one was obtained near Lancing on 13 November 1900; one was obtained near Pevensey on 16 May 1939; one was seen near Sedlescombe between 27 December 1941 and 9 January 1942.
SPOTTED CRAKE —Porzana porzana 
Status.— Rare winter visitor; very scarce passage migrant.
No recent change in status is apparent.
Spotted Crakes were recorded in 17 out of the 30 years between 1947 and 1976, with a total of 26 birds seen.
The table summarises the records by months:
The spring records fell between 16 March and 28 April, and the autumn records between 11 August and 4 December; although there are old spring records up to 8 May, and autumn records from 1 August.
The winter records were for 26 December 1959 at Pett Level, 2 January 1965 at the Crumbles, 3 January 1971 at Eastbourne, and 16 February 1975 at Amberley Wildbrooks, found dead.
Altogether there are 11 winter records for the county.
Although there are three June records altogether, for 1907, 1939, and 1972, there is little evidence that the species has yet bred in Sussex.
Most records since 1947 have been for coastal districts, which perhaps just reflects the distribution of observers at the migration seasons.
MOORHEN —Gallinula chloropus 
Status.— Resident.
No recent change in status is apparent.
As breeding birds Moorhens are common, occurring wherever there is water; even ponds of only a few square yards frequently hold breeding pairs.
The only recent count of breeding birds over an extensive area recorded 23 pairs along 2.5 miles of the Chichester canal in 1969.
In winter some quite large gatherings have been noted.
For example, up to 105 have been seen at Manhood End, 80 at Harting pond, 70 at Swanbourne Lake, 105 in the Arun valley, and 30 at Rodmell, all since 1965.
Although Moorhens are sometimes seen in unusual localities along the coast, definite evidence of migration in Sussex is very scant.
COOT —Fulica atra 
Status.— Common resident and winter visitor.
No recent change in status is apparent.
Very little information on the breeding status of this species is available.
Its distribution is certainly more restricted than the Moorhen's, since it requires larger areas of water for breeding.
Within this context, however, Coot are believed to be fairly common.
Large flocks winter in the county.
Fairly regular counts were made in several areas between 1966 and 1976, and the highest count recorded for each during October to March is shown in the table to indicate the scale of the wintering population.
Counts of Wintering Coot in Sussex, 1966–1976
Substantial flocks were also recorded elsewhere during the period, for example of 100 or more at Burton ponds, Knepp lake, Barcombe Reservoir, and Piddinghoe pond.
It is likely that the records available considerably underestimate winter numbers as the Coot's status on less important areas of water is very imperfectly known.
Winter visitors start to arrive in September, perhaps August in some years, and peak numbers are present in December, after which there is a steady decline through to March and April.
But the movements of this species are not well understood and the pattern varies in some areas.
For example, at Rye the figures show a marked peak in February, with a secondary peak in December.
There is no recent evidence of any passage through the county.
LITTLE BUSTARD —Otis tetrax 
Status.— Vagrant.
There are about 12 records, of which three are undated.
Otherwise there are two for January, one for April, and two each for October, November and December.
There have been no records since 1914.
GREAT BUSTARD —Otis tarda 
Status.— Resident until about 1825.
Otherwise two records.
One was shot near Ripe on 12 January 1876; one was shot on Pett Level on 6 January 1891.
OYSTERCATCHER —Haematopus ostralegus 
Status.— A few pairs breed; common non-breeding resident, winter visitor and passage migrant.
No recent change in status is apparent, except that some decline in autumn passage may have occurred.
Breeding is confined to Chichester Harbour, maximum five pairs; Pagham Harbour, maximum 12 pairs; Rye Harbour, maximum 10 pairs; and the Midrips with a maximum of two pairs.
Numbers at each site vary annually and the total recorded population has yet to exceed 20–25 pairs.
At Pagham Harbour there has been a very sharp increase from one to three pairs up to 1974 to 12 in 1976.
The summer population also involves sizable flocks of non-breeding birds, with up to 275 in Chichester Harbour and up to 80 in both Pagham and Rye Harbours in recent summers.
Counts in Chichester and Pagham Harbours, illustrated in Fig. 6, have shown that most Oystercatchers are present in  Sussex during the autumn migration from July to November.
Peak numbers were usually present in September or particularly October, but in some years the autumn peak was as late as November.
Between September and November the counts recorded flocks totalling 1,000 or more birds almost annually, and the highest count in the period was of 1,670 birds on 22 October 1967.
In fact, since 1968 the counts have indicated a decline in the numbers passing through, which may be as high as 20 per cent., despite another very high count of 1,890 on 23 October 1976.
Autumn passage and the arrival of winter visitors obviously overlap, and some movement may occur throughout the winter.
However, the counts indicate a wintering population of the order of 800 birds in these Harbours, although the counts from December to February ranged from 400 to 1,450 birds.
Elsewhere flocks of 100 to 150 winter regularly near Littlehampton, and flocks of up to 380, but more usually of 100 to 200, do so at Rye Harbour; in both areas rather larger flocks may occur on autumn passage.
Complete counts of the Oystercatcher population wintering in Sussex in each January from 1972 to 1976 ranged from 940 to 1,530, and averaged 1,170.
Little passage is recorded in the spring, although there is fairly steady decline in the winter flocks after February.
Oystercatchers are rarely noted away from the coast, but have been recorded on occasions on flooded levels as well as at the reservoirs.
LAPWING —Vanellus vanellus 
Status.— Common resident, winter visitor and passage migrant.
Some decline in the breeding population has occurred recently.
Although Lapwings still breed in all open habitats in the county, including heathland, numbers have apparently been declining for over 80 years.
Walpole-Bond recorded a steady    decline from about 1885 to 1937, which des Forges and Harber noted as continuing.
More recently the severe winter of 1962/63 seriously depleted the breeding stock.
This showed some recovery until 19 6 7 or 1968, followed by a further and very sharp decline, in particular of about 50 per cent.
on the Downs and 70 per cent.
of pre-1963 levels on the coastal plain; some recovery in the latter area was noted in 1971 and 1972.
No satisfactory explanation of this decline has been adduced, but it seems likely to have stemmed from changes in agricultural practice.
Counts of breeding birds between 1965 and 1976 showed most pairs breeding on coastal farmlands and the permanent grasslands of the river valleys and levels.
In coastal farmland densities of up to 20 pairs over 250 acres sq.
km.) have been noted in favoured areas on the Selsey peninsular and around Rye, but in general distribution is not uniform and overall numbers are certainly below this level.
In the river valleys and levels densities of just over four pairs per square kilometre have been noted in the Arun valley, and of about three pairs per square kilometre in Pevensey Levels.
These counts covered about 60 square kilometres in which distribution was more uniform than on the coast, but higher densities do occur in favoured spots.
Counts have also been made over about 18 square kilometres of chalk farmland north of Worthing, where a density of 22 pairs per 2,500 acres (10 sq.
km.), about one tenth that of coastal farmland, declined to half that level after 1968, but had recovered in 1973.
Again, much higher densities may occur on the chalk, and 14 pairs were found nesting in a three-acre patch of kale at Burpham in 1969, an extraordinary concentration.
A quirk of the Lapwing's distribution in Sussex is that it is very scarce or absent as a breeding bird from many suitable parts of the East Sussex Downs.
Outside the breeding season large flocks of Lapwings are present from June until late March, particularly in the river valleys, levels and along the coast.
Flocking starts directly after breeding, in mid or late June and July.
Arrivals have frequently been noted at the coast during this period, and it seems likely that such movements are of birds going to favoured areas to moult.
Counts round Chichester and Pagham Harbours have recorded a steady increase from June to October, high numbers present throughout October to February and a fairly rapid dispersal in March.
There is no reason to suppose that this pattern of occurrence is not general in Sussex.
But movements occur throughout the winter, particularly if there is even a short spell of hard frost, when spectacular cold-weather movements take place, often involving thousands of birds.
Numerous counts of winter flocks have been recorded in recent years, and gatherings of several thousands have been found regularly in most of the main areas of permanent grassland in the county, and in many coastal areas.
Recently the largest winter counts have been made in Pevensey Levels, maximum 15,000 in early 1973, and Glynde Levels, maximum 10,000 in early 1974.
In 1976 counts in January, which were very incomplete, recorded a total of 25,500 wintering birds.
GREY PLOVER —Pluvialis squatarola 
Status.— A few summer; winter visitor and passage migrant.
Some increase in the number wintering recently has occurred.
A few Grey Plover summer regularly in both Chichester and Pagham Harbours.
These birds are nearly always in winter plumage and presumably are immature.
Usually about 20 to 40 birds are involved, but there were about 200 in 1964.
In winter this species is also largely confined to these Harbours, where regular counts between 1964 and 1974, illustrated in Fig. 7, fairly consistently recorded flocks totalling 400 to 600 birds between December and March.
Flocks of 1,000 to 2,000 were recorded at least once in each month in the period, and are now appearing much more frequently.
Elsewhere small flocks usually winter along the coast between Goring and Worthing and at Rye Harbour, but totals do not often exceed about 50 birds.
Complete counts of the winter    population were made each January from 1972 to 1976 and recorded a steady increase from 300 in 1972 to 2,175 in 1976.
Winter visitors disperse quite rapidly in April and May, and little through passage in spring is shown by the counts in Fig. 2, except in 1973 and 1974 when a marked movement occurred in the second half of February.
Autumn passage may start in July, but most usually does so in August, and peak numbers are most commonly found in September.
The highest counts so far recorded are of c. 2,400 on 13 October 1973, and 2,480 on 25 September 1976.
Grey Plovers are rarely seen away from the coast in Sussex, but there have been six such records since 1947 in March, April, May, October (three together), November, and December.
GOLDEN PLOVER —Pluvialis apricaria 
Status.— Common winter visitor and passage migrant.
No recent change in status is apparent.
In winter most Golden Plover are found on coastal farmland, including the permanent grassland of the levels.
In recent years the largest flocks have been fairly consistently noted on the Selsey peninsular, Pevensey Levels, and in the Rye area, with flocks of up to 3,000 occurring in each place.
Elsewhere along the coast flocks of up to 500 are regularly found.
A few also occur on the Downs and further inland, but usually only in small parties.
Autumn arrival may start in late July, early dates being 21 July 1963 at Chidham, 22 July 1939 at the Midrips, and 22 July 1967 at Thorney.
Some always arrive in August and numbers increase steadily thereafter.
The largest numbers are present from December to February, but there are sizable flocks throughout the period October to March.
Although quite large flocks may still be present early in the month, winter visitors disperse rapidly in April, and few are seen in May.
There are several records for the end of this month, however, and four for June: 21st, 1937, Midrips  (three); 16th to 30th, 1954, Hamsey; 9th, 1968, Pagham; and 13th to 21st, 1975, Sidlesham Ferry.
Two races of the Golden Plover are regularly noted in Sussex,P. a. apricaria and P. a. altifrons .
Since these races are only separable in summer plumage most sub-specific records are for April and May, and the extent to which either race occurs in winter is unknown.
RINGED PLOVER —Charadrius hiaticula 
Status.— Scarce and local breeding species; winter visitor and passage migrant.
The number breeding has declined in recent years with the increasing development of the coast.
An incomplete census of the breeding population in 1973 recorded 66–69 pairs, distributed in Chichester Harbour, with 13 pairs; Pagham Harbour, 16 pairs; Chichester gravel pits, eight to 10 pairs; Southwick/Portslade, four to five pairs; Newhaven Tidemills, two pairs; Cuckmere Haven, one pair; Rye Harbour area, including Camber and Northpoint Beach, 22 pairs.
In addition, pairs usually breed at Bracklesham Bay, Aldingbourne gravel pits, the Crumbles, and Normans Bay, and up to nine pairs do so at the Midrips.
Although the population has shown little change from this level of around 75 pairs since 1965, the figures indicate a decline of 30 per cent., perhaps more, since about 1947, when 40 nesting pairs were noted in the Rye Harbour area alone.
Most birds breed on shingle beaches, where they are increasingly vulnerable to disturbance, so it is fortunate that the two most important localities, at Pagham and Rye Harbours, which hold nearly half the county population, are now statutory Local Nature Reserves administered by the relevant County Councils.
Elsewhere, despite disturbance, some young are successfully reared each year, and Ringed Plovers seem to be developing an increasing tolerance of casual disturbance by man of their breeding sites.
For example, a successful group  now breeds around the power stations at Southwick and Portslade.
In 1972 some birds were also found summering on the Downs, where very stony fields provide apparently suitable nesting sites, and breeding was proved in one such site in 1974.
Counts in Chichester and Pagham Harbours, which are illustrated in Fig. 8, show that by far the largest numbers of Ringed Plovers are present in Sussex during migration, particularly in the autumn.
Peak numbers then occur in August and November and the figures for these two months are extraordinarily similar; probably two distinct populations are involved in these movements.
Surprisingly few remain in winter.
Counts in these Harbours of over 200 between early December and March are unusual, and the average of all counts from mid-December to late March is 140.
However, Ringed Plovers also winter along much of the county coastline, except the cliffs, and counts have recorded totals of 100–300 birds, mainly between Ferring and the Adur estuary and at Rye Harbour.
But it seems unlikely that the county's total wintering population often exceeds some 500 birds, and complete counts made each January from 1972 to 1976 usually recorded smaller numbers, with 165 in 1972, 215 in 1973, 285 in 1974, 490 in 1975; but 761 in 1976.
Winter visitors probably depart in March and there is a very marked spring passage, especially in May, when flocks of over 400 have been noted.
This movement may continue into June, but the period has not been defined.
On both spring and autumn passage the species frequently appears at inland waters as well as right along the coast.
There have been six records of the race tundrae , but none since 1938, presumably as collecting is now illegal.
LITTLE RINGED PLOVER —Charadrius dubius 
Status.— Breeds irregularly; scarce but regular passage migrant.
Although only four birds had ever been recorded before 1948, Little Ringed Plovers have bred in Sussex frequently    since 1950.
Up to five pairs were present annually from 1950 to 1960, a single pair bred in 1965 and up to three pairs have been present annually since 1969.
Breeding sites have been either reservoirs or gravel pits.
The species occurs regularly on passage.
For example, between 1961 and 1976 55 were seen in the spring between 10 March and 16 May, and c. 150 in the autumn between 23 June and 3 October.
On passage birds are seen on inland waters, particularly the reservoirs, as often as on the coast.
Most records are of one or two birds, but seven together were seen at Arlington Reservoir on 6 August 1971 and five on 7 August 1976.
KENTISH PLOVER —Charadrius alexandrinus 
Status.— Formerly bred.
Rare but possibly regular passage migrant.
Kentish Plovers bred regularly in East Sussex until about 1920 and between 1949 and 1956; none has bred since 1956.
The breeding population was always small, and from 1949 onward consisted of only one or two pairs.
Otherwise des Forges and Harber noted it as occurring on passage in several years between 1947 and 1961, and between 1962 and 1975 about 29 were seen, 18 in spring between 17 March (1969, Newhaven, earliest county record), and 13 May, and nine in autumn between 1 July and 15 September.
All records were for the coast.
There were also two in Chichester Harbour in December 1963, and the species has been recorded in late October, November and January in the past.
KILLDEER —Charadrius vociferus 
Status.— One record.
One was seen at Sidlesham Ferry on 30 March 1974.
DOTTEREL —Eudromias morinellus 
Status.— Irregular passage migrant.
Between 1947 and 1976 there were six spring records comprising 25 birds between 25 April and 24 May, and 21 autumn records comprising 46 birds between 17 August and 22 September.
All spring records except one were for the Downs, but all autumn records for the coast.
Small parties were as frequent as single birds.
The species was more frequent in the 19th century, when extreme dates were 22 March and 11 November, and parties of up to 20 or more were seen.
BLACK-WINGED STILT —Himantopus himantopus 
Status.— Vagrant.
There are 11 records, comprising about 14 birds.
One record is updated, otherwise birds were recorded in May (seven), June (one), August (one), September (three), and December (one); one September bird stayed into October.
The most recent records were of single birds at Sidlesham Ferry on 6 and 16 May 1961; possibly, but not certainly, only one bird was involved.
AVOCET —Recurvirostra avosetta 
Status.— Scarce winter visitor; passage migrant, mainly in spring.
A marked increase in the number occurring has been recorded since about 1968, except in the autumn, and the species now winters regularly.
Although des Forges and Harber gave only about 15 winter (November to February) records until 1960, a few birds have wintered regularly since 1964 around Pagham Harbour; what are probably the same individuals have also been seen quite  often around Chichester Harbour.
Up to 13 birds in one winter have so far been involved, and they usually arrive between mid-December and mid-January, and remain until March or April.
Otherwise Avocets are predominantly spring passage migrants in Sussex; the paucity of autumn records seems remarkable and has always been a feature of the species' occurrence in the county.
The numbers recorded each year have shown a large increase, from an average of about nine to 12 per year between 1947 and 1967 to one of about 45 per year between 1968 and 1976.
Besides the small wintering population, this increase is confined to the spring migration, as the table of approximate monthly totals for 1947 to 1976 shows:
A large percentage of recent spring birds have been recorded in parties flying up the Channel during the offshore movements of ducks, waders and terns, which are such a feature of spring migration in Sussex.
Parties of up to 23 have been involved and, in general Avocets, are now likely to be met in small parties quite as often as singly in the county.
Altogether the timing and pattern of this increase suggests that it is connected with an increase, shift or change in habits of a continental population, rather than the British.
In striking contrast to the spring pattern the numbers seen in autumn have, if anything, diminished, although the picture is somewhat distorted by the exceptional occurrence of 21 at Camber on 8 October 1966; there have only been three other October records since 1947.
But the eccentric changes in the pattern of this species' occurrence leave little doubt that the increases in winter and spring are genuine increases in numbers, rather than a reflection of increased observation.
Avocets are rare away from the coast in Sussex but, since 1947, there have been ten inland records, comprising 14 birds, and two reports of birds leaving the coast and flying north up the Cuckmere valley, one on 9 May 1968 and six on 16 March 1969.
WHIMBREL —Numenius phaeopus 
Status.— Occasional in summer and winter.
Common passage migrant.
No recent change in status is apparent.
Although one or two birds may summer fairly regularly in Chichester or Pagham Harbours, the summer population rarely exceeds about 10 birds; seven summered at Rye Harbour in 1968.
There are three winter records of single birds in Pagham Harbour, on 24 January 1965, from January to April 1973, and from 19 January to 8 March 19 75.
Most Whimbrel are recorded in Sussex in the spring.
The earliest record for spring arrival is of one at Chidham on 23 March 1971, but arrival always starts in the first 10 days of April, and some movement continues to mid-June.
Most passage, however, occurs from mid-April to mid-May, when a marked movement along the coast, usually associated with passage of other species such as Bar-tailed Godwits, Scoter, or terns, takes place.
Recently such movements have involved up to 960 birds in one spring, and movements of 100 or more in a day are almost annual events; 488 flying east off Beachy Head on 19 April 1976 is the largest single movement noted so far.
In addition to these visible movements flocks of 50 to 100 birds are commonly noted during this period in favoured places, such as Chichester, Pagham and Rye Harbours.
Small parties are also frequently seen flying over the interior of the county.
Autumn passage starts in July, but visible movements comparable with those of spring have not been observed.
At this season by far the largest numbers are found in Chichester and Pagham Harbours, in both of which flocks of 100 or more are of regular occurrence in July and August; the highest count recorded between 1964 and 1976 was a total of 295 on  20 August 1967.
The highest numbers usually occur in August, particularly in the first half, and comparatively few Whimbrel are seen in September.
Thus the average of all the September counts made in Chichester and Pagham Harbours between 1964 and 1976 was only 15 birds, and the highest count was 41 on 22 September 1968 (mainly on Hayling Island).
Stragglers, however, are usually noted into October, and there have been seven November records since 1947, the latest being of one at Thorney Deeps on 25 November 1953.
CURLEW —Numenius arquata 
Status.— A few pairs breed.
Common winter visitor and passage migrant.
No recent change in status is apparent.
Breeding is confined to Ashdown Forest, where up to six pairs have bred recently, and one area of north-west Sussex, where there are one or two pairs.
Some non-breeding birds are present at the coast throughout the year.
Counts in Chichester and Pagham Harbours, illustrated in Fig. 9, have shown Curlews to be most abundant in Sussex during late summer and autumn.
Movements or arrivals start in June and large flocks are present from July, with the highest numbers between August and October, when the counts in these Harbours have regularly recorded over 1,000 birds, and over 2,000 have been found.
In half the years covered by counts a distinct double peak has been evident during the autumn movements, in August/September, and again between late October and early December.
Numbers appear to drop rapidly in November and early December to the winter level in these Harbours of some 700 to 1,500 birds.
There are marked fluctuations in the monthly totals for any one winter, which must partly stem from the species' habit of frequently feeding outside the estuaries during the day, so that birds are missed by the counts.
Substantial flocks are also found between Pett Level and Rye Harbour in the autumn and particularly the winter, when    up to 800 have been noted.
Elsewhere, however, only small parties are found, and Curlews are very infrequent away from the coast or its vicinity in winter.
Complete counts of the wintering population were made each January from 1972 to 1976, and ranged between 1,055 in 1973 and 1,830 in 1972, averaging 1,400.
Little spring through passage is recorded, but a rapid drop in the wintering flocks after March, shown by the counts in Fig. 4, indicates the departure of wintering birds.
Fewest Curlews are present in the county in May.
BLACK-TAILED GODWIT —Limosa limosa 
Status.— A few non-breeding birds summer; winter visitor and passage migrant.
No recent change in status is apparent.
In Sussex this species is largely confined to Chichester and Pagham Harbours, where a few remain to summer in many years, although totals of more than 50 are most unusual.
Counts in these Harbours, however, illustrated in Fig. 10, have regularly recorded sizable flocks from September to April.
Interpreting these counts needs care, particularly those for the winter, when very marked fluctuations have been recorded, for, unlike most other waders, the wintering Black-tailed Godwits may move about over the whole of the estuarine complex from Pagham Harbour to Portsmouth Harbour in Hampshire.
Thus only counts covering this entire area are likely to give a true indication of winter status.
Such counts were made each January from 1972 to 1976 and recorded 760 in 1972 (260 in Sussex), 935 in 1973 (630 in Sussex), 1,050 in 1974 (550 in Sussex), 1,465 in 1975 (950 in Sussex), and 760 in 1976 (310 in Sussex).
Larger numbers have been recorded, and the highest winter count so far was of 1,625 on 9 December 1972, of which 1,400 were in Chichester Harbour, the largest winter flock ever recorded in Sussex; higher numbers have been noted during autumn migration.
There is also a considerable passage in spring and autumn.
Autumn arrivals start in July and the counts in Chichester and Pagham Harbours have recorded a fairly consistent peak in October.
Spring passage is most marked in March and April.
At both seasons flocks totalling 500 or more are commonplace, and the highest counts were of totals of 1,210 on 12 October 1969, and 1,430 out of 2,000 in the whole Pagham Harbour to Portsmouth Harbour complex on 19 October 1974; and, in spring, 950 on 15 April 1972, and 1,370 on 29 March 1975.
Away from the western Harbours parties of more than 10 are very unusual in Sussex.
However, small groups are noted regularly along the coast and inland on passage.
In winter such records are decidedly rare.
BAR-TAILED GODWIT —Limosa lapponica 
Status.— A few summer; winter visitor and common passage migrant.
No recent change in status is apparent.
Except on passage large flocks occur only in Chichester Harbour; even in Pagham Harbour counts of more than 50 birds are very unusual, although it is nearly always present there.
A few birds frequently, perhaps always, summer in these Harbours.
Since these are nearly always in winter plumage they are presumably immature.
Counts in Chichester and Pagham Harbours, illustrated in Fig. 11, show that most Bar-tailed Godwits are present in Sussex in winter, when there is a very marked peak in January.
This usually involves over 1,000 birds, and the highest count so far recorded was of 1,535 in Chichester Harbour on 30 January 1972.
However, throughout the period November to February flocks of 500 or more are regularly present, and the average of all counts in this period between 1964 and 1976 was over seven hundred.
This is probably the largest wintering flock on the English south coast, and comparisons with des Forges and Harber's account of this bird suggest a large increase in winter    numbers.
But this is almost certainly the result of systematic observation in Chichester Harbour.
The arrival of winter visitors clearly overlaps a marked autumn passage.
This may start in July and always does so in August.
Peak numbers are usually noted in September, when flocks totalling up to 1,600 have been noted in Chichester and Pagham Harbours and flocks of up to 200 have been seen elsewhere along the coast.
In marked contrast very little through passage has been noted in the western Harbours in the spring, counts showing only a rapid departure of wintering birds in March and April.
However, sea-watching at such sites as Selsey Bill and Beachy Head has recorded a large visible passage in spring.
Typically this occurs between mid-April and mid-May, and, as with most such movements, numbers vary considerably.
But sometimes they are very large.
For example, 6,760 were recorded at Selsey Bill between 23 April and 1 May 1962, 4,310 at Beachy Head between 15 April and 2 June, 1971, and 7,490 there between 25 March and 17 May 1973, and 6,450 between 29 February and 15 May 1976.
These are the largest movements so far noted and in some years fewer than 100 birds have been involved.
Presumably such marked fluctuations are connected with the prevailing weather conditions.
Bar-tailed Godwits are very rare inland in Sussex, but since 1966 there have been six reports of birds inland on spring migration between 12 April and 3 May, usually in small parties, but 200 together flew north over Arlington Reservoir on 3 May 1971.
SPOTTED REDSHANK —Tringa erythropus 
Status.— Scarce winter visitor; passage migrant.
No recent change in status is apparent.
One or two now winter regularly in Chichester and Pagham Harbours and single birds sometimes do so elsewhere along the coast.
It is unusual for more than five birds to be found in any  winter, but an exceptional record was of 24 in the lower Rother valley on 13 January 1946.
Spring passage is also quite slight, numbers rarely exceeding about 10 birds in any spring.
Passage, however, may extend from March to early June, although most movement is noted in April or May.
Many more are seen in the autumn, when arrivals often start as early as late June and always in July.
These early parties are nearly always found at Thorney Island and include a high proportion of adults in summer plumage.
Possibly they are birds which have failed to breed successfully and have assembled here to moult.
The largest numbers are noted in August and September, but the bird is quite common in October and passage sometimes continues into November.
Throughout the autumn the great majority of Spotted Redshanks in Sussex are found at Thorney Island, where flocks of 30 to 60 birds have been an annual occurrence since 1965; the highest count so far was of 69 there on 8 August 1967.
Elsewhere single birds or parties of up to five are the general rule, and the species is regularly recorded along the whole coast, and at most of the main areas of gravel pits and the reservoirs during migration.
REDSHANK —Tringa totanus 
Status.— Local breeding species; common winter visitor and passage migrant.
The breeding population has declined in recent years.
A survey of the breeding population between 1965 and 1967 recorded about 250 breeding pairs, mainly distributed in coastal marshes and the permanent grasslands of the river valleys and levels, but with some pairs scattered in small areas of marsh in the interior.
A fifth of this population was concentrated round Chichester and Pagham Harbours.
In the river valleys and levels breeding densities varied from 25 pairs per 2,500 acres (10 sq.
km.) in the Arun valley south of Amberley, to about five pairs per 2,500 acres in Pevensey  Levels; this figure may have been too low, and 29 pairs (20 pairs per 2,500 acres) were found in 1976.
A full report of this survey was published in SxBR 1967, 53–60.
While little overall change has occurred since 1967, these figures represented a marked decline compared with 1938, when Walpole-Bond's account indicated a population of well over 300 pairs in the main levels, and suggested a wider distribution in small areas of marsh in the interior.
This decline is possibly of post-war origin, as in 1949 Thorney Island, the marshes around Pagham Harbour and Selsey, and Rye Harbour still held a total of about 150 pairs compared to about 35 in 1967.
Despite the extensive decline, it is possible that more Redshanks still nest in Sussex today than did in the 19th century.
Walpole-Bond noted that few of the early historians of Sussex birds recorded the Redshank as a breeding species, and that there was a marked increase and spread from about 1900.
Almost certainly these fluctuations in the breeding population are directly connected with changes in agricultural practice and prosperity, but the recent decline probably stems from the drainage and improvement of large areas of permanent pasture, rather than their loss to arable farming.
Counts in Chichester and Pagham Harbours, illustrated in Fig. 12, show that Redshanks are most numerous during autumn migration.
Outside the breeding season they are infrequent inland, and the local breeding stock starts to return to the coast in late June.
Substantial arrivals and passage starts in July, and numbers are high throughout the period July to October, all but two of the counts illustrated being of over 1,000 birds, and the mean of all counts in this period being 2,280.
The highest numbers of the year occur in September, when flocks totalling 3,000 or more are not unusual in these Harbours; the highest count so far was of 4,200 on 5 September 1971.
The pattern of movement shown by these counts is most probably repeated elsewhere along the coast, where this species is a regular and common migrant.
The counts in Fig. 12 show a sharp drop in November, followed in many years by further arrivals in December.
But the monthly means from November to February show      comparatively little variation and indicate an average winter population in the two Harbours of around 1,200 birds; at least some of the fluctuations in the winter counts must arise from the species' regular habit of feeding outside the Harbours in flooded fields, when these are available.
Small flocks also winter regularly at Ferring, Shoreham, Newhaven, Cuckmere Haven, and in the Rye area, and complete counts of the wintering population made each January from 1972 to 1976 ranged from 1,190 in 1975 to 1,680 in 1974, averaging 1,380.
Winter visitors depart in late February and March, when our breeding birds also return inland, and the counts in Fig. 12 show very little through passage in the spring.
LESSER YELLOWLEGS —Tringa flavopes 
Status.— Five records
One was seen at Chichester gravel pits on 15 August 1947; one was seen at Sidlesham Ferry on 13 September 1954; one was seen at Chichester Gravel pits from 16 October to 3 November 1969; one was seen in the Cuckmere valley on 3 and 4 August 1970; and one was seen at Weir Wood Reservoir on 11 and 12 September 1971.