

University of Ulster
An Introduction to Postgraduate Studies (including professional and vocational full-time and part-time courses)
Introduction to the Postgraduate Programme
The University of Ulster offers programmes of study and research at four campuses — Coleraine, Jordanstown, Belfast and Magee College, Londonderry.
Some 13,650 full-time and part-time students are enrolled for courses at all levels of higher education, from part-time certificate programmes to doctoral studies.
The University has placed firm emphasis on the development of an intellectually challenging and vocationally attractive postgraduate programme which provides students with the opportunity to gain a postgraduate certificate, postgraduate diploma, or masters degree following a taught course, or the degree of MPhil or DPhil by research.
The postgraduate student population is as varied as the programme itself.
Many postgraduate students will have proceeded without interruption from their primary degrees; many other participants are seeking career-enhancing or professional development qualifications by either full-time or part-time attendance after deferring the desire to seek postgraduate entry for some years.
This booklet provides an introduction to the postgraduate programme.
The following pages contain information about the University — its campuses, its academic and recreational facilities, student services, the Students' Union, and other relevant subjects.
A list of taught courses with their modes of attendance appears on page 38.
To obtain details of one or more courses and an application form, the tear-off slip at the end of this brochure should be completed and forwarded to the University.
Page 27 contains information about the subject areas in which supervision is available for those wishing to undertake research leading to the degrees of MPhil or DPhil.
Application forms may be obtained by either telephoning or writing to the Admissions Office using the tear-off slip at the end of the booklet.
Prospective applicants who wish to visit the University to talk with members of academic staff or other officers, or to see the facilities, will be very welcome.
Visits can be arranged by telephoning or writing to the Admissions Office.
Dr K I Millar, Academic Registrar 
The Campuses
Coleraine
The administrative headquarters of the University are located to the north of Coleraine, a pleasant market town on the River Bann.
The main complex houses a range of services including a shopping precinct with post office, bank, laundrette, supermarket and bookshop.
The Diamond, the largest hall in the University with a seating capacity of over 1,500, is a popular venue for major choral and orchestral works and has a splendid organ which is used regularly for major recitals.
Beside the Diamond is a smaller hall known as the Octagon, an excellent venue for chamber music, which also contains a purpose-built exhibition area for the visual arts.
Beyond the Diamond is the main catering complex which incorporates two refectories, a snack bar, a coffee lounge and a suite of private dining rooms.
The fine purpose-built Riverside Theatre is linked to the catering complex.
The campus' South Building houses recently refurbished Students' Union facilities and a minor sports hall.
To the north of the campus are the Residences, beautifully situated with views down to the mouth of the river and the distance Donegal hills.
Jordanstown
The 114-acre Jordanstown campus is situated in the borough of Newtownabbey, a few miles north of Belfast.
The grounds lie at the foot of the south Antrim hills, and the land fronting the main buildings slopes down to the shores of Belfast Lough.
The excellent road system of the greater Belfast region means that Jordanstown is merely a few minutes' drive from the capital, allowing students to take advantage of the social life and the living accommodation available in the city.
The main building at Jordanstown is designed around a central Mall, itself a spine for the 17 blocks of academic and recreational facilities and accommodation.
On the Mall are the bank, bookshop, catering outlets, post office, supermarket, Students' Union, Sports Centre, Library and Chaplaincy.
The Student Services building nearby houses the Accommodation, Health and Counselling Services.
The Music Department is housed in the elegant 19th-century Dalriada House, adjoining the modern and well-equipped headquarters of the Department of Adult and Continuing Education.
Belfast
The Belfast campus, some seven miles from the Jordanstown site of the University, houses the majority of staff and students of the Faculty of Art and Design.
Students at the Belfast campus have the opportunity to enjoy the many social and recreational facilities available in the capital of Northern Ireland.
The city of Belfast has a magnificent setting, ringed by high hills, sea lough and river valley.
Some 400,000 people, over a quarter of the population of the province, now live in Belfast.
The city is being redeveloped and much of the centre is pedestrianized.
The wide choice of theatres, cinemas, museums, art galleries, leisure centres and parks is as exciting and interesting as one would expect in the province's leading city.
The southern part of Belfast, where much of the student accommodation is found, is especially good for excellent yet moderately-priced restaurants, pubs, theatres and shops.
Students at the Belfast campus take advantage of its proximity to Jordanstown to share the excellent facilities for sport and recreation available there.
Magee College, Londonderry
Magee College is set on a hillside overlooking the River Foyle in a mainly residential quarter to the north of the old walled city of Londonderry, the second city of Northern Ireland.
The campus is within half a mile of the city centre.
The neo-Gothic main building dates from the foundation of the College in the mid-19th century.
It is flanked by a group of handsome Victorian residences and looks towards the new Phase I building which provides studios, laboratories and workshops for the faculties of Art and Design, Science and Technology and the Faculty of Informatics.
The recently completed Phase II building houses the College's new library and Students' Union.
A third phase, comprising recreational facilities and additional teaching space, lies further ahead.
Since September 1984 the University has been undertaking a major development plan at Magee, rapidly increasing student numbers and establishing a range of innovative, career-orientated courses with an emphasis on cross-disciplinary scholarship involving all faculties.
Most courses feature placement elements; all seek to relate theory and practice.
Full-time courses are set alongside part-time programmes, short courses and extra-mural study, ensuring a student population balanced in age, varied in background and experience and strong in commitment to study and achievement.
As construction progresses and old buildings are refurbished, the most modern equipment and facilities are being installed.
The Province
Northern Ireland is justly famous for its great natural beauty and the warmth and hospitality of its people.
The province offers an excellent network of regular bus and train services and its main roads and motorways are among the best in Europe.
The region around each campus has its particular attractions.
Near Coleraine, for instance, there is the striking landscape of the Giant's Causeway — a geological formation of over 40,000 stone columns created by volcanic action.
The magnificent beaches of Portrush and Portstewart, two very popular holiday resorts, are within five miles of the University.
The night life in these towns is a good source of off-campus student entertainment as well.
Jordanstown is ideally placed for quick trips to Belfast, the capital city, or for an exploratory tour of Carrickfergus, with its perfectly preserved 12th-century castle, Elizabethan parish church and modern marina.
Heading further north, a journey along the 60 miles of coast road is rewarding for its spectacular views.
Belfast has many attractive Victorian and Edwardian buildings including the City Hall, Belfast Cathedral, the famous Ulster Bank in Waring Street and the beautifully refurbished Grand Opera House.
Visits to the Ulster Museum near the city centre and the Ulster Folk and Transport Museum at Cultra are a particularly rewarding way to spend some enjoyable and inexpensive leisure hours.
The historic city of Londonderry, location of the Magee College campus, is famous for, amongst other things, its massive 17th-century walls.
The lovely Roe Valley Country Park, with its old mills, bleach greens and watch towers, is within easy reach; to the east of Londonderry are the blue Sperrin Mountains, while west and north lies County Donegal.
The Academic Year 1991/92
Autumn Term Monday 7 October 1991–Friday 20 December 1991
Spring Term Monday 13 January 1992–Friday 3 April 1992
Summer Term Monday 27 April 1992–Friday 19 June 1992.
Officers and Deans of the University at 31 December 1990
Academic Services
The Library
The University Library operates on each of the four campuses, providing stock and services related to the needs of users.
The total stock consists of approximately 540,000 books and some 5,000 current periodicals and newspapers; this is augmented by borrowing some 13,000 items from other libraries each year.
In most cases books are interchangeable between campuses.
A computer-based catalogue of the library stock on all campuses can now be accessed from terminals in the libraries and elsewhere in the University.
Special collections at Coleraine include the Henry Davis gift of early printed books and fine bindings, the Headlam-Morley library of books, pamphlets and manuscripts relating to World War I and the Peace Treaty, the Paul Ricard library relating to World War II, the Henry Morris collection of Irish material, the microfiche English linguistics collection and the Stelfox natural history collection.
The John Hewitt library and the Francis Stuart archive of literary manuscripts are recent additions.
Particular strengths in the collection at Jordanstown include materials to support American and Women's studies and also UK, USA and Irish radical newspapers and periodicals on microfilm.
There is a good Irish collection at Magee College,and Belfast has strong collections on art and design, including exhibition catalogues.
Other forms of recorded knowledge, such as microfilm, tape and disc recordings, film strips, slides and videotapes are kept in the library.
In particular, there are significant microfilm collections at Jordanstown and Coleraine and 30,000 slides at Belfast .
A modern library makes extensive use of information technology and it is frequently the case that students are tentative in making full use of such technology or are unaware of the wide range of services available.
The University library staff, organized on a subject basis, are fully aware of the needs of all students.
Specialist advice and assistance is readily available.
The staff particularly welcome enquiries and requests for assistance from first-year students.
Opening Hours
Audio-Visual Services
Audio-Visual Services assist in the development of effective teaching/learning through an educational technology approach.
An extensive range of audio-visual facilities and equipment is available on each campus.
Specialist resources include the following:
Belfast
Dark room and photographic studio; facilities for recording and editing live and off-air television; high-fidelity sound recording and mixing facilities; viewing facilities for video, cine and tape/slide programmes, cine cameras and animation.
Coleraine
Colour television studio, gallery, editing suite, cine cameras, audio-visual language laboratories, facilities for receiving and recording satellite transmissions.
Master production using desktop publishing equipment.
Central audio-visual loan, support and maintenance centre.
Operational centre for videoconferencing between campuses.
Jordanstown
Graphics centre with computer-generated graphics and desktop publishing facility, photographic studio and dark room, television studio with three colour cameras, lighting grid and cyclorama, control room, editing suite and caption generator, location cameras and editing suites to high-band standards, off-air recording facilities, audio-visual aids workshop with self-instructional materials, facilities for the production of audio-tapes, 35mm slides and video programmes.
There is also an Audio-Visual Language Laboratory for receiving and recording satellite transmissions and for videoconferencing.
Magee College
Graphics design centre, photographic studio and dark room, television studio and viewing room, sound recording studio, audio-visual language laboratory, workshop for production of audio-tapes, 35mm slides and video programmes, off-air television recordings; videoconferencing.
Computer Services
Computer Services provide a comprehensive computing and data communications service to all sections of the University community.
There are terminal and microcomputer facilities at all four campuses, with over 3000 students registered at any given time for use of the central DEC VAX range of computers.
Multiuser IBM and Unix systems are also available for specific parts of the undergraduate teaching programme.
The central computing facilities are accessible twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week from more than 600 access points throughout the University, or by external telephone or telecommunications links.
Additionally, almost all students make use at some time or other of one of the thirty or so departmental micro laboratories, with about 900 micro computers to choose from, ranging from standard BBCs to powerful SUN and Apollo workstations, and MS-DOS PCs of varying types to Apple Macintoshes.
Recently equipped laboratories include PCs networked to local file servers, which makes for easy loading of software of guaranteed integrity, and secure storage of data.
Some micro rooms duplicate as terminal laboratories to the central systems, using software terminal emulation packages for text, colour graphics and micro-to-mainframe file transfer links.
The University has, on account of its dispersed geographical locations, one of the finest internal University computer networks in the UK, including Cambridge Rings, Ethernets and X25 local area networks, with high-speed inter-campus X25 links connecting the main computing facilities.
Students can address networked printers, plotters, laserprinters and micro subnets from whatever campus they are resident on, or from other campuses.
Computer-aided design and advanced graphics supported by dedicated systems at Jordanstown and Belfast can equally well be accessed from appropriate workstations at any campus.
The software library supported by Computer Services not only promotes general facilities that are found in modern computing departments (such as languages and compilers, mathematical and scientific routines, databases, spreadsheets and word-processors), but also includes a large inventory of teaching software covering the spectrum of academic activity at the University.
Social Skills Training Centre
The Social Skills Training Centre at Jordanstown provides training in interpersonal communication for, firstly, students following courses leading to professional qualifications in areas where dealing with people is an important aspect of the work and, secondly, those interested in the academic study of face-to-face interaction.
The Centre is equipped with extensive closed circuit television and video-recording facilities which are used in the refinement of a range of social skills and the systematic analysis and study of interpersonal behaviour.
Student Services
Most students have little difficulty in adapting to university life, and any problems they may encounter can almost certainly be dealt with by Student Services, which provides information and assistance in the following areas:accommodation, counselling, health, child-care services and income support .
These interrelated services are strictly personal and confidential, and their objective is the complete well-being of students and staff.
For advice or guidance on any aspect of student life, or merely a friendly chat, you are invited to contact Student Services.
Overseas Students
During the academic year, overseas students need to have access to a wide range of information and support in order to adjust to a different culture and benefit fully from their education.
On each campus, there is a designated member of Student Services staff who can assist with any queries or put the overseas student in touch with an appropriate source of help.
Mature Students
The University benefits from a substantial number of mature students.
Adapting to higher education, perhaps after a gap in formal education, can lead to special needs for advice and support.
Student Services organizes sessions for mature students on a regular basis on subjects such as the improvement of study skills and enhancement of self-confidence.
Accommodation
Coleraine
Residential accommodation is available on campus for some 280 students, and the Students' Housing Association (SHAC) provides excellent accommodation nearby.
A number of students reside in flats and other lodgings in Coleraine; others live in the nearby holiday resorts of Portrush and Portstewart, where there is a reasonable supply of competitively-priced accommodation in the October–June period.
The Accommodation Office maintains a regularly-updated list of registered lodgings.
Those who want to rent a privately-owned furnished flat or house must make their own arrangements, but each student can obtain a rent card from the Accommodation Office or from the Students' Union.
Jordanstown and Belfast
On-site accommodation at Jordanstown is provided for about 680 students in residential blocks, six-bedroomed houses, flats and study bedrooms in Halls.
All have shared self-catering facilities.
First-year students are allocated most of these places.
There is also a register of ‘off-campus’ accommodation in lodgings and furnished houses and flats, and details of vacancies can be obtained from the Accommodation Office.
As at Coleraine, SHAC provides attractive accommodation close to the Jordanstown campus.
The Accommodation Office staff at Jordanstown are available to answer queries and provide help with accommodation problems at any time.
Magee College
There are currently 103 residential places available.
These are located in three Halls of Residence on and immediately adjacent to the campus.
Students not in residential places usually rent accommodation or take lodgings in the city.
SHAC provides 250 bed places in two modern residences close to the campus.
The Student Services Assistant at the Resource Centre adjacent to the main building of Magee College provides a comprehensive accommodation advice service.
Counselling, Welfare and Studies Advice
A confidential individual and group counselling and psychotherapy service is available for use by all students and staff members or their families.
Depending on personal choice, the service can be used for brief or longer-term counselling and for dealing with any problems which might interfere with personal achievement and well-being.
Each student is allocated a studies adviser with whom they meet regularly to discuss academic or other problems.
Particularly difficult problems can, with the student's consent, be referred by the studies adviser to the specialists within Student Services.
The Counselling Service offers a number of group workshops and skills acquisition classes during the academic year.
These include: Learning, Study and Examination Workshops; Relaxation and Stress Control Sessions; and Mature Students Groups for older students returning to education after an interruption in their career.
Health Service
The Student Health Service at Coleraine is situated in the Student Services Department on Level One of the Tower.
It provides a family doctor service with access to specialist and hospital facilities for each student who is registered with the University physicians.
A qualified nurse is available to treat injuries and general illnesses and to advise on general health matters.
Students from overseas countries should contact Student Services upon arrival at the University to obtain further information on National Health Service reciprocal agreements.
At Jordanstown , qualified nurses are available in the Health Centre on the ground floor of the Student Services Building to treat injuries, minor illnesses, and to advise on health matters in general.
Patients are referred to the Medical Officer and to local hospitals where necessary.
This service is also available to students at the Belfast campus.
At Magee College , a local Group Practice provides a medical service for all registered students.
Students living away from home are required to register with the Medical Officer or a local doctor of their choice.
This applies particularly to students on long-term medication and those registered as disabled persons.
Child-care Services
The Student Services Department runs two nursery playgroups, at Jordanstown and Magee College.
All staff are professionally qualified and the play areas and crèche are supplied with a wide range of play materials and approved equipment.
A crèche playgroup also operates on the Coleraine campus, under the management of the Nursery Welfare Association.
For details of these services, see p 17.
Income Support
The Student Services Department administers the Access Fund which is available to students normally resident in the United Kingdom to assist in access to higher education and continuation of studies.
An interest-free loan fund is also available to students who find themselves in unforeseen financial difficulty.
Enquiries
Enquiries should be addressed to:
Chaplains
The University chaplains contribute to community life at each campus.
They believe firmly in promoting trust and respect between the different churches and the chaplains work together in the conviction that such an approach best serves the interests of the students and staff.
It is a tradition at the University that the chaplains, as pastors and friends, enter fully into student life.
There are four chaplains at Coleraine.
Their facilities include a room near the main foyer and a prayer room.
There are four chaplains at Magee College and a further four serve Jordanstown and Belfast.
The Jordanstown chaplains' suite is situated on the University Mall.
They also manage a student club, MIXERS,(a non-alcoholic bar) in the Village Hall in the heart of the Student Village at Jordanstown.
These meeting places serve as a central focus for chaplaincy activities and group meetings, but chaplains also visit students in the residences and in their off-campus accommodation.
Full details of chaplaincy activities and services are provided for students at the time of registration and on chaplaincy noticeboards.
Students' Union
Each student registered on a course leading to a formal qualification is automatically eligible for Students' Union membership.
The Union is the main focus of student activity in the University and the principal vehicle of communication and representation for the student body.
For many, the Students' Union will be the first opportunity to participate in making decisions on matters which will significantly affect their student lives.
The activities and policies of the Union are decided by the students through discussion and votes at meetings on each of the four University campuses.
Student activities cover the range of social, academic, political, cultural and sporting interests of the Union body which complements life at university.
The Union also elects student representatives to sit on the principal decision-making bodies of the University, the Council and Senate, and their major sub-committees.
The Students' Union is supported financially by a grant from the University and by the income it generates itself through commercial services.
Nine elected students form the overall Executive who are paid a wage and given a year off from studies to work full-time on behalf of their fellow students.
They are supported by professional staff and part-time Union officers to run the Union on every campus at the direction of the Union General Council.
The Union fulfils an important campaigning role in the University and wider community, and is regularly active on matters concerning student funding, accommodation and issues of government policy.
Most of its energies and resources however, are concentrated in the areas of Clubs and Societies and student welfare services, improving communications between students (there are five student publications) and in developing a social programme to suit the tastes of members across the four campuses of the University.
Coleraine
At Coleraine, the Union occupies a large section of the South Building complex, adjacent to the University administrative headquarters.
The Union area includes a main hall, modern lounge bar facilities, a travel office, shop and cafeteria and disco-bar.
The Union also has the advantage of a location adjoining the University Sports Centre with immediate access to first-class facilities and playing pitches.
Full-time student officers are available to give advice and make representation to the University on behalf of members.
A full-time welfare and education office is complemented by administrative and site executive offices which cater for the day-to-day operation of the Union and provide typing and photocopying facilities.
The tradition of sporting excellence at Coleraine is reflected in the extensive list of clubs currently supported from Union funds.
Sports and societies range from hockey to hurling, and from the Physics Society to the Women's Group.
Coleraine has produced a number of outstanding athletes who have participated in the Commonwealth Games and the World Student Games.
Water sports are particularly well catered for with the advantageous siting of the University overlooking the River Bann.
Jordanstown
The largest University campus houses excellent Students' Union facilities in Block 11, adjacent to the Sports Centre.
The Union facilities include a large social club, lounge bar, games area with pool and video games, full-size snooker tables and a hot food cafeteria.
The Union offices accommodate the elected officers and staff who are available to give advice and information on grants, accommodation and problems with courses.
A typing and photocopying facility is also available.
Elected full-time officers are on hand to make representations or answer queries on behalf of individual students.
The Union at Jordanstown also houses the Print Shop and desktop publishing facilities which service the student members and societies on all four campuses.
A Union Shop is augmented by a Student Travel Office, an Insurance Centre and Bank Service Till.
As an extension to the social facilities, the Union uses the Main Hall of the University to put on big-band events with well-known groups from both the local and international scenes.
The traditional Freshers' Ball is one of a series of such events.
There are others at Christmas, Rag Day and St Patrick's Day — all guaranteed full houses.
The Union employs an Entertainments Manager based at Jordanstown to organize and coordinate an entertainments programme across the four campuses.
Sporting achievement and participation is high at Jordanstown, with outstanding performances in recent times in hockey, Gaelic football, basketball and squash.
Thirty-three sports clubs and thirteen societies receive Students' Union support and all students are encouraged to play a full part in their affairs.
Belfast
The Belfast campus has benefited from a steady increase in student numbers and significant development of facilities.
The Conor Hall development offers an excellent social and recreational complex, including a modern bar, in the centre of the University campus.
The Union provides one full-time officers who is elected from within the Belfast members each year and is supported by a full-time member of staff.
The Union also operates a coffee bar and snack facility along with an art shop designed to help keep costs of study and materials to a minimum.
A photocopying service is also available.
A growing number of clubs and societies such as the movie-makers, art appreciation and folk club, all receive Union subsidy.
Welfare and Education advice is available through the Union Officer and an elected Site Committee looks after many of the day-to-day decisions.
Magee College
The Students' Union occupies the ground floor of the most modern building in the University.
Directly below the library, the spacious facilities accommodate the ever-expanding student population with a cafeteria, large function room, lounge bar and committee rooms.
A full-time Union Officer is supported by seven members of staff.
Together they provide the student welfare, typing and photocopying services, along with catering and club bar facilities.
A wide range of sports clubs and societies is active within the student community, and the University has its own playing fields nearby.
Social, cultural and sports activities (all of which are open to members) are organized throughout the academic year and subsidised through the Union.
Playing a Full Part
The Union places a firm emphasis on the importance of a full and rewarding social and recreational life in support of academic achievement.
With a thriving network of committees, sports clubs and societies, each student is encouraged to play a full part in this aspect of student life.
Among the clubs and societies are the following:
Crèche and Playgroup Facilities
Coleraine
The Nursery Welfare Association organizes a crèche and playgroup for children (aged from one month to five years) of students and staff.
There are ten sessions each week — Monday to Friday, morning and afternoon — except on days when the University is normally closed.
The morning session is from 8.30 am to 12.30 pm.
The afternoon session is from 1.00 pm to 5.00 pm (4.30 pm on Fridays).
As the number of places is limited, those requiring a place are advised to contact the crèche as far in advance as is practicably possible.
Further details may be obtained by telephoning (0265) 44141, ext 4240.
Jordanstown
A well-equipped nursery playgroup caters for children aged from six weeks to five years.
Qualified and experienced staff provide full day care from 8.30 am to 5.30 pm (4.30 pm on Fridays) on Monday to Friday during the academic year (September to June).
A special advantage is the involvement of University staff and students with a professional interest in child development.
There is usually a waiting list, so places should be booked as early as possible.
Further details may be obtained by telephoning (0232) 365433 ext 2539.
Magee College
A new crëche, based at Gate Lodge on the Magee College campus, provides places for children aged from infancy to five years.
Full day care (8.30 am–5.30 pm Monday to Thursday; 8.30 am–4.30 pm Friday) is provided by trained staff in bright, comfortable and fully-equipped accommodation.
At present the crèche operates during term time only but it is envisaged that it will eventually open outside term, subject to demand.
Further details may be obtained by telephoning (0504) 265621 ext 5218 or (0504) 371527.
Student parents are eligible for financial assistance with sessional fees, and should contact the Students' Union Education and Welfare offices at Jordanstown (0232) 365131 ext 2400/2452 or Coleraine (0265) 44141 ext 4323 for advice.
Cultural Affairs
Social activities and a varied arts programme contribute much to the quality of university life.
All four campuses of the University are involved in the programme of arts and cultural activities.
This provision ranges widely in form and presentation with major concerts, recitals, plays, celebrity lectures, opera, dance, films, demonstrations, exhibitions of works of art and even an award-winning Summer Festival of Extra Mural Activities designed for visitors and tourists.
Nearly all of these events are ‘open door’ activities which encourage the local communities to join our students and staff.
Accordingly, such events have brought many internationally acclaimed and distinguished artists to the province to perform and to demonstrate their art through masterclasses.
Coleraine is the home of the Riverside Theatre and the multipurpose Diamond Concert Hall.
Magee College hosts a programme of special events that includes art exhibitions and concerts by folk musicians of local and national reputation.
The Guildhall, Rialto, St Columb's Hall and the Orchard Art Gallery are the major venues in the city centre which regularly host entertainment and cultural groups of national and international interest.
The newly-opened Students' Union area offers catering and recreational facilities.
Jordanstown is the base for the University Orchestra and Choir and the foyer at the University of Ulster at Belfast houses frequent local and international art and sculpture exhibitions.
The thriving film societies at Coleraine and Jordanstown offer a weekly programme of films for every taste — from the popular to the esoteric — which can be enjoyed by everyone, at every reasonable prices.
The Riverside Theatre
In addition to the events staged at all four University campuses, the University also houses the excellent Riverside Theatre, which is situated at the Coleraine campus.
It is one of the most prestigious of Northern Ireland's theatres and is a focus of artistic activity in the North-West of the province, serving both the University and the wider community.
In doing so, the Riverside has forged strong links between ‘town and gown’.
The Riverside programme incorporates drama, music recitals, rock bands, chat shows, ballet, contemporary dance, opera, variety, professional snooker, children's shows, pantomime and recordings for television and radio shows (it is planned this year to record BBC TV's ‘Question Time’).
There is an art gallery in the foyer which hosts regular touring and locally produced exhibitions.
There is also a licensed bar and in the Riverview Lounge a variety of studio events, workshops and demonstrations take place.
Student involvement in the arts is especially encouraged and as well as the theatre being used regularly by the Department of English, Media and Theatre Studies for productions and teaching, the University Drama Group and the Ballet and Contemporary Dance Society regularly use the Riverside for their own public presentations.
The steady increase in lunchtime events offering snacks and other refreshments has resulted in the theatre becoming in every sense a social centre for meeting and encounter throughout the day.
Overseas Students
The University welcomes applications from overseas students.
All students from overseas are encouraged and helped to play a full part in the life of the University community and to take every advantage of the academic and recreational facilities available to them throughout their periods of study.
A specially arranged programme of talks and visits at the start of the academic year is organized to introduce overseas students to their new environment and to the University, its services and surroundings.
Fees and Subsistence
As the cost of subsistence and accommodation for a student unaccompanied by his or her family is unlikely to be less than £60 per week, it is recommended that an overseas student embarking on a course should have at least this amount available.
Before registration, an assurance will be sought from a government body, official agency, or from private sources, that such financial support will be forthcoming.
For details of course fees, please see page 21.
English Language Qualifications
Applicants whose native language is not English and who do not hold a recognized qualification in English will be required to provide evidence that they are sufficiently competent in the use of the English language.
The following language tests may be used:
Other evidence may be accepted at the discretion of the University.
Facilities are provided to enable students holding only the minimum qualification in English language to increase their proficiency in the language.
Medical Fitness
Overseas applicants are required to provide evidence of medical fitness; such evidence, in the form of written verification from a medical officer that the applicant is deemed fit to undertake studies at the University, must be received in advance of registration.
Application and Admission
Application
Application forms for admission to higher degrees by supervised research and to the postgraduate taught courses are available from the:
Completed forms should be returned to this address.
Please use the tear-off slip on p 49 of this booklet if writing to the Admissions Officer.
Early application is advised, as there may be a limit to the number of students admitted to certain courses.
Applications may, however, be considered up to the date when a course begins, provided that not all places have been filled.
Disabled Students
The criterion for the acceptance of applicants is their ability to follow successfully a course of academic study and, in appropriate cases, to qualify for admission to a profession.
In the spirit of this policy, no application from a disabled but otherwise qualified candidate will be rejected because of his or her disablement without the applicant being given full opportunity to see the facilities of the University and to discuss with appropriate staff how particular difficulties might be overcome.
Registration
Students entering an advanced course of study are normally registered from 1 October.
The period of registration for higher degrees by research is effective from the earliest of the following prescribed dates after the admission of students:
Fees and Grant Awards
Fees
The annual fees chargeable for the 1991–92 academic year are:
Full-time Home and EEC Students Research £2,104 Most Postgraduate taught courses £2,104
Full-time Overseas Students Research £4,600 DENIDBA/MBA £5,075 Most other postgraduate taught courses £4,600
Part-time Students (privately funded)Research £400 Most postgraduate taught courses £400
Part-time Students (publicly funded)£1,157
Other Charges Extension of enrolment fee for students on completion of period of registration £133
Note: Where a residential period forms part of a course a higher fee will be charged.
For further information about costs for specific courses please contact the appropriate Faculty Administrative Officer (see page 46).
Grant Awards and Regulations
The following is a brief summary of the main sources of award for full-time postgraduate study.
More detailed information should be obtained from the relevant grant-awarding bodies (for addresses see page 47).
In some cases Heads of Departments may be able to advise applicants of other awards available in specific subject or project areas.
An application for a postgraduate award can be a lengthy and detailed process, and as closing dates for the receipt of applications for awards are normally strictly adhered to, undergraduates are advised to make enquiries early in the second term of their final year of study.
Other applicants should also make enquiries early in the year in which they propose to commence a postgraduate course .
1.
Residents of Northern Ireland 
Students who are normally resident in Northern Ireland are not normally eligible for postgraduate awards from award-giving bodies in Great Britain even if they undertook their first degree at a university or polytechnic in Great Britain.
Most postgraduate awards to Northern Ireland residents are made by the Department of Education for Northern Ireland ().
1.1
DENI allocates quotas of postgraduate studentships and bursaries to institutions of higher education in Northern Ireland.
Studentships and bursaries allocated to the University of Ulster are usually advertised in the second term of the academic year (January to March).
Prospective students seeking an award to carry out postgraduate work at the University may obtain application forms and further particulars for the following awards from the appropriate Faculty Administrative Officer (see page 46).
a.
Postgraduate Studentships are available for research and certain advanced courses leading to higher degrees in the Humanities, Science and Technology, Information Technology, and Social Sciences (including Education and Natural Environment Studies).
b.
Postgraduate Bursaries are available for certain full-time courses which do not lead to a higher degree.
Applicants for bursaries will be required to possess a first degree or equivalent qualification.
c.
Co-operative Awards in Science and Technology (CAST)are postgraduate research studentships which specifically support students working on research projects jointly devised and supervised by an academic department and a collaborating body such as private firm or public body.
CAST awards are offered for periods of two to three years dependent on the anticipated duration of the project, and they will enable students to submit for a higher degree such as MPhil or DPhil.
d.
Medical Research Council (MRC)awards are available to students from Northern Ireland as well as those from other parts of the UK.
Please see 3.2 a. for details .
1.2
The Department of Agriculture for Northern Ireland provides awards for Northern Ireland residents who wish to undertake postgraduate studies in Agriculture, Horticulture, Forestry and related sciences and subjects.
Application should be made direct to the Department of Agriculture.
2.
Northern Ireland Residents and other United Kingdom Residents .
2.1
Distinction Awards 
Distinction Awards are Postgraduate studentships which are open to students ordinarily resident anywhere in the UK, who hold or expect to obtain a 1st class Honours degree and who have not previously obtained a postgraduate research award.
These awards, funded by DENI, are available in the broad fields of Science, Technology, and Business and Management Studies; they attract a substantial premium above the maintenance grant of a basic postgraduate studentship.
Potential applicants are advised to contact in the first instance, the Head of the appropriate academic Department.
2.2
Discretionary Awards 
Applicants for full-time postgraduate diploma courses may be eligible for a discretionary award from local education authorities/education and library boards.
Applications for these awards must be made to local education authorities/education and library boards by 30 June of the proposed year of entry to the course.
2.3
Mandatory Awards 
Applicants from Northern Ireland seeking grand aid in respect of the full-time Postgraduate Certificate in Education should apply to the appropriate Education and Library Board; similarly applicants normally resident in England and Wales should apply to the appropriate local Education Authority; those normally resident in Scotland should apply to the Scottish Education Department.
3.
United Kingdom Residents other than Northern Ireland Residents (other than in 2 above).
3.1
Arts and Humanities 
Awards for postgraduate study in the Arts and Humanities are the responsibility of the British Academy (for residents in England and Wales) and of the Scottish Education Department (for residents of Scotland).
Application for these awards is made individually to the award-giving body through the institution in which it is hoped to study.
Enquiries to the University of Ulster should be addressed to the Academic Office at the address indicated on page 46, or to the appropriate Faculty Administrative Officer (see page 46).
The British Academy operates a bursary scheme for students taking certain designated full-time postgraduate courses in the Humanities at institutions in the UK.
Studentships are offered for postgraduate study within the field of Humanities at universities and certain other institutions of higher education; they are available for certain courses of study and research leading to a higher degree, and for certain certificate or diploma courses not covered by the bursary scheme.
Further details are available from the British Academy, Postgraduate Studentships Office, Block 1, Spur 15, Government Buildings, Honeypot Lane, Stanmore, Middlesex, HA7 1AZ, tel: 081 951 5188.
The Department of Education and Science also offers bursaries for certain postgraduate courses in the Humanities (mainly diploma courses), and makes available a limited number of awards for masters courses in Information Science.
Further information can be obtained from the Department of Education and Science (Awards), Elizabeth House, 39 York Road, London SE1 7PH, tel: 071 934 9000.
3.2
Sciences/Social Sciences/Medicine 
Awards in the Sciences, Social Sciences and Medicine are, for the most part, made by the research councils listed below which, on early application, may allocate a quota of awards to individual university subjects or departments.
All enquiries about nomination for quota awards tenable at the University of Ulster should be directed to the Administrative Officer of the Faculty in which postgraduate study is to be carried out.
Where a university subject of the candidate's choice has not been allocated a quota award, it may be possible for the Head of Department to nominate the candidate for an appeals award.
This type of award is, however, highly competitive and only a limited number of candidates will be successful.
All enquiries regarding appeals awards should be directed in the first instance to the Head of the appropriate Department.
a.
Medical Research Council (MRC)
The MRC provides grants for medically and non-medically qualified graduates who are working in the general field of medical research.
This would include graduates in Anatomy, Physiology, Biology, Pharmacology, Chemistry, Biochemistry, Psychology, Physics, Statistics and possibly Engineering.
MRC awards are available to students from Northern Ireland as well as those from other parts of the UK.
Full details of awards are available from the MRC, 20 Park Crescent, London W1N 4AL, tel:(071) 636 5422.
b.
Natural Environment Research Council (NERC)
The NERC offers awards for research or other postgraduate training in the scientific aspects of the natural environment.
Full information is given in NERC Training Awards , obtainable from NERC, Polaris House, North Star Avenue, Swindon SN2 1EU, tel: 0793 411500.
c.
Science and Engineering Research Council (SERC)
SERC awards are made for research or other postgraduate training in science and technology outside the disciplines of Agriculture, the Natural Environment Sciences and Medicine, but including biological aspects of Psychology, Engineering, Ergonomics and Cybernetics.
The SERC will also consider applications from science and technology candidates for awards in certain business and industrial administration or management courses.
Studentships are allocated to institutions each year on a quota basis.
Full information is given in Studentships and Fellowships , obtainable from SERC, Polaris House, North Star Avenue, Swindon SN2 1ET, tel: 0793 411000.
4.
EC Nationals (including Northern Ireland Residents and United Kingdom Residents)
The University has been allocated from the European Social Fund a number of training grants tenable on the following full-time postgraduate courses:
It is expected that a number of ESF awards will also be available for the Postgraduate Diploma/MA in Languages and International Communication.
To be eligible for consideration an applicant must be:
unemployed prior to registering for the course;
an EC national;
aged under 25 years on the date of registration (except for the Postgraduate Diploma in Biomedical Sciences and the Postgraduate Diploma/MA in Languages and International Communication for which there is no age limit).
Candidates are advised to make application for the above courses in the normal manner indicating in Section 6(i) of the application form that they wish to apply for an ESF training grant.
5.
Overseas Students 
5.1
Information about awards for overseas students in particular is given in the UNESCO handbook Study Abroad , as well as in the Scholarships Guide for Commonwealth Postgraduates and in Awards for Commonwealth University Staff (both published by the Association of Commonwealth Universities).
5.2
The Committee of Vice-Chancellors and Principals (CVCP) offers, on a competitive basis, a number of awards to overseas research students who start full-time study for a higher degree as registered research students.
The scheme provides for the partial remission of tuition fees to overseas postgraduate students of outstanding merit and research potential.
Application should be made to the Academic Registrar in advance of the closing date of 1 May.
5.3
From time to time the University makes available research studentships in selected areas.
6.
Financial Support for In-Service Courses for Teachers 
DENI is prepared to give financial support to teachers wishing to undertake part-time award-bearing in-service courses, subject to certain conditions.
This support is available only for full-time permanent serving teachers in recognized schools.
Application for financial support is made through the University and not through DENI .
Candidates are advised to make application to the University in the normal manner for places on approved courses.
If their application is successful they will be asked by the University to provide details as required by DENI, and nominations will then be made by the University to DENI by the end of June of the proposed year of entry to the University.
Queries about procedures should be addressed to the appropriate Faculty Administrative Officer.
Higher Degrees Through Supervised Research
Types of Award
Research leading to the degrees of Master of Philosophy (MPhil) or Doctor of Philosophy (DPhil) may be undertaken in all Faculties.
Research students pursue a specific aspect of a subject in depth, under the supervision of a member of staff with similar research interests.
Students may be registered for full-time or part-time study, and the appropriate degree is awarded after submission of a thesis and its approval by a Board of Examiners.
Entry Conditions
Graduates who hold a first or second-class honours degree in a relevant discipline or applicants deemed by the Senate to hold equivalent qualifications, are eligible for admission as research students.
However, an applicant who is unable to fulfil these requirements may be permitted to undertake a preliminary course leading to an examination of honours standard.
An applicant may apply for admission from 1 January, 1 April, 1 July or 1 October in any year.
A successful applicant is normally admitted as a candidate for the degree of MPhil but may apply at a later date to transfer his or her registration to that for the degree of DPhil.
Exceptionally, applicants who already have appropriate research experience may be admitted directly as candidates for the degree of DPhil.
Duration
A research student is required to complete a period of full-time study lasting for two years for MPhil or three years for DPhil, or a period of part-time study lasting for four years for MPhil or five years for DPhil.
During this period a student normally attends courses in research methods and is required at the end of the period to submit a thesis embodying the results of his or her work.
Methods of Research
The purpose of the programme of work is to enable the student to acquire competence in the methods of research and scholarship, and to show originality and sustained independent effort.
A candidate for the degree of MPhil is required to investigate and evaluate satisfactorily a chosen topic or topics, and to show lucidity in the presentation of the thesis and an understanding of the context and significance of the work.
A candidate for the degree of DPhil is expected, in addition, to complete successfully a programme of work which results in a significant contribution to knowledge.
Areas of Research Supervision
Supervision is available within the academic Departments and in the areas of research listed overleaf.
The University only accepts suitably qualified applicants interested in undertaking a research project in an area in which supervision is available within the University.
Further Information
For further advice concerning application procedures please contact either Wilma McFerran (Jordanstown and Belfast campuses), Catherine Avery (Coleraine and Magee College campuses) or the appropriate Faculty Administrative Officer.
(The addresses and telephone numbers of those members of staff who may be contacted for further information can be found on page 46).
Applicants are encouraged to have discussions with an appropriate member of academic staff to explore the possible development of a proposal before submitting an application.
It is recommended that they approach, in the first instance, the Head of the relevant Department who can advise on the range of areas of supervised research, and the availability of staff.
Whilst all research students are formally registered in one of the University's Departments, opportunities for postgraduate study also exist within a number of Interdisciplinary Research Centres, details of which are available on page 45.
Candidates interested in these areas of research and who wish to obtain further information and advice should contact the Director of the appropriate Centre.
Please note that the abbreviation (BT, CE, JN, ME) following the name of each Head of Department or Director on the following pages indicates the University campus (Belfast, Coleraine, Jordanstown, Magee) where they can be contacted.
Areas of Research Supervision by Faculty and Department
Supervision is available within the academic departments and in the areas of research listed below.
Faculty of Art and Design
Design In Industry
Head of Department: Mr B McClelland (BT)
Industrial design; Product development; Design research; Computer-aided design; Interior design; Surface decoration; Constructed textiles; Fashion design.
Communication Arts
Head of Department: Mr N Lawrence (BT)
History and Theory of Art and Design:Philosophy and aesthetics of art; History of design and decoration; Modern Irish art and architecture; Design theory in the 20th century; Film and media studies; Theories of popular visual culture.
Graphic Design Studies:Illustration; Creative photography; Video communication; Typography and the new technology; Exhibition design; Promotion and advertising.
Fine and Applied Arts
Head of Department: Mr M McCrory (BT)
Fine art; Painting; Sculpture; Printmaking; Extended studies; Ceramics; Embroidery; Silversmithing and jewellery.
Faculty of Business and Management
Accounting and Finance
Head of Department: Mr R McClung (JN)
Accounting disclosures and stock market prices; Investment appraisal (theory and practice); Financial statement analysis (explanation and prediction of financial distress, merger targets, etc).
Applied Economics and Human Resource Management
Head of Department: Professor V K Borooah (JN)
Poverty and income distribution; Regional competitiveness; Productivity and wage growth; Small businesses, enterprise and economic development; Economic growth in 19th-century Europe; Agriculture, forestry and environmental economics; Economics of the European Community; Energy economics; Manpower Studies; Personnel management; Industrial training.
Banking and Commerce
Head of Department: Mr W M Clarke (CE)
Non-bank financial services (eg. insurance); Corporate finance, international trade and export development; European business studies; Retailing and Distribution management.
Hotel and Catering Management
Head of Department: Dr D A McDowell (JN)
Tourism and leisure; Management and organization; Effects of technology; Food studies; Food safety and quality management; New food production and service systems; Product quality assurance in hospitality management; Hygiene management in modern catering systems.
Marketing and Business Organization
Head of Department: Dr W E McAleer (JN)
International marketing; International business; Aspects of marketing and marketing management; Strategy and small business; Computer modelling and strategic management; Competitive strategy; Acquisition strategy; Strategic issues of the Channel Tunnel; Business policy; Entrepreneurship; Visual interactive simulation.
Public Administration and Legal Studies
Head of Department: Professor M E H Connolly (JN)
Policy studies (including policy-making); Public sector management; Health services management; Education management; Public purchasing; Public finance (especially cost benefit, intergovernmental relations); Law (company, commercial, labour, welfare, housing, building, surveying); Aspects of criminal law.
Ulster Business School
Centre for Executive Development
Director: Professor N Cairns (JN)
Total quality management; managerial competencies; Directors and organizational change; Enterprise in higher education; Business venturing (eg. finance for industry, venture capital, informal investment, corporate venturing, public policy issues).
Centre for Management Education
Director: Professor S Cromie (JN)
Inter-organizational relationships; Interpersonal networking; Technology and competitive advantage; World class manufacturing; ‘Push-pull’ stock control systems; Corporate finance and treasury management.
Northern Ireland Small Business Institute
Director: Mr K O'Neill (JN)
Enterprise development; New business strategies; growth factors; Networking; Marketing; Financial planning and control; Company development; Small business management issues.
Faculty of Education
The Faculty of Education comprises three Departments:
Further and Vocational Education
Head of Department: Mr J A McAleer (JN)
In-Service Education
Head of Department: Dr G Rae (CE)
Pre-Service Education
Head of Department: Professor E D Saunders (JN)
Whilst research students are registered within one of the above Departments, research in the Faculty is arranged under ten areas of Research Specialism as detailed below:
Cultural Heritage:Including such cognate areas as Education for Mutual Understanding, Integrated Education and Religious Education.
Further and Vocational Education:Non-school education and training, post-16.
Information Technology:The application of IT to teaching and related matters, such as computer-based teaching, computer-assisted learning, and distance teaching.
Curriculum Development and Assessment:Covers work in a number of curriculum areas, notably Science, European Studies, Citizenship, English, the Primary Curriculum.
Special Educational Needs:Special school work; children in ordinary schools; categories of educational disadvantage such as handicapped children, girls and women, travelling people and pre-school children; pastoral care, guidance and counselling.
Education Management:Issues of management, organization and links with outside agencies.
Health, Sport and Recreation:Indices of physical wellbeing and matters related to the leisure industry.
Historical and Comparative Studies:Irish Educational History and Comparative Studies across European Countries.
Consumer Studies:Industrial and educational research related to consumer understanding and consumer education.
Media Studies:Television, radio and newspapers.
Faculty of Humanities
English, Media and Theatre Studies
Head of Department: Professor R Welch (CE)
English:English literature from the Renaissance to the present, and in particular the 18th century and modern literature; Anglo-Irish literature — all periods; American literature; Medieval and Renaissance English literature; the classics and English literature; the English language in Ireland.
Media:Media coverage of events in Ireland, England and the United States; Media images of Ireland, north and south; British, Irish and American film; Television; The mass media and society; Popular culture; Contemporary cultural theory.
Theatre:Irish, British, German and American theatre; Ulster theatre; Political theatre; Medieval theatre; Performance art.
General:Cultural and aesthetic theory; Semiotics and representation; Literature, the media, theatre and society; Translation theory; Biography.
European Studies and Modern Languages
Head of Department: Dr R A York (CE)
French:Most aspects of French literature and certain areas of 17th and 18th-century France.
Of particular interest are: Montaigne; Moliere; Sartre; Camus; 20th-century poetry and the novel; Modern thought in France including literary-intellectual movements since 1945; 19th-century drama; Romanticism; 19th-century thought; 20th-century drama; The study of the French media.
German:Goethe; 19th-century prose and drama; Modern poetry and prose; Germany in the 20th century with particular interest in the Allied Occupation (1945–49).
Irish Studies:Contemporary Irish literature; Application of linguistic science to contemporary Irish; Old Irish, classical Irish and Irish literature of the 18th century — with particular reference to Ulster writers; Irish folklore; Syntactic errors of learners of Irish as a second language.
Linguistics:Most areas of theoretical and applied linguistics, with special interests in information structure, sentence order and intonation in English and other European languages; Case grammar in English and German; Contrastive linguistics of English and German; Oriental languages; Epistemology of general semiological theory.
European Studies:Protection of ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities in Western Europe; Problems of divided communities; Problems of human rights; Problems of regional economic, social and political development within the framework of the nation-state and the process of European integration; The course of democracy in West Germany; Church and state in France.
History
Head of Department: Dr T G Fraser (CE)
The early modern, modern and contemporary history of Ireland and Britain, Eastern and Western Europe, the United States, the Middle East, the Indian Subcontinent and East Asia.
Early modern history: Political, economic and social history and the history of science; The history of popular movements and popular disturbances; The development of popular culture.
Modern and contemporary history: International relations; The history of mass communications; The history of war, nationalism and revolutions; British imperial history; The interconnections between religion, politics and community relations in 19th and 20th-century Ulster; Peace and conflict studies; Inter-ethnic conflict.
Music
Head of Department: Mrs H M Bracefield (JN)
Musicology: American music; Analysis and music theory; Contemporary music; 17th and 18th century performance practice; topics in 16th to 19th century musicology.
Composition:a portfolio of original compositions plus either a critical commentary or a dissertation on a related subject.
Performance:a practical recital plus a dissertation on a related subject.
Philosophy and Politics
Head of Department: Mr T M O'Keeffe (CE).
Philosophy:Epistemology; Metaphysics; Ethical theory; Applied ethics; Philosophy of mind; Philosophy of history; Philosophy of religion; Aesthetics; Materialism; Wittgenstein; Schopenhauer; Philosophical theology with particular reference to Tillich.
Politics:The politics of Northern Ireland; Modern Irish politics; Northern Ireland and European Community politics; Modern French politics; Marxism; Socialist and Marxist theories of the state; Political thought; Conservatism; Labour history; Peace and conflict studies; Women's Studies.
Faculty of Informatics
Applied Computing
Head of Department: Mr J C O'Kane (ME)
Human-Computer Interaction — Vision: Industrial computer vision systems; performance assessment and adaptation; Application toolkits; Image processing.
HCI — Design and Evaluation:Issues which determine the usability of computer systems; Novel types of human-computer interface using vision, speech, and hearing; Alternative interface mechanisms eg. touchscreen; The human-computer interactions involved in development and industrial environments; Assessing the usability of computer systems; The design and evaluation of application-specific interfaces.
HCI — Graphics:Three-dimensional graphics, in particular, interfaces for computer-aided geometric design (CAGD) systems; Visualisation; Efficiency considerations; Parallel algorithms; Image synthesis and geometric applications; Hidden-line, hidden-surface and polygon clipping algorithms; Computational complexity; Applications of CAD in craft-based industries.
Information Systems:Information system development methodologies; The role of the user in system design; Information systems in manufacturing industry; Hospital information systems; Information technology training for administrators and health service staff.
Signal Processing:Application of statistical decision theory, parameter estimation and classification to problems in the areas of signal processing, information extraction and measurement system calibration; modelling, simulation and calibration applied to data sets gathered with various types or arrays of instruments.
Machine Translation:The use of computers in the process of translation of natural languages; Dictionary design and management; Translation software; Computational linguistics.
Advanced Telecommunications:Protocol design and testing through simulation; internetworking techniques in communications and networks; ATM gateway design and multimedia bridges to avail of advanced telecommunications infrastructures and provide enhanced services.
Computer-Assisted Learning:The design, implementation, use and evaluation of models, methods and control systems to support computer-assisted open and distance learning systems.
Simulation:Mathematical modelling; The implementation of simulation models of real-world systems on digital computers using conventional and special-purpose languages; The application of simulation in the design cycle.
Software Cost Estimation:Software metrics and life-cycle models applied to project cost estimation and project management.
Computer Science
Head of Department: Professor M E C Hull (JN)
Modular Object-Oriented Notation:Examination and comparison of a number of methods for a range of application areas; Identification of a set of ‘criteria’ for the assessment of methods.
Software Engineering and Database Systems:Database technology and software engineering; The use of parallel processing techniques for database applications; New hardware innovations (such as the transputer) and the associated software; The production of a prototype productive database machine.
Transputers for Geometric Modelling:Parallel algorithms for use in graphics application; Manipulation and display of a model held as a wire line model, of a model built using constructive solid geometry and of a model based on the spatial enumeration cuboids; Accessing pixel-based data in an ordering which is that of a cubic spiral.
DFD-derived Parallel Software Development:Enabling a wide range of non-computer specialists to exploit the power and flexibility of parallel systems; explicitly identifying the needs and requirements of the non-computer specialist and providing tools able to allow them, with minimal technical support, to experiment with parallel computing systems.
Graphics:Methods of transmitting broadcast quality vision through a digital local area network.
Data Communications: Collection and manipulation of data on the shop floor with a view to allowing more efficient management of the industry's resources.
Concurrent Software Behaviour:Development of design ideas and prototype implementations of a formal description and for diagnosis.
Information Systems
Head of Department: Dr J G Hughes (JN)
Information Systems Development Methodologies:Practical and innovative solutions to the problems associated with modern Information System methodologies and Computer Aided System Engineering (CASE) tools; Framework for the evaluation, comparison and selection of Information System development methodologies/CASE tools; Design and development of an object-oriented systems development methodology; Intelligent analyst workbench migration mechanisms.
Human-Computer Interaction:Issues and techniques which determine the usability of computer systems, interactive programming techniques, and novel types of human-computer interface such as computer hearing, vision, speech, and AI systems; Industrial computer vision systems; Aiding the work of a programmer producing computer vision systems for specific applications; Building into such systems the ability to monitor their own performance and adapt appropriately; Studying the human-computer interactions involved both in the developmental and industrial environments.
Object-oriented Databases and Expert Systems:Complex data modelling requirements of large-scale, data-intensive applications; Design and development of a concurrent, object-oriented database programming environment; Interfacing of object-oriented programming languages to databases and expert systems; Application of object-oriented programming languages to database and expert system design and development for real-time engineering applications.
Other Research Areas:Computer-assisted learning — the design, implementation, use and evaluation of model, methods and control systems to support computer-assisted open and distance learning systems; Computer-based linguistic stylometry — development of computer-based statistical methods for the resolution of cases of disputed authorship.
Mathematics
Head of Department: Dr S K Houston (JN)
Consensus:Some preliminary work on the theory of consensus and hierarchical prioritization studies.
Statistical techniques for manpower planning:Development of statistical methods for use in manpower planning; Application of these methods to a large database consisting of career histories of employees working in the public sector.
Statistical modelling of spells in a geriatric ward:Development of models to describe the length of stay of patients in geriatric wards and flows of patients between wards and in and out of hospital; Applications of these models to a database of patients' histories in geriatric care.
Muscular Dystrophy Diagnosis:
Application of multivariate statistical techniques to determine the composition of hemopexin, lactate dehydrodoginase, creatine kinase and pyruvate kinase in carriers and non-carriers with the objective of determining a discriminant function for early diagnosis.
Mathematical Education:Current projects include: Assessing the effectiveness of CAL packages in enhancing mathematics learning in secondary schools; Assessing the extent to which certain important mathematical concepts are not understood by the adult population and devising corrective measures; Assessing the effectiveness of learning mathematics by investigative methods; an open learning approach to investigative methods in mathematics; The place of geometry in the curriculum; Learning by case study.
Faculty of Science and Technology
Applied Physical Sciences
Head of Department: Professor A C Knipe (CE)
Many of the research interests outlined below find application in three major centres for research and development which are directed by members of the Department of Applied Physical Sciences; these centres are concerned with Energy Studies, Surface Science and Ceramics, and Garment and Textiles Technology.
Inorganic and Organometallic Chemistry:Organometallic chemistry of transition metal complexes including metallocenes and porphyrins; Kinetics of reactions involving P-450 and myoglobin models; Development of electrochemical biosensors.
Organic and Biological Chemistry:Synthesis and biosynthesis of natural products; Asymmetric synthesis; Enzyme chemistry; Polymer degradation.
Physical Chemistry:Photochemistry; Organic electrochemistry; Multinuclear NMR spectroscope.
Reaction Mechanisms:Reaction mechanisms and their elucidation; Kinetic studies of reactions of organic and organometallic substrates; Theory of fast reactions in solution; Mechanisms of reaction of porphyrin complexes; Enzyme kinetics.
Surface Chemistry:Inelastic electron tunnelling spectroscopy of surface adsorbates; Characterisation and modification of ceramic and polymer surfaces and interfaces.
Pharmaceutical, Environmental and Bioanalysis:The determination of inorganic and organic species such as drugs, pollutants and naturally occurring molecules in complex matrices such as drug formulations, water, soils, body fluids, etc.
Atmospheric Physics:Measurement of photodestruction cross sections of ionospheric negative ions; Measurement of intensities of weak emission lines of atmospheric alkali metals.
Electronic Display Panels:Development of electroluminescent display panels with integrated drive electronics; Electrical and photoelectric properties of thin films.
Energy Studies:Policy evaluation; Energy systems analysis, heat pump control and applications; Effects of oil-refrigerant mixing in heat pumps; Building energy modelling; Thermal storage; Expert systems in energy industries.
Medical Physics:Applications of physics to medicine; Instrumentation for the measurements of blood flow in limbs; Intensity and spectra of X-ray sources (X-ray dosimetry).
Microelectronics Applications:Instrumentation and measurement systems applied to medical and environmental studies, low-energy houses, district heating, particular needs of the garment and textiles industry, transport studies; Control and measurement of heating systems; Mathematical modelling of building thermal performance; Computer interfacing; Applications of video image acquisition and analysis.
Defects in Semiconductors:Analysis of the effects associated with low concentration transition metal defects in semiconductors using capacitance techniques.
(Investigations are also done using the Surface Science facilities.)
Surface Processes in Ion Etching:Reactive ion etching of metals and semiconductors used in integrated circuit technology; Study of the ion surface interactions using ultra high vacuum surface sensitive techniques which include ESCA and SIMS.
Biological and Biomedical Sciences
Head of Department: Professor P G McKenna (CE)
A team approach to research is favoured.
Main groupings are in Biomedical Sciences, Biotechnology, Applied Ecology and (with the Department of Environmental Studies) Freshwater Studies at Lough Neagh.
Biomedical Sciences:projects range from fundamental work in molecular biology through to investigations into the influence of diet in health and disease.
Areas covered include: cancer, human nutrition, diabetes, ageing, coronary heart disease, infection and immunity, food science, radiation biology, laser therapy, oxidant damage in pathophysiological conditions.
Biotechnology:much of the work is process and design oriented, with research programmes in fermentation, effluent treatment, diagnostic enzymes, microbial toxicity and biotransformations.
Applied Ecology:major research programmes in pest management, monitoring and assessment of changes in ecological communities, the fate of pollutants including radionuclides in natural environments.
Freshwater Studies:limnological and river research.
Building and Environmental Engineering
Head of Department: Mr P R Clegg (JN)
Building Performance:Analysis and measurement of energy use; Passive solar design; Daylighting; Heat transfer in buildings; Thermal comfort; Solar energy systems; Thermal comfort; Solar energy systems; Thermal behaviour of glasshouses; Optimisation of water heaters' passive cooling; Logic programming in building design.
Acoustics:Noise nuisance; Road traffic noise; Sound insulation; Duct-borne noise; Noise-induced hearing loss.
Fire Technology:Fire modelling; Means of escape; Fire growth dynamics.
Wind Energy Conversion
Materials:Quality control of concrete; Properties of home-grown timber; Drying of wood.
Building Management:Computer-aided design in building; Applications of computers in building; Quality assurance in building; Aspects of unsatisfactory housing.
Civil Engineering and Transport
Head of Department: Mr W H Crooks (JN)
Research topics may be selected from the following list or may be arranged in agreement with supervisors in the areas of Structures, Hydraulics, Geotechnics, Highway Engineering, Transportation Planning and Economics, Public Health Engineering and Construction Management.
Design, analysis and product development of novel structural composites and materials; Numerical and experimental studies of sandwich panels, cambered slabs and woven polypropylene cementitious composites; Applications of software tools to structural analysis and design; Hydraulics of open channel flow; Experimental,in situ and numerical studies of flow resistance in channels with floodplains; Highway engineering materials and construction methods; Laboratory and in situ assessments of the performance of highway engineering aggregates and binders; Assessment of highway construction materials at source, during production and construction processes and under working environments; Geotechnics, laboratory and numerical assessment of bearing capacity of soils under curricular footings, enhancement of soil properties using man-made additives.
Transport Studies:Transport systems planning and evaluation; Development and application of expert systems in multi-modal transport; Vehicle routing and navigation; Discrete event studies within multi-modal transport; Cost benefit analysis particularly in conjunction with road transport; Cellular radio and freight distribution; Integration of para-transit and public transport; Community and public transport for the handicapped and elderly; Socio-economic evaluation of road proposals; Transport network analysis with respect to the Channel Tunnel; Peripherality and the Single European Market; Rural and urban accessibility studies of public transport; Freight origin/destination patterns; Modern urban transport technology assessment studies; Co-ordinated public transport planning; Personal mobility with particular emphasis on disabled people.
Electrical and Electronic Engineering
Head of Department: Professor R H Mitchell (JN)
Robotic supervisory control; Thin film fabrication; Semiconductor heterojunctions and superlattices; Flat panel display addressing and pixel modelling; Glow discharge processes; Chemistry of II–VI phosphors; Sensors, biomedical telemetry; Real-time digital signal processing; Sonar signal processing; Bandwidth compression of speech and video; High-speed implementation of computer logic/modelling/transmission line effects; Graphics design for computer simulation of printed circuit board design and facsimile reception; Heart rate variability; Blood pressure monitoring; Cardio-vascular modelling; Speech recognition and synthesis; Artificial hearing devices; Data communications; Electric vehicle drives; Power electronics; ASIC/PAL design; Transputer applications; Radio-frequency devices and systems; Ventricular modelling; Adaptive filters; Fetal and neonatal monitoring; Garment and textile automation and control; Image processing; Control systems; Adoptive systems; Flight control systems; Expert systems applications; Electromagnetic wave propagation studies.
Environmental Studies
Head of Department: Professor R W G Carter (CE)
Environmental Science:Aspects of nature conservation; Hydrology, especially of peat-covered catchments; Coastal geomorphology and sedimentology including beaches and dunes; Sea-level changes and coastal evolution; Ecology and public impact; Structural geology; Glacial sedimentology; Soil mineralogy and weathering; Aspects of meteorology and geomorphology; Tertiary igneous rocks; Geochemistry; Vegetation and land-use surveying; Remote sensing and geographical information systems.
Human Geography:Residential segregation and violence; Socio-economic change and regional development in Eastern Europe and the USSR; Historical demography of the British Isles; European industrialisation, developmental pressures in Southern Europe (especially Spain and Portugal); Third World development studies; Changing structures in agriculture; Computer applications in geography; Historical geography of Ireland; Regional development and employment change.
Mechanical and Industrial Engineering
Head of Department: Professor P P Miller (JN)
Computer-aided design/computer-aided management (CAD/CAM); Applications of finite element techniques; Design and development of heat transfer systems as applied to tools for diecasting and injection moulding; Service performance of explosive welds; processability of polymer and polymer/additive blends; Alloying of polymers, including interpenetrating networks; Modified burning characteristics of polymers; Advanced engineering composites; Effect of moisture and low-energy impact on carbon-fibre reinforced first generation and toughened epoxy resins; Processing, structure and property interaction of fibre reinforced thermoplastics; Composite type rubbers; Robot kinematics and dynamics; Frictionless hydraulic actuators; Metal forming; Machine tool performance; Computer analysis of component roundness; Dynamic stability in cutting; Finite element modelling of EDM parameters; Automatic control of ram movement and strip feeds of hydraulic press; Blood flow analysis and bone necrosis; Ultrasonic evaluation of adhesive-bonded metal structures.
Surveying
Head of Department: Mr E Regan (JN).
Land use and land value; Urban development studies; Urban regeneration; Property valuation; Planning; Housing; Application of quantitative techniques in valuation; Property development within the EC; Project management; Application of computers in surveying; Energy conservation; Life cycle costing; Contract documentation; Construction economics.
Faculty of Social and Health Sciences
Applied Social Studies
Head of Department: Mr D R Bamford (JN)
Social work practice development; Specialized practice, particularly child care, metal health, gerontology and residential work; Specialized practice teaching; Social work education; Youth and community work; Social work with offenders; Ethnically sensitive practice.
Communication
Head of Department: Professor O D W Hargie (JN)
Information networking; Decision-making; Discourse analysis; Communication of innovations; Counselling; Social skills analysis; Social skills training; Speech pathology and audiology; Child language development.
Nursing and Health Visiting
Head of Department: Professor J Boore (CE)
Nursing Practice including: Biological sciences applied in general nursing; Surgical nursing; Intensive care nursing; Long-term care and geriatric nursing; Communication in nursing; Patient teaching; Nutrition; Organization of patient care; Mental health nursing; Community nursing; Sociological examination of nursing.
Occupational Therapy and Physiotherapy
Head of Department: Mrs A J Bell (JN)
Continuing education; Biofeedback in the treatment of physical disorders; Electrotherapeutic modalities; Exercise physiology; Sports medicine; Chronic cardiovascular and respiratory care; Ergonomics; Biomechanical engineering; Community health; Microcomputers and assessment in occupational therapy.
Psychology
Head of Department: Professor J C Leslie (JN)
Quantitative research involving issues in social and/or applied psychology; Social and developmental psychology; Intergroup conflict (especially in Northern Ireland); Mathematical models of perceptual processes and decision-making; Statistical software; Physiological psychology; Experimental analysis of behaviour; Behaviour modification; Behavioural pharmacology; Mother-child interaction; Mental handicap; Education assessment; Intelligence; Personality; Educational achievement; Development of mathematical ability; Developmental aspects of mental and physical handicap; Health psychology; Menstruation and associated behaviour; Behaviour genetics; Comparative psychology; Behavioural teratology of alcohol; Fetal alcohol syndrome; Fetal nutrition; Biorhythms; Gender and identity; Anorexia and bulimia; Ethnic relations; Social skills training; Analysis of professional interaction; Lateral asymmetry; Environmental psychology; Metapsychology; Developmental psychopathology; Unemployment and development; Quality assurance, performance indicators and professional competence.
Social Administration and Policy
Head of Department: Professor W D Birrell (CE)
Housing policy and administration; The development of welfare services in Northern Ireland; Voluntary social services; The development, planning and provision of health care, the Poor Law and social security, take up of benefits, unemployment, redundancies and low pay; Equality of opportunity, religious and sex discrimination; Community conflict in Northern Ireland; Treatment of offenders; Community care.
Sociology
Head of Department: Mr A McCullough (JN)
Sociology and anthropology of developing societies; Health and illness; Media studies; Industrial sociology; Sex and gender; Irish studies.
Taught Courses
Awards
Taught courses are offered at postgraduate and post-experience level leading to awards of the University of Ulster.
They may lead to the award of a masters' degree, a postgraduate diploma or certificate, a post-experience diploma or certificate, or a second degree.
A summary of courses offered in 1991/92 is given on page 38.
In some cases a postgraduate diploma is linked to a masters' degree.
Students may complete the course at diploma level, and if they attain a satisfactory standard in the diploma examinations, they may proceed to the masters' course.
A certificate course, whether postgraduate or not, may also be linked to the diploma and masters' courses, providing a progressive programme of study from certificate to masters' level.
Some courses, such as the Postgraduate Diploma in Social Work, lead to the award of a professional qualification as well as an award of the University.
Courses leading to masters' degrees are normally designed to fulfil one of the following objectives: to follow directly from the study undertaken at first degree level; to enable graduates of one discipline to acquire knowledge of another related discipline or subject area; to develop and apply the student's first degree knowledge in a related specialized area; or to relate and synthesize a number of disciplines which the student may not have studied at first degree level.
Direct entry to masters' courses is normally limited to those with good honours degrees or equivalent qualifications.
Postgraduate and post-experience diplomas and certificates are, in general, designed for students with a wider range of academic backgrounds and experience.
Many of the diplomas and certificates offered by the University are intended to prepare students for a particular career path, or to enhance their prospects in the career they have already chosen by extending their knowledge and developing their skills.
For further information on any of the taught courses on page 38 and an application form, please complete and return the tear-off slip on page 49, or telephone the Admissions Office at the number given on page 46.
Teaching and Assessment
Teaching is normally by courses of lectures but considerable emphasis is also placed on teaching in small groups such as in tutorials and seminars.
For some courses, work of a practical nature is an integral feature; for instance, students of the Postgraduate Diploma in the Teaching of English as a Foreign Language must undertake a series of microteaching lessons, and a period of teaching practice abroad, while the Postgraduate Diploma in Microelectronics and Microcomputer Application emphasizes ‘hands on’ experience with microcomputers.
Some courses draw on the students' own experience, usually in the workplace.
In the Postgraduate Diploma in Management Studies, for example, students are encouraged to relate theory to practical management (and real problems) in their own organizations where this is appropriate.
Students who proceed to prepare a dissertation are allocated a supervisor, who is usually a member of the teaching staff on the course.
By this stage formal lectures will normally have ceased, and students will meet their supervisor at regular intervals during the preparation of the dissertation.
Students generally will be examined on the taught elements of the courses by cumulative assessment or by written examinations, or a combination of the two.
Practical examinations, assessment during placements and oral examinations may also form part of the overall assessment of a student's capabilities.
In addition, many diploma courses require the submission of a project, and master's courses normally include the presentation of a substantial dissertation in an area of study selected by the student, in consultation with the academic staff.
Department of Adult and Continuing Education
Director and Head of Department: Mr R I Houston (JN)
The work of the Department is conducted on all four campuses (principally at Magee College and Jordanstown) as well as off-site.
The Director is based on the Jordanstown campus.
The title of the Department reflects the University's belief that higher education is not the prerogative of the undergraduate but of all who retain an interest in learning, whether at a highly professional or purely recreational level.
Each Faculty makes a substantial contribution to the field of adult and continuing education, in which the University offers a range of part-time degree, diploma and postgraduate courses together with a comprehensive programme of short courses.
In the academic year 1990/91, work by the staff of the Department led to two national awards.
The first, the Partnership Award for innovation in teaching and learning in higher education, reflected the interest in a successful programme aimed at social and economic regeneration in the community.
The second, the Fawcett Award, was in recognition of an outstanding achievement in the field of women's education and marked the impact of the ‘Women in IT’ programme aimed at returning unemployed and largely academically unqualified women to employment in the expanding field of Information Technology.
It is clear that adult and continuing education will grow in importance over the years.
The University has already taken steps to promote this growth and the Department will play the major role in these activities.
In particular, it is concerned with the barriers adults face in finding access to higher education.
The Department has plans to promote a wide range of activities for the community as a whole and to work closely with other bodies in the field to ensure the fullest use of resources.
In this respect, liaison with individuals, groups and other institutions is invited and encouraged.
Research is undertaken in a wide range of subjects within the field of adult and continuing education.
Because of the University-wide interest in the subject, projects have their roots in many disciplines and fields of knowledge.
Recent and current research interests in the Department include: social and economic regeneration in communities; communities and culture; adult education in the Third World; curriculum development for adults; the late entrant to higher education; learning skills and the mature student; access to higher education; and teaching foreign languages to adults.
Supervision is available to those wishing to study for the research degrees of MPhil and DPhil.
The Department also has its own teaching programmes.
Principal topics include the teaching of adults; the training of teachers of adults; research in adult and continuing education; the provision of support to the University's short courses and extramural programmes; and the linking of the University's resources to the non-formal educational needs of the community.
Postgraduate study in adult and continuing education leading to the Postgraduate Diploma/MEd (Professional Development) is provided in conjunction with the Faculty of Education.
The courses include modules and elements in adult and continuing education, and supervision of dissertations in the subject by members of the Department is available.
Modules may be taken individually as short courses by graduates and are accredited.
The courses give teachers of adults an opportunity to reappraise the theory and practice of continuing education.
They include modules on: Adults Learning; the Adult Learner; Political and Philosophical Issues; Community Education; Access to Culture and Knowledge; Mass Communication, Media and Continuing Education; and Research Issues in Adult and Continuing Education.
Students taking these courses, which are offered at both Jordanstown and Magee College, may be teachers in further education, school teachers with a role in community education, or members of the clergy or of any of the professions which have education as part of their function.
For full details of programmes and other information about the Department of Adult and Continuing Education, please contact the:
Administrative Officer Department of Adult and Continuing Education University of Ulster at Jordanstown Newtownabbey Co Antrim BT37 0QB tel:(0232) 365131 ext 2680 or the:
Administrative Officer Department of Adult and Continuing Education University of Ulster Magee College Londonderry BT48 7JL tel:(0504) 265621 
Postgraduate Studies: Interdisciplinary Research
Interdisciplinarity and collaboration across faculties and between departments are strong features of research activity within the University of Ulster.
The University has established a number of Interdisciplinary Research Centres which initiate and develop interdisciplinary research in collaboration with industry, commerce, the public sector, research institutes and institutions of education, at both national and international level.
Currently the University's Interdisciplinary Research Centres are:
Opportunities for postgraduate research exist within all of these Centres, although research students of the University of Ulster are formally registered in one of the University's departments.
The Directors of the Centres will be happy to discuss the project areas in which their Centres are active and the opportunities available to research students.