

CONTEXT
Curriculum in context
Planning a school curriculum has something in common with planning a journey.
Unless the traveller has some idea of where he is starting from and the conditions he may meet along the way, he is unlikely to be able to decide upon a satisfactory route.
In this chapter I discuss what we need to know before we start on our travels, which I call  examining the context of the curriculum and Malcolm Skilbeck refers to as ‘situational analysis’.
Clearly, it is important to consider who undertakes this analysis, how, and where it is likely to lead us.
These issues I touch on in the latter part of the chapter.
What do we mean by context?
Schools are part of a wider education system.
An education system is part of a political, social, and economic framework.
Schools are also composed of individuals (children and teachers) and are responsible to other individuals (parents) within the framework of a community.
This gives each school situation a life and an entity of its own.
Schools also have an existence in time and place.
Their development and their curriculum are often conditioned by practical and administrative problems.
This chapter reflects these aspects of context and the interrelations between them, and further emphasises the diversities, the inequalities and the conflicts within systems that a curriculum planner has to deal with.
Politics and economics
The two most important decision areas in educational planning are to decide how many children should be provided for in the school system at what ages and levels, and to decide the purpose for which they are sent there.
These decisions and many more are usually politically motivated.
Elsewhere I have argued that the whole fabric of a primary school curriculum in a socialist state like Tanzania will differ from that in a capitalist state like Kenya, for the different philosophies will affect  not only selection of syllabus content but also languages of instruction, policy towards competition and examinations, links between school and community and above all the attitudes which teachers foster in the learners.
It is no surprise that Tanzania is the first country in Africa to introduce a less centralised and examination-oriented system of selection for secondary schools and that Zambia intends soon to follow suit, nor that Kenya and Ghana are much concerned with giving primary leavers the skill and the incentive to set themselves up as entrepreneurs when they leave school.
Political decisions may also be taken suddenly and drastically to increase school enrolments.
In recent years political leaders in three of the countries considered in this book, Kenya, Nigeria and Tanzania have very suddenly announced fee-free, and in the last two cases, ‘universal’ primary education.
Such a policy adds an entirely new dimension to the primary school curriculum and its planning.
In the first place, if education is for all, it is for all conditions and all abilities.
In the second, if educational opportunities are suddenly opened for all, it invariably involves a spreading of financial, material, and human resources more thinly than previously.
Frequently one senses a certain unwillingness on the part of professional educators to accept these decisions and work with them.
There is a fear that ‘standards’ may suffer, and a certain civil servant's distrust for ‘politicians’, bred of British traditions.
It may also be asked whether national political and economic policies are always debated and discussed with the seriousness they should be in curriculum committees or teachers' colleges.
Kenya's ‘Harambee’, Ghana's ‘Operation Feed Yourself’, Botswana's concern over water resources and the concept ‘One Nigeria’ are far more than political slogans.
They are instruments for national survival and should be woven into the whole fabric of the primary school curriculum.
Yet because they are politically motivated they may be, in some degree, distrusted.
Of course I have vastly simplified the situation and the arguments.
Often political and economic policies are unclear to educationists, sometimes they may be in the hands of tyrants, not infrequently they conflict, but they can never be ignored.
There is no such thing as non-political education.
Education is for citizens; citizens form a state.
The social context
The typical primary school in Africa is in every physical sense a neighbourhood school, small, local, reached on foot — the teachers well-known and despite their protestations to the contrary, usually well respected.
In the school, children are expected to receive the education of the book.
Parallel to this education and close round the school, the life of the community goes on — the child plays and is expected to play a very full part in it; fetching water and firewood, minding little brothers and sisters, running errands, buying and often selling in the market, performing religious duties at Koranic schools, catechist classes or in traditional preparation for circumcision and other initiation    ceremonies, alongside all the watching, the imitation, the play, the chit-chat and the ‘mucking about’ which is part of growing up everywhere.
Besides the relationships which a child has with his extended family are those maintained with the spirit world and the living dead.
For, particularly in rural areas, this other world is still very close to the villager.
As Castle writes:
‘For centuries he has lived close to calamity: drought and flood threaten his crops and beasts; diseases, infertility and death afflict his wife and children; ghosts disturb his peace.
All evils have to be dealt with; nothing happens by accident; every occurrence that threatens his existence has to be explained.
And the explanation, according to his interpretation of his experience of his world lies in the extra human agencies that surround him.
He is not concerned like Western man with mechanistic explanations of how things happen; he is concerned with why  afflictions befall him, how to forestall them and remove their menace….
Magic thus represents a view of causation utterly at variance with the concepts of the Christian scientific West, which are now as much a part of the African's world as is ancient tradition.’
No valid consideration of the school curriculum can be made without consideration of a child's view of causal relationships and no analysis of causal relationships in African children can be made without consideration of the nature of these spiritual beliefs.
To attempt any close analysis of the social contexts in which African primary schools operate is obviously to court unacceptable generalisations but two points may, nevertheless, be worth making.
The first is that these contexts offer an inequality of educational opportunity even more striking than that evident (and so commonly deplored) between the primary schools themselves.
A child in a materially and culturally rich area has a casual and continuous fund of experiences, in the market, at festivals, in the lorry park, by the roadside.
A child in a deep rural community preoccupied with seeking survival has far fewer.
Wide variations predictably exist not only in what children know but in their perceptual and cognitive development.
A second generalisation concerns the overall relationship between school and the community it serves.
To a great degree they are places apart and the separateness is often maintained by a sort of mutual consent between school and community, despite exhortations to integrate from curriculum makers and earnest protestations from headmasters and teachers that the process is underway.
(‘There's an old man who comes in sometimes to show them how to make musical instruments.’
‘Last term we had the dispenser in to talk to them.’
‘The village football team uses our field.’)
In fact the average teacher values the security and the formality of the classroom and the book, the sense  of order and status which it accords him.
The particular characteristics of a school — time and timetables, fact and figures, books and writing, tests and class orders — belong to a category of ideas which are separate from those in the village and which both the teacher and the parent accept as school business.
How much the language of instruction used helps to set the school apart from the community is a matter of some controversy.
Yet by any measurement it is an important factor.
Certainly a visitor to rural schools in Kenya, Swaziland, Sierra Leone or parts of Nigeria notes with some amazement a community, homogeneous  linguistically and culturally, which supports, often proudly, a school where the medium is English.
In it young children, with the great enthusiasm children always show for a colourful ritual which they do not fully understand, recite with actions an English nursery rhyme for his benefit.
The formal school, in short, remains separate from the community it serves very largely because the people in that community wish it to be so.
Mere exhortations in syllabus documents will not change this situation.
But where the political and social values of a country redefine the function of a school, as they have done in Tanzania, or, as with the growth of universal primary education, it becomes more obvious that the school is not mainly an escape route out of the village and on to secondary and higher education, so the separateness may become less pronounced and the desire for integration more genuine.
At various points in this book, we may be able to discern how changes in attitudes of curriculum planners to the purpose of the primary school manifest themselves in new ideas about languages of instruction, a new urgency in finding out about community needs, an increased commitment to the concept of basic education.
This change of attitude is significant, but there is a long road still to travel between the discussion of these ideas in high places and their transmission into action at the level of the village school.
A world apart
A fascinating and hitherto unpublished study exists of a day in the life of two northern Nigerian school age children (R. Tabatchik's ‘Two Children, Two Days’).
The contrast painted between the intense, vibrant, imaginative life of the child outside school (where at the end of the day the eight-year-old collapses into deep sleep a few seconds after rushing round ‘being a lorry’) and the drab, pointless monotony of his classes is as striking as it is disturbing.
Evidence from a headmaster (Kenya 1976)
‘Usually I need to ask the school committee if I have to replace any equipment, but if I need something really essential like a new clock I can buy it straight away.’
A reminiscence from Uganda
An education officer friend of mine had occasion to visit a primary school on the outskirts of a small town.
The register page for Class I had forty-five spaces and there were forty-five children in the class.
Further investigation revealed another fifty Class I children cowering behind sacks in a food-store.
The following conversation is recorded:
Education Officer:
Headmaster — who are these?
Headmaster:
These, sir, are the etceteras.
CHILDREN IN SCHOOL
The pattern of enrolments in school exercises so much potential effect on the selection and ordering of material that it is surprising that it causes so little apparent concern to curriculum planners.
Because of the odd separations we make between qualitative and quantitative aspects of planning, enrolments tend to be regarded as the purview of the educational administrator.
Yet consider the potential effect upon curriculum planning of the following:
early or later age of entry
mixed or homogeneous age groups
high or low — drop-outs — repeating — transfers in from other schools
homogeneous or mixed language or ethnic groups
sex equality or sex imbalance
high or low numbers in class
high, low, regular or irregular attendance at school
A cruel generalisation, but probably justified, would be to suggest that the large majority of curricula in Africa are designed for an ideal situation — namely a uniform six-year-old entry, relatively homogeneous in age and culture, equal in sex and of average size (say 30–45 in a class) who attend regularly, repeat seldom and complete their primary course.
Yet such a situation seldom exists.
Even official statistics record wide variations, particularly in class sizes, sex distribution and drop-out rates.
The actual situation is a great deal more complicated for two reasons.
In the first place the conditions in schools hardly tally with what is  entered on forms submitted to the Ministry's Planning Division.
Ages tend to be entered initially as six, seven or eight mainly with a view to achieving an acceptable age of completion for secondary entry.
In fact in recent visits to schools I have been struck increasingly, not only by the ‘over-age’ children but by the considerable number of very young ones, conveniently parked in classrooms so that mothers could take employment, trade or visit.
Two other factors often at variance with official statistics are attendance and repeating.
Registers tend to be filled in, often to a pattern, sometimes in advance, whereas actual attendance, particularly in rural areas may be far more sporadic than indicated, while in certain communities (as with nomads such as the Kenya Turkana or Moslem communities suspicious of the corrupting influence of western schools on their children) it is not uncommon to find considerable numbers of pupils who are on the roll, but attend sporadically and unwillingly.
For such,(and I have very clear pictures of them sitting illiterate and uncomprehending in the back of classes), school attendance is merely a sort of ‘protection money’ to pacify inquisitive authorities.
At the other end of the scale one finds the hard pressed teacher or headmaster, besieged by parents, yet limited to a certain class size by government regulation (or even by the number of spaces in his register page).
Frequently he admits pupils without declaring them and very large classes result.
False figures for repeating exist, almost invariably, when governments attempt to insist on an automatic promotion rule or attempt to limit numbers of repeaters in upper classes.
Secondary entry is important enough for parents, especially of a particular social class, to encourage their children to repeat again and again, sometimes under assumed names, until they achieve their goals.
A second reason why official statistics give an imperfect picture of the real situation in primary classes is that they average out differences.
This applies particularly to class sizes which tend to vary dramatically between urban (high) and deep rural (low and uneven).
In the latter it is common to find small classes sharing a classroom, sometimes with a single teacher, sometimes with more than one but nearly always seated as a separate group with their own ‘territory’ and blackboard, for there exists a strange orthodoxy that a teacher with modest education and training ‘cannot be taught to handle more than one class at the same time’.
I have tried to give an indication of the very varied actual pattern of enrolment in schools.
To this we may add the variations in cognitive, linguistic and perceptual growth between children of different backgrounds indicated in my last section.
The picture I am trying to convey, and it is one which is borne on me with passionate intensity almost every time I enter a primary school class, is of rigid and often unsuitable instruments (the centralised curriculum plan, textbooks, methods of assessment) imposed in situations where they do not apply or where they apply only to a small number of individuals within a group.
The faces of the many others remain with me, the bored and the bewildered; those who lost the battle at Book 2 but who are confronting Book 4 ‘because it is there’; those who can mouth Book 4 to the teacher's satisfaction but do not understand the concepts in it; those who know Book 4 by heart already.
These situations point to two needs: firstly for a greater awareness and concern for a variety in learning groups together with a greater knowledge of what an individual learner can and cannot understand, and  secondly, for a degree of controlled flexibility in design and application of plans and materials for learning.
Both these concepts will be examined later in the book.
THE TEACHERS
National and local variations in education, training and experience between the teachers employed to implement school curricula are almost as great as between children themselves.
An obviously desirable situation is for a country to have a sufficiency of well educated and trained teachers working for reasonable lengths of time in areas where they are familiar with the people and their culture.
This ideal, as everyone knows, is far from being satisfied.
There are large numbers of untrained or lowly trained teachers and in certain situations, as in Nigeria and Kenya, percentages of untrained teachers have increased in the face of rapid rises in primary enrolments.
There are many teachers working out of their cultural contexts, and very frequent movement and transfer.
There is also a wide, wide disparity in the paper qualifications of teachers between different parts of the same country or between urban and rural areas.
Tables 1 and 2 show differences in the composition of the teacher force between seven African countries and the internal variations within two — Nigeria and Zambia.
But to base comparisons on statistics of teacher education and training would be extremely unwise.
The fact that a teacher has a secondary education and a framed certificate tells us a little about his potential, but practically nothing about his actual value in the classroom situation.
If he is drunken and disillusioned, owns a taxi or spends most of his time chasing higher academic qualifications with the express view of escaping from the job he is doing (and all this happens very frequently in practice), he will be of considerably less value to the children under his care than a man or woman with humbler qualifications but greater maturity, integrity and interest in children.
Thus if the potential competence of teachers is an important determinant of the actual curriculum in schools, their morale is an even greater one.
In his influential   book The Quality of Education in Developing Countries , C. E. Beeby advances a ‘hypothesis of the stages’ in which he argues that teachers' competence, flexibility and ability to innovate, depend largely on their level of education and training.
My own experience, backed up by that of field workers I have talked with and beginning to be supported by some research evidence suggests that other factors such as personal maturity and the will and opportunity to keep up to date are even more important.
Certainly no impression from visits to primary schools in Africa has been borne more strongly on me than the importance of providing opportunities for the professional growth and survival of teachers in schools.
For no-one would deny that before any growth and development of curriculum in schools is possible, it is necessary first for teachers to be physically present in the school they are employed in and second for them to be sufficiently interested at least to contemplate change.
While there are countless instances of cheerful competence in schools, there are many others where morale has dropped so low that even these two minimum conditions cannot be met.
At this level of crisis, details of content in the syllabus document — if ever anyone in the school could find it — are irrelevant.
In addition to the teachers themselves, many other people make up the human context in which the curriculum operates: supervisors, inspectors, administrators, managers and many more.
All are linked, in their own special way, with the business of selection and implementation and, in an ideal world, should have a common interest towards maintaining quality in schools.
Since, however, we are as we are, there are conflicts to resolve, lack of understanding, preoccupation with irrelevancies (mostly administrative ones) and at worst, disinterest and corruption.
But this in no way negates the importance of understanding the role which all these people play in the context of curriculum change, for while the picture of an obscurantist inspector or manager eager to discourage the innovative teacher is one which is often conjured up by teachers themselves as an excuse for inaction, it can be all too true.
In contrast one frequently meets cases where a local field worker through his initiative and enthusiasm has transformed the curriculum in schools in a local area.
Indeed it will be argued later in this book that it is at this level — the level of field support — that the greatest single power to achieve innovation may lie.
The right person — The right support
Francistown — Botswana (1975)
A young teacher (Class 3) has just been given a special award for the ‘best classroom’ in Francistown.
He is intelligent, sensitive with an inbred understanding of children — and untrained .
He enjoys support from an excellent headmistress in a school visited regularly by an inservice team based on the local teachers' college.
Waterloo — Sierra Leone (1975)
I visit without warning to find a happy and productive school — obviously due in great measure to the personality and competence of the headmistress.
I am introduced by her to ‘my best teacher’ and her class (Class 1).
She is a married woman of intelligence and maturity with twenty years' experience.
The class is excellent.
She is untrained .
The school is visited by a competent advisory service.
The headmistress and some of her staff co-operate in a local Science project, an association of some twenty schools which meets regularly to try out new ideas and share experiences.
Conversation with an optimist (1972)
Optimist
We're introducing New Mathematics into our primary schools.
We hope to develop a spirit of active enquiry in children and to replace rote memorisation.
Hugh Hawes
What are your average enrolments?
Optimist
Very high.
Many classes have eighty children to a single teacher.
Classrooms are often packed full.
Hugh Hawes
What is your equipment position?
Optimist
Very sad.
We lack furniture and essential books.
There is no apparatus and little material to make it out of.
Hugh Hawes
In these conditions are activity methods possible?
Optimist
Hardly possible.
The material context
At its most obvious this refers to the placement of the school in the natural or man-made environment and I have already commented on the vast variations which exist, from town to country; seashore to savannah, forest or mountain.
In two senses the rural environment currently puts children at a disadvantage.
In the first place it is notably less rich not only in human resources (for isn't education very much about people) but even in things like straight lines, angles or congruent objects.
Moreover country children often discover their syllabuses, materials, examinations, all tend to be framed by and for people from more prosperous environments.
Occasionally this is a result of lack of knowledge or lack of sensitivity on the part of urban, middle class curriculum workers, as in Kenya where an early version of the New Primary Approach for African Schools contained four ‘centres  of interest’: the Post Office, the railway station; the game park and the coast.
Yet in its essence the problem is inescapable.
A social studies programme must suggest the use of resources such as the market, the shop, the dispensary or the roadside, even though its makers may be aware that a very large number of deep rural schools have none of these resources at hand.
Mathematics or Language or Science programmes for young children must be accompanied by suggestions for the use of ‘waste’ materials such as cartons, empty milk tins, bottles and bottle tops even in the knowledge that in many areas these are impossible to come by or that articles such as tins or bottles when in very short supply acquire a cash value in communities.
But while dilution of a national curriculum to the lowest common denominator of the poor, isolated rural school is clearly ludicrous, the reality must be faced that poor rural schools exist in large numbers and that a curriculum policy needs to be framed with them in mind — which it very rarely is.
The material context of education also includes the buildings and furniture provided for children and teachers and the scale of books and equipment available to them.
At their poorest, buildings and furniture can be exceptionally restrictive.
1975 statistics from Lesotho reveal the following figures: Schools in Cameroon and in rural areas in Sierra Leone and Ethiopia are unlikely to fare better, while there is no country in Africa without substantial numbers of schools where physical conditions inhibit any but the most basic instruction.
At the other end of the scale there are those schools, and they are numerous, where children enjoy the benefit of an adequate weatherproof classroom, something to sit and something to write on.
In certain areas — Botswana, Lagos State and Ashanti come to mind — such conditions will be available for most children.
Elsewhere one may expect to find a variety, from the very adequate to the very bleak.
There is a similar wide variety in the scale of teaching and learning equipment provided, which can be explained by a number of factors: the financial provision made to schools by central or local authorities, the type and efficiency of supply and distribution mechanism (bureaucratic centralised distribution systems seem universally inefficient), differences in attitudes and capabilities of communities to help in the provision of services or equipment to schools or individual children, the initiative and morale of teachers, the richness or poverty of the school environment.
My own recollection of school visits amply bear out these differences.
I have found full cupboards and empty ones, children with books and children without; schools and classrooms where the resources of the community have been mobilised, where well stocked classroom shops have been organised using packets, wrappers and tins collected by children, where great varieties of natural and man-made  objects have been collected for children's use in science and mathematics — and schools with none of these things.
I have seen schools where children drew and made clay models, gathered and displayed local crafts collected, made and used local musical instruments — and schools as bare and empty as any prison cell.
I have seen schools with their own livestock — chickens, goats and rabbits; and schools where the only livestock in evidence were the bats in the roof and the cockroaches in the latrine.
With such a wide variety — and the variations exist within as well as between countries, it is difficult, again, to make useful generalisations about the material context.
Certain issues, however, seem general enough and important enough to warrant discussion.
The first regards the priority accorded to providing an adequate minimum scale of equipment to schools.
This issue becomes most significant in countries which are very poor or where school enrolments have increased very suddenly.
In these instances it is not uncommon to find a government's revenue (as in Lesotho) almost totally committed to paying its teacher force — hence nothing left over to equip the schools; in which case it is worth asking whether the whole costly mechanism of providing school education has not come to an unprofitable full-stop just before the only point where it can be productive — enabling children to learn.
For a child without reading books cannot learn to read adequately, and I have met many children without reading books and many who could not read.
One common solution to this problem, which avoids the politically undesirable alternative of imposing or reimposing fees, is to rely on parents to provide equipment, just as they are very widely expected to help in the construction and sometimes the furnishing of schools.
This principle of self-help, of ‘harambee’ when applied at school level, may emphasise local differences, may lead to some difficulties over matters of replacement and repair, but, because it emphasises the community's participation in the education of its children, must be accounted a social as well as a financial good.
Yet it is very much less easy to defend the policy of expecting parents to buy their children's books.
Not only does this increase costs and emphasise differences between richer and poorer children but it also contributes to a very inflexible and inefficient distribution of learning materials, since under this system ‘shared’ material is never bought — only class texts — and it is by no means uncommon to find that as a result a class may end up with only two or three books at its disposal, all in multiple copies.
For allocation of resources is an area where conservatism of approach ('each child must have a textbook') tends to combine with administrative convenience and often with the commercial interests of publishers and suppliers to ensure that limited financial resources available to schools are not used to their best advantage.
Frequently, moreover, there appears to be little concern that advice should be available to the teacher or headmaster, to ensure that he uses what few resources he has to best effect.
This lack of expertise sometimes seems to apply also to the maintenance and storage of equipment, a very essential part of the material context for curriculum development.
It is all too common to find schools without stores, classrooms without cupboards, books without covers and a quite alarming rate of materials loss in schools often bearing little relationship to the official ‘life expectancy’ of materials on which the cost of replacements are calculated.
This is not for want of official concern by education commissions, curriculum projects and national ministries.
It appears to stem rather from a lack of awareness and concern at a more local level — a very basic question of attitudes.
Conversation piece (Uganda 1969)
Hugh Hawes
Why is your school so well equipped — when your neighbours have so little?
Headmaster
Some headmasters have Voices in the Education Office.
Hugh Hawes
Have you a Voice?
Headmaster
Of .Books or uniform (Kenya)
In theory, Peter Osogo's Class 3 schooling is free.
In practice his father is faced with a formidable list of charges, a building fund, a sports fund, a book fee and a uniform fee.
Now the headmaster is insisting that every child should possess a pair of lace-up shoes.
Reluctantly the shoes are bought, for who would wish their son to attract comment for not wearing what others wear.
But no such social constraints exist over possession of books, and the new reading book Peter had asked to buy — that had to be sacrificed.
Peter has to be content with the single class reader provided by the school, which he already knows by heart.
He attempts reading it upside down, which temporarily relieves the boredom.
How long does it last?
Official policies, in their delusion, often calculate a three year book life.
Consider the realities.
Alice Kamara (9) attends a rural school in Western Sierra Leone.
Apart from her exercise books Alice possesses just two textbooks, an English and a Mathematics reader.
These she carries to and from school daily in a distressed plastic bag and uses continually.
The books are paper covered and not very well bound.
Both at home and at school they usually have to remain on the floor and Alice doesn't always remember to put them back in the bag.
The floor isn't clean and neither, often, are Alice's fingers.
Miraculously, however, the books hold together, with the loss of only a few pages, until the end of the year.
The administrative context
Schools must also be seen within a system of administration (usually centralised) conforming to certain patterns and practices of control and within a hierarchical structure often difficult to change.
Certain instruments like terms and timetables are familiar and institutionalised.
In particular, transition from primary to secondary school is usually governed by a highly organised examination system understood and accepted by administration, teachers and parents alike.
The effect of this system on both the official and actual curriculum in schools is examined in later chapters.
The historical context
Whatever new curricula are introduced into a school the influence of educational traditions remain as much a source of continuity and stability as they are of unacceptable ‘educational conservatism’.
The strength and nature of these traditions has been brilliantly analysed elsewhere and we need only remind ourselves here of their importance and their diversity.
For in English-speaking African countries there can be found many strands and many contradictions.
In each case we may trace from them important effects on learning in schools today on the curriculum plans, on policy and programmes for teacher training and, most significant, on the attitudes of teachers themselves and of those who train them.
In the briefest analysis the following may be identified as particularly significant.
INFLUENCES OF  INDIGENOUS EDUCATION
These are evident in attitudes to authority and in learning styles used or preferred.
Oral explanations and discussion may convey a meaning and a depth lacking in written explanation which may tend to be accepted at an uncritical and somewhat superficial level.
There is some evidence that the desire to find one rather than alternative answers to a problem may have its origins in patterns of  indigenous education.
RELIGIOUS AND MISSION INFLUENCES
The styles of learning in Koranic schools and catechist classes have predictable effects on the way children learn in school, but the missionary tradition in education is responsible for so much else besides,(over a long period of the history of formal education the great majority of schools were missionary schools).
On the credit side there must be recorded the conscious emphasis on the school as a transmitter of moral values and as an instrument in building up the attitudes necessary for an active citizen: co-operation, integrity, industry and many more.
On its debit side there is sometimes observable a certain strange ordering of priorities in moral codes and very often the systematic and conscious neglect of many aspects of African culture, particularly that great cultural legacy, music and the dance.
It is exceptionally ironic still to find children in a culture which has fathered half the popular music in the modern world, condemned to drone away in their music lessons over nineteenth-century hymn tunes, with dancing relegated to a few minutes at the conclusion of the physical education lessons.
‘Not cricket’
‘It is notable that Native ministers are often the most emphatic in their opposition to Native amusements…
Their convictions are sometimes the result of their intimate knowledge of the degenerating influences of Native amusements, but often have their source in a narrow conception of recreation imported to them by the missionaries.'
Two points of view
‘If more intelligent natives were taught to read, write and speak English, and to acquire a sufficient knowledge of Arithmetic in English they would be able to occupy many of the minor posts in the service of the Administration.’
‘There is a very proper feeling abroad against mere book-learning as a complete course of school education.
This is felt to be an inadequate preparation for the work of life, because it tends to produce a super-abundant supply of an indifferent clerkly class and to create and foster a distaste for agriculture and the handicrafts, which are more indispensable to the country and are better calculated to promote independence of character.
INFLUENCES FROM PATTERNS OF COLONIAL EDUCATION
It has been frequently noted that two separate streams run through the history of the development of African primary school curricula in the last fifty years of the colonial period.
On the one hand we may trace the influence of the theories of ‘adaptation to environment’, a natural extension of the policy of indirect rule, argued in the influential reports of the Phelps Stokes Commissions in the early nineteen-twenties and brilliantly summarised in the memorandum of the Colonial Office's Advisory Committee on Native Education,Educational Policy in British Tropical Africa , 1925 — hence the school gardens (or the remains of them), the handwork, the needlework, the local History and Geography programmes and the ‘vernacular’ syllabuses.
On the other hand there was the demand, often locally generated, usually far more enthusiastically supported by parents and teachers, for an education which would produce a competent and reasonably docile junior civil servant, a clerk, storekeeper, interpreter or later an assistant this or junior that to work under a white colonial officer.
Hence the emphasis on English, on Arithmetic, on the very desirable virtues of neatness and punctuality, on examinations and class order.
Hence the moulding of that most deplorable product the ‘humble boy’ and the strengthening of what I had always referred to as ‘the civil service mentality’until I encountered Michael Manley's much more telling phrase the ‘psychology of dependence’.
BORROWING FROM BRITAIN
Linked with colonial traditions we may trace the conscious borrowing of contents, practices and methods from metropolitan education systems (in this case Britain).
Two contrasting reasons exist for these importations.
On the one hand there were those introduced by British or British trained educationists because they appeared at the time to represent the ‘best’ education (though naturally criteria for judging quality varied widely).
On other occasions specific contents or practices were introduced following demands by nationals themselves because they represented a type of education practised in Britain or in ‘European’ schools in a segregated education system like Kenya.
Thus they assumed all the glamour and promise that forbidden fruit always holds.
But in either case there was a tendency for such borrowings, whether they were syllabuses, textbooks or examinations to become fossilised and  consequently to represent a historical rather than a current picture of British educational practice.
To a certain degree such borrowings have continued, often prompted by the same underlying sense of insecurity which seeks the new or the modern uncritically rather than as a result of any conscious selection of educational objectives or examination of alternatives.
SURVIVAL TEACHING
A final set of influences come from that oral tradition, I call it ‘survival teaching’, handed down by one hard pressed disillusioned teacher to another in the face of long hours, poor conditions and low recognition.
These traditions, and they are very strong, all contribute towards maintaining authority, reducing pressures, saving time, achieving passable examination results.
They lead to a formal, didactic, teacher-centred approach, they operate with devastating force upon teachers newly trained in ‘activity methods’, but in the tough, bleak conditions which obtain in some schools they may well represent the only possible alternative for a struggling teacher to adopt.
Issues relating to curriculum context
This brief discussion of the nature and importance of educational context in curriculum change would appear to lead up towards discussion of two major issues.
First, what do we need to find out, who may be involved in the process and how?
Second, after we have got all this information what are we going to do with it?
INVESTMENT IN RESEARCH AND SURVEY
Two separate ‘orders’ of information may be required, though we should guard against closing our categories.
The first is the more sophisticated ‘university research type’ evidence, much of it psychological and sociological, involving not only what Tyler called ‘studies of the learners’(their social background, cognitive, perceptual and linguistic development, attitudes and aspirations, health and nutrition) but similarly studies of the teachers who teach them and the communities which support the schools.
The more evidence becomes available, the closer we lie to answering those key questions: what content may profitably be introduced in what manner and at what speed?
Second and equally important, for there is no ‘first’ and ‘second’class research, is that body of information about schools — you might call it a ‘professional inventory’, which is as important to a curriculum planner as statistics are to a ministry planning officer.
I refer to information regarding school buildings and equipment, to relevant financial information, to details of the type, number, education and training of teachers in an area, to languages understood and spoken, to the availability or scarcity of local resources.
It would be wrong to conceive of these two ‘orders’ as being respectively University and Ministry based, for both types of information may be collected at a number of levels including school and teacher's centre level.
Nothing is more important than teachers finding out more about their own educational contexts.
Recognition of the need to invest in both types of research has been slow to materialise possibly because other pressures tended to shut it out, but also because of the remarkably esoteric image which University research workers have given themselves.
Nevertheless in recent years considerably more interest has been aroused and in at least some cases governments and international agencies are showing themselves willing to put real money into research.
AN INSTITUTE FOR APPLIED RESEARCH — CAMEROON
In one country at least— the Cameroon — a research institute, The Institute for the Reform of Primary Education at Buea, was set up in 1974 with reasonable resources in terms of personnel (a team of twelve to fifteen nationals and experts has been employed), adequate funding jointly from Government and UNESCO/UNDP, and in its initial stages a sensible time scale to work to.
The initial aim of the Institute at Buea has been to assemble reliable information on the most appropriate way of preparing pupils and school leavers for integration into the life and work of communities.
Such information is seen as a preliminary to the trial of materials and the subsequent, final design and implementation of new curricula.
There has been a familiar aura of UNESCO optimism about the plans of the project and it remains to be seen how far the recommendations of its Report on the Reform of Primary Education issued in 1977 will be accepted by the Government.
But the work so far attempted is fascinating.
There are four teams working closely together: two in environmental studies concerned respectively with village technology and agricultural and social aspects, a third on Mathematics and the fourth on Language.
The team concerned with Environmental Studies, agricultural and social aspects (I refer to it somewhat unwillingly by its official title) made a random sample of visits throughout the two English speaking provinces of Cameroon.
They interviewed teachers, headmasters, parents, chiefs and their counsellors, local farmers and final year pupils in schools in an attempt to bring out a picture of the local and school environment and of needs and aspirations of young people and adults.
The wealth of information collected and most ably synthesised in the project's report was used as evidence on which to base suggestions for possible key topics round which teaching could be based.
Since different communities with different needs were identified — from remote, isolated environments to well-served rural and semi urban ones, separate community-orientated activities were suggested to suit each of these.
Figure A reproduces the suggestions offered for ‘poorly served rural communities’.
The village technology team initially used teachers' training college students to gain preliminary information on crafts and skills available in the two provinces.
It visited chiefs, and worked through them to find out about local resources, tools, apprenticeship patterns and market locations.
This provided background information which was extended through visits.
Visits were made to fifty villages throughout the two provinces and included interviews with school teachers, village heads and local craftsmen together with personnel at craft stores and co-operatives, and a very large number of other individuals and groups such as parents, prospective employers and education personnel.
Crafts and techniques Identified In Northwest and Southwest Provinces of Cameroon, 1975/6 
The project then examined each of the crafts identified to show how they could be correlated with teaching in other school subjects, in particular, Language, Mathematics and Science.
Not surprisingly the analysis revealed a large number of ways in which such correlations could be made.
From discussion and interviews with these people, the team collected information on the skills and crafts of the people, the tools used (local and foreign), the work procedure used, market demands, training obtained by craftsmen and the training offered, conditions of training and apprenticeship, the cost of the article produced, the time taken and the profit made from the sale.
From all this information the team drew up a matrix of crafts, materials and local resources, analysed technologies applied locally and attempted to order skills development in level of difficulty and in relation to social custom as a preliminary to curriculum design.
Teams in Mathematics and English were concerned with finding out what knowledge and what concepts children and teachers have and can master at different levels and of assessing the strengths and limitations of the environment and the cultural traditions within that environment for teaching and materials production in these two areas.
Whatever action is taken on the final report of the Buea project (and I have fears that the heavy reliance on expatriate experts in the project and in drawing up the report may not contribute to its being widely read and followed in Cameroon) there can be no question that the project marks an important landmark in curriculum planning in Africa.
The importance of situational analysis as a preliminary to curriculum design has been recognised, investment has been made and important questions are being asked.
In the sister institute in the French-speaking Cameroon set up somewhat earlier at Yaounde, workers embarked more conventionally straight into a programme of materials production and were able to announce confidently that by March 1973, ‘about 47 tons of textbooks and 33 tons of documents have been produced’, but you cannot profitably assess the success of a curriculum by weight; many megatons of unprofitable material have been produced (and will still be produced) all over Africa just because no preliminary study had  been made to ascertain whether children and parents wanted them, could afford them, read them or understand them.
OTHER GOVERNMENT AND INTERNATIONAL INITIATIVES
Elsewhere in Africa, national and international concern towards establishing a basis of research information for curriculum decision grows slowly and fitfully, but noticeably, nevertheless.
Within ministries there is an increasing disposition to mount surveys into actual conditions in schools and opinions of parents and community leaders.
In Lesotho a four man primary curriculum research unit has been set up and has undertaken a sample survey of primary schools under four headings (i) The physical environment;(ii) the curriculum;(iii) methods of learning and teaching leading to (iv) recommendations.
The report presents the truth about conditions in what is, probably the poorest (financially) of all the countries I have visited and makes compelling reading (if you like horror stories).
Research sections have been set up at the Institutes of Education in Kenya and Sierra Leone and there have been important regional conferences on educational evaluation (at Dar es Salaam in April 1975) and on the growth of scientific and mathematical concepts in East African children (Nairobi, September 1974).
A small international centre for educational evaluation at Ibadan has been set up (and will be described further in my next chapter) and another on child development is being planned in Nairobi.
But for all these little awakenings and small scale investments, it is impossible to pretend that the volume of interest or commitment is anything like what, on sober reflection, we realise it should be, nor that any proper partnership has been achieved between universities who should have the expertise and interest to conduct and co-ordinate research, and ministries of education who should be increasingly aware of what they don't know and need to know.
One apparent stumbling block to mounting more research is that we lack qualified people to do it or the resources to employ or deploy them, but as so often, a wider and less conventional look at the problem reveals one possible solution.
For rapid changes are taking place in the structure and content of teacher education and, with it, a massive increase in part-time school-based schemes for initial and further training together with a more extensive use of ‘sandwich’ type training especially for higher grades of teachers.
Currently there is considerable discussion about the possibility of harnessing the resources provided by mature students who attend full or part-time diploma, associateship and master's courses and who write ‘long studies’ in part fulfilment of these courses.
What if such studies could be written on subjects and to designs jointly devised by ministries, colleges and universities?
The possibilities opened up are exceptionally exciting and realisable provided certain strange notions of academic freedom (in this case often amounting to a student fishing desperately around for an ‘original’ and totally useless subject like the history of his old school), can be avoided.
In fact the  channelling of reports and dissertations towards educationally productive goals is merely part of a wider and far more important issue, that of establishing a new climate of opinion among teachers and those who train them  which regards enquiry about the learners and the environment in which they learn as an important part of a teacher's professional life, which seeks to develop interests and provide skills for them to do so as part of their training and retraining and which rewards initiatives undertaken in college and subsequently.
AFTER RESEARCH WHAT?
Hitherto such emphasis and recognition have not been current, nor, I believe, has there been sufficiently widespread recognition of the need to spread the information we have to those who should use it — it may therefore be appropriate to end this chapter with a few rude questions.
I How often are relevant descriptions of educational context made available and studied by curriculum workers as a basis for their decision making? 2 How often are staff seminars on these issues held in university departments, teachers' colleges or curriculum centres (or are all the workers always too ‘busy’ to attend them)? 3 Do syllabuses and textbooks used in colleges or universities adequately reflect our considerable current knowledge about the educational context in Africa — particularly our knowledge about children?
Or are we still largely dependent on British and American models?
When I look back over my own experience, I find these questions embarrassing.
I wonder whether this feeling is shared by any of my readers?
PLANNING
Strategies for curriculum planning and development
Pressures towards change
THE PROCESSES INVOLVED
Curriculum changes and the planning necessary to achieve them originate at a number of points: in the cabinet, in the ministry of education, in the curriculum project or in the school; yet in every instance six similar processes are involved:
1
Gathering basic information about the context in which the changes are to take place and about their feasibility.
For unless we know where we are we cannot plan a course of action.
2
Deciding aims and objectives .
For, as the old Jewish proverb has it, ‘if you don't know where you are going, any road will take you there’.
3
Planning a strategy for change .
For resources in manpower, materials and time must be correctly deployed.
4
The process of curriculum development which involves devising the material and trying it out.
5
Its final implementation in schools with learners.
6
At every stage a process of evaluation takes place.
Do we have sufficient information on which to base change?
Are our aims and objectives sensible and realistic?
Is the strategy sensible and workable; can it be afforded?
Is the process of curriculum development efficient; is it working?
How well and how consistently is the implementation of curricular plans being achieved?
There are many such questions to be asked and answered.
In some degree, all these processes take place wherever a curriculum changes.
What varies, and varies dramatically, is the conscious effort with which they are identified and undertaken.
The strength and potential of the modern concern for curriculum development lies in the fact that we now realise how important it is to undertake these processes, and in a logical sequence.
In this chapter I look back over responses to the challenges of curriculum planning and development in Africa in the ‘sixties and ‘seventies.
With the benefit of fifteen years’ experience and from the security of a university in Britain, it is possible to pronounce with considerable confidence upon what should have happened; to comment owlishly on how untidy and illogical were the processes employed, how more information should have been spelt out with more precision, how more evaluation should have been undertaken sooner, how unreal were our  expectations in terms of how quickly and how evenly changes can effectively take place.
In making such judgments one is in much the same position as a journalist describing a battle after it had taken place from the bar of a hotel, for the pressures in the 'sixties were very great and very immediate and those of us in the Ministries of Education responded to them as best we knew how.
INTERNAL PRESSURES IN THE 'FIFTIES AND 'SIXTIES
Self-government and independence came to the British colonial territories in Africa in the late 'fifties and early 'sixties — with them all the internal pressures towards reshaping a school system and its curriculum towards new national goals and aspirations.
Foremost of these was the maintenance and strengthening of a sense of national unity with its implications for language and the content of history and geography syllabuses.
Certain countries, Ghana first and Tanzania considerably later, developed their own particular political creeds and naturally saw the primary school as an important instrument to lay the basis of particular attitudes and values.
But other internal pressures were most strong, on the one hand towards providing a type of education both in quantity and quality which ‘we had been denied’, on the other towards meeting a need for high level manpower which the authority of the international planners then recognised as paramount.
The effect of the former set of pressures can be seen first in the ‘fifties and especially in West Africa in a series of attempts, all politically inspired and none of them entirely successful, to introduce universal primary education — with all the over-extension of resources consequent on such a decision — and second in the popular pressures felt everywhere towards adopting a curricular content similar to that in ‘European schools’.
I can recall the phrase ‘being left behind’(whatever it meant) being used far more frequently than it is at present.
Pressures towards manpower production meant in effect, that demands from higher levels of the education system fed down towards the primary curriculum and there was a certain rather questionable pyramid philosophy built on the premise that ‘many are called but few are chosen’.
Hence dropouts were to be accepted as a fact of life and the curriculum designed particularly with the needs of higher levels in mind.
In some ill-explained way, manpower needs were held also to be closely linked with a shortage of mathematics and science graduates so that emphasis on strengthening and ‘modernising’ mathematics and science curricula at all levels was strong.
EXTERNAL PRESSURES
Such were the internal pressures for curriculum change in the ‘sixties and they were very important.
They were further reinforced by two sets of external pressures of almost equal strength.
The first of these was the intense interest in, and massive support for, subject-based curriculum change particularly in Mathematics and Science which originated in the late nineteen-fifties in the United States, largely as a result of a realisation of the enormous gaps which were opening between what  university research workers were examining and what schools taught, between the demands of a computer based technology and the realities of a curriculum designed in the nineteenth century to serve a nation of shopkeepers.
From these programmes which were largely for secondary schools, activities multiplied and interest spread quickly from America to Britain, from secondary down to primary, from subject initiatives towards the wider theory of curriculum development.
What has been described as the curriculum revolution was well under way.
Now, like all revolutionaries, its earliest protagonists possessed a certain prophetic fervour and the time when this fervour was at its height coincided with a time when, following independence, aid to Africa had been vastly increased, with the usual mixed motives.
Hence there were a considerable number of able and committed prophets around at a time when the gospel they were spreading — a gospel of modernity — was one which their auditors were anxious to hear.
These pressures I have described, both internal and external, invited change in almost every aspect of the curriculum, but in many respects they were also conflicting.
The demands of higher level science and mathematics were often irrelevant to the needs of mass education.
The ‘curriculum denied us’ was often a European centred curriculum.
Potential conflicts in language policies were already apparent.
There was an underlying tension between curricular objectives which derived from traditions and conditions in capitalist and highly individualist societies and the goals of governments intent on imposing the discipline they considered necessary for nation building.
The ‘four cornerstones’ of the Malawi Congress Party: unity, loyalty, obedience and discipline, match ill with the ‘scientific spirit of enquiry’which the country's 1966 syllabus announces as the guiding principle for primary education syllabus change.
Syllabus change
In the period just before or just after their independence many countries embarked, quite naturally, on primary school syllabus changes.
The Uganda syllabus, typical of many, will serve as a profitable example.
Uganda became independent in October 1962 and an education commission report followed in 1963.
Primary subject syllabuses were reviewed and recast during 1963 by subject panels largely composed of experienced teacher trainers and inspectors, moderated and in some degree co-ordinated by an advisory committee, edited in the Inspectorate and issued in 1965.
The syllabus reflected the good sense and experience of panel members but its shortcomings were typical of its time.
Aims of subject syllabuses were very generalised, no attempt having been made to isolate any specific terminal or intermediate objectives in respect of knowledge, skills or attitudes to be developed.
Co-ordination between subjects was lacking and the whole overloaded and exceptionally ambitious in scope requiring, moreover, a scale of expenditure well in excess of schools' ability to pay for it.
There was virtually no trial or possibility of modification of any of the subject syllabuses.
They were sent to schools and teachers were expected to teach them.
New content and emphasis is to be found in all subjects of the syllabus but  radical changes (most of them very typical of other syllabuses of the time) included: earlier and more intensive teaching of English, the teaching of more Mathematics earlier (and less computational arithmetic), the localisation of History and Civics syllabuses (but with world affairs added in the upper classes), the introduction of a Science syllabus, with considerable time weighing, based on an ‘experimental approach’ and intended to integrate contents and approaches originally taught separately as Nature Study, Rural Science, General Science, Health Education and Gardening, and a revised, expanded, and considerably more africanised Music syllabus.
International projects for curriculum change (subject based)
During the years that the Uganda syllabus panels were meeting, the Lake Victoria Hotel, Entebbe was chosen as the venue for the first in a series of international workshops which heralded a new approach to curriculum development, a new dimension for pan-African co-operation and whose eventual product, the Entebbe Mathematics, proved to be possibly the most influential curriculum project yet to be launched in English — speaking Africa.
The ‘Entebbe Maths’ is the popular name for the African Mathematics Programme which in turn is part of the African Education Programme (AEP) of the American Education Development Center (EDC) formerly Educational Services Incorporated.
Educational Services Incorporated had emerged in the 1950's as a leading agent for curricular reform in the United States, and its development owed much to the concern and dynamism of some of the country's foremost scientists and mathematicians.
It was the personal initiative of one of these, Jerrold Zacharias, Professor of Physics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, which was directly responsible for the inception of the AEP.
He had attended an International Conference on Science and the Advancement of New States at Rehovot in Israel and there met the Rev. Solomon Caulker, then Vice-Principal of Fourah Bay College.
Caulker had been deeply concerned (and I am convinced rightly so) that the conference concentrated its time and discussion on the provision of sophisticated and expensive technology for developing countries, ignoring the need to lay foundations in schools for fundamental growth of knowledge, skills and attitudes to understand them.
Discussions between the two men led to the organisation of an important and influential summer study in African Education at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1961 (fifty-two participants attended, including fourteen from African states, a larger number of American academics and a few British).
The conference split up into working parties including groups for mathematics, science, language, social studies with the humanities, and teacher training.
From the discussions of the conference and its working parties and with considerable United States Government and Ford Foundation aid, the AEP and its various curriculum projects were born.
I have included this somewhat lengthy account of the inception of the AEP since it does a good deal to explain some of the subsequent strengths and weaknesses of  these highly influential programmes.
They were motivated by real, sensible and human concern by academics of the highest standing and reputation — Americans like Bruner, Zacharias, Morrison; Africans like Porter, Abubakkar, Dyasi, Kajubi.
At the same time, however, discussion tended to be dominated by certain sets of people; by academics, by Americans, by mathematicians and scientists, by people with little experience of younger children or of the teachers who normally guide them, by scholars whose passionate concern for their own disciplines and the elegance of thought within them may have outweighed their concern for the school curriculum and the balanced development of school children.
The exceptional quality of the participants certainly enabled the curriculum workers (or most of them anyway) to adapt to their environment as programmes developed — but their heredity kept showing through.
Three curriculum projects originating from the African Education Programme are briefly considered in this chapter, the African Mathematics Programme, The African Primary Science Programme (APSP) and the African Social Studies Programme (ASSP).
In the short term, at any rate, the first has proved the most influential.
THE AFRICAN MATHEMATICS PROGRAMME
The stated aim of the programme was ‘to improve the quality of mathematics teaching and to develop in each participating country a nucleus of people knowledgeable in Mathematics and capable of undertaking improvement of Mathematics curriculum’.
This has been attempted in two distinct phases, the first from 1962–69 with the initial development of the ‘Entebbe’ materials and the second from 1970 onwards with its adaptation and implementation through the activities of the West African Regional Mathematics Programme (WARMP) and the East African Regional Mathematics Programme.
Yet to characterise the development in this fashion is too simplistic since at different times there have been offshoots, modifications and borrowings from different countries and even within them.
In the first ‘stage’ yearly writing workshops were held from 1962, first at Entebbe and subsequently elsewhere.
Production of materials from them was exceptionally prolific.
By 1969 a complete textbook series from primary one to primary seven (pupils' books and accompanying teacher's guides); a manual for teacher training,Basic Concepts in Mathematics ; and two alternative series for secondary schools had been produced, providing in all 67 volumes of prototype materials.
But the quantity of these early materials was not entirely matched by their quality and relevance.
They still remained somewhat too close to the American School Mathematics Study Group materials upon which they had been modelled.
They were not derived from any significant analysis of aims or objectives in relation to the development of learners, nor based on a sufficiency of basic knowledge about the pupils and teachers and schools who would have to use them.
Attempts to test and modify materials (although included in the programme) were perfunctory since there was a tightly structured writing and production schedule to meet.
The fact that the materials which emerged, for all their faults, were usable in schools reflects the hard work and experience of the writers, but as many of the participants  themselves readily admitted the original ‘Entebbe’ books needed considerable modification — and the further down the primary age range one travelled the more they needed it.
In certain cases they never received this modification and found their way almost unaltered into school programmes, as in Lagos State, Nigeria.
More typically in the ‘second stage’ they formed the basis for local modification and adaptation in the West African Regional Mathematics Programmes based in Accra and including Ghana, Sierra Leone and Liberia, and the East African Mathematics Programme for Kenya and Ethiopia.
In these they were subject to varying degrees of revision and improvement, yet retained a number of the shortcomings resulting from their initial hurried drafts.
Chief among these, I would argue, are a too heavy reliance on language, particularly descriptive terminology, a constant preoccupation with classroom and textbook centred examples at the expense of using the rich mathematical resources in an environment, and a sense of rigid, logical class by-class progression resulting probably from the original division into year-based writing groups.
As the years have gone by, much doubt has been cast on the approaches even by people closely involved in them.
But once foundations are laid it is very, very difficult to do anything but modify a programme and the original structure always shows through.
In both the first stages of the African Mathematics Programmes and the Regional Programmes which followed it, very considerable investment was made in both initial and in-service teacher training and international ‘Institutes’ designed to promote a cadre of university staff, teacher trainers and inspectors capable of carrying the momentum of the project.
The fact that in the event the volume of training proved insufficient, relates (as I shall argue later) to the whole issue of priorities in teacher education and to the relationship between expectations in curriculum reform and means available.
But no subject received more attention than Mathematics and no curriculum project then or since has received such massive support as the Entebbe programme and its successors.
In terms of adoption in syllabus and recommended materials, the success has been phenomenal.
In five countries, all schools now use materials directly derived from the AEP.
In Nigeria until very recently it has been very strongly reflected in the national syllabus guidelines and materials or derivatives are widely used at state level.
In other countries considerable indirect influence is apparent, particularly in teacher education programmes.
Moreover, the international co-operation originally envisaged by the fathers of EDC is much in evidence and that ‘nucleus of people knowledgeable in Mathematics curriculum’ is already in being in some countries.
Personally, I have some very strong reservations about the apparent success of the ‘Entebbe programme’ and other parallel new Mathematics programmes of the ‘sixties.
I believe that the very speed at which they have been absorbed into the school system indicates an uncritical acceptance of the package because it is new and modern and fashionable and that there has been little serious examination of which aspects are relevant and which are not.
I believe that there has been too much attention to ordering of content — which is an easy job — and too little in considering the process — which is a very difficult one.
Consequently, more often than not we have exchanged old rote for new.
Lastly I fear that because the Mathematics programmes came first and were so well organised and established, with the neat sequential task of curriculum development so easy to define (despite its obvious size), there may have been a tendency to concentrate scarce resources upon an item which, on sober reflection, I believe now to be a lowish priority in the primary curriculum.
But these are thoughts for 1978.
The ‘Entebbe Maths’ in the ‘sixties and for the ‘sixties was a success story and one which laid the foundation for interest and expertise in curriculum development not only in Mathematics but in other subjects as well.
Preface to an APSP Unit ‘Juba Beach’(developed in Sierra Leone)
‘During the months of January and February my class six children studied the beaches and sea at Juba.
This book is a collection of writings, drawings and photographs of what they discovered.
‘As a teacher I have observed that children truly learn when they try to solve questions which they themselves ask.
In order for children to ask questions they need a diversity of materials to arouse their curiosity and a sense of freedom to question and explore their own potential.
For my school, the beaches provide the materials.
But it doesn't matter whether it's a beach or a river or an upland farm or a village market: the children will still want to ask questions and find out.
Whatever is near the school the children can study, and because it is near the school and the children's homes it is important.
‘I hope the following pages show that the general topic of beaches and sea integrated many experiences of learning.
The children found and observed a wide variety of animals.
They examined rocks and shells and sand.
They tasted and tested water for salt content.
They counted waves and the flow of rivers and talked to fishermen.
The challenges were without limit.
‘The children knew much about the beach environment before they began their study.
The events of this unit encouraged them to find answers to questions.
They wanted to learn and because of this they used and developed their skills — they measured, weighed, compared and counted, they kept notes and discussed their findings.
For me, their own evaluations and this record book tells more about the progress of the children than any written examination I might have given them.
‘Most important, the children had the satisfaction of discovering things on their own.
Their discoveries built their confidence to look  further into what is around them.
This book is the result of the children's looking and experimenting, a continuous inquiry into their environment.’
THE AFRICAN PRIMARY SCIENCE PROGRAMME (APSP) AND THE SCIENCE EDUCATION PROGRAMME FOR AFRICA (SEPA)
The second of the AEP programmes was radically different in both philosophy and structure from the first.
The philosophy of the African Primary Science Programme derives from the experimental American curriculum projects such as the Physical Science Study Committee (PSSC) but the initial goals set at the MIT conference in 1961 indicate that considerable thought was given to needs and conditions in Africa.
The prime goal of the programme was to help develop processes of scientific thinking in children.
It was not sufficient to describe the chain of cause and effect nor only to observe it.
Wherever possible the pupil would intervene with his own thought, his own hands and his own will to learn.
The following criteria for selection of content were also set:
I
Wherever facts are presented they should be discoverable by the student.
2
Facts selected should be of critical importance to understanding of a principle.
3
Content should help to show how science proceeds through a method of discovery.
4
It must be cheap to do, cheap to find out, economical in time as well as money.
Following some preliminary work at Nsukka, Nigeria — the APSP was formally established in 1965, a preliminary conference held in Kano and initial writing workshops in Entebbe (1965), Dar es Salaam (1966) and Akosombo (Ghana, 1967).
Both the pilot work at Nsukka and the outputs of the writing workshops owed a great deal in style and organisation to the EDC'S American Elementary Science Study.
Like it, the basis for development was the ‘unit’— an enquiry based topic which might be used in any order and at more than one level.
Prototype units were designed at the international workshops and discussed and modified in the field for the APSP was far more decentralised than the Mathematics programme.
Science Curriculum Development Centres were established in Ghana, Ethiopia, Kenya, Malawi, Nigeria, Liberia, Sierra Leone and Uganda.
These could test and modify units designed at international workshops (or by other centres) or initiate work of their own and present it for international criticism, modification and subsequent diffusion to other countries.
Certain aspects of centres' work may have been less successful than others (there was a considerable and unproductive stress on making inefficient ‘cheap’ material such as bead microscopes) and some centres like Nsukka, Nairobi, Domasi and Njala were more active than others but the overall record  in terms of creation of exciting relevant material based on children's experience is indeed impressive.
Table 3 shows a list of units and details of their later modification at national level.
From 1969 the direction and administration of programmes was handed over to an African organisation (SEPA) with its headquarters in Accra, though training for Science Educators is offered under its auspices at Njala, Sierra Leone.
SEPA'S role was originally seen as a clearing house for exchanging ideas and information about science curriculum development and as a means of supporting and strengthening national bodies in member states in their efforts towards improving the learning of science, but under effective direction, it has extended its interest and influence further towards interest in evaluation, child development and the relationship between the materials and approaches developed in science and the evolution of the primary curriculum as a whole.
Most specifically, however, SEPA has concentrated its efforts towards developing expertise in teacher education in science and in the process of integrating units initially developed by the APSP into evolving national programmes.
The adoption of the APSP materials has been far less immediate and widespread than those in mathematics.
There are certain obvious reasons.
Science is a ‘lower priority subject’ especially when viewed through the distorted lens of selection examinations.
There were other science materials in the field and other programmes.
But essentially the APSP units have been slow to gain acceptance because both the method of their development (which offers choice and demands local initiative) and the philosophy of their content — so  unequivocably enquiry based — demand radically new approaches.
In some countries, such as Nigeria, Ghana and Kenya, developments have been very considerable but the process is necessarily slower and perhaps deeper and more lasting for that.
THE AFRICAN SOCIAL STUDIES PROGRAMME
The impact of the third programme initiated by the EDC, the African Social Studies Programme, is noticeably slighter than in the two other areas.
The initial conference which launched it at Mombasa in 1968 produced a thoughtful and influential document which has done much on its own to stimulate interest and activity in social studies teaching and curriculum development.
The founding of the African Social Studies Project in 1969, the establishment of its headquarters in Nairobi and the international workshops (there were four) have done something to advance knowledge and interest through the designing of packs of source material, teachers' guides and trial units of varying quality.
But funding has been significantly less than other programmes, dissemination of materials less effective and leadership less dynamic.
For this reason and probably also because Social Studies is not an area where governments readily welcome international initiatives, support for the programme is distinctly lukewarm.
Yet though the African Social Studies Programme suffers from close comparison with its two elder brothers it has nevertheless already influenced practice and served as a forum for international exchange of ideas and can be seen as a contributory factor in the widespread change of emphasis towards study of man in his environment.
A statement of EDC philosophy
‘The final criterion of our curricular style is this: it takes time.
What the textbook can summarise in a page of results — life is cellular, cells have water and carbon, cells divide to multiply — our methods with the child's own work, with his own hands, with his own microscope and his own laboured arithmetic may take six weeks of classroom effort.
We do not begrudge this time.
We are not disturbed by slowness, for what goes slow can run deep.
And school hours are not all of life.
To stroll into reality, the detail of it and the context, to unravel and to uncover it is a better thing than to sprint past, reading the billboards of science.’
From ‘The Curricular Triangle and its Style’ by Philip Morrison, in W. Martin and D. Pinck,Curriculum Improvement and Innovation , Robert Betley, 1966, p 16
Machinery for change
Subject initiatives were, perhaps, the first indication of widespread interest and activity in curriculum planning and development.
They were closely followed by setting up the national machinery to promote and manage it.
EDUCATIONAL POLICY AND CURRICULUM CHANGE
Governments were used to the fairly simple process of changing a syllabus, but confronted with a new orthodoxy that it was desirable to engage in curriculum development, they were usually happy initially to see this potentially time-consuming exercise take place outside the Ministry, at University Institutes of Education or specially constituted curriculum development centres.
It seems odd, in retrospect, to see governments delegating so passively their most important educational function, but there were two main reasons for it at the time.
The first is that nobody had really analysed and spelt out the interrelated series of planning and policy decisions which changing a school curriculum entails; the essential links between the processes of curriculum planning and implementation; the costs of change.
Moreover we never look hard for what we don't particularly want to find, and governments’ revenues and manpower were so highly committed towards programmes of quantitative expansion (particularly at secondary level) and subsequently towards keeping the machine they had created running, that few people were prepared to question advice which suggested that a certain new activity could be safely (and, hopefully, inexpensively) tucked away at a centre or institute.
Such advice was undoubtedly given since the predilections and experience of the aid donors and advisers who exercise, I would argue, a quite disproportionate amount of influence in deciding fundamental issues of curricular policy, strongly supported the idea of centre or project based curriculum development.
In Britain there was no tradition of government ‘interference’ in matters of curriculum.
In the United States most of the great curriculum projects in the ‘sixties had been subvented rather than controlled by government and in both countries university personnel had been heavily involved, bringing with them, in almost equal measure, a power of creative innovation and an unacceptable academic arrogance which ignores realities in schools and distrusts anything ‘political’ as a threat to ‘academic freedom’.
The result was therefore an initial policy towards curriculum planning which separated curriculum development from its implementation in schools and which ensured a rapid, but perhaps unnatural, growth, of new ideas and new materials.
Later in this chapter we will examine the gradual growth of government concern to assume a closer control of the process.
PATTERNS OF CONTROL:(1) INSTITUTES OF EDUCATION
The name ‘Institute of Education’ has been used in African universities to describe institutes which do little except train secondary school teachers, but in the sense of  a professional centre concerned with various aspects of quality both of teachers and the curriculum they teach, it was first used in Bakht Er Ruda in the Sudan in the 1930's.
Later the idea was strongly revived at the University of East Africa Conference in Mombasa in 1964 and the influential Institutes of Education in Uganda and Tanzania were founded which assumed an important national role in curriculum planning and development at both primary and secondary level.
In West Africa two Institutes have been delegated important curricular functions at primary level: at Ahmadu Bello and Sierra Leone Universities (the latter not until 1968).
Other Nigerian Institutes have exercised influence to a slightly lesser degree: Nsukka, Ife, Lagos and Ibadan.
I have questioned the degree of control which university institutes assumed, but there must be no minimising the contribution they have made to a more rational and systematic form of curriculum development.
A university based institute offers the possibility for greater objectivity and a greater preoccupation with overall purposes than may be possible in a hard pressed Ministry, together with the potential (and it remains a potential) for linking research findings with the practical problems of curriculum design.
In two other respects certain Institutes developed important machinery for curriculum planning.
The first regards the essential task of co-ordination between subjects and between levels and it was the Institute at Dar es Salaam which first developed a structure which has served as a useful model elsewhere.
This is a system of horizontal and vertical panels, thus a primary, secondary or teacher training panel (horizontal) which co-ordinates and moderates activities for a particular educational level together with vertical panels, say in mathematics, science or music which are responsible for the overall and systematic development of a subject.
Sub-panels and writers' groups report to the vertical panel and the whole is co-ordinated by the Institute's professional board.
A further development of this pattern of interrelated panels and committees is provided by the Boards of Studies system at the Ahmadu Bello Institute of Education.
In this model the curriculum for teachers' colleges and the examination system for both schools and colleges are closely linked with school curriculum development.
(2) CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT CENTRES
In some countries University Institutes did not assume such initial importance in curriculum development.
Instead curriculum development centres were set up, physically separate from the Inspectorate and possessing some degree of autonomy, yet at the same time firmly established under Ministry control.
In at least one case there was a deliberate policy decision not to involve the University.
This was in Kenya where the Ministry of Education's special centres in English, mathematics and science were brought together into a Curriculum Development Centre in 1966 and the whole amalgamated with the Kenya Institute of Education, a non-university body which co-ordinated standards in teacher education in 1968.
Other important curriculum development centres were set up in Ghana (1967) and Zambia (1970).
In Uganda a centre set up in 1973 assumed control of many of the functions originally undertaken by the Institute.
Which Is most Important?
Deborah is an excellent teacher.
If she is withdrawn from school for two years to help produce a new language course eighty children will lose out.
What a pity!
But then half a million children will benefit.
The arithmetic seems to be very clear.
Yet how many times have Deborah or her brothers and sisters been refused secondment on the ground that they could not be spared either because ‘there was no money’ or because Peter, who could very thankfully be released, was sent off instead.
Because the efficiency of a curriculum development centre is a direct concern of the Ministry, there would appear to be a much greater probability that the very considerable staffing demands which curriculum development makes should be recognised.
Bodies such as the Kenya Institute of Education with some thirty full-time professional staff and the Zambia Curriculum Development Centre with about forty, would claim, probably rightly, that they were still understaffed and often experience difficulty in securing the release of the most able teachers from schools and colleges, but the provision made for them is certainly more realistic than that available in University Institutes like those in Ahmadu Bello or Sierra Leone.
A Ministry Centre has also the opportunity to establish far closer links with the means and process of implementation especially in regard to publishing and distribution of materials, trial, follow up and evaluation in schools.
Such opportunities are obviously present in Kenya and Zambia though they do not appear always to work out in practice, one reason in Kenya being that centre personnel are continually called on to perform routine professional jobs such as practical examinations for final year college students.
The fact that this happens so widely and the fact that in relation to the volume and importance of the work they have to do, curriculum centres are still understaffed and under-funded indicates that there still exists a rather strange ordering of educational priorities.
(3) CURRICULUM UNITS WITHIN MINISTRIES
But even a Ministry Curriculum Development Centre can find itself in some sense isolated from the main machinery of educational planning and administration and thus acquire a certain sense of unreality.
The mere physical separation of personnel can be a real source of frustration.
Until 1977 the Secretary of Nigeria's Educational Research Council had to battle his way through the appalling Lagos traffic from Apapa to Lagos Island if he wanted to consult with his Permanent Secretary or Chief Federal Adviser.
The Director of Swaziland's Curriculum Research and Development Unit at Manzini must motor miles to Mbabane if he wants to see the Chief Education Officer.
Others may have shorter journeys but they are still in danger of being classed as ‘those people from the Centre’.
It is interesting to find, therefore, that in certain systems there has evolved a tighter and more centralised system of control with curriculum units established and housed within ministries of education.
Thus certain states of Nigeria such as Bendel and Oyo States have curriculum units within Ministry Planning Divisions while under the latest reorganisation in Ghana, the Curriculum Development Division has been established as one of the divisions in the Ghana Education Service.
The former curriculum and courses unit situated some miles from Accra has been closed and its personnel transferred into the new division.
(4) TOWARDS GREATER MINISTRY CONTROL
The pattern observed in Uganda, Nigeria and Ghana represents the same trend — a gentle but firm assumption of increasing control by ministries of the policies and   mechanisms of curriculum planning.
The same trends are observable in both Zambia and in Tanzania where we have witnessed the gradual shift of power and responsibilities from a University organised Institute to a national one and from the Institute into the Ministry itself.
DIFFERENT AGENCIES, DIFFERENT ROLES
Table 4 indicates briefly the bodies currently responsible for primary curriculum control in ten countries.
What emerges from any comparative analysis of the tasks of curriculum planning and responses to them is that no one centre or unit can adequately accomplish them all.
Ideally structures within a country should —
be closely related to decision making and planning including financial appropriation;
be sufficiently autonomous to exercise a degree of flexibility;
have links with sources of information concerning the system to be changed — e.g. research and survey;
be closely linked with machinery for dissemination of information about changes and their implementation in schools;
be involved in evaluation both of product and process.
Some of these functions are best performed by University Institutes, some by a Curriculum Development Centre, some by a Curriculum Planning Unit and it is therefore possible that functions which may hitherto have been seen as either  wholly performed by this body or that may increasingly be undertaken in partnership.
There are indications, particularly from Nigeria, that this is beginning to happen.
Yet it seems nevertheless as inevitable as it is logical that the prime mover and co-ordinator of curriculum planning and development must be a national Ministry of Education.
Planning activities undertaken centrally
In a centralised education system, the setting up of machinery to undertake curriculum planning and development is no more than a means towards making possible the six processes I outlined at the beginning of this chapter and which in our ideal world should have happened logically at national level: laying a research base for change, deciding objectives, forming a strategy, developing materials, implementing them and evaluating both the process and the result — a clinical sequence which even the methodical Swedes did not perform to their satisfaction.
Yet, as we have already noted, the sequence of events in Africa was neither logical nor ideal.
There were too many outside pressures.
Subject-based curriculum programmes  thrust in very insistently and very early in the game.
Facilities and activities for gathering basic information (described in Chapter 2) were relatively few and late.
Curriculum development programmes of some magnitude got going before ever attempts were made to chart national goals or directions for educational advance.
Machinery for curriculum development was often set up and  put in motion in advance of machinery for its co-ordination with other educational activities.
Yet once the processes were under way and the machinery was set up there did come the realisation that national goals must be set, often coupled with the very welcome awareness that this process is far too important a one to be left solely in the hands of the curriculum developers themselves.
NATIONAL GOALS AND DIRECTIONS
The extent to which national goals for primary education have been consciously set and conscientiously followed varies in emphasis from country to country.
There are two ways, not mutually exclusive, by which goals may be set and subsequently made public — through a political announcement of national policy and philosophy and its application to the school system and/or by seeking some form of consensus through a commission, review or national symposium.
In either case the initial statement is merely the beginning of a long road.
The goals must be debated and discussed until their true implications are appreciated, then their application worked out in terms of the curriculum planning and development decisions they imply at the various stages of the educational process.
These include the selection of subjects and their emphasis, the way teachers are trained, how materials are written and presented, the content and conduct of assessment procedures and a host of other key decisions.
The most influential example of a political lead in curriculum policy is Nyerere's pamphlet Education for Self-Reliance published in 1967, a direct follow up of Tanu's Arusha Declaration.
The content and implications of this document have been very widely analysed and debated as has the Tanzanian reaction to it, but a few short passages need perhaps to be quoted yet again if only to underline the very fundamental challenges it poses for curriculum planners.
I have selected from a wealth of alternatives:
…we want to create a socialist society which is based on three principles:equality and respect for human dignity; sharing resources which are produced by our efforts; work by everyone .’
2 ‘…
This means that the educational system of Tanzania must emphasize cooperative endeavour, not individual advancement; it must stress concepts of equality and the responsibility to give service which goes with any special ability, whether it be in carpentry, in animal husbandry, or in academic pursuits.’
3 ‘It must also prepare young people for the work they will be called upon to do in the society which exists in Tanzania — a rural society where improvement will depend largely upon the efforts of the people in Agriculture and village development.’
4 ‘Schools must, in fact, become communities — and communities which practice the precept of self-reliance.
The teachers, workers, and pupils together must be members of a social unit in the same way as parents, relatives, and children are the family social unit….
This is not a suggestion that a school farm or workshop should be attached to every school for training purposes.
It is a suggestion that every school should also be a farm; that the school community should consist of people who are both teachers and farmers, and pupils and farmers.’
5 ‘Increasingly children are starting school at six or even five years of age, so that they finish primary school when they are too young to become responsible young workers and citizens.
On top of that is the fact that the society and type of education they have received both led them to expect wage employment — probably in an office….
This problem calls for a major change in the content of our primary education and for the raising of the school entry age so that the child is older when he leaves, and also able to learn more quickly while he is in school.’
6 ‘One difficulty in the way of this kind of re-organisation is the present examination system….
There is no reason why Tanzania should not combine an examination, which is based on the things we teach, with a teacher and pupil assessment of work done for the school and community.
I have selected these six passages because they appear to me to call effectively for a rethinking of practically every aspect of the pre-1967 school curriculum in Tanzania — its underlying values, the structure, the balance between in-school and out-of-school activities, the content and pacing of the materials in relation to the age of the learners and the whole process and attitude towards evaluation.
An impartial commission of enquiry (Englishmen imported to tell Kenyans what to teach)
I am sorry for Mr Gordon Bessey.
He must have suspected that his all British commission was hardly the kind of body that Kenyans either needed or were likely to listen to in 1972.
Indeed the detailed, cautious, inconclusive report of the commission is probably now of more interest to outsiders like me than it is to the Kenyans.
I am told by some Kenyan cynics I fell in with that the commission was appointed largely to satisfy demands from one aid donor (was it the World Bank?).
Such attitudes to both the giving and receiving of aid (and they are so common) spell the same dismal answer — an opportunity missed, for how much could have been achieved by a well-funded national commission.
Reminiscence from the Nigerian National Workshop on Primary Education
I was invited to attend as a ‘participating observer’ and the time I spent in the Social Studies group, I remember as one of the most exciting and productive in my educational experience, marred only by the fact that the conference had to end a little early because the money ran out.
I remember thinking at the time that someone had got their priorities wrong.
In retrospect I am sure I am right.
Opportunities to come together, to think, to plan, to chart the future are not occasions for financial economy.
Since the publication of ‘Education for Self-Reliance’, the process of transforming these goals into curriculum plans and curriculum practice has been taking place, somewhat languidly at first, but with increasing momentum.
But ‘old attitudes die hard,’ and nobody I have spoken to from Tanzania is under any illusion that the changes in content which have been undertaken in curriculum plans and examination policies necessarily reflect a change of heart among all teachers or parents.
The political lead provided to curriculum planners in Tanzania is present in varying degrees in other countries.
In Zambia it is strong.
The President's statement ‘Humanism in Zambia’(1967), subsequent declarations at Mulungushi (1968), Kabwe (1972) and the cabinet pronouncement (1975) that schools must become production units, provide a general, but relatively clear brief for education planners and have been clearly reflected in the Zambian Education Review (1976).
Elsewhere, too, there have been significant statements: the Kenya Government Sessional Paper ‘African Socialism and its Application to Planning in Kenya’(1965),’ Seretse Khama's ‘Education for a Nation’(1969), a speech which deserves to be better known than it is, and the statement of the Imbokodvo National Movement in Swaziland (1972).
Development plans in these countries and others also carry statements of national intent.
In one country, Malawi, the President has taken a somewhat extreme stand against ‘modern methods’ in education and has forbidden their use.
The second way in which national guidelines for curriculum policy have emerged is through conferences, reviews or national commissions.
Education commission reports past and present have always addressed themselves in varying degrees of rigour to the analysis of educational objectives and it would be possible to collect an impressive dossier of high minded statements of intent.
Of most interest to us, however, are those initiatives particularly concerned with defining and refining educational objectives and with laying down guidelines for curricular policy.
We note the university-based Sierra Leone Education Review (1974) and subsequent curriculum conferences in 1976; Kenya's 1972 enquiry and report ‘Curriculum Development in Kenya’(oddly undertaken by an all British commission) and its current national commission on Education Objectives; Uganda's inaugural National Curriculum Conference in August 1976; Nigeria's National Curriculum Conference (1969) and National Seminar on Policy of Education (1973).
The Nigerian Curriculum Conference and the National Workshop on Primary Education which followed it in 1971 are important for a number of reasons:
(i)
Although some foreign observers were present at the conference and a few expatriate lecturers attended the primary workshop, all the decisions were made by Nigerians (a state of affairs somewhat unique for its time).
(ii)
At the conference a successful effort had been made to invite informed opinion not only from the educational community but from many interest groups within Nigeria, an initiative which met with a splendid response and which led, with the help of some skilful chairmanship and competent editing to the production of a useful and sensible working document.
(iii)
At the workshop the organisers had managed to unite informed educational opinion throughout Nigeria and to establish a productive working climate in which panels in six areas of the primary school curriculum:cultural and creative art, languages, mathematics, physical and health education, science and social studies met and in the light of the goals set at the 1969 Curriculum Conference expanded and refined objectives in these areas and produced a series of guidelines which have since been used throughout Nigeria at university and state level as a basis for detailed curriculum planning.
There are many ways in which, in retrospect, we may find fault with the procedures adopted in Nigeria; lengthy time gaps between conferences and in the production of the reports; shortcomings in follow up and publicity (largely due to inadequate funding and staffing of the NERC); failures in articulation of content and approach between subject areas; an overloading of committees with university academics.
But for all these criticisms there was still a serious and effective attempt to involve the best minds in the country in laying a foundation for curriculum decision making and to provide an instrument to ensure that detailed curriculum plans reflected this.
PROGRAMMES AND PROJECTS UNDERTAKEN
Once a curriculum development centre or similar body is established, it naturally sets about developing curricula, usually with some fervour.
So, with considerable encouragement from overseas donors, the institutes, centres and units described earlier produced in the late 'sixties and early 'seventies a very impressive crop of programmes and projects, sometimes linked with programmes of syllabus renewal, sometimes more or less independent of them.
In subject curriculum development, schemes in Mathematics, Science and English predominated, a number being linked more or less closely with the EDC's African Education projects described earlier, but some, like the UNESCO sponsored science project in the Bendel State of Nigeria, of different parentage and philosophy.
Multinational publishers also made a considerable contribution and investment to the process of subject curriculum development, in co-operation with institutes and centres, through the funding of writers' workshops in Science, Mathematics and later, Social Studies and in the production, on numerous occasions, of trial editions, particularly of language courses.
This healthy contribution of commercial interests, which, after all, have experience and technical know-how which is often in short  supply in ministries, deserves more recognition than it has received, especially since it does much to offset the squalid tale of the involvement by one British company at this time in corrupt monopoly state publishing ventures during the Obote and Nkrumah governments in Uganda and Ghana.
Yet these examples, too, are significant, for they underline the unfortunate truth that the production and distribution of books to primary schools are important enough, financially, to attract the very largest species of shark against whom the professional at the ministry or in the centre (who is usually no more than an average sized fish) has little redress.
LARGER SCALE CURRICULUM PROJECTS
But piecemeal modifications of school curricula were often considered inappropriate, particularly in the light of new national policies and structures.
Thus a number of much larger curriculum reform schemes were undertaken.
The first and probably the most influential of these grew from small beginnings.
The New Primary Approach in Kenya derived from a research project carried out in twenty-five Asian schools in Nairobi, experimenting basically with the teaching of English (the Peak Course) but at the same time with new and active approaches to teaching young children.
The success of the scheme was rapid and spectacular, borne along by the enthusiasm of organisers and experimental staff alike and by the conviction that here was a programme far more relevant and exciting than anything Kenya had had previously (which it was).
So the material spread into all Asian schools and, after modification, into selected African ones (the New Peak); from towns where supervision was easy and teachers well-trained to country where supervision was infrequent and teachers far less well-grounded.
What had started as a ‘new look’ language course began to be seen as a new approach to teaching children based on a new and popular medium — English.
A follow-up language course, the Safari Course, was devised, and programmes framed by the language section of the newly formed Curriculum Development Centre were to be integrated with those prepared in other subject sections.
Training for English medium was made compulsory in all teachers' colleges and a government decision was taken, at political level, to provide for extension of English medium teaching to all schools in Kenya where there was local demand for it.
Government took over field supervision of the project with eager help from the USAID.
These were heady days when the wine was new.
Nowadays in Kenya nobody is quite so happy or so optimistic about the NPA, for though it survives in urban schools its extension proved to be full of problems.
In the first place the scheme literally drowned in its own success.
The extension went too far, too fast.
Time available for in-service training was cut and cut again.
Supervision arrangements broke down.
There were pained complaints about pseudo-literacy or even of illiteracy in upper classes.
More fundamentally perhaps, people are asking themselves, ‘Why did we all want English medium anyway?’ and there is a rather bitter feeling around that perhaps all the enthusiasm, all the euphoria about ‘new methods’ought to have been preceded by a sober consideration of ‘new objectives.’
Sadly indeed, the pendulum seems to have swung, as it does swing on the education clock, so far away from the New Primary Approach that even the integrated approach to lower primary teaching, which had been so wisely and effectively urged, is no longer reflected in the current Kenya syllabus.
Appropriate reading?
One of the things that really annoyed us in the Ministry was when the Publisher's representative used to go straight into the Minister's office and dictate letters which the Minister then signed.
But even that wasn't as bad as some of the titles which appeared on the ‘recommended’ lists (in a desperate attempt to clear old stock, I suppose).
One English book was entitled Mr Kneebones' Hobbies.
Another called Toby and Bilbo and recommended for Primary 2 contained passages such as the following: ‘Toby's friends are coming up the path now.
They are Don Donkey, Kitty Cat and Tom Cat, Perky Sparrow, Pip Puppy Dog, Gerty Cow, Terry Tortoise and Busy Bee.’
A visitor to Kagumo NPA 1964
‘The teacher was not highly qualified but very much alive and specially trained in English medium teaching at Kagumo Training College nearby; the children had been learning English for six months.
Everyone in the room seemed to be engaged; I have seldom seen children more eager to talk and learn and think….
‘The peak of the lesson was an exercise in mental arithmetic involving very simple addition of halves, quarters and units.
The thinking was done in English and the answers came out in English right or wrong.
The teacher queried one boy's answer, he stood in rapt recalculation, you could almost hear his brain working.
‘No, it is one and a quarter, sir,’ and he was right.’
From Growing Up in East Africa , by E. B. Castle, OUP 1966, p 211.
Meanwhile at least one offspring of the NPA flourishes — the ‘English Through Activity’ programme in Swaziland, where I found similar activity and enthusiasm in schools, talked to a committed supervisor who saw her role entirely as getting her materials — including issues of English Ladybird books — to rural schools as efficiently as possible and of encouraging ‘active learning’,(but of what and why she took little heed).
However, at the primary curriculum unit in the building next door, I encountered a growing unease, a growing preoccupation with purpose.
THE PRIMARY EDUCATION IMPROVEMENT PROJECT
A second and rather later example of a large scale curriculum project is provided by the Primary Education Improvement Project in Northern Nigeria which started in 1970 and until 1977 received considerable support from UNESCO and UNICEF.
This extremely ambitious programme, co-ordinated by the Institute of Education at Ahmadu Bello University and operating in six (now ten) of the northern states, sought to effect a complete change of approach in primary schools, through new courses in either Hausa or English medium depending on the policy in operation in the states.
Eleven centres were selected near to teachers' colleges or state capitals and in each six experimental schools identified.
Prototype materials were tried out in these schools with the help of field curriculum workers (mobile teacher trainers whose story we shall take up in a later chapter) and later refined and distributed in final form to a further eight hundred schools with a similar scale of supervision, in the hope that these would serve as a nucleus in each state for further dissemination to other schools.
The materials developed by the project were happily in line with the national objectives and syllabus guidelines developed in '69 and '71.
They were relevant, exciting and highly ambitious in the knowledge and skills they demanded of teachers.
Despite attempts to recommend local materials, the per capita costs of the scheme were also high and there seems to have been a certain ‘willing suspension of disbelief’ about the local capacity to provide replacements for all the goodies originally supplied by UNICEF.
In planning terms the scheme was understaffed and the whole operation conducted at a headlong speed rendered necessary by the short perspective and the uncertainty of UNICEF funding.
I had been personally concerned (and I employ the word in both its senses) with this project in its early stages.
It was therefore particularly interesting to visit, with my colleague, ministries and schools in two of the states concerned, Kano and Benue Plateau in 1976, to read current reports from other centres and to talk with colleagues at Ahmadu Bello — six years ‘into’ the project.
Enthusiasm for the content of the materials — especially in lower primary classes — was still clearly evident and at state level there was considerable resolve to maintain aspects of the new curriculum and the closer supervision it entailed in at least some schools, despite the challenge of universal primary education which effectively meant that everyone had to try to do more with less.
Moreover, a number of materials developed by the project have since been commercially published and are in use in Nigeria.
Yet only a very modest proportion of its original grandiose objectives had been achieved.
There had been no sweeping transformation of schools in the northern states in Nigeria and there never could have been .
On the treadmill
In the Kenya Institute of Education I meet excellent teams producing good materials in Language and Mathematics.
They are cheerful, competent, overworked and understaffed.
A series is in course of production and implementation in both areas, and once a programme is introduced in Class I this is the beginning of a seven year ride which cannot be slowed down or stopped.
In both subjects I am told that more time and more help is needed to spread the ideas, to run courses, to try out new approaches in different situations, to evaluate the success of the last step before embarking on the next, but the curriculum workers I met were disturbed that they were unable to provide what they knew teachers needed.
Yet these men and women are well off compared to their counterparts in Ghana where subject teams had been given just nine months to produce new curriculum plans and to launch a new series of materials to fit a ‘new content and structure of education’ announced by the cabinet.
At a conference (Nigeria 1971)
First delegate
That Mathematics syllabus is too difficult.
Rural children in the North wouldn't be able to follow it.
Second delegate
It's been tested.
The children at the Lagos University Demonstration School have no difficulty with it.
Postscript (1979)
It was adopted.
Rural children in the North could not follow it adequately.
Poor teaching was blamed.
HOW FAR AND HOW FAST?
Certain common elements in the New Primary Approach and the Primary Education Improvement Project — ambitious goals and policies, unrealistic time scales, high hopes and eventual very fragmentary success — may be traced in other big centralised projects throughout Africa.
Indeed several schemes in their very early stages, like the current hurried reorganisation in Ghana, and the plans announced in 1977 for curriculum revision in Cameroon, carry in their very planning, like a Greek tragedy, the seeds of eventual disillusion.
At first sight the solution looks easy: attempt less, more slowly.
But in practice this is very difficult to achieve.
Subjects depend on each other.
National objectives postulate certain contents.
Parents demand others.
Curriculum workers are resolutely opposed to excluding content and approaches which they know, with good teaching, to be within the grasp of a fair percentage of the nation's children.
It can also be clearly demonstrated that the ‘best’ curricula as designed by centres in Ghana, Nigeria or Kenya are within the competence of the ‘best’schools, teachers and children.
So who wants to level downwards?
Shouldn't targets always be set high so that we should have something to aim at?
These are comfortable philosophies for middle class educationists with school age children of their own.
There are no instant answers to this dilemma, but two partial solutions present themselves.
The first lies in increasing the efficiency of the curriculum development workers themselves through heightening their awareness of the growth points and problems in the schemes they are developing.
The beginnings of preoccupation with educational evaluation described at the end of this chapter represents one response, the prospect of more widespread training, examined in Chapter 9, another.
The second lies in the adoption of a more flexible and decentralised policy for curriculum planning and implementation.
Decentralisation and curriculum planning
The orthodoxy of educational planning and aid policy is subject to spectacular changes as world politics change, as the advice so confidently given and taken in former years proves not to yield the promised fruit, as old gurus are discredited and new ones rise to take their place.
In the early nineteen-sixties they liked their policy centralised (and linked to manpower projections) and their institutions big.
So there were big hospitals, big schools, big colleges, big curriculum development centres.
Now the song has changed.
The World Bank sector review of December 1974, with the same olympian assurance that formerly urged big units, centralised  control and emphasis on the secondary sector, now advocated basic education, small institutions and decentralisation.
‘Vector planning’, another term currently in vogue, suggests that we build unevenly using natural growth points within systems rather than devising elegant (and unworkable) master plans.
We begin to accept that in education, as in economics, small can be beautiful.
In this new climate new policies for curriculum development are much easier to envisage, for they support what I herald as a return to common sense.
For as the somewhat disappointing fruits of big, centralised curriculum projects become apparent, as the essential human and uneven character of curriculum development comes to be appreciated, more and more systems are seeking alternatives.
Two different types of approach may be detected.
The first is the willingness to mount genuine experimental projects (as distinct from ‘trial’ or ‘experimental’schools in curriculum projects committed from the very start to widespread implementation), the second the building up of machinery for curriculum development at local level.
EXPERIMENTAL CURRICULUM PROJECTS
A conventional ‘project school’ modifies trial curricula but undertakes no fundamental changes.
For these to be undertaken it is necessary to mount a separate ‘experimental’ project, but since children are not white mice it is necessary first to enlist enough parental support to allow people to give them their children to experiment on, and enough official support to ensure that in matters such as official examinations, children who have followed radically different curricula do not suffer.
For this reason, although it is possible for an armchair academic like me to imagine a number of very profitable working experiments taking place involving length of schooling, age of entry and patterns of teacher deployment, in fact such controlled experiments are not common.
But the potential of such ‘working models’ is well illustrated by those which have been mounted.
Two in particular in Namutamba (Uganda) and Ife (Nigeria) have attracted continent-wide interest because they are examining issues of importance to practically everyone.
The Namutamba Rural Education Project started in 1967, is based on a teachers' college and involves fifteen primary schools near the town of Mityana, some fifty miles from Kampala.
The project examines possible approaches towards providing more relevant locally orientated curricula for rural children and strengthening links between the school and the rural community.J– To this end the formal school operates a single morning session of five hours leaving the rest of the day for projects undertaken by students which are seen as complementary to the in-class programme.
These include written assignments of various types and a number of community-based schemes such as brick making for home improvement, apprenticeship schemes, young farmers' club activities and workshop practice.
During the afternoon the school buildings are used for a variety of adult education and community purposes and teachers undertake further community work outside them.
Uganda, it hardly needs to be said, currently faces problems in translating the results of this experiment into practical action, but the results and experience gained have been well publicised to the obvious benefit of other systems in Africa.
The Ife Six Year Primary Project demonstrates just how profitable a well-run and well-funded project can be.
The project which started in 1970 in one experimental school, and in 1973 extended to classes in ten more, is administered from the University of Ife with the co-operation from the state Ministry of Education and with financial assistance from the Ford Foundation.
The main aims of the project as described by its organisers were as follows:
1
The project will make it possible to test the validity of the claim that primary education received in the mother tongue is richer and more meaningful than that received in a second language.
2
Solutions to the problems accompanying the adoption of a Nigerian language (such as Yoruba) as the medium of instruction will be stimulated.
3
It is hoped that the experiment will suggest a solution to the perennial problem of teaching English effectively to Nigerian children.
The initial emphasis of the project was therefore linguistic and, clinically examined, it might have appeared that to carry on with current curricula, making the change of language policy the only variable, would have made for more easily comparable results.
But since good teachers, like the project staff at Ife, put children first, they considered themselves to be in duty bound to devise the best possible workable curriculum for the school.
Consequently the project became as concerned with curriculum issues as it did with linguistic ones.
The whole operation and the monitoring of it was thus rendered more complicated, yet at the same time the experiment became far richer.
Using national and state curriculum guidelines as a basis parallel texts are devised in both English and Yoruba, children in Yoruba medium streams being taught English as a subject from Class I — in the experimental school by specialist teachers, in the expansion classes by the regular class teacher.
Approaches are somewhat more teacher-centred and consequently easier to handle by average teachers than parallel material from the Primary Education Improvement Project in the North, but interesting and relevant nevertheless.
Copious reading material, cheaply produced, is made available to children and in one class I visited each child had ten substantial units to read in Yoruba, in addition to the English language text and supplementary readers.
In all, the project has produced 400 trial publications.
Per capita costs of material appear low, but the project is so small that production costs are minimal and a great deal of good will and free time has gone into material production and distribution.
Attempts at evaluation of the project continue, but in terms of establishing conclusively whether children ‘learn better’ through Yoruba or English, they are unlikely to achieve the precision which the Ford Foundation would like to see largely because of the very richness of the project.
Subjective assessments are said to be less acceptable, but I offer mine, nevertheless, drawn from my own studies of the literature of the project (including one evaluation so far completed), from talks with project workers and brief visits to schools.
I recognise that it may also be tinged with a note of bias, for I passionately believe with the project organisers that school and community are parallel and co-operative agencies in the education of young children, and that to establish understanding, as well as to promote real creativity, children should begin reading and learning in the language they speak at home.
I would assess the project as follows:
1
It has shown how effectively a locally based curriculum unit can devise and produce trial materials using the strengths of both the university and the school system.
2
It has indicated that children in experimental Yoruba medium classes do not appear to suffer either in their knowledge of English or in their performance in a final state examination in English.
3
It suggests that children in these classes are better adjusted, more relaxed and resourceful than children in parallel English medium classes.
4
A great deal of useful information on the problems of both Yoruba medium and English subject teaching has been gained and a critical analysis of currently recommended English teaching material is still in progress.
A true story from Ife (1976)
Tunde, aged 10, in the Yoruba medium class, had been asked in his Social Studies class to find out details from his father about a local festival.
At first father was unwilling…it had nothing to do with school, he said.
But Tunde persisted, father told him, and Tunde made his contribution in class — with great success.
He went back and told his father.
A few days later the father told a project worker, ‘You know that was the first time I felt I had something to offer to the school.’
Perhaps I have been over enthusiastic about this project, but there was something about the schools I visited, and I am no stranger to African primary schools, which seemed to me to provide a recipe for steady progress.
The children could read the books, the teachers could understand the method, the parents could understand the children, the university understood the schools.
Ford's money may have been in evidence, but Ford's men were not.
It was all Nigerian from start to finish.
LOCALISED CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT
A second and probably a more significant aspect of decentralisation is where a certain measure of local autonomy or local initiative is encouraged by central authorities.
In Nigeria federal authority is very naturally devolved to state ministries, but these are larger in size and population than many sovereign African states, so it is within states as well as within smaller nations that true devolution is to be sought.
Increasingly it is to be found and in a number of different forms.
In several countries local ‘curriculum implementers’ of one species or another have been appointed and in the main they have proved to be conscientious and down-to-earth professionals who do an exceptionally useful job.
In Tanzania they are called ‘itinerant teacher educators’, in Northern Nigeria ‘mobile teacher trainers’(possibly an English translation of the former), in Ghana ‘local subject organisers’.
In each case they have proved a potentially effective instrument for channelling productive local suggestions and for achieving sensible modifications in centrally designed materials.
Meetings and feedback sessions in which they share local experiences have proved very valuable.
In other areas teachers' centres are beginning to be set up, and I shall be discussing their current effectiveness and future potential in Chapter 6.
While these are primarily still seen as centres where teachers come to learn things, there are some instances where in small measure local curricula and local materials are beginning to emerge.
In Kenya, for example, interesting and original booklets on local history are being prepared at teachers' centres, supported in some cases by  collections of traditional artefacts.
This area is seen as only one of a number of possible future points of development, for plans are being discussed for setting up a linked structure of subject panels from national down to district and location level to give all teachers the opportunity to comment on materials and raise suggestions for new approaches.
Indeed the Director of Kenya's Institute of Education looks forward to a time when a syllabus may be devised which, in addition to a national ‘core’, has specific defined areas where programmes devised at district or local levels will be developed and implemented.
No one in Kenya underestimates the amount of thought still necessary to get these proposals from the discussion to the operational stage, but they are on the table and they are exciting.
In Botswana the principle of limited decentralisation was accepted as Ministry policy in the establishment of an ‘in-service project’, with support from the British Ministry of Overseas Development, based on the country's three in-service colleges with a co-ordinator at the Central Ministry of Education.
It was envisaged that teachers' centres would be set up based on the three colleges and that these would combine in-service course work with active experimentation on new approaches.
An initial memorandum from the Chief Education Officer elaborates the policy:
‘At this initial stage the priority is to help teachers to adopt more enlightened approaches to learning.
Naturally this will also involve a much more critical look at the existing syllabuses and there will be areas where it will be felt that curriculum reforms consistent with enlightened teaching and effective learning are imperative.
If so, any school or group of schools in consultation with the College and the leader of the in-service team may decide to depart from a particular syllabus or portions of it and develop in its place new material which after being tried out and improved upon may be passed on to other schools and colleges for use on a wider scale with the approval of the Ministry.
This will be a definite contribution to a continuous process of renewal of syllabuses and closely linked and incidental to teacher education.’
A further innovation in Botswana has been the setting up of local curriculum development committees.
According to the Ministry memorandum their membership should be as follows:
1
the local Education/ Assistant Education Officer (or Chairman)
2
a member of the in-service team
3
a member of the College staff
4
a Headmaster from one of the local primary schools
5
a teacher from one of the local primary schools
In Francistown, where the idea of a local curriculum committee has been most warmly adopted, the actual committee is considerably larger including head teachers of all local primary schools where new approaches are being tried.
Its organisers look on the participation of these head teachers who have become very active as they become increasingly involved, as an  indispensable and exciting part of the committee's operations.
The Ministry's circular suggested the following as possible roles for the committees:
1
Identification of problem areas in the current syllabuses;
2
Suggestions as to the necessary modifications;
3
Advice on the programme of work to be done in the schools;
4
Preparations for workshops, seminars and courses;
5
Assistance with displays at the Teachers’ Centres where these exist and encouragement of displays in schools;
6
Encouragement of regular visits to the Centres by teachers and guidance and help to teachers with regard to sources of information and other material;
7
Such other functions as may become necessary.
In practice considerably more has been attempted in Francistown including suggestions for production of localised materials and in some cases their actual design and issue.
A very important function appears to be the discussion and rationalisation of conflicting demands for materials made upon local councils and the drawing up of agreed minimum lists of equipment.
Policies in Botswana have not worked out as smoothly as expected.
There have been personality clashes, difference of opinion on degrees of centralisation and devolution, but, quite apart from successes in individual subject projects, it has been shown that in at least one instance, a local curriculum committee can be made to work productively, a model well worth studying.
CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT THROUGH IN-SERVICE TRAINING
One further interesting model of decentralised curriculum development is provided through the various new patterns of in-service teacher training which are emerging.
The provision of opportunities here for introducing and monitoring new materials is now beginning to be realised and opens very exciting possibilities.
I discuss it at some length in Chapter 6.
Machinery for evaluation
Essential in the process of curriculum reform is the control of two aspects of evaluation.
They are:
1
The evaluation of outcomes through the examination processes and alternatives to them (both internal and external).
2
The evaluation of the process of curriculum planning and development.
(1) EVALUATION OF OUTCOMES
Curriculum planners would all agree that it is necessary to establish strong and efficient links between the machinery for curriculum development and public assessment.
Indeed most would argue that both were part of the same operation.
But they find it strangely difficult to do.
In the first place the setting up of machinery for examination and selection predates the creation of means to plan and develop curriculum.
So bodies such as the West African Examination Council are already institutionalised and, in considerable measure, resistant to change.
Straight talking (from Tanzania's Commissioner of National Education.
at the closing speech at a seminar on evaluation)
‘You are now better equipped to carry out your challenging task of educational evaluation.
Let us not, however, be complacent….
You will need the co-operation and the involvement of many types of people in carrying out your tasks.
This raises the necessity of transferring what you know and will know about educational evaluation to other people in many other disciplines.
This, I consider, is a vital task if Tanzania is to satisfy its need for qualified, experienced evaluators who are supported by an informed, critical and positively motivated public and is also to establish, on a long-term basis, a systematic, effective and efficient evaluation programme.
For I believe educational evaluation, in its broad interpretation, is the sole means for ensuring the progressive and enlightened development of the people the educational system serves.
Goals are often too readily set and aims too ambitiously expressed and unless a systematic (scientific) examination is made of the methods utilised to achieve these ends, there is the danger that progress may be slowed or even upset….’
From Michael Kinunda's speech at the African Regional Seminar on Education Evaluation , Dar es Salaam, 1975.
Nor do curriculum planners usually get any really dedicated help from administrators or politicians, for a single, centralised and not too complicated final examination ensures quiet rest for both Minister and civil servant.
Yet the issue at stake, is not merely the content of the final examination.
It is its whole style and importance.
For current examinations seem to carry with them a number of hidden assumptions:
1
that only the final product of the primary school system is worthy of serious evaluation;
2
that only knowledge or skills (such as language skills) of national relevance are worth testing;
3
that the only kind of learning worth seriously measuring is that which can be evaluated by making a mark on a card for subsequent ingestion by a machine (An awful corollary to this is that judgments made by human beings must be given less weight than electronically certified facts.)
Of deep concern, also, is the fact that in many countries machinery and criteria for final assessment of primary school children (with all the feedback that this brings into the school curriculum) are still dominated by the requirements of selection for Secondary School despite the obvious truth of Nyerere's statement that those capable of further education will readily identify themselves.
These issues are discussed later in greater detail, but even at this point they must be raised and current policies and machinery for assessment and selection set alongside those for curriculum planning and development described earlier in this chapter.
For in some cases the one practically negates the other.
Currently in some areas, concern is breeding action towards designing better methods of testing and, more fundamentally, towards a shift in policy which places greater emphasis on regional and school-based methods of assessment.
These, too, are examined in my next chapter.
Yet for all this, more co-ordinated machinery still has to emerge and I confess to experiencing a certain sour taste of insincerity when I hear educational leaders talking about promoting a relevant and dynamic curriculum for primary schools, yet notice that they are hastening most slowly in providing the assessment policy needed to enable this to happen.
(2) EVALUATION OF THE PROCESS
This aspect of evaluation is only just beginning to receive the attention it deserves.
The word ‘evaluation’ is sagely introduced into most conferences by most speakers.
The International Institute for Educational Planning held an important and, I understand, effective regional seminar on education evaluation in Dar es Salaam in 1975 which has led on to a certain degree of follow-up in a number of countries.
An International Centre for Educational Evaluation has been established in Ibadan and, though currently very understaffed, has made a useful start in mounting long training courses in evaluation and in undertaking evaluation of curriculum projects at the request of their organisers (among which are the Namutamba and  Ife projects described earlier in the chapter).
In one national primary curriculum unit (Swaziland) a full time evaluator has been included from the very inception of the work.
Yet apart from the obvious general fact that there is still insufficient concern about process evaluation and that there is a regrettable tendency for people to embark upon long and costly courses of action without carefully considering whether they are necessary or possible, there remain two major issues to cause concern in the countries I visited.
The first is that there still exists a widespread misunderstanding about the nature and purpose of evaluation.
Formative evaluation (to use the current jargon), is so obviously more important than summative, since you need to modify things as they develop rather than wring your hands over them when they have failed.
Yet an evaluation seems so often to be understood more as a sort of independent commission of enquiry undertaken at a fairly late stage in the life of a programme or project by ‘experts’ from outside whose findings may or may not be in straightforward language.
There is a need for such evaluators, but they are surely a very minor part in a much larger process, for evaluation is foremost an attitude of mind backed up by a series of techniques which may, indeed, be very simple and which affect all the workers from the start and throughout the project.
The development of the APSP and SEPA materials provide, I believe, a very fair example of this kind of formative evaluation in action.
The second concern is that evaluation is largely a wasted exercise unless it leads on to some action.
In a number of cases, however, there may be a tendency to regard it, rather, as a sort of libation to the gods — a project or programme acquiring a certain added respectability by being evaluated, but with no deep-seated resolve on the part of its organisers to make any substantial organisational or financial investment in change (after all to contemplate fundamental change to a primary programme once it is underway is an exceptionally costly business).
Yet in spite of these areas of concern, there is growing pragmatism and reality everywhere apparent in Africa among politicians and educationists — a measure of confidence gained and success achieved.
This provides a firm basis for the new interest in evaluation and an earnest desire for its continued growth.
Issues raised in this chapter
Three issues are particularly relevant to this chapter: planning, balance and dissemination.
(1) THE ISSUE OF PLANNING
The issue of planning is complex since it involves far more than merely accepting new structures and new forms of co-operation — for in effect it involves recognising a new dimension of financial commitment at a time when money is short.
The following questions must therefore be asked:
To what extent are the real planning implications of curriculum development realised?
If they are realised with their true implications in terms of money, manpower, materials and time, can the realities be faced?
If not have we a long term alternative or are we doomed to continue dealing in unrealities?
(2) THE ISSUE OF BALANCE
We have recognised in this chapter the need for balance between the various processes involved in curriculum development and of balance between local initiative and central (including political) direction.
This involves a very considerable degree of planning and administrative skill together with sufficient maturity at both local and national level to recognise what can be devolved and what should be maintained as a national concern.
(3) THE ISSUE OF DISSEMINATION
When activity is taking place rapidly under pressure and with scant resources, there is a tendency to neglect to tell anyone what is going on or to fail to find out whether the ground may have already been covered by someone else.
The need to spread the word both within and between systems is accepted in theory by almost every educationist within Africa.
Yet still not enough takes place nationally or internationally (where there is an additional danger of conferences being high on rhetoric, low in practicalities).
An African Curriculum Organisation was set up in 1976 and has already proved that it has an important part to play in this process.
CONTENT
What shall they learn?
(I) The official curriculum
In my next two chapters I shall attempt to compare the official curriculum in African primary schools with actual curriculum practice, and thus to contrast what official plans say should happen in schools with the realities of what actual schools and real teachers plan and provide.
Starting from this distinction it is easy, and initially satisfying, to present a nice clear argument, supported by well chosen anecdotes, proving how wide and how unacceptable is the gap between the two.
In an article I wrote in 1970 I described the whirlpool of activity in the official curriculum: in syllabuses, in Institutes of Education, in curriculum centres, and I commented sadly that ‘most of its impetus is at the centre, that some of it is circular, that its impetus decreases rapidly towards the perimeter and that the vast majority of primary schools lie in the stagnant water outside and are totally unaffected by its movement’.
This sort of imagery is amusing to elaborate but the argument derived from it can be dangerously simplistic.
For one thing it is by no means easy to recognise an official curriculum and for another it is very easy to confuse a government's policy, a process which is growing and evolving, with static written evidence which may be out of date and even recognised as such.
Often all sorts of local or national variations to an official plan are known, permitted and encouraged, while original documents gradually slip into greater degrees of obsolescence pending their next public revision.
My whirlpool analogy can prove equally dangerous in its generalisation for there are innovators to be found even in the most remote schools.
Yet since this book abounds in generalisations I shall retain both the simple distinction between official and actual curriculum and the simple argument that the differences between them are wide and disturbing.
What constitutes the official curriculum?
We commonly and erroneously assume the syllabus document to be the core of any official curriculum in schools.
It is only one of a number of instruments which express the official curriculum.
These include: national public statements of goals and intent (e.g. the Nigerian ‘Seminar on a National Policy on Education’), the legal and administrative framework of the school system, official calendars and time allocations, the syllabus and related descriptions of prescribed content, official lists of recommended books, and the content and style of the final and intermediate examinations.
Aims of primary education (Sierra Leone 1974)
Many sensible and realistic statements of aims for primary schools have recently emerged from Africa.
The following from Sierra Leone, seemed to me to be particularly well framed.
The primary school would aim for its students to acquire:
1
‘Literacy in one or more languages, eventually to include literacy in at least one Sierra Leone language and in the official language, English;
2
‘numeracy, i.e. computational skills in Arithmetic, understanding of certain basic mathematical principles, and ability to judge the quantitative results of certain decisions and actions;
3
‘a rational outlook on natural and social events through observing and understanding the environments in which the students live;
4
‘occupational skills at elementary level;
5
‘positive attitudes toward themselves, their cultural backgrounds, towards work and the process of community and national development;
6
‘positive traits of character and ethical values.’
From Sierra Leone Educational Review Final Report, ‘All our future’, 1976, p 7.
If we look further we can discover yet more determinants like official policies concerning building, furniture and equipment of schools, contents of national radio and television programmes and the official syllabuses for teacher training.
Rarely do we set these prescriptions alongside one another and examine the total picture which emerges.
Indeed, if we did so, we should certainly discover many ambiguities and overlaps.
Consider just a few of the more common and more obvious ones.
There are instances where the official syllabus recommends one type of content and emphasis (e.g. in language skills), while the official examination is clearly constructed with the intention of testing different ones; or cases in which the official aims of education extol the virtues of self-reliance and enquiry-based education, whereas the official syllabus contains an outline of content so rigid and overcrowded as to render any initiative almost impossible to achieve.
An official teachers' guide may recommend project work and locally based enquiry, whereas the official timetable renders such initiatives impossible by dividing up the day into small fragments.
Yet again the official syllabus and scheme of work may recommend the purchase and use of local materials gathered from the local environment when official administrative regulations preclude the headmaster from purchasing these and fail to provide him with any facilities for storing them once he has obtained them.
One thing is certain: to the head, the manager or education officer in school, the official syllabus often appears far less important than it does to the curriculum committee or the outside observer.
Let us consider some of the chief influences which determine the official curriculum schools follow and assess changes which have taken place and trends which may be emerging.
THE STRUCTURAL FRAMEWORK OF THE CURRICULUM
The age at which children go to school, the amount of time they spend there and the disposition of that time have the very greatest bearing on the learning that is planned and provided for them.
Predictably, the basic patterns are inherited from colonial times and often (at some remove) from the English Board Schools of the early 1900's; hence the three term year, the five day week, the six or seven year cycle, the age five or six entry, the forty minute period.
There are also some interesting survivals in terminology like ‘standards’, and ‘monitors’, both words still in common use throughout Africa, both harking back to the English era of ‘payment by results’ in the late nineteenth century.
Until recently, nobody stopped to consider the rationale for these practices.
They were accepted uncritically as part of the school package in the same way u blazers, school caps and terminal reports.
But currently these traditions are being quite rapidly eroded, sometimes as a result of conscious rethinking of philosophies, purposes and priorities, sometimes in  the face of dire necessity.
The following changes in practice or intention are significant.
AGE OF ENTRY
Certain countries in our 1975–76 survey, Sierra Leone, Tanzania and Zambia, and others outside it such as Ethiopia and Somalia, are seeking to raise their minimum age of entry into primary schools.
The purpose of this policy is twofold, first as a means of achieving a more effective link between education and employment so that school leavers are old enough to take up productive work when they leave school, secondly as a means of offering a basic education to a greater number of the nation's children and ensuring that they stay at school to complete it.
LENGTH OF COURSE A parallel and significant trend of policy is a move in a number of countries to differentiate between a basic education cycle and a continuation cycle, the first aiming to provide basic learning skills, the latter emphasising prevocational studies and education for citizenship.
Predictably, where such policies have merely involved adding on a vocational junior secondary top to a general primary base u in Ghana and Nigeria, there has been little overt reaction to the proposals.
Where there has been suggestion that the new ‘basic cycle’ will involve shortening the number of years available to children (in Sierra Leone, the 1973/1974 Educational Review originally suggested a two year cut from 7 to 5 years) the reaction has been vehement.
Yet over the past two decades we have seen reductions, in almost all countries surveyed, from eight to seven and sometimes even to six year primary cycles.
These have been absorbed, often under protest, by the educational systems.
LENGTH OF SESSIONS
Yet another critical factor is the length of time children actually spend in class and the time of day they are there.
Often under pressure of numbers, urban schools are adopting a shift system only too common in Asia and Latin America, but a new feature in African primary schools.
In Botswana and Lesotho, for example, many lower classes, from Class I to 3, are working short two-and-a-half to three hour sessions, thus enabling teachers to split up very large groups.
Clearly all these structural changes are vital determinants of the official curriculum.
An eight-year-old child does not learn the same thing at the same speed as a five-year-old child.
You cannot teach the same amount in seven years as in six; or in four hours in the afternoon as you can in five hours in the morning.
The lack of official recognition of these truths is disturbing.
Syllabus makers appear to suffer from a sad tendency to measure curriculum content by what is contained in the syllabus and textbooks rather than by what is, or what can be, absorbed by the learners.
Hence, to my knowledge, no school curriculum materials have been  designed with older learners in mind and there has been an alarming tendency, when cycles have been reduced in length, not to reduce content.
The reason, frequently given, and I shudder because I can remember advancing it myself on a history syllabus committee, is that since primary schooling is terminal for many children, they must cover the ground or remain forever ignorant.
Little concession either, is made for double shift or ‘short session’ pupils.
In countries where the practice is officially, if apologetically, accepted, as in Sierra Leone, Zambia or Botswana, revised timings are provided in the official syllabus, but there exists no guide as to what the teacher is to leave out from an already overloaded syllabus.
What subjects, when, and in what language?
Writers on curriculum theory may expound on ‘forms of knowledge’ or ‘realms of meaning’, but to the curriculum worker and to the headmaster the issues to be resolved are as follows:
In what language do I teach?
What subjects do I include, at what stage?
What balance do I accord them?(principally decided by time allocation).
How far, and for what purpose do I attempt to integrate areas hitherto taught separately?
What is to be assessed, when and how?
LANGUAGES OF INSTRUCTION
The choice of language affects selection, integration and choice of curriculum content throughout the primary cycle, and is of dominant importance in planning for the first school years.
Language policies for education are highly charged political issues and seldom if ever decided on educational grounds alone.
When they are made, they are almost invariably subject to mistrust and misunderstanding by some sections of the community.
It is virtually impossible to please everyone.
Stripped of some of their emotional overtones, the main issues in English-speaking Africa are as follows:
1
Language embodies culture.
Teaching in the mother-tongue provides a vital link between home and community education on the one hand, and school education on the other.
2
Most teaching in lower primary classes and some in upper classes depends on linking learning with the local environment through the use of language, e.g. storytelling, social and environmental studies, the oral work which precedes reading; religious and moral education.
3
English is an official language in most countries and is the medium of instruction in secondary schools.
Competence in English is an unquestioned asset both for learning and in employment.
It is fully recognised as such by parents and children.
4
In some subjects and topics, particularly in Mathematics and Science, English language embodies western thought patterns and there is a risk that translation may lead to fundamental misunderstandings.
5
Language situations vary widely in countries and between them.
In the three little countries in Southern Africa, Botswana, Lesotho and Swaziland, nearly everyone speaks the same mother tongue.
In one big country, Tanzania, there is a widely accepted national language, Swahili.
Elsewhere national language maps are exceptionally complex, ranging from large and clearly educationally viable groups like Hausa or Luganda through progressively smaller units to situations where numbers speaking the mother tongue are very small or very scattered.
6
There are consequently variations in the quality and availability of reading material in school and out and in the number of teachers who can speak the language and teach in it.
Small language groups, e.g. Kalenji speakers in Kenya are thus very much at a disadvantage compared to larger groups such as Gikuyu.
7
The language of instruction in adult education may be different from that used in school.
Adult education programmes have consistently used more local languages and the current realisation that formal and non-formal education must be more closely linked has, at last, awakened concern over this strange state of affairs.
In the face of these conflicting issues a choice has to be made.
However the pressures are such that in many countries no clear unambiguous official statement is available.
Rather, one encounters a sort of educational case-law built up.
This, in its turn, may conceal considerable variation in practice.
It should be an easy task to produce a comparative table listing official language policies.
It has not proved so.
Table 5 indicates the best available information I have at time of writing.
Readers are invited to disagree.
Yet, though official policies may be difficult to pin down, trends are very clear.
There is increasing use of the mother tongue or local ‘language of the market place’, as a medium of instruction, particularly in lower classes and consequently a movement, albeit slow and tentative, towards the development of a body of expertise in curriculum development and materials production in the mother tongue.
The Curriculum Development Centre in Zambia, the Kenya Institute of Education and the Bureau of Ghanaian Languages, working in association with the Curriculum Development Division of the Ghana Education Service, are providing leadership in this field.
This trend is reinforced by international opinion, particularly pan-African opinion, and it should be noted that both the Intergovernmental Conference on Cultural Policies in Africa (Accra 1975) and the Conference of Ministers of Education of African Member States (Lagos 1976) recommended the increased use of African languages as vehicles of instruction.
There is also an indication that certain countries, particularly Kenya and Ghana are becoming increasingly prepared to recognise more languages as media for the initial years of formal education.
I believe that this trend will spread and that it is based on very sound educational grounds.
Mastery of the code of reading is intimately bound up with oral competence in a language.
Once the code is mastered it is relatively easy to transfer the skill to another language; but to learn to read in a language where the spoken word is not well understood is to invite pseudoliteracy of the kind so painfully apparent in many countries.
The anatomy of change (Kano State 1970–1977)
Hausa is spoken throughout the state, but in the sixties English had been used, often disastrously, as a medium in schools.
It was introduced in the north of Nigeria as the result of the ‘straight for English’ policy, one of the many offshoots of the Kenya ‘New Primary Approach’.
In 1970, the State Ministry of Education wisely recommended a reintroduction of Hausa medium in lower classes, but this proved far easier said than done.
First the governor, a military man, demurred.
This move, he claimed, would undermine the ‘One Nigeria’ policy.
His fears were eventually allayed.
However, appropriate teachers and materials had to be found; neither were easily forthcoming.
Kano was short of teachers, and still is.
Many teachers from the south of Nigeria were employed and they do not speak good Hausa.
Eventually they were replaced, moved to higher classes, or learned Hausa.
Newly qualified teachers posed another problem.
They spoke Hausa, but had very little training in teaching it.
The staff available in teachers' colleges consisted in the main of dignified old gentlemen, veritable repositories of folklore and tradition, ever eager to discuss finer points of language with other scholars, but totally unequipped to teach reading methods.
Writers and the books they produced were of the same type, full of antiquarian information and the archaic vocabulary that went with it.
Nobody seemed to write books about what was happening in the 1970's.
Consequently, a new diploma course had to be set up, new teacher trainers prepared and new books written.
The effort continues but change comes slowly.
However, alongside the trends which reinforce the introduction of local language medium, no sign of weakening of emphasis in the teaching of English can be detected.
Politicians, parents and educationists seem determined to try to have their cake and eat it.
Theoretically this is perfectly possible.
The experiment at Ife suggests that it is a myth to believe that early introduction of English medium (especially if it is badly handled) can be correlated with eventual better performance in English.
Moreover I firmly believe that children cannot satisfactorily be taught to read in two languages at the same time and that they will be better English readers if they learn it after they have mastered the skill in their mother tongue.
Yet while the maintenance of a degree of competence in two languages is both possible and desirable, it can only conceivably be achieved following a reassessment of present curricular priorities, a recasting of a great deal of current material in school, and a new emphasis on teacher training.
Very naturally, there has been a disinclination to face up to these very daunting issues with their massive implications on educational investment and, perhaps, a subconscious hope that the contradictions would resolve themselves.
Unfortunately the language problems will not go away.
They are central to curriculum planning and have to be recognised as such.
SELECTION AND INTEGRATION
Table 6 attempts to show comparative official time allocations contained in syllabuses in six countries — and alternative patterns within two of them, Nigeria and Tanzania.
Further information concerning all ten countries in our survey is contained in Appendix 2.
As I have previously stressed, it would be unwise to place too great an emphasis on these official documents.
Many of them are under review and some of them may be virtually ignored in practice.
Yet they do indicate certain interesting patterns.
They are very crowded.
They place a predictable emphasis on language (particularly English) and on Mathematics, an emphasis which we shall see intensified in the actual curriculum.
They offer very scant opportunity for children to express themselves in creative and cultural activities, while retaining a relatively generous allocation for physical education (a subject which in all my years as an inspector and teacher trainer I never saw convincingly taught outside college teaching practice).
They also offer relatively modest time allocations for practical and prevocational subjects in upper primary classes, a feature which may reflect a lack of real conviction by syllabus panels to respond to the political creed that such studies are necessary and profitable for primary level children, but may also be born of a firm realistic assessment of the lack of money and materials to make such studies workable.
If we look back over the record of the last twenty years in our ten countries, we may detect certain common trends, unspectacular, but nevertheless significant.
The pattern of time allocations to subjects has changed with an increase in time allotted to language teaching — especially English.
Indeed as Dottrens noticed in his world survey of primary curriculum in 1962 there seems to be a bit more of everything included in a curriculum every time it is revised — a trend which is likely to be reinforced whenever syllabuses are designed by committees rather than individuals.
Finally, we may detect a marked tendency to integrate subjects hitherto taught separately, a trend reflecting curriculum practice in Britain but also stemming from a desire to stress the relatedness of learning within a child's own environment.
INTEGRATION OF SUBJECT AREAS
The topic of integration is worth looking at in somewhat more detail.
Few subjects are more hotly debated in curriculum committees.
People get very emotional over the issues involved and discussion may tend to become polarised.
At opposite extremes are the ‘seamless web of learning’ party who would appear to argue that integration is so noble in itself that it should be undertaken whether teachers can handle it or not, and the committed and dogmatic subject specialist with a bookful of behavioural objectives and forty pages of sequenced syllabus to back them up.
I often find myself in the middle, accused of reaction by both parties.
In fact, moves towards integration in most countries have been cautious and sensible.
Four different trends are observable.
First a considerable, and, on the whole, successful attempt to introduce some measure of integration to programmes at lower primary level.
Often official syllabuses and timetables reflect the influence and expertise of infant method specialists in ministries or from colleges of education.
Sometimes, as in Uganda, a lower primary panel has been formed to coordinate approaches.
Sometimes specific projects have helped to promote integration.
The ‘centres of interest’ introduced in the New Primary Approach in Kenya, have been mentioned and this pattern was taken up in both Zambia and Swaziland with topics gradually refined and widened.
The Primary Education Improvement Project in Northern Nigeria has produced a programme for the lower classes where more formal subject-based lessons were planned to cover about half the teaching time, but complemented by a carefully planned activities programme based on group work.
These are only two examples selected from a rich bank of experience.
Indeed, there is no country in English-speaking Africa which cannot boast some useful project in co-operative teaching at lower primary level.
A second focus for integration has been through the design of materials based on one subject discipline but specifically planned to feed across the curriculum.
Later in this book I will argue the importance of this approach to develop skills of ‘language across the curriculum’, but in the lower primary booklets produced by the Science Education Programme for Africa (SEPA) we have a brilliant prototype for developing basic scientific and mathematical skills across subject boundaries.
Their units on construction, water, dry sand, exploring the environment and many others have been taken up and adapted in Language, Social Studies, Mathematics and Science syllabuses throughout Africa.
More directly, the cause of integration has been served by the formal incorporation of subjects hitherto taught separately into new programmes with new names.
Syllabus planning: Nigeria
In our Social Studies syllabus committees in Nigeria at both national and local levels, we made an honest attempt to achieve a real degree of integration.
The processes involved a number of related steps:
1
Identifying the aims of the programme as a whole.
2
Examining and listing characteristics, needs and problems of learners at three stages: lower, middle and upper primary.
3
Listing themes and sub-themes (units) for each class of the primary school.
4
Developing each of the themes on a grid with the following headings:(a) Topic (b) Main objectives (c) Concepts to be developed (d) Attitudes and values to be inculcated (e) Skills and abilities to be acquired (f) Facts to be taught (g) Ways of learning and teaching (h) Teaching and learning materials to be used (i) Evaluating the learning.
Sometimes the rigidity of our approach tripped us up.
Sometimes, too, our suggestions bordered on the impracticable.
But what a change for the better, I kept thinking, when compared to old committee meetings I used to attend when we haggled over lists of topics for inclusion in a syllabus.
Conversation over coffee (National Workshop on Primary Education, Ibadan, 1971)
Hugh Hawes
This new Social Studies Syllabus they are designing seems a great improvement over the old History and Geography ones.
Nigerian colleague
But it is difficult to make and even more difficult to get taught properly.
Hugh Hawes
Why so?
Nigerian colleague
You have blue bits and you have yellow bits and it's going to be much easier for you to put them together one on top of the other so you have a blue and yellow syllabus.
But you have to design a green syllabus.
You also have blue teachers and yellow teachers.
You will need to turn them into green teachers…and that will be even more difficult.
Thus Science syllabuses may include material formerly taught under the separate headings of General Science, Nature Study, Rural Science and Health Education; Social Studies syllabuses incorporate what used to be taught under History, Geography and Civics.
In Nigeria there has been an attempt to integrate Music, Dance, Drama and Fine Art under Cultural and Creative Art.
Typical of the trend is the new panel structure in Lesotho where panels are grouped into five main areas: Language, Mathematics/Science, Social Studies, Practical and Cultural Activities and Religious Knowledge.
Such integration can be largely formal; in Lesotho, for instance, the evidence of real integration in between Mathematics and Science is very slight.
On the other hand it may represent a genuine attempt by specialists in related subjects to sit down together and plan a programme which allows for separate activities but suggests common themes and provides examples of integrated lessons as in the Nigerian Cultural and Creative Art syllabus.
Yet again it may be the product of basic rethinking and true integration founded on new objectives and a fresh approach as in the Social Studies syllabus now under development in Sierra Leone where an integrated programme with significant regional variations is being planned in a series of central and local workshops and where a special series of booklets on skills development (e.g. map making, note taking skills, creative skills) is being produced for teachers.
One other pattern of integration has, to my mind, considerable potential value since it maintains a useful and workable balance between an entirely subject-based curriculum, often fragmented and irrelevant to real life and an integrated curriculum which may neglect essential learning skills, or prove beyond the capabilities of the ordinary teacher to teach effectively.
It involves the development of a restricted number of units of study based on themes which can be examined across the curriculum.
In Lesotho for instance, a six week unit has been designed on transport.
Another more modest project has been based on a school garden in Botswana.
In the latter instance a whole timetable was freed for two days, this being in itself an innovation, and two classes, 6 and 7, combined to work in groups with their teachers and a local inspector.
I detect in such tentative experiments the germ of a potentially exciting innovation.
They show the possibility of identifying themes vital to national development like ‘saving our soil’, ‘clean water’ or ‘feeding ourselves’; of designing carefully selected units of material to cover perhaps two weeks' learning with teachers trained to handle them; of arranging the school programmes of studies so that they allow in every term, a period, two weeks or so, available for such common projects.
These ideas are further elaborated in a note at the end of the next chapter.
To achieve any measure of integration requires a confidence and a breadth of understanding which teachers possess in varying degrees.
Part of the art of curriculum development — for it is, indeed, an art and not a science — is to gauge the extent to which teachers are secure enough to forsake the safety and familiarity of the categories into which they have been accustomed to divide learning.
This extent will inevitably vary and, in consequence, it may prove wiser to provide for alternative approaches within a system than to force patterns of integration on insecure and bewildered teachers.
Contents of subject syllabuses
It is neither possible nor practicable to attempt a critique of syllabus content in all subjects in African primary schools.
The most I can do is to offer a very brief and personal view of some of the recent changes in emphasis drawing from the syllabuses of ten countries and to isolate a few of the new approaches which strike me as particularly interesting and exciting.
In most cases I instance one or two well designed syllabuses which exemplify these.
CULTURAL SUBJECTS — ART AND MUSIC
Main trends : Integration of separate subjects and inclusion of dance, mime and drama have already been noted (Nigeria).
There is increasing emphasis on African musical tradition, including the making of musical instruments (Uganda and Kenya) and the gradual weakening of mission tradition based very largely on choral singing and religious music.
New syllabuses (e.g. Lesotho, Uganda) show a greater diversification of materials and media in art and craft, and recommend many materials available in the environment rather than depending so single-mindedly on picture-making.
LANGUAGE
Main trends : More interest and importance is now attached to mother tongue teaching; improved design of materials for the teaching of language and reading (Zambia and Tanzania).
There is greater partnership and closer friendship between mother tongue and English teaching; development of complementary materials and approaches, particularly at lower primary level (Kenya and Ghana)
Greater efforts are now made towards identifying the purpose and function of language; to answer key questions such as‘what does the primary school leaver need English for?’, ‘what kind of skills does the learner need to develop in his mother tongue, at what stage, with what purpose?’
(Nigeria)
There is greater concern for the role of language throughout the curriculum, particular attention being paid to the relation between language and activity methods in lower primary classes (Zambia and Swaziland).
MATHEMATICS
Main trends : The continent-wide adoption of ‘New Mathematics’ programmes has already been noted.
Metrication and decimalisation of coinage have been introduced.
In recent years the following changes have emerged:
1
a swing of the pendulum away from uncritical acceptance of ‘New Mathematics’ programmes, sometimes manifest in overt political opposition to them (Nigeria and Malawi), more commonly by a re-emphasis placed on the values and processes of basic numeracy, e.g. tables, measurement, number bonds (Swaziland and Lesotho).
2
a greater concern with the environment as a basis for the teaching of Mathematics in relation to examples which can be used, e.g. in measurement, sampling, graphs, as well as to the uses of Mathematics in everyday life (Botswana and Ghana).
RELIGIOUS, MORAL AND POLITICAL EDUCATION
Main trends : Christian Religious Knowledge syllabuses are rapidly developing joint denominational approaches (Lesotho and Uganda) and more slowly, but nevertheless steadily beginning to widen syllabuses, based on Bible knowledge and catechism, towards greater discussion of local and contemporary moral issues (Kenya and Zambia); local beliefs and customs are no longer excluded or contrasted with Christian beliefs.
In some instances, Islamic Religious Knowledge under the influence of Egypt becomes more concerned with belief and less centred on mere learning of the Koran (Uganda and Nigeria).
Political education with syllabuses devised by national parties, is introduced in two States (Tanzania and Zambia).
Community service is required in varying measure, from a very considerable degree of involvement (Tanzania) to occasional gestures such as National Tree Planting Day (Lesotho).
PHYSICAL AND HEALTH EDUCATION
Main trends : These subjects are sometimes planned separately, sometimes jointly.
Physical Education has long shed approaches based on exercises and drill, for approaches based on training in skill and co-ordination (Kenya).
More culturally based elements e.g. dancing, mime and movement are often now absorbed in Cultural Activities and Music syllabuses (Nigeria).
Health Education may be less formally treated than previously, with activities woven into other subject syllabuses and stressed as part of the school programme as a whole (Ghana).
SCIENCE
Main trends : Syllabuses based largely on Biology are now superseded almost everywhere by ‘General Science’ syllabuses.
Integration of Health and Agricultural Science with General Science as mentioned above prevails in many countries.
The basis for selection of materials varies between mainly content based criteria (e.g. what scientific knowledge and ways of thinking are most appropriate to the present and subsequent experience of the child), and mainly process based criteria (e.g. what thought processes are necessary for a primary child to develop and what knowledge and experience must therefore be selected to form a content from which this development can best be effected).
The most sophisticated statement of a process approach comes from Nigeria where a modified version of a list produced by the American Association for the Advancement of Science has been suggested in the national ‘Guidelines on Primary School Curriculum’ to help evaluate coverage and approach in syllabuses and curriculum materials.
Trying to understand
An African Primary Science Unit called ‘Ask the Ant Lion’ has been incorporated into the ‘Primary Science’programmes in Northern Nigeria.
Ant lions are infamous little creatures which dig pits and trap ants.
Nobody has ever bothered much about them because they harm no one(except the ants).
It is precisely for this anonymity that they were selected.
Children are invited to find out how they trap ants, how they make their pits, what material they use.
They are easy to find and children are fascinated by this unit.
The following conversation, recorded almost verbatim, may give us cause to think….
Visiting expert
What's the use of that unit about the Ant lion?
Hugh Hawes
It makes children think.
Visiting expert
But what's the use of knowing about Ant lions?
Hugh Hawes (patiently): It's the process of thinking we are trying to develop, the content helps us to do this.
Visiting expert
I think I can see now, why you have put it in.
Ant lions eat ants.
Ants eat crops.
Pest control is an important topic in a Science syllabus.
I understand….
He didn't, of course: and if he did not understand the rationale behind the process-approach, how much less would a primary teacher?
No people
I was once heavily criticised by a BBC producer for saying that early African history was boring in school because there were no people in it.
He cut the remark out of the final programme lest it should offend the listeners.
There is, however, a good deal to what I was saying.
Most children would rather learn about Julius Caesar who was a real person with a long nose, killed by his own friends because he had become a dictator, than study the rise of Meroe or Axum which have little interest to an eleven-year-old.
There are some syllabus makers, often expatriates, in all subjects, who would see anything African as desirable and anything European as irrelevant; the antithesis of the old Euro-centred approaches and equally ridiculous.
The following fifteen processes are listed: observation, classification, communication, counting number relationship, measurement, raising questions, prediction, inference, formulating hypotheses, making operational definitions, controlling or manipulating variables, experimenting, formulating models, interpreting data, manipulative skills.
A very stimulating series, ‘Primary Science’, developed at the Institution of Education, Ahmadu Bello University, based on this approach, is now in very wide use throughout Nigeria.
There is some common ground between these two approaches to selection of materials for Science teaching, but they do result in radically different programmes: the content based approach is much easier to understand and interpret by the average teacher whereas the process-based approach often strikes much deeper towards the prior aim of making learners think more scientifically in a world where this process is increasingly necessary for survival.
SOCIAL STUDIES, HISTORY AND GEOGRAPHY
Main trends : Moves towards integration have already been discussed and some very creative Social and Environmental Studies programmes are being devised (Nigeria, Sierra Leone).
But even in countries where History and Geography syllabuses have been maintained (Kenya and Botswana), considerably more local study is incorporated.
Gradually syllabuses are shedding that heavy load of world history, though a somewhat indigestible mass of early African history is often retained together with analysis of the structure and working of central and local government.
Upper classes are often heavily loaded with current world affairs and the complicated workings of the United Nations and its agencies.
VOCATIONAL AND PRE-VOCATIONAL SUBJECTS
Some trends : Some excellent primary school Agriculture syllabuses now exist (Swaziland and Uganda).
Home Economics syllabuses, ever ambitious, are gradually now incorporating more elements of home-making, child care, nutrition (Kenya and Nigeria), while needlework assumes less paramount importance.
In one country (Kenya), a potentially profitable approach exists towards ‘occupational education’.
It is regarded as an area of concern, rather than a school subject.
The specialists in the Institute of Education are hoping to devise means of feeding ideas and units related to skills training and pre-vocational work into other school subjects.
I would see this approach as being capable of useful application in other areas, e.g. Health Education or Development Studies.
TEACHERS' GUIDES
Occasionally official syllabuses contain very detailed advice for teachers and in one case (Botswana), a separate, loose-leaf file has been prepared for each grade, but in many cases it is the teachers' guide, or even the pupils' text which provides the real plan from which the teacher works.
The style and format of teachers' guides vary from the most detached to the most prescriptive.
Usually teachers can expect detailed (possibly too detailed) help in English and Mathematics and sometimes also in Science and Religious Education, but often far less in local languages, Social Studies and cultural subjects, significantly enough, those subjects which are most closely connected with the local environment.
Can the syllabus work?
From the brief analysis in the last pages, I hope I have managed to convey the impression that a good deal of interesting, useful and imaginative content is being planned for primary schools.
The picture, so beloved of third-rate politicians, of schools following inappropriate and European-centred syllabuses (hence not ‘delivering the goods’) is, and always was, a false one.
But it is not true, either, to maintain, as some people do, that there is little wrong with the subject content and everything wrong with its implementation.
Despite all of the official curriculum plans, there are many instances where the contents are inappropriate and still more where the plans themselves are largely responsible for the weakness in implementation.
The following are some of my misgivings.
In the first place these schemes often represent the experience and values of a middle class urban or semi-urban culture, at times totally alien to the rural child .
In some smaller countries such as Lesotho and Swaziland schools may even use materials designed for other African cultures.
The English course used in Lesotho and designed originally for Rhodesia provides a particularly obvious example.
The syllabuses are heavily overloaded particularly in upper classes.
Furthermore they are exceptionally ambitious in the language, skill and concepts they expect young children to acquire .
A recent diagnostic test (1976) devised by the Mathematics section of the Curriculum Research and Development Division in Ghana reveals serious problems at all levels in comprehension of the language content of the Mathematics syllabus.
Comprehension of recommended English readers in upper primary classes is undoubtedly poor, probably appallingly so.
Certainly the reading content of the recommended book for Class 2 in Sierra Leone which I saw being used with very young children in Freetown schools is far above the average reading level one might expect for six-year-olds in London who speak English, not Creole, at home.
The introduction of abstract concepts into Social Studies and sometimes into Science syllabuses at a very early stage presupposes a level of cognitive development which Piagetian research would suggest to be beyond the average capacity of Swiss children.
Since comparative studies from Africa seem to reinforce the evidence from all over that children pass through much the same stages, we can confidently predict that they mean as little to the children of Kenya or Zambia.
Railway matters (Lesotho 1977)
I am taking a lesson in Class 6 in a school half-way up a mountain in an attempt to find out how well the children understand their English reader.
The passage is about a schoolboy who goes on an outing and drops his bag out of the window of a railway carriage.
We are not doing well — the point of the passage seems to elude the class.
I ask how many of them have ever seen a train.
Three.
How many have ever travelled on a train?
None.
There are just two and a half kilometres of railway in Lesotho.
Extract from a teachers' guide (Nigeria)
Required for one Science lesson: Class 3
live insects,
earthworms,
a frog or toad,
a lizard,
an aquarium with live fish,
a cat,
a dog or other mammal,
preserved specimens of each of the above,
a needle,
a spirit lamp,
a cooked piece of meat’.
I was particularly struck by the requirement for a preserved cat or dog.
The rural teacher might find some difficulty here.
As to whether a preserved aquarium is required, or merely a preserved fish, the text is unclear.
Equally unrealistic are the demands made by syllabuses on teachers .
Sometimes they contain more material than any human being could teach in the time recommended.
Sometimes they presuppose background knowledge which teachers do not possess; very often they demand approaches and attitudes quite at variance with those held by an average teacher.
Consider the case of a teacher brought up in the hard school where right answers were rewarded by praise and wrong answers by the cane.
Now he is being invited to learn along with the children in Science, to admit ignorance (he the headmaster!), to reward discovery learning when neither he nor the children know the answer.
Small wonder that he seldom responds to the challenge.
Demands on teachers, both in preparation time and materials to be collected may also be unrealistic.
Sometimes materials are just not available or too expensive to afford, but often curriculum panels, drawing on experiences from college demonstration schools and materially rich urban contexts, place far too great reliance on the collection and use of ‘waste’ materials or require large amounts of apparatus to be made by teachers.
Where and how they can do this in the conditions which prevail in many rural areas is rarely specified.
Finally teachers' guides are very frequently of a length and format and in a language which make them very, very difficult to comprehend by the average teacher.
Research on the readability of guides to teachers is lacking, is needed and would be relatively easy to design and execute.
The rigidity in tone and approach of the syllabuses and materials is also a matter for concern .
Often an introductory section mentions that the teacher may select and may concentrate on certain aspects in preference to others; sometimes it gives an indication that regional variations in content may be acceptable in certain cases.
On the whole, however, there is little positive incentive for the teacher to select or diverge.
The ground is there to be covered.
Moreover there seems little practical recognition of the fact that teachers vary, in their knowledge, in their experience and in their confidence.
To manage such a spread of ability is one of the most delicate tasks a curriculum planner has to undertake, yet there arc means, too seldom explored, of providing extra support for weaker teachers and extra ideas for innovative ones.
Moreover, the curriculum plan and materials are still firmly linked to a class by class progression and to teacher centred learning .
The syllabuses are labelled Class I, Class 2 and so on up the ladder.
The books are graded and individual lessons often numbered and sequenced.
Very little attempt is made to suggest alternatives in the syllabus plan or teachers' books, very little attempt made to design or recommend more flexible materials such as reading or number cards, and this, despite enormous variations in ages, abilities and background of children.
Few serious attempts have been made to devise diagnostic tests in reading and number for the purpose of indicating relative attainment of learners.
Added to this, plans and materials are still remarkably classroom orientated .
Relatively little indication is given of the way that the school environment can be exploited for teaching.
There are seldom any references to co-curricular activities and the important part which they might play in the whole curriculum of a school.
Typically, for instance, a Physical Education programme concentrates on P.E.
lessons, making little reference to games and sports, while Language and Cultural Activities syllabuses stress classroom drama but ignore potentials for clubs and community activities.
As yet, little emphasis is placed on learning initially planned in school and subsequently carried out in the community, such as home garden plots in Agriculture and Health Education projects.
Sadly, when such activities do occur, they are heralded as innovations and labelled ‘community education’.
Finally, I am always depressed at the apparent lack of concern in our syllabuses and teachers' guides for the poorer educational contexts .
If you have forty children and desks for all of them, a set of recommended texts and a full complement of teaching time, the syllabus is for you and the texts help you.
If you are teaching a heterogeneous mob of children in an afternoon session with little or no equipment, the advice given is clearly not for you: you are a ‘sub-teacher’, teaching a ‘sub-class’, The official curriculum plan washes its hands of you.
Yet, you are well aware that you and those like you, well outnumber your more fortunately placed colleagues.
Examinations, selection and the official curriculum
The curriculum of the last two years of primary school is inevitably dominated by the final public examinations a child takes.
Although schools and teachers I visited may not always have been able to produce copies of the official syllabus, everyone had copies of previous years' questions and were assiduously preparing children to sit for the current examination.
WHAT KIND OF EXAMINATION?
Table 7 indicates patterns of examinations in ten different countries.
Although some attempt is made to design an instrument which serves the needs of primary school leavers as well as secondary school entrants, the main official purpose of the exercise, and practically the only purpose which interests teachers or children, is to select entrants for secondary school.
This purpose is amply reflected in the design, setting and weighting of the examinations.
The following facts are worth noting:
1
Examinations are heavily weighted towards Language and Mathematics.
Except in Tanzania, English language papers tend to be more heavily weighted than local language papers.
Frequently, indeed, local languages are not examined or not counted in the final mark to determine selection.
2
English language skills are also necessary in all other parts of the examination.
In cases where a verbal ability test is set, it is set in English.
Mathematics, Science and Social Studies questions often require considerable speed and accuracy in English comprehension.
3
Certain subjects in the primary school curriculum, notably practical and cultural subjects are not usually assessed externally.
4
Those involved in setting the examination may lack direct experience of primary schools and their curriculum.
They think, perhaps, more in terms of what knowledge and skills they would hope to find in a secondary school entrant rather than of those one might expect from a child who had successfully completed a primary school course.
They may, therefore, only be marginally concerned with the effect that the examination they set has on teaching and learning in primary schools.
There are even strange cases where primary syllabus panels have little or no direct link with examiners and where conflict exists between what the syllabus recommends and what the examinations examine.
5
Examinations are designed very largely to secure ease of marking since skilled markers are limited, and to ensure that, as far as possible, justice is seen to be one and that instances (and accusations) of nepotism or corruption are kept to a minimum.
Multiple choice questions, easily machine marked, are therefore greatly favoured.
Where essays are required in language, they tend to be marked to a fairly rigid marking scheme.
6
All examinations are competitive.
Sometimes there is a fixed pass mark and leavers receive their certificates graded as I, II, or III; sometimes passes or grades are adjusted to fit places available in secondary school, but in either case, everyone knows that there are just so many secondary school places, and many, many more aspirants for them.
The level of marks required for entrance to secondary school is a very closely guarded secret and seldom officially revealed.
In many cases, especially in Mathematics, it may be very low indeed.
Thus we frequently have a pattern where a relatively difficult examination is set to conform to the entry standards someone hopes may be achieved, where a large number of candidates do very badly on it and some of the least bewildered are then selected for further education.
‘THE BACKWASH EFFECT’
The effects of the examination on the primary school curriculum, described by Somerset as the ‘backwash effect’, are massive and on the whole disheartening.
King comments on the effects in Kenya; his remarks would apply with few local variants to nearly all the countries visited in our survey:
‘It appears, as a general finding, that there is much cynicism amongst primary school teachers about the possibility of innovation in curricula when teaching is under its present constraint.
A number of teachers have of course been exposed to discovery methods, the principles of new maths and new science; there is, however, a strong countervailing trend in which pupils know from their CPE texts what are the answers, the definitions of the scientific laws, and increasingly regard as a waste of time proving by rudimentary experiments what they already know.
Inevitably perhaps the present style of objective test concentrates on the general rules and definitions, and the pupils resent time not spent on revising these.
Additionally, few primary schools have the equipment or facilities to carry out scientific experiments as the syllabus suggests.
On the mathematics side one of the most serious charges, parallel to the lack of interest in the writing of English, is that some of the skills such as the careful construction of graphs and geometric figures are no longer considered important by students.
In the actual examination all the figures are provided and it is only necessary to infer from inspecting the graph or drawing which of four alternatives is the correct one.
Furthermore, a casual inspection of some of the children's workbooks in Standard 7 will reveal in most subjects lists of question numbers at the side of the page and then merely the corresponding answer letter, a, b, c, or d.
However, it is some of the non-examinable subjects which would appear to fare worst in the primary school at the moment.
These are Swahili, domestic science and handicrafts, practical agriculture and religious knowledge.’
Miscellaneous Information
The following are culled from Science and General Knowledge papers in two countries.
They are typical of the kind of factual information which may be expected of children and could be paralleled elsewhere.
Nigeria (1974)
The mountains in Algeria are called: A. Drakensberg B. Fouta Djallon C. Atlas D. Ethiopian E. Adamawa
Lagos was conquered by the British in:
A. 1949 B. 1851 C. 1871 D. 1901 E. 1939.
The diagram represents a cockroach.
The structure marked I is:
A. a spiracle B. an antenna C. a proboscis D. a leg E. a cuticle.
Lesotho (1975)
In which layer of the skin is fat stored 7
A. hornified layer B. epidermis C. dermis D. malpighian layer E. subcutaneous layer.
Which of these teams won in the Sturrock League Soccer finals in 19747
A. Bantu F.C.
B. Manjantja F.C.
C. Maseru United F.C.
D. Linare F.C.
E. Mattama F.C.
Moreover, this is only half the story.
The examination is set and marked in such a way that it excludes by its very nature from Science and Social Studies papers any questions based on the local environment.
As a result, environmental study is virtually neglected in the curriculum in the years when it could be most meaningful and most beneficial, especially to school leavers.
The multiple choice questions, mentioned earlier, besides restricting the extent of the subject matter, often limit the range of intellectual skills which can be tested.
In theory, items can be devised to test the more sophisticated thought processes listed in Bloom's Taxonomy such as knowledge of trends and sequences, or skills of analysis, but such item writing demands not only a high degree of skill, not often available, it also requires a considerable sophistication in language and comprehension skills which second language learners are unlikely to possess.
It is by no means surprising, therefore, to find that the vast majority of items in Social Studies and Science papers demand straight recall of specific facts and that teaching is adjusted accordingly: in one paper analysed in Botswana out of fifty questions, forty-nine required only recall of factual information.
Finally, because the examination is set on knowledge and abilities required for secondary school entry, and because all children do aspire to such entry, it forces teachers to cover material with their pupils whether they are able to understand it or not; the very antithesis of sound pedagogy.
NEW APPROACHES, NEW IDEAS
Concern over the effect of terminal examinations and of their efficiency is widespread throughout Africa.
While a few voices, mainly from the safety of universities, call for their abolition, the majority of practical opinion recognises that examinations are inevitable and that three tasks are necessary to improve both their efficiency and their effect on the school curriculum.
The first is quite simply to set better papers, to make sure that panels who evolve objectives and plan the content of the primary school curriculum assume control of the evaluation process, at the same time to reconsider the weighting of subjects and revise the languages in which they are set.
Already considerable improvements in papers in language and mathematics have been effected by the West African Examination Council's Test Development and Research Unit, and by the Regional Testing Centre in Malawi.
But it is still apparent that many current ‘verbal ability tests’, together with most papers in Social Studies, Science and General Knowledge are in urgent need of review.
In at least two countries, Kenya and Botswana, such a review is already underway and CPE papers in Kenya already begin to show considerable improvement over those analysed by Somerset in 1974.
The allegory of the swimming pool
Hugh Hawes
How then do the children of Africa pass through their first school?
Socrates
I would have you imagine a swimming pool.
It is long and the bottom slopes downwards.
At the one end it is very shallow and at the other end it is deep.
Into this pool plunge rank after rank of children chained together.
They are of different heights: some are short and some are tall.
At the edge of the pool stand guardians with spears.
They force the children forward at a steady pace.
After a time the shorter children become submerged and the number under water increases as the ranks go forward.
Hugh Hawes
What happens to these?
Socrates
Some drown and are hauled out of the pool and left on the edge.
Still more are forced to walk on underwater, oblivious of the world outside.
By the time they reach the end of the pool they are too exhausted to climb out.
Hugh Hawes
What of the tallest children?
Socrates
They reach the end of the pool without difficulty but very slowly for they must march in step with their weaker and shorter fellows.
Hugh Hawes
The end of the pool, then, represents the final examination, the lines of children are the pupils of different ages and abilities, the guardians, I suppose, are the textbook writers, syllabus makers and educational administrators.
Socrates
Just so.
The second task is to assess the effects, present and potential, of the examination style and content on the school, and to redesign examinations with these effects in mind.
One relatively manageable task would be to use the computers currently employed to sort out lists and marks for item analyses of marks scored in individual questions, thus building up a profile of strengths and weaknesses in the subject analysed.
Much more fundamental, however, is the issue which concerns the existing format of the examinations.
It may well be that machine-marked multiple choice type questions may prove inappropriate instruments for measuring or achieving desired curricular goals such as content or skills in Environmental Studies.
In this case I believe that it is by far preferable to accept the lack of consistency which we all know exists in papers marked by people, rather than suffer the strangling constraints on what and how we teach forced upon us when papers are marked by machine.
The final task is to reconsider the virtual monopoly of the final examination as the instrument of selection.
Already, and much publicised, we have the Tanzanian alternative whereby cumulative records of performance and teachers' reports have been used alongside examination marks to determine who goes to secondary school.
It has always seemed to me that in pupils' day to day work and more specifically in their exercise books, we have a reasonable body of evidence which can be evaluated, probably in the school, moderated, probably by other teachers and headmasters and allowed to count in some way towards the success of pupils.
In this way, provided they are given guidance on the type and volume of work expected, schools could be brought back into the mainstream of assessing their own pupils' work instead of being totally dependent on the success or failure of the guessing games they play with the examiner.
It may be appropriate to end this section with a quotation from H. C. A. Somerset whose research on examination and selection in African schools has done so much to clarify problems and suggest solutions:
‘If the Certificate of Primary Education tested material which was firmly within the grasp of primary school teachers: if it tested the ability to re–son and understand relationships of cause and effect; and, if, above all, it tested relevant and practical knowledge, it would be at the same time both a more efficient and equitable instrument for selecting secondary school entrants and also a more useful preparation for those for whom primary education is terminal.
The two goals are not incompatible.
In Education for Self-Reliance , Nyerere has written: ‘We should not determine the type of things children are taught in primary schools by the things a doctor, engineer, teacher, economist or administrator needs to l–now.
Most of our pupils will never by any of these things….
Our sights must be on the majority.’
If we wish to make a reality out of Nyerere's vision, the place to start with is the secondary school selection examination.’
Issues for debate
Underlying all the decisions, all the choices which have to be made concerning an official curriculum, all the conflicting influences and all the necessary compromises, three familiar issues can be recognised:
What curriculum is to be selected?
Who is going to make the choice?
How is this selection to be expressed to the users?
Choices of language, decisions regarding objectives, content, the priority accorded to them and the criteria for determining them all have to be made, renewed and periodically revised.
Side by side with these come decisions regarding curriculum control, in particular those related to the degree of flexibility to be permitted and encouraged in relation to choice of language, of content and of evaluation.
Currently, in many countries, debate centres on whether some kind of core curriculum with permitted options should evolve, as suggested in recent reports from Zambia, Botswana and Lesotho, and if so of what nature that core should be.
But who makes the choices, establishes the criteria and decides the priorities?
Who co-ordinates and resolves conflicts?
It must have become clear to us by now that a committee of different subject specialists trading off time and contents with each other is an unwieldy and potentially dangerous body.
But what can be suggested to replace them?
A small primary curriculum steering committee, perhaps.
Would it be heresy to suggest that such a committee need not be composed entirely of educationists and should not be composed entirely of specialists in curriculum development.
Finally how are such official plans to be expressed and disseminated?
In only one country I have recently visited, Kenya, was I able to buy a syllabus in the bookshop.
Yet a statement of national intent concerning the learnings planned and provided for a nation's youth is surely a document which should be available and one which needs to be open to public criticism.
Could we not look forward to an era where our syllabuses for instruction in schools were as carefully drafted, as well produced and as widely read and discussed as our development plans for education?
Teacher-centred learning (West African style)
The teacher is telling a story in Yoruba, but not in the way 1, an Englishman, would tell it.
She is dancing it, singing it, acting it.
She tells with her face, her voice, her whole body.
The class is completely caught up in the action: toes and shoulders wriggling in sympathy.
There is a song involved; the whole class joins in without invitation.
As we all dance forward towards the next episode, I realise that for one brief hour we have escaped from the drab monotony of the Oxford English Culture.
(This is a win-dow.
What is this class?
That is a window.
First row?
That is a window.
Musa?
That is a window — Good, now all together….)
A headmaster with a problem (Sierra Leone 1976)
The class is working — and working hard — on a verandah.
Conditions are difficult.
The house is in the centre of the village and there seems a very real danger that the goat will eat your Mathematics books.
I am greeted warmly by the headmaster.
Hugh Hawes
How are you getting on?
Headmaster
Fine, we only have one problem.
Hugh Hawes
What is that?
Headmaster
We haven't got a school.
Hugh Hawes
Why is that?
Headmaster
Well, the inspector came and noticed a hole in the roof and told us to mend it.
So we took the roof off but then it rained very hard so the walls fell down.
Hugh Hawes
Has the inspector come back?
Headmaster
Not yet.
What shall they learn?(2) The actual curriculum in schools
What determines the actual curriculum
To step out of the curriculum centres, the institutes or the ministries into the schools of Africa provides such a contrast that it is easy to caricature the differences.
It is also treacherously easy to fall into facile and unproductive stereotypes, to categorise the curriculum in schools as ‘teacher-centred’ and ‘formal’.
Often it is both, but there are so many exceptions, so many degrees of variation that generalisation often invites misunderstanding.
We should also be wary of accepting unquestioningly the ‘romantic’ values implied in these labels.
There is only one valid measure of success of a curriculum: the learning which takes place.
Apart from the obvious fact that certain kinds of learning may be most appropriately learnt directly from a teacher, there are many contents in Africa where ‘formal’ and ‘teacher-centred’approaches are the only ones which can rationally and effectively be used.
Indeed, I have sat in many classes dominated by the art and personality of a teacher, where the whole class was carried forward to new understandings.
In Chapter 2 and subsequently, I have stressed the enormous variations in context which exist in African schools, between countries, between urban and rural conditions, between and within individual schools, and the way that these various elements so critically affect the learning experiences a school offers.
As I look back over visits to schools in recent years, the impressions, the differences, the experiences come crowding in.
I picture richly rewarding learning environments: I walk, unnoticed, into a creative activities period in Jos (Nigeria) where the children remain too absorbed in their various tasks to look up at a stranger, however unfamiliar.
I am shown over a large and productive school garden in Lesotho by the teachers and pupils who created it.
I meet an eager mob of fifty Class 2 children in Swaziland and a large lady who had taught every single one of them to read, determined collectively and individually to hold me in the classroom until they have proved it true.
I recall being earnestly explained the breeding cycle of rabbits by pupils in a Class 6 in Machakos (Kenya) where the classroom floor appeared almost ankle deep in the creatures.
I can tell of many schools and many teachers doing an exciting job under very difficult circumstances: a school set up in abandoned, corrugated iron railway sheds in Ghana with no partitions, hot at midday and unspeakably noisy during rainstorms, yet well equipped with a cheerful co-operative staff, an open plan school, Ghana style; an overcrowded school in Lesotho where teachers had evolved their own brand of team-teaching, one teacher imparting information to a class of 120, followed by groupwork where two teachers and a student supervised written work; a school down the road from them where Class I and 2 teachers who finished teaching at lunchtime had organised afternoon sessions on remedial reading for older children; another in Francistown, Botswana, in temporary classrooms, with walls made of hessian and children organised into ‘family groups’ playing reading and number games under the guidance of older children.
By contrast I retain pictures of those dull, soulless lessons, the daily lot of so many children throughout the world:
A Science radio lesson with poor reception and without accompanying teachers' notes;
A Mathematics class working through sums with half the children in a state of total incomprehension and getting all the examples wrong, while others spend fruitless time doing sum after sum on a process which they had mastered weeks previously;
A Civics lesson largely devoted to copying from the blackboard a diagram on the hierarchical structure of the ministry of education;
A singing lesson where the class intoned a version of ‘Bobby Shaftoe’ with words apparently modified by some early missionary;
A handiwork lesson where children were mechanically engaged in a task (making brooms) which all had already mastered before they ever came to school.
At the bottom end of the educational scale I remember so very clearly the instances — and there were far too many of them for my peace of mind — where the school had virtually given up in the face of difficulties.
Classes abandoned by their teachers, children enslaved by their headmaster to do his work and not the school's and those endless revision classes with or without the benefit of ‘students’ guides' of one sort or another.
These impressions, so varied, so vivid, serve to underline the enormous variety in actual practice in African primary schools.
But actual practice is somewhat different from actual curriculum.
Practice may be intended or unintended.
Curriculum is learning which is planned and provided for a purpose.
Plans and purposes of schools and teachers may differ from those of ministries and the experts they employ — and may indeed be more realistic.
Of course the gap between the official and the actual curriculum varies in nature and extent, but certain types of variations are common enough to warrant generalisations.
Consider some of these.
TIME ALLOCATIONS
Time available in schools is almost invariably less than time allocated in curriculum plans.
Quite apart from the leisurely beginnings and ends of terms, the examination time, unexpected holidays, and festivals, requests for children to parade or sing or help with community work, there are the apparently inevitable absences of teachers: the headmaster to collect salaries, the senior teachers to mark and supervise examinations or attend panels, the married ladies to nurse sick children or to have babies.
These absences are part of life in an African primary  school and no number of official circulars will alter the situation.
Consequently, syllabuses and teachers' guides which depend on the full official time allocation for their completion, and many do, are doomed to failure, whereas a shorter and more manageable core, with optional and enrichment materials for better endowed schools and better teachers would ensure that minimum content was taught.
LANGUAGE OF INSTRUCTION
Whatever the syllabus says, the teacher and the school to some degree choose their own language medium.
The official policy will influence that choice and so too will the school and community perception of what language medium is most likely to help towards secondary entrance, hence pressures towards more English medium and earlier English teaching in some areas.
But the main determinant will usually be ease of communication: what language the teacher can teach and what language the children can best understand.
As a result, all sorts of patterns emerge, including lessons which go on in two and sometimes three languages.
To insist on a dogmatic policy is unworkable.
It may prove more feasible and profitable to set standards of language competence to be achieved at certain levels and leave room for different paths to these common goals.
BASIC SKILLS
Syllabuses and those who frame them may talk of ‘all round education’ but schools are in no doubt about their curriculum priorities.
These are Language and Mathematics.
The emphasis on them is apparent even on the most casual visit to schools.
Obvious indicators are the books schools or parents buy for children and the priority in which they buy them, the volume of work in exercise books and the care with which it is corrected as well as the actual, as distinct from the official, allocation of teaching time.
Emphasis as between local language and English teaching varies according to national patterns and policies, but a survey would most probably reveal the English text as the most commonly possessed book in most schools.
These priorities are pragmatic and sensible.
Teaching the 3 R's is what schools do best, and what no other form of education can do in their stead.
It would seem entirely appropriate if official syllabuses, official materials' production schemes and official policies of implementation ensured, like the schools, that wherever else economies were made, the teaching of language and number and particularly the former, received adequate attention and adequate funding.
EXAMINATIONS AND PREPARATIONS FOR THEM
I have earlier discussed the critical importance of examinations and selection as a determinant of the actual curriculum in schools.
Subject selection, content and methodology are to a great extent, dominated by their influence on upper classes and no one who is aware of social and salary structures in Africa, or who has had children of his own in the system, would expect otherwise.
Even in a socialist country like Tanzania, however committed one may be to the abolition of privilege in society, there is no arguing with the fact that young people with secondary and higher education can expect life to bring them a richer and more interesting experience than it does to the primary school leaver.
Philemon's results (A story from Zambia)
The headmaster stood up behind his desk.
Although he greeted them cheerily enough, they noticed that he was twisting a new piece of white chalk nervously between his fingers.
The boys knew from long experience that this was a sign of trouble.
‘Good afternoon, boys.
I've now received the acceptance from the headmaster of the Secondary School.
I am afraid that some of you are going to be disappointed, but you know that there are not places in the Secondary School for everyone who passes Standard Six.
With only two exceptions you all did very well in your qualifying examinations and I am very proud of the school's results, but, I am sorry, only twelve of you have been accepted for Form 1.’
There was silence in the classroom.
No one moved, or said anything, because each one of the boys sitting there was quite certain that he would be one of the lucky twelve to be chosen.
It was only when the headmaster had finished reading the list of names that the hubbub started.
The twelve lucky ones jumped up laughing with relief and went wild with joy, the others shouted angrily, stamping their feet and banging the lids of their desks.
The only one to remain quite still was Philemon.
He sat like a man stunned by the sudden news of death.
Slowly he rose from his seat and went over to the headmaster who stood twisting the piece of white chalk between his fingers.
‘Mufundishi, you didn't read my name.
You know me, Mufundishi, I'm your boy Philemon Nalusanga.
You always told me that if I worked hard, one day, I would go for Secondary.
You know I am going to be a doctor, Mufundishi.
You know my Standard Six certificate won ‘t get me any job at all.
Mufundishi, what am I going to do now?’
The headmaster was an honest man, so he just didn't say anything.
Extract from Merfyn Temple's ‘From Chipapa with love’, an open letter to President Kaunda, Zambia, January 1974.
A revision lesson (Botswana 1975)
It is the afternoon session and very hot.
I enter a Class I with hot, sleepy six and seven-year-olds and a hot, sleepy teacher.
The children have exercise books and scraps of paper.
At a rough estimate 50 per cent can write a few words, 50 per cent cannot.
Hugh Hawes
What are the children doing?
Teacher
They are revising for their examination.
But to consider only the final selection examination, is to see only half the picture.
Although the tyranny of ‘promotion examinations’ has mercifully decreased in the past decade, in many countries yearly and termly examinations and preparation for them account for a quite disproportionate amount of school time and teachers are virtually ignorant of how and why and when to test.
Few approaches would produce more positive results on the actual curriculum in schools than review and retraining in this field.
While there are certain examples of examination paranoia in final classes which are unproductive and unnecessary such as the ‘mock’ examinations and endless preparation for them, it is idle to deny the influence of the examination or to discourage classes from working towards it.
As I have already indicated, the critical question we must ask is how we may design selection procedures which encourage sensible teaching and learning.
Where do the official and actual curricula meet?
I have indicated that a wide and unacceptable gap exists between central plans and local realities.
As a generalisation this is all too true: however there are areas where the gap is narrow or narrowing and others where it hardly exists.
This happy state of affairs happens, mainly I believe, when two conditions are satisfied.
The first of these is when the teacher is asked to do a manageable job, where he is working within his intellectual capacity and has that confidence which proceeds from really knowing more about what he is teaching than the children do.
Such confidence is further strengthened when there is positive and practical help available to the teacher in the form of clear sequenced teachers' notes with practical advice.
The large volume of sound (if somewhat stereotyped) English teaching in lower and middle classes and the solid and sensible teaching of basic arithmetical processes are all, I believe, a product of such a sense of security, as are the generally more creative attitudes and approaches of teachers in the lower classes of primary schools.
The official and actual curricula are also brought close together whenever there is genuine interest and enthusiasm on the part of the teacher (which is almost invariably communicated to the children).
This is noticeable when short term goals can be identified and seen to be worth reaching and may well account for the very impressive efforts by schools in agricultural, sports and music competitions.
But it is most evident whenever a teacher has developed a real interest in some school subject or area of the curriculum, often the result of some form of limited subject specialisation by the teacher.
Sometimes this is officially encouraged.
More often it is not, for administrators would have a manoeuvrable teacher, and any form of specialisation decreases manoeuvrability.
Yet it is doubtful whether this argument outweighs the benefits a teacher gains from being able to concentrate his  interests.
For if he considers himself in some small way a specialist, not only can he spend a good proportion of his time teaching what he likes and probably, therefore, understands better, but he also has more of a chance of keeping up to date on his chosen subjects, particularly if he has support, as many of the teachers I observed had, from local subject advisers, associations or selective in-service programmes.
One popular myth needs, perhaps, to be dispelled at this stage.
That is the belief that teachers and children ‘don't like getting their hands dirty’.
Indeed I detect a genuine and growing support for Agriculture in schools, evident from pupils and their parents, whenever leadership is given by an enthusiastic teacher, and I have met a number of these, giving freely of their own time and sometimes of their limited funds as well.
The assessment of practical subjects and their funding remains a problem, but the negative attitudes towards Agriculture, which I remember so clearly in the years just preceding and just after independence in the countries where I worked and travelled, seems virtually dead.
Instead there comes the realisation, surely necessary all over the world, that every African, whatever else he is, is also a food producer and must learn to be an efficient one.
HOPES AND FACTS
‘Objectives are like targets,’ says Richmond, ‘the nearer they are, the easier they are to hit.’
In this chapter I have attempted to draw a distinction between the targets we set and our ability to hit them.
No one expects every one to hit these targets in the middle, but at least they should be in sight and the marksman should be provided with a gun that shoots straight.
The fact that many syllabuses and teachers' books are full of relevant and challenging content and that in every country schools can be found where interesting and exciting work is in progress, must not obscure the central problem.
To the average teacher in the average school the official curriculum plan is unattainable .
He just can't hit the target however hard he tries.
Unless and until more knowledge is gathered concerning the aspirations, capabilities and limitations of schools and the people who work in them, and until sufficient flexibility is built into syllabus planning to allow for the necessary variations that are inherent in planning and providing learning for different people in different contexts, the gap between prescription and reality will remain an unconscionably wide one.
Perhaps those of you, my readers, who are involved, like me, in curriculum design, might join me in a New Year's resolution to keep our wishful thinking in check and face reality more consistently.
Those of you who are teaching and training teachers for school, I would invite to rebellion.
It is high time that more of you spoke up in protest against us whenever we invite you to do that which is impractical or inappropriate.
Out of our argument, a better and more workable curriculum could emerge.
The realities of curriculum choice — perspectives from Lesotho
Analysis of context and goals, of comparative trends and approaches to curriculum change provides valuable data for a curriculum planner.
A knowledge of appropriate theory and the techniques of curriculum development gives him certain tools to work with.
Yet in the last analysis there are always hard decisions and choices to be made: which learnings are worthwhile, which are appropriate, which should be emphasised above others.
In 1977 I visited Lesotho and worked together with colleagues in the Ministry of Education to recommend a possible strategy for primary school curriculum change in conjunction with the setting up of a Curriculum Development Centre funded by the World Bank and a parallel UNICEF programme to assist in the processes of syllabus and materials production and implementation.
The plan which has emerged from my visit and subsequent discussions is based on needs and conditions in Lesotho, but certain issues are of wider relevance.
DETERMINING AIMS AND OBJECTIVES
We envisaged the following processes as necessary:
1
‘To reconsider, re-emphasise and publicise national aims for primary education and to spell out broad implications of these for the curriculum.
2
‘To refine these further by attempting to specify what it is hoped that a Mosotho child should know ,feel and have the skills to do as a result of a full Primary education and at each stage during that education.
3
‘To identify priorities : minimum learning needs for all Lesotho children who have attended primary school.
To consider the broad implications of these priorities on the selection and balance of the curriculum.
4
‘To identify issues vital to national development which can be woven into the fabric of curriculum materials for different subjects at particular levels or at all levels using the spiral approach.
(We would have in mind issues such as conservation of national resources, self-reliance, population education, health priorities, concepts of nationhood and the use of appropriate locally based technology.)’
Such statements derive from the meetings of a specially convened working party on national objectives, but as a preliminary to this a national debate on the purposes of primary education has already taken place in 1978, culminating in a widely publicised and widely representative National Seminar on the Content of Primary Education.
DEVELOPMENT THEMES
The concept of ‘development themes’ was central to our thinking Once these were identified, suitable approaches could be considered for different ages and stages in the curriculum and ‘topic webs’produced.
Thus a theme on population education would be centred, perhaps, on ‘our family’ in Class 2 and ‘people and food supply in Class 5.
In respect of materials production:
‘Once a theme (e.g. conservation of soil) is agreed upon it is up to all subject writers to ensure that it is woven into the content of materials produced; made the subject for reading passages in language, for problems in mathematics, for field surveys in social studies and for practical demonstration in agriculture.'
POLICIES AND PRIORITIES
Two interlocking cycles were recommended to cover the seven year primary course:
‘Cycle 1 concentrates on basic skills and extending from Grade I to Grades 4 to 5 (depending on standards of children).
In this cycle emphasis would be on achieving acceptable standards of oracy and literacy (in Sesotho), though oral English is also introduced, together with adequate numeracy and other basic elements: i.e. coordination of eye and hand; simple powers of observation and reasoning based on the home, school and local environment; personal health habits and positive attitudes appropriate to the age of the child.
Cycle 2 is a continuation cycle extending from Grade 4 to 5 up to Grade 7.
Here two elements are emphasised.
(i) Environmental Studies in which the child learns more about his or her environment and actually takes part in activities such as gardening and home science which help to control it and make it productive.
(ii) Further acquisition of learning skills: including further mastery of language skills (literacy in English is now introduced) and of skills in mathematical and scientific thinking.
In both cycles the fostering of sound moral, religious and patriotic attitudes are conceived as permeating the whole of the curriculum.’
A non-competitive literacy test (in Sesotho) is recommended to be taken at the end of the first cycle or any time thereafter prior to the final examination since mastery of literacy skills is seen as the first priority in primary school education in Lesotho —‘if learners are to profit from further opportunities for education in or out of school.’
APPROACHES TO CURRICULUM DESIGN
Central also to the recommendations was the concept of core, optional and enrichment materials.
Core materials refer to topics studied by all Basotho children at a particular level.
Optional materials would be of three types:
1 ‘Choices by schools and within schools of practical and cultural activities appropriate to local manpower and conditions.
Thus one school might offer drama because a teacher was interested, another pottery because a local potter was available to help and because clay was readily available.
Limits of choice should be indicated, but schools should be encouraged to offer local plans for approval.
2 ‘Choices within subjects e.g. alternative units in science and social studies to suit different interests and different local conditions.
Alternatives would be offered in the curriculum plan but there would also be opportunity for many other alternatives hopefully designed at teachers' workshops.
3 ‘Interdisciplinary units.’
‘Small numbers of units which cut across traditional subject boundaries could be designed — one such unit on transport having already been produced.
Schools who had the interest and expertise should be encouraged to make a reasonable investment of time in teaching such units in place of separate optional topics.'
Enrichment materials were seen as being produced mainly in connection with the  teaching of basic skills and would include additional topics and materials in Sesotho, Mathematics and English chosen so that they deepened children's understanding of core topics and including supplementary readers, apparatus, assignment cards, games and radio broadcasts.
The design of the new syllabus and the programme of materials production was to reflect these three categories.
At the same time both syllabus and materials would emphasise that the primary curriculum is seen as something much wider than a mere list of topics to be covered in class.
As our report indicated, besides denoting objectives, content and possible means of evaluation (probably entitled ‘how do we know what they have learnt’), the syllabus and materials were also to call attention to:
1 ‘The way that the subject is taught through the life of the school e.g. health habits, games, school government and self help in building and decorating etc. 2 ‘The way that the subject taught in school can be related to life in the community, e.g. community health, social service, home vegetable plots etc.
‘Such sections should not be inserted as footnotes but rather as important component parts of the syllabus — under headings:In The Class; In The School; In The Community.'
As this book goes to press (1979) these recommendations feed into the process of curriculum development in Lesotho.
Assuredly some will prove more valuable, some less so, some unworkable.
They are all part of that continuing process of gaining experience in rational curriculum planning which forms the theme of this book.
IMPLEMENTATION
Proposals into practice (I) Changing people and their attitudes
In the early days of the ‘curriculum revolution’, when our enthusiasm was matched only by our arrogance, many curriculum workers in Europe, America and Africa seemed to take for granted that, since their new ideas were such very good ones, they would be widely and rapidly accepted by schools.
Now sadder but wiser, we are prepared to admit that the implementation of curriculum change is a complicated business.
A considerable amount of thoughtful literature is emerging to help clarify our thinking.
Implementation involves a series of related tasks : so the dissemination of ideas is the first necessity to prepare people to accept change, understand what it involves and why it is worth making.
In a centralised system the dull and docile will always go along with new policies, but no change can be properly interpreted or adequately sustained without support from active thinkers and innovators at different levels in a system.
Next it is essential to agree a workable strategy for implementation based on conditions as they are, not as we would wish them to be.
Only then can the process of implementation follow.
This involves not only the introduction of new practices into a system, but their consolidation and continuation after the first enthusiastic impulse has worn off.
Implementation is capable of different strategies which may and should be used to suit different circumstances.
Havelock suggests three categories:the research and development and diffusion model , where an idea or practice conceived at the centre is fed out into the system;the social interaction model , where change proceeds through formal and informal contact between groups; and the problem solving model , where individuals are themselves involved in initiating, developing or modifying aspects of a programme at local level.
Such distinctions are valuable only, I believe, once we realise that they are not alternative, but, rather, mutually supportive.
To achieve implementation is a long, slow, uneven task.
We need to exploit every means at our disposal to achieve our goals.
Implementation policies are very difficult to assess .
Whenever we say a system has ‘adopted’ a new curricular practice we are making all sorts of value judgements.
Sometimes we may apply relatively simple yardsticks, such as whether the school has or has not received the newly recommended material and whether it is using it.
More often, however, we wish to assess teachers' and pupils' attitudes and understanding.
But whatever criteria we use, we cannot conceivably make valid judgements unless we spell out what we are attempting to achieve and try to measure whether we have achieved it or not.
Some form of planned evaluation is therefore essential.
In the very simplest analysis, the task of curriculum implementation can be said to involve two main processes: first changing attitudes of policy makers, administrators, teacher trainers, supervisors, teachers, parents and ultimately (the sole goal of the process) learners; secondly providing the materials and administrative means to make this possible.
The two tasks are interrelated but in this book we separate them and look in this chapter at the first and most difficult task.
New demands on teachers and planners
The nature of the demands which new programmes may make on teachers has already been discussed.
They involve acquiring new knowledge and attitudes to learning including a degree of flexibility often uncomfortable to an insecure teacher and foreign to an authoritarian culture, more work and more thinking for everybody: and thinking in itself is hard work.
The demands upon those involved in the management of implementation are equally great and often overlooked.
Even the most straightforward programmes based on centralised planning, trial in project schools and eventual diffusion throughout the system involve considerable organisation and have far reaching financial implications.
With any model, however limited, implementation proceeds unevenly and involves participation at local level, a degree of flexibility in plans and among planners, a measure of decentralisation of control and the development of management techniques at local as well as at central level, together with the communication and the partnership which make all these possible.
To undertake this kind of management requires considerable knowledge and close personal relations between central and field workers, qualities only bred of confidence and maturity of judgement which can only come with time.
Significantly it is in Kenya where both experience and investment in curriculum development have been greatest over the past fifteen years that policies towards devolution in curriculum implementation are furthest advanced.
Spreading the word
One initial difficulty is that effective communication is just not one of the strong points in African systems of education.
All too often headmasters, teachers and parents are ill-informed about intended changes in primary curriculum programmes.
There has always been some awareness of this problem and the publication of simple informative magazines such as The Teacher in Uganda, has been regarded as one means of overcoming it.
More recently, however, I detect a considerable increase in concern.
It is significant that the public debate on policies and content of education mounted in Zambia in 1976 has aroused much interest in other African countries.
There can be no doubt that the people themselves in Zambia felt they had something to say: some 1,500 contributions were received, more than 1,100 from individual members of the public, the remainder submitted by local, district and provincial seminars, parent-teacher associations, teacher associations, church organisations and other bodies, including schools themselves.
A large number of these responses had direct bearing on school curriculum.
Different country — same problem
Reflections on the Keele Integrated Study Project 1968–71:
‘Three conclusions can be drawn:
First , the pressures on teachers involved in innovation to revert back in traditional content and methods are strong.
These are only partly due to the nature of the innovation.
They are also the product of the way the teaching role is traditionally defined.
The innovating role seemed insecure.
The assessment of standards of work was difficult.
The new content was strange.
Enquiry methods often seemed too time-consuming….
The second conclusion was that involvement in innovation was both wearing and stretching.
The crucial stage was not the introduction of the project but its establishment once these strains began to tell.
This strain was increased by the exposure of the innovating teachers to outside observation.
Innovations have to be evaluated.
The teachers have to report back, be observed and accept visitors.
As more time and energy is expended there is more exposure to critical evaluation.
The pull of the traditional is combined with the strain of the new.
The third conclusion follows from this combination of strain and exposure.
Successful establishment seemed to depend on the teachers investing enough in the innovation to overcome that already built into the traditional role.
This was itself dependent on the resources made available by the school.’
(And by the local authority.)
Extract from Marten D. Shipman's ‘The Role of the Teacher in Selected Innovative Schools in the United Kingdom’ in The Teacher and Educational Change: A New Role , OECD, Paris 1974, pp 205–206.
Yet there is little doubt that in most countries a good deal more could be done to get people talking and thinking about proposed changes.
Publicity materials could be increased and certainly better designed: teachers' magazines, newsletters, circulars could be shorter, better laid out, perhaps less patronising in tone.
Moreover, there seem to be all manner of missed opportunities to communicate and discuss proposals with teachers and headmasters.
Alongside the usual diet of methodology and administration, in-service courses could profitably include discussions on policy.
Visits of inspectors and college tutors might well be occasions for staff discussions on new plans and projects.
Better use could be made of radio and newspapers.
Experience is beginning to show us how necessary is even modest investment in such programmes.
Without information there is distrust.
Where distrust is rife, innovations falter and fail .
Teachers and schools are of necessity partners in the business of curriculum reform and partners must set forth on an enterprise with an understanding of what it is about, and a certain confidence in the policies they pursue.
Teacher education — a first essential for implementation
There is no conceivable way in which curriculum implementation can be divorced from the process of teacher education.
The teacher in school interprets the objectives and content in the curriculum plan and manages the learning situations through which intention is transformed into actual practice.
Over the last twenty years, we have come to draw a distinction between the initial and continuing training of teachers.
The terms ‘pre-service’ and ‘in-service’have been commonly used; they are, in fact, misnomers, for a substantial proportion of entrants to ‘pre-service’training have always been drawn from the ranks of those untrained teachers who perform such an important and unrecognised job in African primary schools.
Currently, however, distinctions between initial and ‘inservice’ training are becoming more difficult to recognise, as new alternative patterns evolve through the use of sandwich courses, internship schemes and multimedia courses.
Currently, too, the whole weighting between different modes of teacher education is coming under review, as the realisation of the vital necessity for in-service education to professional survival forces us, somewhat reluctantly, to question the investment we make, in time and money, in initial training.
As the perspective on teacher education widens to span the whole career of the teacher and as the work of teacher-preparation courses becomes far more closely linked to the 