

MIND AND BODY
Can food allergy or intolerance cause mental symptoms?
This is, without doubt, the most controversial aspect of food sensitivity.
Reports of mental disorders that were apparently caused by foods began with the work of the early clinical ecologists in America.
Since then, many other doctors who treat food intolerance and chemical sensitivity have claimed that such sensitivity can produce a wide range of mental problems.
The most common are anxiety and depression, but many more serious illnesses, including psychosis and schizophrenia, have also been attributed to food.
For the most part, objective evidence to support these claims, in the form of scientific trials, is still lacking.
But this may simply reflect the tremendous difficulties involved in such trials.
For doctors specializing in the treatment of food sensitivity, the many positive responses they have seen in their patients are sufficient evidence that food can cause mental symptoms.
But the case has been greatly overstated in some popular publications, and genuine psychological problems wrongly attributed to food sensitivity, both by patients and fringe practitioners.
This is just one of the mind-body controversies that besets the question of food sensitivity.
Equally acrimonious are the disputes over the purely physical symptoms of food intolerance, which some regard as psychosomatic — conditions where the mind produces genuine physical symptoms in the body.
On the one hand, there are those who see most ‘food intolerance’ as misdiagnosed psychosomatic illness, and on the other hand, those who see most ‘psychosomatic illness’as unrecognized food intolerance.
The effect of the mind on the body, and the problem of disentangling physical and emotional causes in chronic health problems, are also considered in this chapter.
The mind has the power to produce health, as well as illness, and  ways in which its healing powers can be harnessed are described here.
Psychological problems in food allergy
Some doctors believe that true, IgE-mediated allergy can produce mental symptoms as well as physical ones, but others would dispute this.
Certainly, some studies have shown that those with serious allergic disorders, such as asthma, tend to have more emotional and social problems.
The difficulty lies in separating cause and effect.
The disabling symptoms of the allergy, and the restrictions incurred by having to avoid certain allergens, is bound to cause mental suffering.
Indeed,.
studies that have compared asthmatic children with children suffering from other physical handicaps find little difference in the level of psychological problems.
However, there are innumerable reports of children with allergic disorders such as asthma or perennial rhinitis (runny or congested nose) who also show a cluster of symptoms that includes an inability to keep still, excitability, clumsiness, poor memory and short attention span.
These symptoms, often known collectively as hyperactivity or the hyperkinetic syndrome are dealt with more fully in Chapter Eleven.
Some of these children show an interesting reaction when the allergenic foods are removed from the diet and other allergens avoided: their mental and behavioural symptoms clear up at the same time as their physical ones.
Reintroducing those foods brings the bad behaviour back along with the wheezing or runny nose.
Although the mental symptoms could be a result of the physical ones, this seems unlikely.
One study showed that some such children had high IgE levels for foods that caused behavioural problems, so it seems that this could sometimes be a true allergic symptom.
However this is a controversial area, and conventional allergists do not seem eager to welcome behavioural disorders such as hyperactivity into their domain.
Less controversial is the notion that some allergic symptoms may affect the brain and cause mental problems, these being ‘secondary’ to the allergic response itself.
In those with severe asthma, for example, the reduction in oxygen reaching the brain can cause changes in mood and abnormal behaviour.
Lack of concentration, poor memory, ‘slowness’, drowsiness, depression, anxiety and irritability can all result from lack of oxygen.
Hay-fever and non-seasonal rhinitis (constant runny nose) can also have secondary effects on the brain.
The congestion in the nose may result in the normal breathing pattern stopping entirely during sleep (sleep apnoea ).
This wakes the patient up and breathing starts again, but if there are repeated attacks during the night this can produce severe fatigue and drowsiness during the following day.
Overall, the evidence suggests that IgE-mediated allergy probably can affect the brain, either directly or indirectly.
But the mechanism of direct action is unknown and the subject remains highly contentious.
Nevertheless there is considerable evidence that the immune system interacts with both the nervous system and the hormones.
This evidence, which will be looked at in the next section, is an indication that a direct link between allergy and mental problems is not impossible.
Interlocking systems
One of the newest and most exciting fields of biological research at present concerns the relationships between the immune system, the nervous system and the hormones.
The realization that these three systems can interact, and the identification of the mechanisms involved, has only come within the past few years.
This new science has been given the rather daunting name of psychoneuroimmunology.
Among the discoveries made in psychoneuroimmunology is that stressful events can make the immune cells far less responsive to infection.
Bereavement can have devastating effects on our defensive cells, but even something as minor as taking an exam can make us more vulnerable to infection.
With long-term stress, it appears that a sense of being in control makes all the difference — feelings of helplessness and inability to improve matters are the most damaging.
Controllable stress, on the other hand, can actually improve immune status.
The mechanisms behind these interactions are still waiting to be unravelled, but there are indications that small messenger molecules may be important.
These small messengers include the major chemical signals produced by the body (hormones ), messenger substances released by the nerves for communication with adjacent nerves (neurotransmitters ) and mediators released by immune cells which stimulate or suppress other immune cells (lymphokines ).
Some of the hormones known to affect the nervous system, such as the endorphins (p 230), now appear to bind to immune cells as well, and probably influence their behaviour.
Conversely, mediators produced by immune cells can influence nerve cells — histamine and prostaglandins both have this effect.
One lymphokine with marked effects on both body and mind is interferon (see p 227).
The hormone,noradrenaline , also acts as a neurotransmitter for some nerves.
In other words, these are three closely interconnected systems.
There are also direct links between the nerves and the immune system that do not rely on messenger substances.
Detailed anatomical studies have revealed nervous connections that were not previously suspected.
It turns out that several parts of the immune system — including the lymph nodes, the spleen, the thymus gland and the bone marrow — are connected by nerve  fibres to the central nervous system.
Exactly what effect the nerves have on these organs is as yet unknown.
So far, research into psychoneuroimmunology has done no more than scratch the surface of this potentially important topic.
But it indicates that the idea of allergies affecting the mind — and vice versa— is not implausible.
Food intolerance and mental symptoms
Most of the British doctors now working on food intolerance trace their interest back to a book, published in 1976, with the intriguing title Not All in the Mind .
Written by Dr Richard Mackarness, a psychiatrist at Basingstoke District Hospital, it described the good results of dietary change on a patient called ‘Joanna’ whose severe mental disturbance had been variously diagnosed as ‘schizophrenia, schizo-affective psychosis, presenile dementia, temporal lobe epilepsy, neurotic depression and anxiety hysteria.’
During seven years of illness she had been admitted to hospital 13 times, often compulsorily during episodes of violent behaviour when she was a danger both to her children and herself.
She had made determined attempts at suicide by slashing her wrists several times.
The outlook for this patient was very poor.
Although his fellow psychiatrists were thoroughly sceptical about the usefulness of an elimination diet — which Dr Mackarness had learned about from clinical ecologists in America — they were desperate enough to try anything.
During a five-day fast, Joanna showed a ‘very marked improvement in her condition’ and when subsequently challenged with individual foods, she responded sharply to some but not others.
In follow-up tests, the same foods were given by a tube leading straight into the stomach (thus avoiding the taste-buds) to check whether she would still respond in the same way.
By using the stomach tube, and portions of liquefied food identified only by a code number, the test could be carried out without either the patient or the nurse giving the test food knowing its identity.
(This sort of test — known as a double-blind test — is a must if the observations are to be verified objectively.
Even if the patient does not know the identity of the food — as in a single-blind test — the expectations of the experimenter can still influence the outcome.)
In Joanna's case, the double-blind test confirmed the severe mental reactions to culprit foods already identified in open testing.
This is how one of the more sceptical psychiatrists involved later described the patient's case: ‘I must admit that such a remarkable response has been a surprise to me.
However, it has been so dramatic that I think it would be difficult for us to say that it was due to anything but the dietary changes, especially in view of the double-blind trial.’
These and other well-documented case-histories lend support to the idea that food sensitivity can sometimes be at the root of serious mental illness.
But  it seems unlikely that it is often so, and it would be a mistake to extrapolate to other cases of mental illness which have been given the same diagnostic labels.
There is little doubt that a variety of different diseases are concealed under umbrella terms such as‘psychosis’ and ‘schizophrenia’.
No-one is suggesting that the mental hospitals are full of food-sensitive individuals who simply need an elimination diet to set them free from their illness.
Nor is it possible to say what percentage of cases might be attributable to food, because nobody has even attempted to find out.
For obvious reasons, it is extremely difficult to set up a large-scale trial of dietary treatment among patients who are seriously disturbed.
ROSEMARY
Rosemary was 67 and lived alone.
From time to time she suffered from bouts of depression as she had done for many years.
At one stage, in her early fifties, the depression had been so bad that she had been admitted to hospital.
But this was not her reason for seeking medical help now.
She suffered from diarrhoea with pain and bloating, which had been diagnosed as irritable bowel syndrome.
Her doctor had told her that there was nothing he could do for this problem, so she decided on private treatment from a doctor that a friend recommended.
He put her on an elimination diet, and within two weeks her bowels were functioning normally, for the first time in many years.
She also reported feeling much more cheerful, alert and confident than before, and the doctor assumed that this was an effect of losing her unpleasant bowel symptoms.
What surprised them both was Rosemary's reaction on retesting food.
Milk taken at breakfast time produced itchy skin by lunchtime, and severe bloating and diarrhoea in the afternoon.
A profound depression set in at the same time, despite the fact that she knew her bowel symptoms could now be controlled quite easily.
The depression took two days to clear, but afterwards Rosemary felt as well as before, both mentally and physically.
Two years later she is still very healthy on a milk-free diet, and no longer suffers from depression.
Less serious forms of mental illness, such as depression and anxiety, are commonly reported among those with food intolerance, usually accompanied by some physical symptoms.
Doctors who treat food intolerance have observed the mental symptoms to clear up at the same time as the physical ones during an elimination diet, and to reappear when the patient tests particular foods.
In many cases, it was the physical symptoms alone that were the target of the treatment, and both doctor and patient were pleasantly surprised at the change in mood that occurred simultaneously.
It is possible, of course, that the depression or anxiety is felt in response to the physical symptoms — rather than being directly caused by the food itself — or that the person experiences certain mental responses to certain foods simply because they expect to do so.
But the pattern of response that is observed is not easily explained in this way: with most patients there is a strong impression that the food itself is directly responsible for the symptoms.
Proving this is not easy, however.
It involves administering food in such a way that the patient cannot taste it, and somehow assessing their mental symptoms objectively.
The food must not only be disguised, but also given in sufficient quantity, a task that has taxed the ingenuity of many a researcher (see p91 and p92).
For the present, mental responses to food must be regarded as ‘unproven’, but with considerable circumstantial evidence in their favour.
Apart from depression and anxiety, the following mental symptoms are reported in cases of food intolerance: fatigue, mental exhaustion and confusion, inability to concentrate, poor memory, insomnia, tension, dizziness, disorientation, over-excitement, ‘nervousness’, irritability, violent mood-swings and aggressive behaviour.
In children, hyperactivity is frequently reported (see p 206), while in adults the most common symptom is excessive fatigue that is not relieved by rest.
Children may also show great lethargy and drowsiness.
Some doctors interpret both fatigue and hyperactivity as part of a common set of reactions which they describe as the ‘tension-fatigue’ syndrome, in which the patient may be profoundly tired or tense and irritable, or both.
For many, the fatigue is worst in the morning, so that the patient has difficulty in waking up and feels ghastly on getting out of bed.
As the day progresses the fatigue begins to clear.
Schizophrenia
One mental disorder, schizophrenia, deserves special mention here because it has been strongly linked with food sensitivity by some doctors.
The idea originated with the observation that it was more common among those with coeliac disease than among the population at large.
Coeliac disease is an extreme sensitivity to wheat that causes damage to the structure of the small intestine (see p l36).
Because of the damage to the gut wall, there is often a greater absorption of intact food molecules, which creates the potential for further food sensitivities.
The earliest studies designed to test this idea gave promising results.
A gluten-free, milk-free diet produced fewer symptoms in some schizophrenics, while feeding extra gluten made the symptoms worse.
Later studies failed to find any response, for the most part, although one found that two out of 16 schizophrenics responded.
It may be that gluten is important, but only in a fairly small proportion of schizophrenia cases.
Psychosomatic illness and hypochondria
A large proportion of those with food intolerance are diagnosed as having psychosomatic illness by their family doctors, or by consultants to whom they are referred.
Although this is distressing and frustrating for the patient, the confusion is understandable because the two disorders do present a very similar picture in terms of symptoms.
Psychosomatic illness , like hypochondria , is a term that is frequently misused, by the public and the medical profession alike.
The term ‘psychosomatic’ is derived from the Greek words psyche meaning soul, and soma meaning body.
It denotes an illness in which the action of the mind creates a damaging reaction in the body, with physical symptoms that can be observed or measured.
There is no sense in which the symptoms are imaginary or ‘all in the mind’ as is often implied in both medical and casual use.
Nor is it possible for the sufferer to ‘snap out of it’ as is often suggested with varying degrees of tactfulness.
There are several ways in which psychosomatic symptoms can be generated.
One major route is via the autonomic nervous system which regulates the bodily functions that are not under conscious control, such as digestion, circulation of the blood, breathing and sweating.
The autonomic system consists of two parts, the parasympathetic and the sympathetic , which have largely opposing effects.
The parasympathetic is responsible for the day-to-day running of the body, for keeping things ticking over nicely.
The sympathetic system comes into force when there is an emergency to deal with.
It increases the heart rate and blood pressure, and mobilizes glucose, the body's energy source.
It diverts blood from the gut and increases the flow to the muscles, preparing the body for action.
The sympathetic system can also cause bowel movement so that the contents of the gut are voided promptly, making the body lighter and therefore faster-moving.
The benefit of these reactions have to be understood in terms of life in the wild, where fighting off predators, or fleeing from them, may literally be a matter of life or death.
The reactions produced are often summed up as the flight or fight response.
The sympathetic nerves achieve their effects by releasing the hormone noradrenaline from the nerve-tips, which are located close to the organs that they influence.
A very similar hormone,adrenaline , can also be generated by a pair of glands known as the adrenals that sit above the kidneys.
The  sympathetic nerves control the adrenals' activity, so they are really part of the same system.
The inner part of the gland, the adrenal medulla, produces adrenaline, while the outer part of the gland, known as the adrenal cortex, is responsible for producing corticosteroids (‘steroids derived from the cortex’).
As the bloodstream carries these hormones around the body, the adrenaline produces the ‘flight or fight’ reaction already described, while the corticosteroids have a great variety of effects.
They too are capable of mobilizing glucose, but they also suppress inflammation (see p 318) and inhibit some immune functions.
Their main function in emergencies is to release glucose and thus perpetuate the ‘flight or fight’ reaction initiated by adrenaline and noradrenaline — they have a longer-lasting effect on the body.
Over-stimulation of the sympathetic nervous system can produce psychosomatic symptoms such as diarrhoea, nervousness, tremors, high blood pressure and abnormal heart rhythms.
Whereas in the wild, the effect of a burst of adrenaline would be worked off by the strenuous exercise (running for your life) that followed, this does not happen when the adrenaline is generated by an unpleasant encounter with a bank manager or traffic warden.
Our instinctive reactions seem to be rooted in the past and they are not always appropriate to twentieth-century living.
To make matters worse, adrenaline production is encouraged by smoking and by too much sugar, alcohol or coffee.
TABLE 1 SOME COMMON SYMPTOMS OF PSYCHOSOMATIC ILLNESS
Body system affected
Digestive system
Dry mouth or excessive saliva production.
Spasm of the oesophagus (the tube leading from the throat to the stomach).
Nausea and vomiting, stomach ulcers, frequent indigestion, loss of appetite.
Diarrhoea or
Nervous system
Headache, fatigue, insomnia, tremors, ‘nervousness’, dizziness and loss of balance.
Circulatory system
Abnormal heart rhythms, pain in chest.
Respiratory system
Runny or congested nose, constant sore throat, catarrh or post-nasal drip, difficulty in breathing, hyperventilation.
Skin
Excessive sweating, skin irritation.
Overactivity by the parasympathetic can also result in bowel disturbances, or contraction of the bronchi producing asthma, or over-secretion of acid by the stomach eventually leading to stomach ulcers.
A third way in which symptoms.
can be produced is through mental tension being translated into muscle tension, especially in the muscles of the neck, jaw and head.
Prolonged tightening of these muscles can produce headache, and possibly migraine (for more on this see p l26).
The full range of symptoms attributed to psychosomatic illness are shown in Table 1.
In addition there are conditions where the psychological component is only a small part of the story —it can make the symptoms worse but not initiate the illness.
This is true of eczema, psoriasis and most cases of asthma.
Exactly how the mind affects such symptoms is not known, except in the case of asthma where the autonomic nervous system can make the bronchi contract  in response to anxiety or emotion.
diagnosing psychosomatic illness
A diagnosis of psychosomatic illness should not be made lightly.
Firstly, the possibility of any organic illness must be ruled out.
(Organic in this sense means ‘of the body’, and organic illness includes infections, autoimmune disorders, allergies and other problems with an identifiable cause.)
Even if all organic diseases have been ruled out, there are still other criteria to satisfy.
me patient should have the right sort of symptoms and should have been subject to some stressful emotional experience before the onset of the illness.
A typical pattern in psychosomatic illness is for the disease to fluctuate with periods when the symptoms disappear only to return again at a later date.
If this pattern is present, and if other members of the family have had psychosomatic complaints, then the diagnosis is strengthened.
Unfortunately, a diagnosis of psychosomatic illness is often arrived at by a much shorter and less strenuous route than this, particularly with female patients, who tend to be perceived as more ‘nervy’.
All too often, doctors use ‘psychosomatic’ as a diagnosis of convenience, to cover any illness with no obvious cause.
What is more, little is offered in the way of treatment.
This is paradoxical because physical illness is taken seriously and given adequate treatment, and mental illness with mainly mental symptoms is taken seriously and treated (if not always very effectively or humanely).
For some reason, mental illness that produces physical symptoms is relegated to the status of an ‘imaginary’ disease.
Hypochondria
The same is also true of hypochondria, an anxious preoccupation with the body, or a part of the body.
The patient characteristically believes that the part  is diseased or not fully functional.
He or she generally reports pain, and other bizarre sensations of bodily disturbance and internal movement.
There are few physical symptoms that can be observed, apart from vomiting, fainting and sweating in some cases.
Hypochondria is thought to be a result of repressed emotions and secret fears, and it is far more likely to develop in families where there is a preoccupation with illness, or in people who have a great deal of contact with invalids as children.
In earlier centuries, hypochondria was recognized as a ‘real’ illness, with a distinctive set of characteristics.
And it was considered to be worthy of treatment.
The dismissal of hypochondria by most doctors is a relatively new attitude, and one which is lamented by those that have studied this disorder.
Robert Meister in his book Hypochondria writes: ‘Those physicians who shrug off a suffering patient because they regard his condition as psychosomatic or hypochondriacal are not acting as professional healers…
The cultural and social norms that affect considerations of health and illness have established what might be called an unspoken ‘Acceptability Index’ of various forms of illness.
On such an index, bacterial pneumonia, which is regarded as a ‘real’ illness, would indubitably outrank peptic ulcers, which are viewed suspiciously as being of psychosomatic’origin, and all illnesses known to man would outrank hypochondria…
The prevailing negative attitudes towards hypochondria are largely unexplained, unjustified and certainly unjust to victims of the condition.’
The best type of treatment for both psychosomatic complaints and hypochondria is some form of psychotherapy or hypnotherapy (see p l53) which should make it possible for the sufferer to identify the underlying emotions that are responsible for the symptoms.
Once aware of the source of the problem, the patient can come to terms with these emotions and the physical symptoms should then diminish.
In some cases, however, the symptoms are a vital element in the way the patient deals with the world and with his or her own conflicts about life and relationships.
For such people, the symptoms are indispensable and the best hope is to keep the condition within limits so that it causes the least possible disruption to the patient and his family.
The placebo effect
One intriguing aspect of illness is that it can often be ‘cured’— at least temporarily — by any form of medical attention.
A medical investigation or injection can work wonders, and a course of tablets is almost as good.
This phenomenon is known as the placebo effect,placebo being a Latin word that means ‘I shall be pleasing’.
Research shows that over a third of people in pain get relief from inert  tablets that they believe to be painkillers.
Headaches, migraine, insomnia, epilepsy and rheumatoid arthritis are among the conditions that are susceptible to placebos.
In some cases, the symptoms may have been psychosomatic in origin, which would account for the good effect of the placebo.
It may be that the patient feels gratified by someone taking his or her illness seriously, or it may simply be the power of suggestion — because they feel they are being offered a cure, they actually begin to get better.
In other cases, there may be a mixture of organic illness and psychosomatic illness behind the symptoms — the two can coexist, one feeding on the other.
Again, the placebo could be powerful because it meets some psychological need for attention and treatment.
With diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, it is less obvious how the placebo effect works.
However, the immune system plays an important role in rheumatoid arthritis (see p 119), and this may provide a clue.
A new form of treatment, or a new and more enthusiastic doctor, may act as a morale-booster which has a beneficial effect on the immune system — the sort of effect that the psychoneuroimmunologists are currently studying.
Placebo effects are also seen in allergy, perhaps for the same reason.
A characteristic feature of the placebo effect is that it does not last all that long: it is usually only a matter of weeks, and two to six months is about the most that can be expected: If a patient responds to a new treatment and is still well after a year, it is unlikely to be a placebo effect.
Psychogenic reactions to food
The other side of the placebo coin is that people can be made ill by something they believe will make them ill.
Some patients are more suggestible than others in this respect, but a fair proportion of food-sensitive people will react with symptoms if they think they have eaten one of their culprit foods.
This reaction in no way invalidates their food sensitivity — it is real, even if the symptoms of the moment are mentally generated or psychogenic.
Such reactions are not really surprising, if you remember Pavlov's famous experiment with the dog and the dinner bell.
The dog was ‘conditioned’ by a bell being sounded every time it was fed.
Even before it was given the food, the dog began to produce saliva in response to the appetizing smell.
After a time, the dog would salivate whenever it heard the bell, whether food was present or not.
An experiment with guinea pigs has shown that immune reactions can be conditioned in exactly the same way.
The guinea pigs were sensitized to an antigen by having it injected into them, and they were simultaneously exposed to a strong odour.
Later, the odour alone was enough to make them release large amounts of histamine.
If guinea pigs can do this, then why not humans?
Certainly anyone who has ever had a severe, immediate reaction to a food is likely to react in the same way if they are told that they have consumed some of the same food.
And people whose intolerance of a food has long since cleared up may continue to react to that food for purely psychological reasons.
Occasionally people develop psychogenic reactions to food when there is no physical response.
This can happen if someone becomes convinced that they are food-allergic or food-intolerant without undergoing proper diagnosis.
They may decide that they react to particular foods, on the basis of a bogus diagnostic test or an elimination diet that is not properly carried out.
Thereafter the reaction occurs obligingly every time they eat the food — but the response is a psychogenic one.
This response is one of the pitfalls of self-treatment, but it can occur just as readily — if not more so — with treatment by fringe practitioners who use ineffective methods of diagnosis.
Psychogenic reactions of this type are most likely to occur in those whose symptoms are purely psychosomatic, but who prefer to think they are ‘allergic’ to food, because they see this as being a more respectable sort of illness.
The medical neglect of psychosomatic illness and hypochondria must shoulder some of the blame in such situations, because the stigma attached to these disorders owes much to doctors' negative attitudes.
Patients who mistakenly believe that they are sensitive to food often put themselves on increasingly strict diets as their symptoms persist, and they may become seriously malnourished.
They are in need of sympathetic professional help to identify the true causes of their malaise, and should be persuaded to undertake psychotherapy or some other form of psychological treatment.
Such treatment can be valuable even where foods are a major cause of symptoms (see p l53), so undertaking this type of therapy is worthwhile for a whole range of patients, not just for those whose problems are purely psychosomatic.
Psychogenic reactions to food are important in the diagnosis of food allergy and intolerance, because a challenge with any food may produce symptoms if the patient is expecting symptoms.
In order to separate real responses from psychogenic ones, dummy challenges, with foods that are known not to cause any reaction, are included in the double — blind trials.
Most patients are expected to respond to some of these dummy challenges, but they should respond to significantly more of the real ones.
These dummy challenges are also known as placebos.
Food intolerance or psychosomatic illness?
It will be clear from Table 1, that many of the symptoms seen in psychosomatic illness are also features of food intolerance.
Indeed, ‘opponents’ of food intolerance would maintain that most supposed food intolerance is psychosomatic illness.
But doctors specializing in the treatment of food allergy and intolerance would disagree.
They see innumerable patients who have been told that their symptoms are psychosomatic or ‘all in the mind’ by one doctor or another.
Yet a high proportion of these patients respond to an elimination diet.
They get better when foods are eliminated from the diet — and they stay better, which is the important thing.
A diagnosis of psychosomatic illness or hypochondria is very largely a diagnosis of exclusion — it requires all other possibilities to be excluded first.
With many patients suffering vague, multiple symptoms, food intolerance must be regarded as one of those possibilities.
Unless steps are taken to ‘eliminate it from the enquiry’— and that must mean a diagnostic diet — then there is no sound basis for saying that a patient's symptoms are psychosomatic.
Things are not necessarily done in this order, however, and for good reason.
Many of those attending the doctor's surgery with physical symptoms, such as headache or diarrhoea, actually have serious emotional, sexual or family problems that they want to discuss with the doctor, but find it difficult to start on such sensitive topics.
Family doctors are trained in the art of discovering what the patient has really come to see them about.
If you have symptoms that you think may be caused by food intolerance you should not feel affronted if the doctor's initial questions seem rather personal and irrelevant to the aches and pains being suffered.
Answering the questions calmly and reasonably will do much to convince the doctor that your problems are not psychosomatic.
The question of how many psychosomatic cases the average family doctor sees is an interesting one.
One survey concluded that a full third of patients have some psychological element in their illness, with 18 per cent showing purely psychiatric or psychosomatic symptoms.
Other studies put the figure even higher, some as high as 50 per cent.
Such studies have received a lot of publicity, so it is small wonder that the average family doctor suspects a psychological cause rather than a physical one, especially where patients complain of multiple symptoms.
Doctors who are aware of food intolerance and experienced in diagnosing it have a different statistical outlook.
They vary in their estimates of how many patients might trace some or all of their symptoms to food, but most come up with a figure of 20–30 per cent.
The surveys described above, that showed large numbers of patients suffering from psychosomatic symptoms, took little account of the possibility of food intolerance .
Many of those classified as ‘psychosomatic’ may in fact have been sensitive to food.
On the other hand, more objective methods of assessing psychological disorders have also pinned the ‘psychosomatic’ label on problems such as irritable bowel syndrome and migraine-diseases that are claimed as prime  indicators of food intolerance.
And forms of treatment that address the mind rather than the body — including psychotherapy and hypnotherapy — have been successfully used to treat them.
In the next section we will look more closely at these apparently conflicting claims in relation to one particular disorder, irritable bowel syndrome or IBS.
Mental factors in IBS
One study that is often quoted by ‘opponents’ of food intolerance was carried out by Dr David Pearson of Manchester University and Dr Keith Rix of Leeds University.
They studied 27 patients suffering from irritable bowel syndrome who believed themselves to have food allergy or intolerance.
The study only found evidence of food reactions in 15 per cent of the patients, compared with 70 per cent in another major study.
The main reason for this discrepancy was probably their method of testing which only used very small amounts of the test foods (see p 91).
Dr Rix, who is a psychiatrist, examined half the patients.
He identified a variety of mild psychiatric problems, principally neurotic depression and anxiety neurosis, in 86 per cent of them.
The conclusion the doctors reached, given the apparently poor response to food testing, was that the psychological problems were affecting the bowel, rather than the other way round, in the majority of patients.
Doctors with an interest in food intolerance take a different view — that the psychological problems, where they exist, are largely a result of the illness, or of its rejection by the medical profession, or a mixture of the two.
But they would agree that anxiety, tension or depression can make the physical symptoms worse.
It is not difficult to imagine how a disorder such as irritable bowel syndrome could affect a patient psychologically.
For those with diarrhoea — one form of IBS — the symptoms are highly disruptive to normal life.
Any outing revolves around the need to find a lavatory at short notice, and many outdoor activities, such as hiking or climbing, are virtually impossible.
Apart from the pain which many patients suffer, the continual diarrhoea does great damage to the self-image and feelings of self-disgust are common.
If the diarrhoea comes and goes, there is an understandable tendency to blame ‘germs’ and a neurotic concern about food hygiene may result.
Where constipation is the predominant symptom, there may be considerable discomfort which again is damaging to morale.
Given these difficulties, it is hardly surprising that many patients with IBS show signs of neurotic depression and anxiety neurosis.
Lack of understanding by family members and doctors is likely to compound the problem.
Dr Joseph Miller, a clinical ecologist working in Alabama, writes: ‘These patients  are not basically neurotic, but they are less able to cope with daily problems because their symptoms distract and bewilder them.
They shop for relief from physician to physician, their self-esteem diminishes, and.their anxieties increase when they are told repeatedly that their symptoms are ‘only due to nerves’.
They receive symptomatic and supportive care rather than specific treatment.
Many…become secondarily depressed from the feeling of being hopelessly trapped.’
Dr Pearson and Dr Rix point out that the level of psychiatric disorder in patients with a variety of other bowel complaints is much lower — only 34 per cent compared to 86 per cent.
One factor in this difference is probably the attitude of the medical profession, since the other bowel complaints studied were all recognized conditions which are not dismissed as psychosomatic.
Unpleasant symptoms are a lot easier to cope with if you know you have Whatsisname's Syndrome than if you've been told that it's ‘all in your mind’.
The idea that the psychological symptoms could be largely a result of the physical symptoms, rather than the cause of them, is substantiated by one of the patients that Dr Pearson and Dr Rix studied.
This patient was sensitive to yeast and reacted to it in very small amounts, so that she produced a positive reaction even with the minute quantities that they used for testing.
This patient was put on a yeast-free diet, and given a second psychiatric assessment when her bowel symptoms had resolved.
Before the diet her score on the psychiatric assessment was 20 — well over the critical score of 12 that indicates significant psychiatric disturbance.
With IBS a thing of the past, her score was one — a marked improvement.
The usefulness of treatments such as psychotherapy and hypnotherapy in treating IBS is entirely compatible with this view.
If such treatments could eradicate the symptoms in a large proportion of patients it would be a different matter, but they do not-in most patients, they simply reduce the symptoms to a more manageable level.
For the patients who respond to such treatment, there is probably a subtle interplay of mental and physical factors — the distressing symptoms lead to anxiety or depression, and the disturbed state of mind makes the symptoms worse.
In some patients, psychological disorders may be even more important.
Mental and emotional problems, which began long before the food intolerance, could make a significant contribution to the symptoms, once the gut has become sensitized and over-reactive.
Even quite ordinary forms of stress can have an exaggerated effect on an irritable bowel.
A stressful situation, such as having to catch a train or make a speech, might make a normal person's stomach churn a little, but in the IBS sufferer it can provoke a violent attack of diarrhoea.
During psychotherapy or hypnotherapy, the patient should acquire new insights into his or her own problems, which can help to modify unhealthy ways  of thinking and behaving.
If the treatment is successful, imbalances between the different arms of the autonomic nervous system — the sympathetic and the parasympathetic — should be corrected.
This helps to tone down the bodily reactions to mental stress, and can therefore moderate a symptom such as diarrhoea, even though the primary cause of that diarrhoea is a reaction to food.
Mind over matter
Thanks to the action of the autonomic nervous system, any disorder of the digestive system can be exacerbated by the emotions — IBS is not unique in this respect.
The bronchi and the blood vessels are also controlled by the autonomic system, so they too can be affected, aggravating conditions such as asthma and migraine (due to expansion and contraction of blood vessels in the brain).
Although the mechanism is not understood, mental stress also seems to make eczema and urticaria worse.
Indeed, most of the physical symptoms of food sensitivity can probably be influenced by the mind.
If an illness has multiple causes it makes sense to attack it on several fronts at once.
By coming to terms with basic personal problems and achieving a calmer approach to life, the symptoms of food sensitivity can sometimes be much reduced.
It may still be necessary to avoid certain food items or undergo other forms of treatment, but it should speed the body's recovery, and make it possible to return to a more normal diet sooner.
And in the long run.
it will help to ensure continuing good health.
The approach used can vary considerably.
For those who can afford it, a course of treatment with a professional psychotherapist may be the best answer, although it is important to select the person and the approach carefully.
At its simplest, psychotherapy consists mainly of talking through past events and present problems, with assistance from the therapist or counsellor.
Hypnotherapy is also useful, except with those susceptible to depression, since this can be brought on or made much worse by hypnosis.
A professional hypnotherapist should assess each potential patient carefully and advise against treatment where necessary.
Some useful addresses are given on p 337.
For those who cannot afford this sort of treatment, but have plenty of time to spare, co-counselling may represent a viable alternative.
After a period of training, co-counsellors are paired off, and thereafter act as both counsellor and client to each other.
The idea may sound strange at first, but it often works very well, and the co-counselling movement has many enthusiastic adherents.
Contact addresses can be found on p 338.
For some people it can be enormously helpful just to write things down on paper.
The process of recording how you feel sets up an internal dialogue that can offer new insights into old difficulties.
Yoga or meditation may also be helpful in learning to relax.
For the less spiritually inclined, biofeedback  offers a ‘scientific’ route to relaxation.
There is one ailment where learning to relax is of special importance, and that is asthma.
The fear of suffocation that accompanies an asthmatic attack is understandable, but the anxiety itself can make the attack worse — or even bring one on unaided.
Asthmatics should learn a relaxation technique and practise it every day so that it can be ‘turned on’ at will, whenever an attack seems imminent.
Hypnotherapy is often used to teach this sort of instant relaxation, and is particularly effective with children.
They learn to feel that they are able to control the asthma, which reduces their feeling of helplessness and panic.
In the case of children, it is very important for the parents and other adults to stay calm as well— anxiety is infectious.
For children who are too young to learn a relaxation technique, a reassuring presence and a warm drink can often stave off an attack.
Physical health — mental health
Maintaining good mental health is a vital part of the fight against physical disease, and is especially important in long-term or ‘chronic’ illnesses such as food intolerance.
While some sufferers will quickly be restored to perfect health, for others it may be a long haul.
This is particularly true for those with multiple symptoms who have been ill for many years.
Patience and perseverance are needed, and a positive frame of mind is essential.
The following suggestions should help to improve your general health and maintain a well-balanced mental outlook.
If you are undertaking an elimination diet, you should be cutting out tea, coffee, alcohol and sugar anyway.
Assuming you are not sensitive to these items, you may later reintroduce them, but avoid taking any of them in large quantities, and in particular avoid strong coffee or tea.
Caffeine can be very damaging — see p 159.
If you smoke, make every effort to give up.
Eat regular, adequate meals and make sure you get enough sleep.
Try to keep to a regular timetable of waking and sleeping.
Keep your surroundings tidy and well organized.
Get out of doors as much as possible and take some exercise — preferably fairly strenuous — every day.
Feeling fit does wonders for the morale.
If you suffer from morning fatigue, taking some exercise before breakfast is often very helpful.
It need not take very long but it should be fairly strenuous — running up and down stairs a few times will do.
You will probably find that you perform very badly and feel dreadful for the first few minutes.
Take a rest and try again — it is amazing how much better you do the second time around.
Exercising before breakfast seems to ‘clean the slate’ for the body, before it has to deal with a new dose of food.
Try to spend plenty of time with other people, especially people outside  your immediate family.
If you find yourself endlessly talking about your illness or your diet, as you may begin to do, make a big effort to occupy your mind with other things.
Restrict yourself to one news bulletin a day, or avoid the news and newspapers altogether.
The constant exposure to doom and gloom that most of us take for granted can be a source of hidden stress — if you have real problems to contend with you do not need this extra mental burden.
Television programmes or books that make you laugh will do you far more good.
Hyperventilation
Some of the typical symptoms of food intolerance can also be caused by simply breathing too deeply.
When we breathe we take oxygen into the body and expel the waste gas, carbon dioxide, or CO2.
Our normal breathing pattern keeps oxygen and carbon dioxide at a level to which our bodies are well adjusted.
But we have to have some spare capacity in case we want to run for the bus or climb Everest (where the air is less oxygen-rich).
So we have the ability to breathe faster or take deeper breaths, as required.
The problem, in those who hyperventilate, is that they have got into the habit of breathing faster all the time.
Yet they are unaware of doing this.
The level of CO2 in their blood falls below the normal level, and this alters the pH (acidity-alkalinity) of the blood, producing a wide range of mental and physical symptoms.
The type of symptoms produced by hyperventilation are shown in Table 2.
The importance of hyperventilation depends very much on your point of view.
Some of those who are dismissive of food intolerance, see hyperventilation as a widespread cause of vague, multiple symptoms.
They claim that large numbers of those who are diagnosed as food-intolerant are actually hyperventilators.
The belief that they are ‘allergic’ to a particular food or environmental chemical makes these patients hyperventilate when they encounter it — breathing more deeply is a natural reaction to fear or anxiety.
The hyperventilation brings on the symptoms, but the patient perceives them as a consequence of the food or chemical — so the pattern of behaviour is reinforced.
Those who specialize in treating food intolerance regard hyperventilation as a somewhat less common problem, but one which can masquerade as food sensitivity.
More importantly, they recognize a minority of patients who are both food sensitive and hyperventilators.
They suspect that the anxiety caused by the food reactions was originally responsible for the change in breathing pattern, and that the two disorders aggravate one another.
A number of these patients are very seriously ill and appear to react to almost every imaginable food and chemical.
Some doctors call them ‘universal reactors’, and they will be discussed more fully in Chapter Nine.
TABLE 2 MAIN SYMPTOMS OF HYPERVENTILATION
Brain
Migraine and headache.
Poor memory.
Spaced-out feeling, confusion, anxiety or depression, tension, dizziness, panic attacks, hallucinations, delusions, mood swings, phobias, stupor, convulsions.
Waking up with symptoms, having vivid or frightening dreams.
Fear of sudden death.
Ears
Ringing sounds in ears, vertigo, sensitivity to loud noise, sounds seeming very distant.
Eyes
Blurred vision, double vision, sensitivity to bright lights.
Breathing
Shortness of breath, tightness and aching in chest, frequent sighing or yawning, dry throat, cough, asthma-like attacks, ‘lump in the throat’.
Heart
Abnormal heart rhythm, chest pains.
Digestive system
Stomach pain, bloating, belching, intermittent diarrhoea.
Muscles
Sudden loss of strength, tremors or twitches exaggerated twitching when falling asleep, cramps, aching muscles.
General
Tingling or numbness in the tongue, lips, fingers or toes.
Coldness or sweating, flushing, poor circulation, fatigue, fainting.
Feeling of pressure in the throat, difficulty in swallowing, husky voice, swelling below the jaw (‘swollen glands’).
(Reproduced by kind permission of Dr L. M. McEwen.)
Another school of thought maintains that a mild form of hyperventilation can be a feature, perhaps a symptom, of food intolerance.
According to these doctors, when the incriminated foods are avoided, or neutralization therapy provided (see p 286), the hyperventilation automatically disappears, without the patient even being aware of it.
They suggest that the adverse reaction to the food has some direct effect on centres in the brain which control breathing.
Anyone who shows a large number of the symptoms listed in Table 2 should consider the possibility that they are hyperventilating.
The most characteristic symptoms are numbness, tingling and a ‘spaced-out’ feeling.
Hyperventilation can be tested for, but not necessarily treated, at home.
To test yourself, choose a time when your symptoms are severe, take a fairly large, clean paper bag, and hold it over your mouth and nose.
Breathe as you normally would for a few minutes.
If you begin to feel better, then it is likely that hyperventilation is the cause of the trouble.
By rebreathing expelled air from the bag, you are increasing your intake of CO 2 which raises its level in the blood.
EDITH
Edith's medical problems dated back to her teens, but her symptoms had always been rather vague — excessive tiredness, headaches and indigestion.
At the age of 38 she suffered premature menopause, and her health then deteriorated very rapidly.
She suffered from migraine, diarrhoea with wind and bloating, and stiff, painful joints.
Hormone replacement therapy, the standard treatment for symptoms associated with the menopause, was tried.
She seemed to have more energy as a result, but she developed nettle-rash and a vaginal discharge, which turned out to-be due to thrush (Candida infection).
Apart from this she had a great many ‘mental’ symptoms — floating feelings, panic attacks, irrational bouts of crying, dizziness, numbness and tingling in her hands and arms.
Her doctor was convinced that most of Edith's problems were psychosomatic, but he referred her to a specialist who was interested in such cases.
She immediately recognized the signs of hyperventilation and retrained Edith's breathing pattern, which cleared most of the mental symptoms very promptly.
Suspecting that her diarrhoea and wind might be due to Candida infection, she put her on an anti-Candida diet and a course of anti-fungal drugs.
Her bowels were much improved by this, but Edith still had migraine attacks and trouble with her joints.
So she was asked to undertake an elimination diet, which cleared these symptoms within a week.
On testing foods, she found that wheat brought her stiff joints back, while milk and cheese produced a migraine within a few hours.
By avoiding these foods, she has remained very well, and has far more energy in her fifties than she had as a teenager.
If you are hyperventilating, but also have food intolerance, you may find that the hyperventilation clears up spontaneously when you undertake an elimination diet.
If it does not, then you need to be retrained into a normal breathing pattern, and your family doctor should be able to refer you to someone (eg a physiotherapist) who can do this.
Caffeine
KEN
Ken was in his forties when he was first found to have high blood-pressure.
He was given drugs which controlled this well and had no more health problems for the next four years.
Then he experienced pains in the chest, faintness, sickness and sweating.
Suspecting a mild heart attack, his doctor had him admitted to hospital but tests were negative and he was discharged after a few days.
This seemed to be a turning point for Ken.
After leaving hospital he was tired, anxious and depressed, apparently losing all interest in life.
He also experienced panic attacks from time to time.
Hypnosis and electroconvulsive therapy were tried but had no effect, and he became heavily dependent on tranquillizers.
Eventually Ken was referred to a doctor who had an interest in dietary factors in disease, and asked him about his diet It emerged that Ken drank 20 cups of tea or coffee, both very strong, in the course of the average day.
He was told to gradually cut these out, along with all other drinks containing caffeine.
Within a few weeks he began to feel better, and his depression, anxiety, tiredness, panic attacks, fainting and sweating are now a thing of the past Problems, due to too much caffeine are fairly common, but not everyone has the sort of symptoms that Ken experienced.
Some suffer severe headaches, others abdominal pain or vomiting, or a variety of other symptoms (see p 159).
One important dietary component, that can have a powerful effect on both mind and body, is caffeine.
This drug is found in coffee and tea, and, in lesser amounts, in chocolate, Coca-cola, Pepsi-cola and other cola drinks.
Some experts advise a maximum dose of 350–500 mg per day, but according to others, a dose of 250 mg a day is potentially toxic.
Two to six cups of coffee (depending on its strength), three to seven cups of tea, or seven cans of cola supply this amount.
Children are more susceptible to caffeine than adults and should probably not drink more than one or two colas a day.
Some individuals are far more sensitive than others and should not consume caffeine at all.
Taking excess caffeine can produce anxiety, mood swings, tremors, insomnia, abnormal heart rhythms (palpitations), sweating and weight loss.
Hyperventilation sometimes accompanies these symptoms, producing breathlessness, chest pains, tingling in the toes and fingers, dizziness and fainting.
Some patients who drink too much caffeine show none of these symptoms, but vomit violently instead — this is particularly common with tea drinkers.
Abdominal pain and diarrhoea can also be produced by too much caffeine, and in children it can produce hyperactive behaviour.
Those who drink large amounts of coffee during work hours may suffer from caffeine withdrawal at weekends, or if they miss their morning cup of coffee.
They may be irritable, lethargic, depressed, drowsy or nervous.
Nausea, sneezing and a runny or congested nose are other possible symptoms, and a headache may follow.
Some cases of ‘weekend migraine’ may be due to caffeine withdrawal.
Another symptom that has been attributed to excess caffeine is the restless legs syndrome .
Extreme discomfort in the legs, and sometimes the arms, leads sufferers to constantly move their legs around in bed, resulting in insomnia for themselves and anyone unfortunate enough to have to share a bed with them.
Although not all doctors would agree that restless legs are attributable to caffeine, anyone suffering this condition should try avoiding caffeine for a while to see if it makes any difference.
The amount of caffeine should be reduced gradually, over a period of two to three weeks, to minimize withdrawal reactions.
Remember that some painkillers contain caffeine (eg Anadin) and cut these out as well.
Psychological effects of allergy drugs
Some of the drugs used to treat allergy may have side-effects that involve the mind and behaviour.
It is easy to mistake these for direct effects of the allergy itself, so it is important to be aware of the possible effects of particular drugs.
Antihistamines tend to cause drowsiness, but some are better in this respect than others (see p 316).
If you or your child are affected it is worth asking the doctor to change you to another type of antihistamine.
Corticosteroids, if used for a prolonged period, can cause a type of dependency.
When they are withdrawn the patient may suffer fatigue, headache, depression, weakness, and aches and pains.
These drugs are only likely to cause such problems if they have been taken continuously, at high doses, for some months.
Ephedrine (see p 317) can cause anxiety, insomnia and restlessness.
Although it is less widely used than it once was, it is found in some bronchodilators and cough mixtures.
Some of these can be bought without a prescription.
Pseudoephedrine (see p 317) can produce euphoria and delusions, if taken in very large doses, and even in normal doses it may cause nightmares and behavioural problems in children.
It is widely found in cough mixtures (eg Actifed) and hay-fever medication, some of which can be bought without a prescription.
Consult the list of drugs on pp 326–9.
If the medicine you are taking is not listed there, ask to speak to the pharmacist at the shop where you buy it — he or she will be able to tell you if it contains any of these drugs.
Consult your doctor before discontinuing any prescribed medicines.
CHEMICAL SENSITIVITY
Hazel had been ill, in one way or another, for most of her life.
As a child she had pains in her stomach a lot of the time, and shooting pains in her arms and legs.
She was sick when she ate certain foods, notably fish.
Despite this, she was a bright child and did well at school.
At 17, she suddenly became very lethargic, put on weight and suffered ‘swollen glands’(enlargement of the lymph nodes, which are part of the immune system).
These symptoms looked just like those of glandular fever, and that was what her doctor diagnosed.
But the illness lingered for over a year, and in the end the doctor decided that she must be suffering from depression.
Her tiredness was such that Hazel could no longer study and she failed all her school exams.
She remained unwell, with recurrent headaches, sleepiness, fatigue and inexplicable bouts of fainting.
Alcohol made these symptoms worse, she noticed, so she gave up drinking at the age of 20.
Her family doctor remained convinced that all her problems were in her mind.
When she was 22, Hazel consulted a doctor who felt that her illness might be something in her diet or environment, rather than a psychosomatic problem.
He tried out an elimination diet, and got a reasonably good response.
Six common foods were identified as causing symptoms, but even when she avoided all these Hazel was still not particularly well.
So she was admitted to a special hospital with controlled environmental conditions (described later, on p 173).
Here she blossomed, recovering a great deal of her former vitality and alertness.
She was then exposed to various synthetic chemicals in turn, and reacted badly to diesel fumes, cigarette smoke, natural gas, chlorine and alcohol.
Some made her drowsy or faint, others produced a severe headache or nausea.
Tap water and filtered tap water also affected her, whereas mineral waters caused no problems.
By avoiding her culprit foods, and removing a number of synthetic chemicals (see p 164) from her home, Hazel managed to maintain a reasonable state of health once she left the environmental unit.
Problems with chemicals
Hazel is one of those unfortunate patients who not only have food intolerance, but also seem to be sensitive to various everyday chemicals as well.
A few of these people react to a great variety of chemicals and foods, and are quite severely ill.
They are sometimes called ‘universal reactors’ by doctors working in this field.
A few cases have attracted public attention — such as that of Sheila Rossall, a pop singer, who was flown to America for treatment in the 1970s, before such problems could be treated in Britain.
The newspapers invented the misleading name ‘total allergy syndrome’ for her problem, as well as the melodramatic headline ‘Allergic to the Twentieth Century’.
Patients of this sort were first discovered in the late 1940s by Dr Theron G. Randolph, one of the founders of clinical ecology in America, and they have been reported by many other doctors since.
People with a milder form of chemical sensitivity have also been found — they may become dizzy and nauseated if they breathe too many car exhaust fumes, have headaches when there is a strong smell of paint, or develop a sore throat and catarrh when they use particular cleaning fluids.
In children, hyperactivity (see p 206) is among the symptoms, and food colourings appear to be common culprits.
The range of chemicals that have been identified as causing problems is enormous — Table 3 shows a representative selection.
The range of symptoms is also vast, and includes many of those linked with food intolerance: headache, migraine, fatigue, nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, abdominal pain, rhinitis (runny or congested nose), wheezing, coughing, epileptic seizures, eczema, urticaria (nettle-rash or hives) and hyperactivity.
Despite these many similarities, patients with chemical sensitivity are noticeably different — for one thing, mental and behavioural symptoms are very common with chemicals.
Depression, excessive sleepiness, severe mental confusion, uncontrollable anger and ‘drunken’ clumsy behaviour have all been reported.
Another characteristic of reactions to chemicals is that they come on very promptly after the exposure — which helps in the diagnosis.
Like food intolerance, chemical sensitivity appears to be linked with Candida infestation (see Chapter Ten) in some people.
There is a suggestion that Candida makes the body more susceptible to chemicals, but this is unproven.
It could be that some underlying defect opens the way to both candidiasis and chemical sensitivity.
Recently, the problem of hyperventilation (see p 155) has been diagnosed in same people with alleged chemical sensitivity — particularly the ‘universal  reactors’.
This has led some doctors to dismiss the whole idea of chemical sensitivity and claim that all such patients are hyperventilating.
The truth is probably more complex than that.
Careful investigation often shows that these people have a dual problem: they are sensitive to foods and chemicals on the one hand, and they are hyperventilating on the other.
Which came first is anybody's guess, but the two are now working together to make the patient even more ill.
Chemical controversies
The question of chemical sensitivity is no less controversial than that of food intolerance — if anything it is more hotly debated.
But whereas there is good evidence to support the idea of food intolerance (see pp 85–95) there is almost no scientific data about chemical sensitivity.
Belief that the phenomenon exists is simply based on seeing individual patients who get well when they avoid certain chemical exposures.
A great many doctors feel that chemical sensitivity is improbable — a dubious diagnosis that probably covers up for psychosomatic illness, hyperventilation, or purely psychological symptoms.
Convincing them otherwise would take double-blind trials and a plausible explanation of how the sensitivity might arise.
Double-blind trials (see p 141) are difficult to perform with chemical-sensitive patients for a variety of reasons.
Firstly, it would be impossible to try out many of the gases and solvents ‘blind’ because they have a powerful smell — the patient would know what was being tested.
Secondly, many of the symptoms produced are highly subjective — headache, confusion or nausea, for example.
These are very difficult to measure objectively.
Looking for a plausible mechanism is slightly easier, but the search has only just begun, and there are few clues to go on at present.
Later in the chapter, we will consider the various possibilities in this area.
First we need to look more closely at ‘chemicals’ and discover exactly what they are.
WHAT ARE ‘CHEMICALS’?
All living things are made up of chemicals — chemicals and water and nothing else.
So are rocks and the air and other inanimate objects.
But when people use the word ‘chemicals’ that is not what they usually mean.
Colloquially, it means man-made chemicals or synthetic chemicals — ones that do not occur in nature, or which only occur naturally in very small quantities, compared to the amounts that we manufacture.
TABLE 3 SUBSTANCES THAT MAY CAUSE PROBLEMS IN CHEMICAL SENSITIVITY
GASES AND AIRBORNE Fumes from chlorinated water and bleach DROPLETS Natural gas Industrial air pollution Aerosols Pesticide sprays
SMOKE AND OTHER Tobacco smoke COMBUSTION PRODUCTS Coal smoke Fumes from gas- or paraffin-burning stoves/heaters Petrol and diesel exhaust fumes
SOLVENTS AND OTHER Petrol and oil vapours, also lighter fuel and VOLATILE COMPOUNDS paraffin Perfumes and after-shave Scented soaps and toiletries, scented cleaning materials Paint Varnish White spirit, meths, paint-remover Disinfectant Mothballs Air-fresheners Polish (furniture, brass etc) Formaldehyde (from cavity wall insulation, chipboard, foam rubber) Smells given off by: plastics (eg when warm) rubber and foam rubber coated (shiny) paper newsprint new fabric
NON-VOLATILE COMPOUNDS Food additives Pesticide residues in food Pollutants in water Plasticizers (escaping from cling-film and some flexible plastics) Waxes (on some vegetables and fruit) Medicinal drugs
Synthetic chemicals are not intrinsically different from naturally-occurring ones — their basic chemistry is much the same, although there are some novelties (eg chlorinated hydrocarbons — hydrocarbons are fundamental to life, but adding chlorine to them was a human innovation).
What is more, many naturally-occurring chemicals are highly toxic: the natural foods we eat are stiff with potentially damaging chemicals — plants, in particular, spike their products with an armoury of defensive substances (see p 15), fungi on the plants contribute their own toxins, and the bacteria in our gut add to the number we absorb.
Human beings are well equipped to detoxify these natural chemicals, with a powerful array of enzymes (see p 18).
For the most part, the enzymes that our ancestors evolved to tackle natural chemicals work pretty well on synthetic ones — as long as they are not overwhelmed by the amount they have to detoxify.
However, the initial products of the enzyme reactions are sometimes more toxic than the original chemical.
In other words, the body's detoxification enzymes have evolved to deal with a certain range of naturally occurring chemicals — they can go to work on synthetic ones, but on the way to breaking them down they may produce intermediates that are harmful.
For this reason, such changes are known as biotransformation rather than detoxification.
Chemicals from oil and coal
Most of the synthetic chemicals that we come into contact with —including pesticides, petrol, plastics and most solvents — are made from oil or coal.
These are known as organic chemicals — which probably sounds like a contradiction in terms to anyone who buys ‘organic’ vegetables!
The word organic is being used in two different ways — but with the same etymological root.
It means ‘of living things’.
The chemicals that make up living things are all based on chains of carbon atoms, with hydrogen atoms attached to them all along the chain — such molecules are known as hydrocarbons .
Until 1828 it was thought that only living things could make such molecules — hence the name ‘organic’.
Chemists now know how to make most organic molecules in the laboratory, but the name has stuck.
In the case of ‘organic’ farming, the name was originally used to show that crops were grown using fertilizers derived from living things — manure or compost — rather than inorganic fertilizers such as nitrates, which are made by chemical processes.
As pesticides became more widely used by most farmers, ‘organic’ farming took on a broader meaning — the crops were not sprayed with synthetic pesticides either.
So an ‘organically’ grown carrot is one that has not been sprayed with synthetic pesticides — despite the fact that these are ‘organic’chemicals.
Geologists believe that oil and coal are composed of organic molecules because they themselves are derived from living things.
In the case of coal, this is undoubtedly true: it is the partially decomposed remains of forests, which were made up of giant clubmosses and other extinct trees.
These forests covered the earth about 300 million years ago.
Oil is derived from the remains of microscopic sea creatures, and is even older, according to most geologists.
A novel theory about the origin of oil suggests that it is actually a product of the earth's core, and not of living organisms at all, but this is not widely accepted.
The origin of these substances is worth considering here, because there is so much misinformation on the subject.
It is part of the folklore of clinical ecology that coal and oil are both derived from ‘ancient pine forests’.
In fact, both were deposited many millions of years before the first pine tree grew on earth.
The clubmosses, which created most of the coal seams, are more closely related to ferns than they are to pine trees, and oil — from which most synthetics are obtained — is not derived from plants at all.
These distinctions are important, because the ‘ancient pine forest’ myth has led to the idea that chemical-sensitive patients are also likely to react to pine wood and pine products.
Perhaps chemical-sensitive patients are affected by pine resins — which contain a lot of natural toxins to protect the tree — but it has nothing to do with the origins of coal and oil.
The ‘ancient pine forests’ concept is linked to another myth about chemical sensitivity — that patients who are ‘universal reactors’are reacting to all synthetic organic chemicals because they come from a common source .
In other words, they are reacting to the ‘coalness’ or ‘oilness’of the chemical, rather than the chemical itself This theory stretches credibility considerably, because synthetic compounds go through so many chemical reactions, distillations and purification procedures that they bear little relationship to their raw materials, let alone to each other.
And in any case, those raw materials — coal and oil — are not at all similar in their own origins.
Again, these misconceptions are important, because the ‘common origin' idea is the basis for some forms of therapy used with chemical sensitive patients.
Doctors employing the ‘neutralization technique’(see p 287), often give ethyl alcohol in sublingual drops (under-the-tongue drops) as neutralization  therapy for mild forms of chemical sensitivity.
Ethyl alcohol , also known as ethanol , is the alcohol we use as a social lubricant in wines, beers and spirits.
But what is used in sub-lingual therapy is industrial alcohol.
This is made by adding water to ethylene gas, which itself is obtained from oil.
The theory is that industrial alcohol can desensitize someone to all synthetic organic chemicals, because it is derived from oil.
It will be clear from the facts given above that this is highly unlikely.
Which is not to say that ethyl  alcohol drops do not work — they could help a chemical-sensitive patient by stimulating the liver to produce more detoxification enzymes.
The chemical environment
Exposure to synthetic chemicals comes in three main forms — by mouth, through the nose and lungs, and through the skin.
The sort of synthetic chemicals that we eat and drink are described in Appendix VI, p 305.
Those that we commonly breathe include solvents (see Table 3), exhaust fumes, cigarette smoke and aerosol droplets.
In addition to these, many people are exposed to fumes at work — from industrial processes, photocopier machines or dry cleaning solvents, for example.
Those living in industrial areas, or near rubbish incinerators, are exposed to other airborne chemicals from these sources.
The third source listed above — the skin — is far less important.
The number of synthetic chemicals that get into our bodies through the skin is relatively small, but solvents such as white spirit can enter in this way, as can oils and solvents used in cosmetics.
Someone eating an average diet and drinking unfiltered tap water is likely to ingest at least a hundred different synthetic chemicals every day — see pp 305–10.
Exposure to airborne chemicals will vary more widely, depending on where people live, what work they do, how well-ventilated their homes are, and what sort of household products they use.
A smoker in the house will increase the variety and quantity of air pollutants considerably.
In all, we are probably exposed to at least two hundred different synthetic chemicals every day — and some people will encounter many more.
WHAT CAUSES CHEMICAL SENSITIVITY?
Why are some people apparently made ill by everyday synthetic chemicals?
There are two types of explanation on offer, which can be summed up as ‘allergic explanations’ and ‘deficiency explanations’.
The first type of theory proposes that these people make an inappropriate immune response (allergic response) to certain synthetic chemicals, in the same way that a hay-fever sufferer reacts adversely to pollen (see Chapter Two).
The second type of explanation suggests that these people have some sort of defect that makes them less able to cope with environmental chemicals.
It is usually assumed that this  is a deficiency in the enzymes (see p 18) that detoxify foreign chemicals.
We will look at the evidence — such as it is — for each of these explanations.
The allergic explanation
This assumes that the affected person makes IgE antibodies to the synthetic chemical concerned (see p 25), or responds with some other inappropriate and damaging immune reaction.
Since the chemicals concerned are too small to act as antigens in their own right, they would have to combine with body proteins and act as haptens (see p 31).
It has been suggested that this can happen with some food additives, particularly preservatives and synthetic colours.
These cause chronic urticaria (nettle-rash) in some people, and urticaria is sometimes due to an allergic reaction.
There are also isolated cases of tartrazine (a synthetic colouring) causing acute asthma attacks, or a severe reaction that resembles anaphylactic shock (see p 29) in some very susceptible.people.
Other food colourings, particularly the synthetic ones, have been known to cause allergic dermatitis, mainly in food workers exposed to large amounts.
The preservative, sorbic acid, has occasionally caused allergic dermatitis when used in medicinal creams.
In most of these cases, the tests to show that the reaction really is an allergic one have not been carried out.
And when a group of patients who were apparently allergic to tartrazine were tested for IgE antibodies, none were found.
So it looks as if these are not allergic reactions at all, even though they produce allergy-like symptoms.
Doctors suspect that tartrazine produces symptoms in these people by directly affecting the immune response in some way — perhaps by stopping the synthesis of immune regulators called prostaglandins (see p 28), or by triggering mast cells directly.
In the case of synthetic chemicals apparently causing asthma, the effect may be due to irritation rather than an allergic reaction.
This is well known for metabisulphites and sulphur dioxide (see p 291).
These are cases where the symptoms provoked by chemicals at least looked like allergic symptoms.
In the majority of chemical-sensitive people, the symptoms are not those commonly associated with allergy.
So it seems unlikely that chemical sensitivity is allergic in origin.
It is possible, however, that synthetic chemicals might affect the immune response in some way.
This has indeed been shown for some chemicals, but the usual effect is to lower resistance to disease, rather than to make allergies more likely.
The deficiency explanation
Some synthetic chemicals are excreted from our bodies unchanged — in urine, for example, or on our breath when we exhale.
Some, such as DDT, are stored  unchanged in the body's fatty tissues.
But the vast majority are acted on by enzymes, which change them chemically in biotransformation reactions (see p 165).
Ultimately, these reactions lead to the detoxification of the chemical.
In recent years, minor enzyme deficiencies have been found in some people, which do not normally make them ill unless they take a particular medicinal drug.
Studies of such drugs in food-intolerant patients have shown that a large proportion of them suffer from these minor enzyme deficiencies (see p 233).
In one study, some of the patients also had chemical sensitivities, and when the results for these patients alone were considered, 90 per cent were found to be deficient in a particular enzyme system.
Such a high percentage is unusual in medical research, and suggests strongly that there is a link between chemical sensitivity and enzyme deficiency.
This result was for just one set of enzymes — and hundreds are involved in detoxification.
Due to lack of resources, no further studies of this sort have been carried out as yet.
In another study, described on p 233, certain artificial food colourings have been found to inhibit crucial detoxification enzymes.
It is possible that enzyme inhibition by these artificial colours contributes to the problem in people whose enzymes are partially defective.
This could account for the frequency with which food colourings have been identified as the source of adverse reactions.
If enzyme deficiencies are at the root of the problem in chemical-sensitive patients then one might expect them to show the same sort of reaction to small amounts of a chemical as normal people show to large amounts of that chemical.
Occupational medicine — the study of how exposures in the work-place affect workers' health — is the main source of information here.
This branch of medicine studies the effects of brief high-dose exposures (as during an industrial accident) and long-term exposures at a lower level (but still much higher than most people would encounter).
It is the latter which are relevant to the chemical-sensitive patient, and they do provide some interesting and revealing parallels.
In the case of organic solvents, for example, the prime symptoms seen in workers exposed to regular ‘low’ doses are mental ones.
For example, toluene (found in paints and glues) produces fatigue and vague feelings of malaise, while styrene (used in the manufacture, of polystyrene) produces fatigue, a sense of ill-health and irritability.
Trichloroethylene (an industrial solvent that is a common contaminant of drinking water) may produce tiredness, dizziness, headache, irritability and digestive problems.
White spirit, which is a mixture of solvents, produces fatigue and general feelings of ill-health.
These are very much the sort of symptoms seen in many chemical-sensitive patients when they are exposed to organic solvents.
(Common sources of solvents are shown in Table 3.)
SHEILA
Sheila was a healthy woman in her early forties, who drove a delivery van for a chemical manufacturer.
Her problems began when a chemical drum in the back of her van sprang a leak, and filled the van with fumes.
She never discovered what chemical it was, but the immediate effect was to produce a headache, sore throat and intense irritation of the nose and eyes.
She had to continue driving the van all day, and again the following morning.
By lunchtime the next day, her eyes were so sore and swollen that she could hardly see.
She was also short of breath, and her whole face was beginning to swell.
Despite hospital treatment, it took a long time for Sheila to recover.
In fact her sight was not back to normal for three months.
Even after that, she continued to have headaches almost daily and felt nauseated most of the time.
A host of other problems added to her discomfort, including extreme fatigue, itching skin, pains in the stomach, constipation, and aches in her muscles and joints.
These symptoms were present most of the time, but became much worse if Sheila drove the car, used certain aerosol sprays, or had to sit in the same room as someone wearing perfume or aftershave.
When tested by a doctor with various synthetic chemicals, Sheila's symptoms reappeared.
Exhaust fumes made her drowsy and brought on a headache and pains in her eyes.
Sulphur dioxide produced a severe headache, while chlorine resulted in sneezing, itchy eyes, a runny nose and a sore throat
By ridding her home of aerosols, solvents, chipboard and most cleaning materials (see p 173), Sheila has managed to reduce the severity and frequency of her headaches, and her nausea has gradually subsided.
She is now reasonably well as long as she is at home, but car journeys and other people's houses usually bring her symptoms on again.
It is known from occupational medicine, that exposure to two chemicals at once can be far more damaging than being exposed to each chemical individually.
This cocktail effect commonly occurs when the same enzymes  are involved in detoxifying both chemicals — the two then ‘compete’ for the same enzyme, which is only present in limited amounts.
Even chemicals that are broken down by different enzymes may ‘compete’: some enzymes need substances known cofactors to help them do their work, so the two chemicals are ‘competing’ for cofactors, rather than for the enzymes themselves.
Many organic solvents interact with each other in this way, and it may be the combination of chemicals surrounding them that causes illness in chemical-sensitive patients.
Most of the vitamins are enzyme cofactors, and some doctors believe that a lack of vitamins can make people more sensitive to environmental chemicals (pp 259–60).
The alcohol in alcoholic drinks is itself an organic solvent, and it ‘competes’ with several other solvents for detoxification enzymes, slowing their breakdown.
Not surprisingly, perhaps, most chemical-sensitive patients cannot tolerate alcohol — this is often one of the earliest symptoms.
Many food-intolerant patients, with little or no sign of chemical sensitivity, are also unable to drink, which supports the idea that enzyme defects are important in food intolerance as well(see p 232).
The multiple role of many detoxification enzymes would explain one of the curious features of chemical-sensitive patients — the fact that they are usually affected by a whole range of chemicals, not just one.
This has nothing to do with the chemicals all being derived from oil and coal (see p 166) as is often suggested.
But it could be due to defects in an enzyme that is responsible for detoxifying a variety of environmental chemicals.
In general, enzyme defects are inherited — passed on from parents to children in the form of an abnormal gene.
So one might expect chemical sensitivity to run in families, if enzyme defects are a common cause of the problem.
But what about patients who are apparently fit and healthy until they suffer a massive exposure to toxic man-made chemicals?
Many patients with severe chemical sensitivity trace their problems back to an incident of this sort.
It is possible that such people had minor enzyme deficiencies before their damaging exposure, but that these were not causing any symptoms at that stage.
Some parts of the liver could have sustained mild damage during their exposure — not enough to cause  characteristic symptoms such as jaundice, but enough to leave a legacy of inadequate detoxification systems.
Liver damage is known to occur when the breakdown product of a chemical is highly toxic.
Because the chemical is being dealt with in the liver, the toxic intermediates (the initial products of the biotransformation reaction) accumulate there.
So damage is concentrated in.the cells of the liver.
Canaries of the chemical age?
One enzyme system, involved in detoxification, was found to be defective in  90 per cent of patients with chemical sensitivity (see p 169).
But that same enzyme system is defective in 20 per cent of normal, healthy people.
This suggests that there is some other deficiency as well in those with chemical sensitivity — perhaps a defect in another enzyme.
But it also suggests that many –normal, healthy' people are not as immune from everyday chemicals as they might appear to be.
One in five apparently has a potential problem, considering this one enzyme system alone.
Many of the symptoms shown by food-intolerant and chemical-sensitive patients are symptoms that we all suffer from at times — headaches, tiredness and indigestion for example.
Which is why some doctors feel that such patients are ‘not really ill’, simply over-reacting to everyday symptoms.
But to look at the problem from another angle, none of us lives in an environment free from synthetic chemicals — if we did, would we still suffer from those ‘everyday symptoms’ such as headaches?
Sceptics will argue that the chemicals we are exposed to have all been tested for safety, and should have no ill-effects at the concentrations we encounter.
But the fact is that such tests are done on single chemicals, never on mixtures.
So any ‘cocktail effects’ will have gone unnoticed in such tests.
Given the mixture of 200 or more chemicals that we may encounter everyday, cocktail effects could be very important.
It is also the case that the tests use animals such as rats, not human beings.
How does a rat tell the experimenter that it has a headache or feels a bit off-colour?
Quite apart from these objections, there are many other doubts about the effectiveness of safety testing — some of these are discussed in Appendix VI, in relation to food additives and pesticides.
Perhaps the chemical-sensitive patient is like the miner's canary, carried along in a cage to detect dangerous accumulations of gas in the pit.
This may sound alarmist to some people, especially those in the chemical industry who have a large financial stake in the continuing use of their products, but there is worrying evidence that we are being made ill by the chemicals around us.
One study of Parkinson's disease, an incurable nervous condition, showed that the use of garden pesticides was associated with a higher incidence of the disease.
Another study, carried out in America, showed that the children of parents who used pesticide sprays were more likely to suffer from leukemia.
Yet these products are supposedly ‘safe’ for domestic use.
The recent volte-face by the British government on the dangers of pesticide residues (see p 309) raises doubts about official assurances on other safety matters.
TREATING CHEMICAL SENSITIVITY
For those who think they may be sensitive to synthetic chemicals, the only sound method of diagnosis is to avoid chemical exposure as much as possible and see if the symptoms improve.
Individual chemicals can then be tested to  discover which ones are to blame for the symptoms.
Those who are seriously ill may be ‘universal reactors’(see p 162) and they will only recover fully if they can be protected from the majority of synthetic chemicals.
This is achieved with ‘environmentally controlled units’, which were first developed in America.
Ideally, these should be built and furnished using.wood, metals, cotton and other natural products — no plastics or other synthetic materials, which might release solvent fumes, are allowed.
Air going into the unit is filtered, as is the supply of water used for washing.
Spring water only is used for drinking and cooking food.
All foods are organically grown, except when foods with pesticide residues are used for testing.
Two environmental units are now in use in Britain, one a purpose-built unit of this type.
Needless to say, treatment in such units is costly.
Fortunately, there is much that can be done at home to reduce the level of chemical exposure — for the majority of patients, these simple measures will be enough to alleviate the symptoms considerably.
Reducing chemical exposure
The following measures will reduce the level of chemical exposure experienced.
The list begins with the simplest measures, and works through to more difficult ones.
Try the first three measures for a couple of weeks, and see what effect this has.
If there is some improvement, add the next two measures and wait another two weeks, and so on.
If there is none, it may be that work-place chemicals, or generalized exposures (eg air pollution) are the problem.
Consider whether this is likely, and if it is, try out the appropriate avoidance measures.
Cigarette smoke
If you smoke, even only occasionally, you should stop.
If other people in your household smoke, try to persuade them to give up, or to smoke in the garden shed for a while.
Wash curtains and other furnishings that harbour smoke residues, and air all rooms thoroughly.
If cigarette smoke is unavoidable, you could consider hiring an air filter for a while (see p 335).
Cigarette smoke at work is more of a problem, but if your colleagues smoke you might try asking your employer to provide you with a smoke-free environment.
Household chemicals
Clear out all cleaning materials, white spirit, turps, meths, dry cleaning fluids, polish, bleach, aerosols, air-fresheners, moth balls and disinfectant.
Rags and dusters with polish, window-cleaning liquid or white spirit on them should also be removed.
Banish all these items to a garage, shed, garden or balcony for a while.
If you live in a flat, and this is impossible, throw away all those that  you do not really need, and store the remainder in large biscuit tins or other airtight containers.
Stick to an unscented washing-up liquid (see p 336) for all cleaning purposes.
A herbal alternative to mothballs is available, if moths are a problem (see p 332).
Painting, gluing, varnishing, soldering and similar activities are banned for a while, If magazines or books smell strongly (usually the ‘glossy’ magazines and books with shiny paper), read something else.
Do not use felt-tip pens, especially the strong-smelling ones.
me rule here is — if it smells, avoid it.
Some furnishings, pot-holders and ornaments have a very strong-smelling varnish coating, particularly cheap bamboo products with a glossy surface If you have any items of this sort, banish them or put them in an airtight container.
Also evict any smelly plastic items — certain plastic bags, for example.
Open all windows whenever you can, to blow away residual smells.
If you have gas or coal fires, and can avoid using them for a while, it would be a useful addition to this list.
Make sure electric heaters are clean and free from dust before turning them on.
Avoid places such as dry cleaners and petrol stations while you are testing out these measures.
Do not use any insecticide sprays in the house, or pesticide sprays in the garden.
Perfumes and cosmetics
Do not use perfume, after-shave or any strongly scented toiletries for a while.
If you have to use deodorant, use the unscented, roll-on variety and try not to breathe the fumes.
Do not use aerosols or talcum powder.
Water pollutants
For details of these, see p 309.
You can either buy bottled mineral water, or use a filter to improve the quality of tap-water.
Filters do not remove all contaminants however — see p 311.
Rather than investing in a filter, it may be better to use bottled water if you are just avoiding tap-water for a few weeks.
Food additives
Avoid all packaged foods and drinks with additives listed on the label.
Remember that ‘flavourings’ count as additives, even though they have no E-numbers, and that ‘No Artificial Additives’can be very misleading — some ‘natural’additives are potentially harmful (see p 306).
Bear in mind that bread from a bakery can contain additives although it does not have to be labelled — buy bread from a healthfood shop or make your own.
Unwrapped cakes, sweets and  delicatessen foods are exempt from detailed labelling, as are alcoholic drinks.
Do not drink alcohol, unless you have home-made wine brewed from pure fruit and sugar (no Campden tablets), or can buy organic wine (see p 333 for suppliers).
Restaurant, cafeteria, or take-away food, including fish-and-chips, is often very rich in additives.
Also avoid tinned foods, because the phenolic resin that is used to line the tin can contaminate the food.
If you are taking any vitamin tablets with coloured coatings, give these up — an uncoloured supplement is suggested on p 337.
If you are taking medicines that appear to contain colourings, ask your doctor if he can prescribe an uncoloured version.
Pesticide residues
If you are able to get organic foods, and can afford them, then try to use these as much as possible.
Addresses of suppliers are given on p 333.
Growing your own vegetables is much the cheapest way of avoiding pesticides in the long run, but in the short term it may be possible to get unsprayed produce from someone with a large garden or allotment.
If none of these options are open to you, then shopping at a large supermarket is probably the best solution.
Two supermarket chains — Sainsbury's and Tesco — have their own systems for checking that fresh foods do not contain significant pesticide residues.
One major source of pesticides in our diet is potatoes, because these are sprayed after harvesting with a pesticide called thiabendazole, to prevent them from going mouldy.
Significant amounts of this pesticide remain on the potatoes we eat.
There are no legal limits on the amount of residue, although some large retailers (eg Marks and Spencer) set their own limits.
If you can only afford to buy a certain amount of organic produce, potatoes would be a good choice.
Fortunately potatoes are among the easiest vegetables to grow; and a small garden can provide a surprisingly large harvest.
As long as you buy good quality seed potatoes you should not need to use any pesticides — planting ordinary potatoes is not recommended as they can succumb to viruses.
For information on organic gardening methods, see p 334.
Thiabendazole and other fungicides are also used to prolong the storage life of oranges and lemons.
It is a good idea to wash such fruit in hot soapy water, and rinse them thoroughly, before grating the peel, or adding slices of lemon to drinks.
Oranges that are to be peeled and eaten should also be washed, because the fungicide is contained in a wax layer which comes off on the hands during peeling and then contaminates the fruit.
Washing other fruit and vegetables thoroughly will help to reduce the amount of pesticide eaten, and peeling fruit will reduce the quantity further.
When fruit is cooked in an open pan, some of the pesticides are boiled off, so this can help to lessen the amount that you eat.
Formaldehyde
The main sources of formaldehyde in the home are cavity-wall insulation and chipboard.
There is little one can do about the former.
The latter can be  replaced or ‘sealed in’ with gloss paint — get someone else to do this for you if you can, and stay out of the way until the smell of paint has dispersed.
If you have cavity wall insulation as well, the only way you can test for its effects is to go away for a while, to a house without sources of formaldehyde.
Simple stone cottages with solid walls are a good bet.
Plush modern hotels are likely to be oozing formaldehyde vapour.
Other sources of formaldehyde include foam rubber, new textiles, paper (including newsprint), photographs, leather luggage, antiperspirants, some cosmetics and shampoos, plywood and blockboard.
It is only worth eliminating these if you have strong reasons to suspect formaldehyde.
Plastics and other synthetics
Plastics and other synthetic materials release small amounts of volatile chemicals — a process known as ‘de-gassing’.
By evicting smelly plastic items (see p 174) you have already got rid of the worst de-gassers.
Removing those that remain is a fairly drastic step, which you should only embark on if you have good reason to suspect chemical sensitivity.
Bear in mind that soft plastic items de-gas more than hard items.
With synthetic fabrics, it may be sufficient to just stop wearing them and using them as bedding for a while, to see if this is beneficial.
One common source of fumes is the foam-backing on carpets — this tends to break down due to constant wear, and formaldehyde (see above) may interact with it to produce toxic airborne chemicals that can irritate the airways causing symptoms similar to bronchitis.
If you are sensitive to certain plastics, you should avoid keeping food or drinks in plastic containers.
This applies to mineral water as well— substances in the plastic bottle can leach out into the water.
Choose a mineral water that is available in glass bottles, but do not consume too much Perrier, as it seems to cause problems for some people.
Natural gas, oil fumes etc
The idea that people can be sensitive to natural gas is a contentious one, but it is claimed that some people have made dramatic recoveries after removing the gas supply from their house.
Just turning gas appliances off is not sufficient apparently — small amounts of gas still escape from the joints of pipes.
The sort of symptoms reported in gas-sensitive patients are faintness, mental confusion, irritability, aggression, lack of coordination and facial flushing.
A holiday in a gas-free house is the best way to test if gas is a problem.
Sensitivity to oil fumes, coal smoke, paraffin fumes and other odours from heating systems can be tested for in the same way.
Exhaust fumes
For most people, a couple of weeks ‘away from it all’ is the only way to test for  sensitivity to exhaust fumes.
But for anyone who does a lot of travelling by car or lorry, simply reducing the amount of travelling can significantly lessen exposure to exhaust fumes.
This may be enough to alleviate the symptoms.
Exposure to chemicals in the workplace
For anyone working in the chemical, pharmaceutical, engineering or food-processing industries, exposures at work should be a prime suspect.
The fact that symptoms come on after work does not rule out occupational illness — the effects can be delayed.
Not everyone gets better at weekends either — sometimes it can take a week or more to recover from the effects of chemicals at work.
Taking a long holiday in an unpolluted environment, while avoiding other chemical exposures, is the best way of testing for this possibility.
Hairdressing salons, dry cleaners, photographic developers and petrol stations are other places of work that may cause ill health Those working in offices may also be suffering from workplace exposure — to photocopier fumes, for example, or to solvents released by erasing liquids (Tippex etc), glue, carbon paper, chipboard and plywood.
Such airborne chemicals are likely to accumulate if the ventilation is poor.
Sometimes it is simply dry air that causes symptoms in modern air-conditioned offices.
Or it may be fungi and other microorganisms growing in humidifiers and being circulated with the air — typical symptoms in such cases are cough, tightness in the chest, fever, aches and pains, and general feelings of malaise.
Whatever the cause, a holiday in a cleaner environment should be sufficient to show if the workplace is the source of trouble.
The difficulty here is that simple lack of stress may also alleviate the symptoms — so an improvement while on holiday may be a slightly ambiguous result.
Outside air pollution
This is only likely to be a problem in heavily polluted areas.
Symptoms that regularly appear in close, humid weather, or when the wind is in a particular direction, are an indication of air pollution problems.
Again, a holiday in an unpolluted environment is the only test.
Living with chemical sensitivity
If you find that you are sensitive to various chemicals, then avoiding them is the best treatment.
Complete avoidance is often very difficult, but fortunately it is rarely necessary.
For most people, reducing their overall chemical load' makes them far more robust and able to cope with everyday exposures.
So simply avoiding cigarette smoke, household chemicals, food additives and tap water may be enough to eliminate symptoms, or reduce them to a bearable level.
You should also avoid exposure to large doses of synthetic chemicals, such as from household timber treatment or crop-spraying (see p 249).
There are also other measures that can improve overall health and make the body more resilient.
These include correcting nutritional deficiencies (see p 261), taking regular exercise, eating a good, healthy diet and reducing stress.
Tackling underlying problems such as Candida overgrowth (see p 183) or hyperventilation (p 155) will also help considerably.
Try to get outdoors, to somewhere with clean air, as often as you can, and take some strenuous exercise to improve your general health and fitness.
For those with severe chemical sensitivity, creating a chemical-free ‘oasis’ in the house can be very valuable.
For preference, this should be the bedroom, but there should be comfortable chairs, a table, and whatever else is needed for everyday living.
A space in which you can do some simple exercises may also be useful if you have difficulty getting exercise out-of-doors.
The idea is to retreat to the oasis whenever you can, thus reducing your overall exposure.
The oasis is also useful when you are feeling ill and need to recover.
All synthetic fabrics, plastics, chipboard, plywood, foam rubber and other man-made materials are excluded from the oasis.
This means old-fashioned armchairs, cotton blankets or a feather duvet, and a traditional type of mattress or a futon.
(If you are also allergic to feathers, see p 335.)
Nothing that has been painted or varnished recently should be allowed in, nor should cosmetics, cleaning materials or any of the other items mentioned in Table 3.
If you must, have a television in the room, but it is best not to watch it for too long, as the warmth of the set makes its plastic components give off fumes.
Books and a radio-set are a better choice.
If the air outside is polluted, an air filter may be a useful addition to the oasis (see p 335).
It is very important for chemical-sensitive patients to keep their problem in perspective, and not get unduly paranoid about the world around them.
The twentieth century may seem threatening at times for someone with these problems, but at least you are not likely to be struck down in your prime by cholera, smallpox or bubonic plague, and there is little risk of being eaten by lions.
Life has always had some risks attached to it.
Rather than focusing on the hazards of the world around you, try to think what you can do to make your body stronger and more resistant to environmental chemicals.
Above all, make an effort not to develop psychological reactions to chemicals — never assume that you are going to react to a chemical just because you have in the past.
If you allow yourself to become fearful of certain chemicals and imagine that they are harming you, you will just be perpetuating the problems rather than solving them.
PROBLEMS WITH PARASITES: CANDIDA AND GIARDIA
THE CANDIDA QUESTION
For several years a strong link has been reported between food sensitivity and overpopulation with a yeast,Candida albicans .
Again, this is a highly controversial topic, and there is considerable disagreement, even among those doctors who treat food intolerance.
Some deny that Candida is a common problem, while others claim that it underlies the majority of cases of food intolerance.
The truth is probably somewhere between these two extremes.
What is Candida?
Candida is a yeast — the same sort of organism that we use to brew beer and make bread, although only a distant relative of these domesticated microbes.
Yeasts are microscopic fungi — tiny cousins of the moulds and mushrooms.
Most fungi grow as long thin threads called hyphae — they are so slender that they can only be seen under a microscope, but a mass of intertwined hyphae is visible: this is what makes up toadstools and mushrooms.
Yeasts are different from other fungi, in that they do not usually form hyphae, but exist as tiny egg-shaped cells.
However, some yeasts can grow in both ways — either as hyphae or as single cells.
Candida is one of the yeasts that has this versatile approach to life, and the relevance of this will become clear later.
All of us have some Candida yeasts in our gut.
They are a normal part of the gut flora — the millions of bacteria and other microbes living in our digestive tract, mostly in the large intestine.
These feed on the remains of our meals but do us no harm — in fact they are essential to the well-being of the gut.
GERALD
As a young man, Gerald had suffered a severe bladder infection for which he needed prolonged treatment with antibiotics.
Although the infection cleared up, he was left with a mild diarrhoea that proved very persistent.
Five or six bowel movements a day were not uncommon.
Fortunately, Gerald found an office job, with a national charity, and his symptoms were only a slight inconvenience.
But in later years, as he was promoted to more senior posts, he found that he had to travel more and more to oversee fund-raising projects.
The symptoms that he had put up with for 20 years now became a real problem.
Sometimes he had to leave important meetings hurriedly and rush to the lavatory, which he found extremely embarrassing.
His doctor offered him drugs that would control the diarrhoea, but these were only partially effective.
Eventually he was referred to a consultant who took a careful case-history and wondered if there might be some connection between the heavy doses of antibiotics he had received as a young man and the continuing diarrhoea.
He explained to Gerald that by killing off bacteria in the gut, antibiotics can open the way for excessive growth by Candida.
Gerald was asked to try a diet containing no sugar or white flour and was given an anti-fungal drug, nystatin.
At first there was little change, but after about three weeks his bowel symptoms were much improved.
He now has only two or three bowel movements a day, and these are much more predictable and less urgent, which makes travelling easier.
A number of activities that were closed to him before — such as camping and sailing — are now a possibility.
As a result he gets more exercise and is generally fitter and healthier.
In the normal, healthy person the gut flora is a balanced community of different organisms.
But under certain circumstances, the gut flora can become disturbed, and then one microbe may be overrepresented, while another is rarer than it should be.
The most common cause of this is taking antibiotics by mouth, because these can kill off the ‘good’ bacteria in the gut, allowing not-so-good microbes to multiply and replace them.
Most antibiotics are bacteria-killers, and because a fungus is a very different sort of beast, these anti-bacterial drugs do not kill off yeasts.
So any course of antibiotics is likely to benefit the yeasts in the gut at the expense of the bacteria.
A modern epidemic?
According to some doctors, the widespread use of antibiotics since the 1940s has produced an ‘epidemic’ of Candida overgrowth, or candidiasis .
They also believe that too much sugar in the diet, and the use of the contraceptive Pill have contributed to the problem.
Sugar is the natural food of yeasts (which is why they are used in brewing), and it is clear that sugary diets do encourage Candida to grow.
The role of the Pill is slightly less obvious, but the statistics show that the Pill increases the risk of Candida overgrowth for women.
Exactly how the Pill produces this effect is unknown — the simplistic explanation usually offered is that the hormones in the Pill promote Candida because they are steroids, but this is really no explanation at all.
It is true that cortico steroid s will promote infection by Candida in susceptible individuals, because they have a general depressive effect on the immune system (see p 318).
Among its many other duties, the immune system has the responsibility of keeping gut microbes where they belong — only in the gut and not in the body's tissues.
But the steroids in the Pill are of a different sort — they are the female sex hormones (or closely related chemicals) and they do not act in the same way as corticosteroids.
There is great disagreement over the effect of the Pill on immune function.
Some studies have shown that the Pill decreases antibody production slightly, and others have shown more allergies, infections and autoimmune diseases among Pill-takers.
But the differences are very small indeed, and most doctors feel that the effects of the contraceptive Pill on the immune system are insignificant.
However, there does seem to be a relationship between the level of the female sex hormones, oestrogen and progesterone, and the ease with which Candida infects the body.
But this is not a general suppression of the immune system, more a specific interaction between the sex hormones and Candida .
This may explain why candidiasis is so much more common in women generally, as well as showing how the Pill might influence candidiasis.
Anything that depresses the activity of the immune system can lead to Candida overgrowth.
Long-term use of corticosteroids for diseases such as asthma or rheumatoid arthritis can make people more susceptible, and Candida infections in the mouth and throat are a feature of AIDS.
Vitamin and mineral deficiencies (see p 261) can affect the immune system, as can stress (see p 140), and these factors may be important in some people with candidiasis.
Candida overgrowth
Although the main site of Candida overgrowth is in the gut, it can also proliferate elsewhere — in the vagina or mouth, and on the skin, especially in damp areas, such as between the toes.
The common name used for infections in the  mouth and vagina is thrush .
In the vagina, thrush produces an intense itching, and an unpleasant discharge in some cases.
In the mouth, it can produce a sore throat, or creamy-yellow patches inside the mouth that leave a sore area when they are rubbed off, or tiny red spots that show where the Candida infection has occurred.
If Candida gets into a woman's urinary tract or bladder it can produce a form of cystitis — characterized by a burning sensation when passing urine.
Babies are very susceptible to such infections, especially in the mouth, where Candida produces a creamy or grey-coloured membrane covering the tongue.
In newborn babies, the infection is usually picked up from the mother's vagina during birth.
Some cases of ‘nappy rash’ are due to Candida .
Diabetic women run a higher risk of developing Candida infections in the vagina, because of the sugar in their urine — sugar feeds the yeast.
Thrush in the mouth is also more common in diabetics.
In the gut, the main symptom of candidiasis is said to be bloating and wind, because as the yeast ferments its food it produces prodigious quantities of carbon dioxide gas.
Diarrhoea and abdominal pain are also common symptoms, probably a result of toxins produced by the yeast.
In some people there may be constipation.
Much more rarely,Candida can invade the eye, kidney, liver or brain, doing serious damage.
However, such infections only occur in people with a severe -immune defect, a serious disease affecting their hormones, or some other fundamental disorder.
Long-distance symptoms?
The aspects of candidiasis discussed so far — the infection of specific parts of the body — is not in doubt.
What is more contentious is the claim that Candida overgrowth in the gut can affect other parts of the body, where there is no actual infection.
The belief that Candida can affect distant parts of the body — including the brain — is not based on hard scientific evidence.
But some doctors report that such ‘distant’ symptoms clear up, along with the diarrhoea and bloating, when candidiasis in the gut is successfully treated.
The type of symptoms commonly reported are fatigue, poor concentration, irritability, headaches, migraine, aching joints and muscles, hypoglycaemia (low blood sugar), irregular heartbeat, sinusitis, urticaria, psoriasis, eczema and other skin conditions.
It has also been suggested that candidiasis can cause asthma, although only very rarely.
How might symptoms like these be produced?
One possibility is that the yeast is releasing toxins and other products that travel around the body in the blood.
Some toxins have been identified, and one makes the blood vessels more leaky, which might account for the production of urticaria.
But the main effect of the Candida toxins is to depress the immune system — while this may well be important in perpetuating the Candida infection, it would not account for the symptoms described above.
TABLE 4 SYMPTOMS REPORTED FOR CANDIDIASIS
Diarrhoea or other bowel disturbances
Wind, bloating, abdominal discomfort or pain
Headache or migraine
Fatigue, poor concentration, irritability
Joint pains, sometimes with swollen joints
Aching muscles
Urticaria (nettle-rash)
Irregular heartbeat
Itchy anus, with the inflammation sometimes spreading to the buttocks and thighs
Premenstrual tension and irregular periods
Psoriasis and other skin complaints
Asthma, but only very rarely
Recurrent Candida ('thrush') infections in the throat or vagina
Recurrent cystitis, not due to bacterial infection
Recurrent fungal infections of the skin
Craving for sweet foods (this can also be caused by hypoglycaemia, see p 130)
ALAN
Alan developed a severe throat infection after swimming in the sea near a polluted stretch of beach.
He was treated with antibiotics and his throat healed, but soon afterwards he developed red itchy bumps all over his body — nettle-rash.
He asked the doctor if the two events might be connected but was told this was most unlikely.
The nettle-rash got somewhat better in time, but it continued to bother him at regular intervals for the next 20 years.
In his forties it grew worse and he decided to see a specialist When Alan mentioned that he had taken a lot of antibiotics just before the urticaria began, the specialist suggested that he try a diet with no sugar and very little starch.
At the same time he was given a course of anti-fungal drugs.
The nettle — rash cleared up promptly and has not returned, suggesting that it was due to overgrowth of Candida in the gut as the specialist had suspected.
Rather than toxins, it may be the yeast's waste product, acetaldehyde, that is causing problems.
This is a small chemical molecule that the yeast produces when it ferments sugar — in the same way that brewer's yeast produces alcohol.
If enough acetaldehyde passed into the blood, it might alter the oxygen-carrying ability of the blood, and this could affect the amount of oxygen reaching the brain.
At present, there is no evidence for this, however.
For toxins or acetaldehyde to produce multiple symptoms, quite large amounts would have to be produced.
Whether the yeast could ever be as abundant as this is open to question.
An alternative explanation is that the person becomes sensitized to chemicals produced by the Candida yeast, and therefore reacts to quite small amounts of them.
Some patients with candidiasis give a positive skin-prick test to Candida antigens, showing that they have indeed developed an allergic reaction to them.
This is unusual, however.
Other patients give a negative skin-prick test but respond positively to an intradermal test (see p 288), which is more ‘sensitive’ because it uses more antigen and places it in a deeper layer of the skin.
Whether this actually demonstrates anything is debatable — we all have antibodies to Candida because we are exposed to it from birth, and a positive response to an intradermal test is seen in some healthy individuals.
Even if there is an immune reaction to Candida antigens in a majority of patients, this would not explain all the symptoms attributed to candidiasis.
One feature of candidiasis supports the idea of an immune reaction being involved: many patients are affected by yeast-containing foods, such as bread, beer and yeast extract.
This suggests that there is a cross-reaction between the Candida antigens and those of other yeasts: antibodies whose primary targets are the Candida antigens also bind to similar proteins, produced by their cousins in the yeast world.
A number of patients show a more general sensitivity to fungi, and are affected by inhaling spores from moulds.
The usual sources of these are damp houses, compost heaps (a fungal paradise), rotting leaves, over-ripe fruit and other ‘mouldy’ items.
Such people may also be made ill by eating mushrooms.
A third possibility is that the Candida provokes antibodies which happen to cross-react with some of the body's own proteins.
Such antibodies have in fact been found, and they specifically attack the ovaries.
Many women with candidiasis have severe premenstrual problems, irregular periods and reduced sex drive — symptoms which clear up when their Candida infestation is treated.
It is possible that these symptoms are due to hormonal upsets, caused by anti-bodies affecting the ovaries.
A sweet tooth
One of the most curious symptoms of candidiasis is a craving for sugary foods or for foods containing yeast.
According to Dr George F. Kroker, an allergist working in Wisconsin: ‘Carbohydrate and/or yeast craving is such a characteristic finding in this disorder that one should seriously doubt the diagnosis of this illness if it is not present.’
LOUISA
Louisa was about 46 when she began to be troubled by unsightly red blotches on her face.
She worked as an assistant in a dress shop and it was important that she looked smart.
She found that she was having to wear more and more make-up to cover — these blemishes.
Before deciding on the best treatment, the doctor asked her about her health generally.
It emerged that she had suffered from mild diarrhoea and wind for some years, but had not thought it worth bothering the doctor about these minor problems.
She had also been feeling very tired, and had some pain and stiffness in her joints, which she thought was ‘just her age’.
Checking through her notes, the doctor saw that she had been treated for vaginal thrush on several occasions.
The doctor had no idea what might be causing the red blotches, but he did have a suspicion that the other symptoms might have a common cause.
He put Louisa on a diet which excluded all sugar and most starch.
She found this very difficult to keep to, as she had a sweet tooth and loved cakes.
But she persisted, and after two months her bowels were functioning normally, she felt far more energetic, and her joint pains had vanished.
It seemed that the doctor's hunch had been right: all these problems had been due to Candida.
At about the same time the red blotches on her Louisa's face also disappeared — which the doctor put down to coincidence.
A craving for sugar is undoubtedly more common, so we will deal with this first.
Since eating sugar will give the yeast a burst of growth and therefore precipitate symptoms such as bloating within a few hours, one would expect sufferers from candidiasis to be averse to sugar.
Presumably there is some positive response to sugar before the bloating sets in, but what might this be?
The most likely answer is that the Candida lowers the blood sugar, by constantly using up the sugar supplied in food, producing a type of hypoglycaemia (see p 130).
Eating a lot of sugary food would relieve this, if only temporarily.
The reported craving for yeasty foods is far more difficult to understand, since Candida does not feed on other yeasts as it does on sugar.
The link with food intolerance
It is widely observed that patients with food intolerance often have candidiasis as well— and those whose main problem is Candida often turn out to have food sensitivities.
Although there are no hard data to support these observations, many doctors working in this field feel that there must be a link between the two.
Sensitivity to man-made chemicals also seems to be part of the picture.
Some patients date the onset of their candidiasis to some heavy chemical exposure, such as installing cavity-foam insulation (this releases large amounts of formaldehyde into the house).
Others began to react badly to various chemicals at about the time they developed candidiasis.
One explanation for the link with food intolerance runs as follows: although Candida is normally a yeast (individual egg-shaped cells), it can convert to a hyphal form (tiny threads, as described above) in certain circumstances.
In the laboratory, this occurs if there is a shortage of the vitamin biotin, or of other nutrients.
Assuming the same thing happens in the gut, then a vitamin deficiency might make the yeast convert to the hyphal form.
Once in this form, the hyphae grow into the gut wall, just as the hyphae of a mould penetrate a piece of stale bread.
This creates tiny holes in the gut wall, making it more permeable.
More undigested food molecules pass through the gut wall than in healthy individuals, making food intolerance much more likely.
Unfortunately, there is no evidence to support this explanation, apart from some rather dubious circumstantial evidence.
Candida can convert to the hyphal form in infected areas of the skin or vagina, but it only does so partially — most of the Candida is still in the typical yeast form.
Whether Candida ever converts to the hyphal form in the gut is unknown.
Even if it does, the idea that it penetrates the gut wall, leaving tiny holes, is questionable.
This explanation also fails to explain the observed link with chemical sensitivity.
Many of the chemicals concerned are airborne ones, such as exhaust fumes or solvents, which enter our bodies through the nose and lungs.
So the leakiness or otherwise of the gut wall will not make someone more sensitive to such chemicals.
At present, there is no good explanation for the link between candidiasis, food intolerance and chemical sensitivity.
It is clear that Candida interacts with the body in various ways, which are both complex and subtle — in particular, its relationship with the sex hormones and with the immune system.
Perhaps these effects unbalance the body's normal control mechanisms, and make food and chemical sensitivities more likely.
Alternatively, there could be some underlying fault (in the control of the immune system, for example) that makes the body more vulnerable to Candida invasion, on the one hand, and more apt to react inappropriately to foods and chemicals, on the other.
Diagnosing candidiasis
Part of the standard procedure for establishing that organisms in the gut are causing disease is to examine the patient's stools for signs of that organism.
Unfortunately, this is not very helpful in candidiasis.
We all have some Candida in the gut, and patients supposedly suffering from candidiasis often show no more Candida cells in the stools than healthy people do — yet they respond well to anti- Candida treatment.
It may be that Candida is overabundant, but that this does not show up in the stools because the yeast is attached to the gut wall in some way — perhaps in its hyphal form.
In the absence of a reliable test, the diagnosis of candidiasis has to be based solely on the symptoms reported.
These are summarized in Table 4.
This is a rather unsatisfactory situation, but fortunately the treatment for Candida infestation (described below) is fairly innocuous, so it does not matter too much if it is sometimes given unnecessarily.
For many people, it may be difficult to distinguish candidiasis from food intolerance at the outset, because the two have a great deal in common, at least in the symptoms they cause: compare the table on p 183 with the illustration on — p 13.
Previous Candida infections, such as recurrent vaginal thrush, are a strong clue, but they are not infallible.
Some women patients who are plagued by thrush turn out not to have candidiasis, despite many likely symptoms.
Others with no history of thrush, and no abdominal bloating or wind, turn out to have candidiasis.
The only sensible course of action is to decide which is the more likely and try the treatment for that problem first.
In general, someone with food intolerance will respond to an elimination diet within a week, whereas someone with candidiasis may take much longer to respond to an anti- Candida diet — the response is also more gradual and less dramatic.
So if there is any doubt, it is probably best to start with the elimination diet procedure described in Chapter Fourteen.
The first stage of this involves cutting out sugar anyway, so the simplest type of Candida problem will be sorted out during that stage.
If there is no  response to either Stage 1 or Stage 2, then go on to the anti- Candida diet, described below.
If this has no effect, then it may be worth trying Stage 3 of the elimination diet.
Treating candidiasis
An important part of the treatment of candidiasis is to avoid sugary foods, and other refined carbohydrates (white flour, white bread etc) which can quickly be broken down into sugar once they reach the gut.
The idea is simply to starve the Candida in the gut, by denying it sugar.
Step 1
If you are on the Pill, and suspect you have candidiasis, you should ask your doctor about changing to some other form of contraception.
Women who have been on the Pill may have nutritional deficiencies (see p 260) and you may wish to take a nutritional supplement of the kind described on p 330.
It is a good idea to wait for one to three months, after coming off the Pill, to see what effect this has — for some women, the Pill itself is the unsuspected source of vague health problems, so the anti- Candida diet may be unnecessary.
Assuming you do need anti- Candida treatment, the first step should be a sugar-free diet — for some people this is all that is needed.
The foods to avoid are shown in Table 5.
If you are taking any medicines in syrup form, ask your doctor if he can prescribe a sugar-free alternative.
Artificial sweeteners can be used if required (see p 334), but it is best to break the ‘sweetness addiction’ altogether if possible.
Total abstinence from any sweeteners can cure a sweet tooth permanently — which is much better in the long term.
After a few weeks on an unsweetened diet, it is remarkable how disgusting anything sugary tastes.
Stay on this diet for at least a month.
If there is some improvement, persist for another month or two — the Candida is slowly dying of starvation, and it may take a little while to finish it off entirely.
If you are no better at all, then go on to Step 2.
Step 2
If the sugar-free diet does not do the trick, the next step is to cut out all fruit for a while.
White bread and anything made with white flour (eg pastry, pasta) should also be excluded.
Wholemeal bread and flour can be eaten instead, as these are broken down more slowly and do not release glucose all at once.
But they should only be eaten in small quantities, as should potatoes.
The bulk of the diet should be made up of vegetables and high-protein foods, such as meat, fish, eggs and cheese.
Eat plenty of freshly-crushed garlic, as this is thought to combat yeasts in the gut.
Fresh herbs, and green leafy vegetables, such as spinach and ‘greens’, are also recommended as they contain anti-fungal agents.
It may also be worth trying a herbal tea, called taheebo or pau d'arco — it is said to have anti-fungal properties, although this has not been verified scientifically.
For suppliers, see  p 334.
Eating live yoghurt may also be worthwhile as it contains some of the ‘useful’ members of the gut flora, and may help to reestablish a healthy balance among the inhabitants of the gut (see p 194).
Giving up fruit may make you concerned about Vitamin C deficiency, but if you eat sufficient quantities of fresh vegetables this should not be a problem.
Cabbage, broccoli and brussels sprouts are rich in Vitamin C, and potatoes are a valuable source.
It is important not to soak potatoes, as this leaches out the vitamin, and not to overcook cabbage and other green vegetables, as heat gradually destroys Vitamin C. Rosehip tea is also an excellent source of this vitamin, as is fresh lemon juice, which is permissible on this diet as it contains little sugar.
Again, you should stay on this diet for at least a month, and longer if you begin to feel partially better.
If there is a good improvement on this diet, fruit and other excluded foods can be gradually reintroduced later, but not sugar.
If you feel worse on this diet, then you may have food intolerance — to eggs or cheese, for example.
Step 3
If there is little or no improvement on the Step 2 diet, then it may be because there is a general yeast sensitivity, due to candidiasis (see p 184).
Continue with the diet as before, but cut out all yeast-containing foods.
These are listed in Table 6.
It is sometimes claimed that the Candida derives nourishment from yeasts in food, but this is not the case.
The reason for avoiding yeast is simply that you may be sensitive to it.
The distinction is important, because if you are very sensitive to yeast, even the smallest amount can make you ill, so scrupulous avoidance is necessary, especially at first.
If there is a partial  response to this diet, then it is a positive sign, and you should consider going on to Step 4.
If there is no  response at all, the most likely explanation is that Candida is not a factor, and it might be a good idea to try an elimination diet instead at this point, if food intolerance is suspected.
But keep in mind the possibility that Candida is the culprit — some cases of candidiasis need far more stringent treatment than that described so far.
Step 4
This is a very drastic diet ,and should not be started without medical advice .
Carbohydrates — the ‘starchy’ substances in foods — are restricted to 80 gm per day.
This effectively means no potatoes, bread, flour, rice, breakfast cereals, pasta or other starchy foods, except for one very small portion each day.
The incidental carbohydrate in vegetables, nuts and other foods will account for most of your daily allowance.
High-carbohydrate vegetables such as sweet — corn, peas, parsnip, lentils and broad beans should be avoided.
Nuts can be eaten in moderation, but not cashew nuts as they are rich in carbohydrate.
Continue to eat plenty of garlic and fresh, green leafy vegetables.
Step 5
If the Candida proves resistant to these measures, then drug treatments may be the only answer.
The drug most widely used is nystatin.
Although this is available in tablet form it is often prescribed as a powder, to be taken mixed with water — this combats Candida in the mouth and throat, as well as in the intestines.
Nystatin is not absorbed from the gut and is a remarkably safe drug when taken by mouth.
However, there are rare instances of individuals proving sensitive to it, and vomiting and diarrhoea can occur at very high doses.
TABLE 5 FOODS CONTAINING SUGAR
White and brown sugar
Honey
Golden syrup
Treacle
Molasses
Maple syrup
Malt
Barley sweetener (macrobiotic sweetener)
Jam, including ‘no added sugar’ jam
Chutney and pickles
Most alcoholic drinks, except very dry wines
Cakes and Biscuits
Ice-cream
Puddings
Chocolate and other sweets
Fizzy drinks and fruit squash
Any food labelled: corn syrup, dextrose, fructose, glucose, maltose, sucrose or sugar
Baked beans, including ‘no added sugar’ brands
Peanut butter (except sugar-free brands, sold in health food shops)
Some other apparently savoury foods contain sugar-some tinned soups for example, and some meat pies
Some medicines, especially syrups and coated tablets
Dried fruits, which are rich in natural sugars, should not be eaten
Anything that tastes sweet should be regarded with suspicion, unless designed for diabetics
Quite often, the initial response to nystatin is severe and unpleasant, but this is not usually a reaction to the drug itself.
What happens is that the drug kills off a lot of the resident Candida , the yeast cells burst open, and some of the cell contents are absorbed into the bloodstream, producing an exaggerated version of the usual symptoms.
This is known as a die-off reaction or Herxheimer reaction .
The best way to avoid this problem is to embark on a low-carbohydrate diet to reduce the numbers of Candida before starting the drug — if you have followed Steps 1–4 described above, then you should not experience this problem.
Starting with a small dose of nystatin, and gradually building up to the full dose, also helps to avoid a Herxheimer reaction.
TABLE 6 FOODS CONTAINING YEAST
Main sources of yeast
Bread, including pitta bread and pizza, but excluding soda bread, matzos and chapattis.
Buns and cakes made with yeast eg doughnuts
Yeast extract (Marmite, Vegemite etc).
Oxo cubes and most other stock cubes (for non-yeast instant stock see pp 303 and 334
Bovril
Anything labelled ‘hydrolysed vegetable protein'
Beer, wine and cider
Vinegar and pickles
Sauerkraut
Vitamin tablets containing B vitamins, unless labelled ‘yeast-free’
Secondary sources of yeast
Dried fruit
Over-ripe fruit
Any unpeeled fruit
Commercial fruit juices
Anything labelled ‘malt’
Yoghurt, buttermilk and sour cream
Synthetic cream
Soy sauce
Tofu
Any leftover food, unless eaten within 24 hours, or 48 hours if in a refrigerator
Whiskey, vodka, gin, brandy and other spirits
Other sources of fungi which may affect some people
Mushrooms, puffballs, truffles and other edible fungi
Quorn, mycoprotein (meat substitutes derived from fungi)
Cheese, especially Brie and Camembert
Women patients with recurrent vaginal thrush should also have a course of nystatin pessaries while they are taking the nystatin powder.
Even if they do not have thrush symptoms at the time, there is likely to be a reservoir of Candida in the vagina.
This course should last for three weeks — if a monthly period occurs during this time, the pessaries should be continued throughout the period.
Some doctors feel that all women being treated for candidiasis should have this treatment, even if they have never suffered the symptoms of vaginal thrush.
Other fungal infections (eg between the toes) should be treated simultaneously with appropriate creams.
The nystatin treatment must continue at the full dose for at least two months, to ensure that all the Candida has been destroyed.
For some people, a longer course of treatment is necessary, up to six months in very difficult cases.
Strains of Candida that are resistant to nystatin are now being discovered, and other drugs are available to treat candidiasis in such cases.
Keeping candidiasis at bay
Anti- Candida therapy is not a life-long cure — the problem can come back if you revert to your old eating habits.
Once you are fully better, and have been so for some time, you can risk the occasional slice of white bread or a sliver of cake.
But you should try to eat as little sugar and refined carbohydrate (white flour, pasta etc) as possible.
Beware of ‘sugar-free’ commercial products such as cakes and jams, especially those from healthfood shops — often they are made with fruit-juice concentrate and are just as rich in natural fruit sugars as if they were made with cane or beet sugar.
Diabetic products are suitable however.
If your symptoms start to return, then you must immediately cut out all sugar again.
If you only recovered on Step 3 of the diet, then you are probably sensitive to yeast.
In a few cases, this reaction to yeast is permanent, but most people lose their sensitivity after several months of avoiding yeast products.
Some people may have to avoid eating yeast every day (see p 265).
Some of those who have been successfully treated for candidiasis will still have residual problems due to food intolerance.
Although an elimination diet may be needed to sort this out, going straight on to another restricted diet is not a good idea.
It is advisable to stay on a normal, varied diet for a while (while still avoiding sugar and white flour of course).
This will give you plenty of vitamins and minerals, to build you up for the elimination diet.
In some cases, it may be a good idea to take a nutritional supplement (see p 330).
GIARDIA
Giardia was, until recently, thought to be a harmless member of the gut flora, because it was sometimes found in the intestines of apparently healthy people.
Only within the last few years have doctors begun to realize that this microbe can cause disease.
It is found throughout the world, and about 5–15 per cent of people are infected.
In Britain, these are usually people who have travelled abroad, especially to the tropics, which is where Giardia probably originated.
Giardia lives in the gut and produces microscopic hard-walled cysts that pass out of the body with the faeces.
These can get into food or water, especially in countries with poor sanitary facilities, and thus infect other people.
Giardia cysts are resistant to chlorine, at least in the amounts usually used for disinfecting water supplies.
For most people who become infested with Giardia there are no symptoms.
Such people are infectious however, and if they are involved in food preparation and are careless about washing their hands, they may be the modern equivalent of ‘Typhoid Mary’, passing Giardia on to others.
Those who do suffer symptoms, when infected by Giardia , experience an acute attack of watery diarrhoea, with bloating, abdominal pain, belching and fatigue.
This usually clears up of its own accord after a few days — thereafter the person has no symptoms but may remain infectious.
However, some patients continue to suffer milder symptoms.
Their main problem is that food is not absorbed from the gut properly.
This produces loose, frequent stools, often foul-smelling and frothy.
There may also be flatulence, pain, nausea, loss of appetite, weakness and weight loss.
Children with this disease — and they are the most susceptible group — are often pale and stunted.
There may also be a milder form of the disease, in which there is no diarrhoea as such — discomfort, wind, belching and nausea are the main symptoms in these cases.
Urticaria (nettle-rash), joint pains and feverishness may also be present.
Not surprisingly, some of these patients are thought to have food intolerance.
Indeed, many do , because Giardia , like Candida , seems to be linked in some way to food sensitivity.
Giardia infection can be diagnosed by looking for the parasite in the stools.
It is treated by a short course of drugs, the main one used being metronidazole.
This can have some side-effects, such as nausea and vomiting, but only has to be taken for about a week.
Unfortunately, it seems to make candidiasis more likely, so anyone taking it would be well advised to adopt a sugar-free diet during the treatment, and for a month or so afterwards.
TREATING A DISTURBED GUT FLORA
In theory, the way to treat a disturbed gut flora is to repopulate the gut with the ‘good’ bacteria, and so exclude the more damaging bacteria and yeasts.
Unfortunately, a reliable treatment of this sort will be impossible to devise until more is known about the gut flora.
At present, the best treatment is to eat live yoghurt, which includes one of the important bacteria in the gut,Lactobacillus .
There are also commercial preparations of bacteria which are intended to restore the normal flora of the gut.
Some of these have been tested by Dr John Hunter of Addenbrooke's Hospital, who found very few live bacteria in them, making them less useful than live yoghurt.
To ensure that the brand of yoghurt you are buying really is live, add a spoonful to some warm milk that has been heated to boiling point and then allowed to cool.
Keep the mixture in a vacuum flask for 6–8 hours.
If it has not turned to yoghurt, then the original yoghurt was not live.
The best way of ensuring your yoghurt is live is to make your own — starter cultures are available from some health-food stores, or by post (see p 335).
If you cannot eat yoghurt, because of a sensitivity to milk, then commercial preparations of bacteria might be worth considering, but ask to see a bacteriological analysis showing how many live bacteria there are per gram (there should be several million) before buying.
FOOD PROBLEMS IN CHILDREN
The other chapters in this book apply equally to adults and children, but a special chapter on children's food problems is necessary because there are important medical differences between young patients and older ones.
Altering the diet is also far more risky for a child than it is for an adult, so there are more difficult decisions to be made before embarking on an elimination diet.
This chapter is intended as a supplement to the earlier ones, for those with a special interest in children's problems.
Parents reading this book with a view to helping their children are strongly advised to read the earlier chapters as well as this one.
Food allergy and intolerance in children
Food allergy generally begins in childhood, while food intolerance can begin at any time of life.
Having said that, there is often no clear distinction between allergy and intolerance (see p 9), especially in children.
Those with proven allergies, such as asthma or eczema, may show other symptoms that most self-respecting allergists would have nothing to do with — hyperactivity, for example, or muscle aches. if these clear up along with the allergic symptoms when certain foods are withdrawn, then is it allergy or intolerance?
To avoid the problem, we will use the term ‘food sensitivity’, to cover both allergy and intolerance.
TABLE 7 SYMPTOMS THAT MAY BE DUE TO FOOD SENSITIVITY IN CHILDREN
The page numbers show where these problems are discussed in detail
Digestive system
Vomiting
Colic, in babies (p 197)
Persistent diarrhoea (p 203)
Diarrhoea with blood or mucus in the stools (p 133)
Poor appetite and failure to grow, in babies
Stomach aches, in older children
Nose, ears and lungs
Rhinitis (runny or congested nose)(p 37, p 54)
Glue ear (p 38)
Asthma (p 41, p 53)
Skin
Eczema (p 45, p 55)
Urticaria (hives or nettle-rash)(p 44, p 571)
Nervous system
Headaches (p 120)
Migraine (p 92, p 120)
Epileptic fits, where these accompany migraine (p 128)
Hyperkinetic syndrome (hyperactivity)(p 206)
Other symptoms
Aching joints (p 117)
Muscle aches (p 116)
Rheumatoid arthritis (p 119)
Some types of kidney disease (p 73)
Over the past ten years, doctors have begun to recognize just how many different childhood problems can be caused by food sensitivity.
Colic, eczema, asthma, persistent runny nose, glue ear, headaches, migraine and even behavioural problems, have all been traced back to certain foods or food additives.
These discoveries have a bittersweet taste for the many mothers who have been told by their doctors that they themselves were at the root of such problems — because they were over-anxious, inexperienced, nervy, overindulgent or whatever.
This sort of ‘diagnosis’ is usually based on minimal evidence and does untold harm to the self-confidence of mothers at a time when they most need help and support.
Anxious, inexperienced mothers can be the source of their child's mysterious health problems, of course, but there is increasing evidence that it is commonly something in the diet or the environment.
There is also evidence that children who show food sensitivity in their early years are more likely to develop other health problems later, often continuing — or reappearing — in their adult lives.
Helping these children to adapt  to their environment is therefore important, and putting their symptoms down to poor mothering, without any evidence, is irresponsible and potentially damaging.
It is now believed that babies can be sensitized to food even before they are born, because a few food molecules, from food the mother eats, can reach the baby in her womb (see p 246).
More importantly, food molecules get into the mother's breast milk, and babies that are exclusively breast-fed can be ill because of the sort of food the mother is eating.
Although sensitivity to cow's milk is by far the most common problem in babies and children, all sorts of other foods have been implicated.
These relatively recent discoveries have meant that food sensitivity can now be recognized and dealt with far more effectively.
They have also suggested ways in which parents can reduce the risk of food sensitivity in their children, as explained on pp 241–7.
The common features of food sensitivity in children are listed in Table 7.
Of these, asthma, eczema and rhinitis (runny or congested nose) are all examples of ‘classical allergies’ and they are therefore dealt with in Chapter Three.
Glue ear, which frequently follows on from rhinitis, is also described there.
Treating these conditions is discussed in Chapter Four, although anyone who is interested in investigating the role of food should also read pp 213–8 of this chapter.
Symptoms that fall outside the allergic camp, and which also affect adults — such as headaches, migraines, nausea, diarrhoea and rheumatoid arthritis — are discussed in Chapter Seven.
COLIC
Colic is a sharp pain in the stomach or intestines of a baby, that causes it to cry uncontrollably.
Crying is more usual in the evenings and the baby may draw its legs up as it cries and become very red in the face.
Because the attacks are most common in the first ten to twelve weeks of life, the name ‘three-month colic’ is often used.
The colic controversy
Of course, it is not always easy to tell-why a baby is crying — there may be many different causes.Even the question of how much crying is ‘natural’ is contentious.
The following quotations illustrate the widely differing views of this common problem: ‘During the first few weeks of life the average baby sleeps a great deal but, when awake, cries lustily and often….
It is only from about six weeks of age onwards, when the baby is becoming aware of his or her surroundings, that there are some wakeful periods without crying….
There is no reason why the simple milk diet (whether natural or otherwise) of the normal baby should  cause tummy ache.
If the baby cries uncontrollably for several hours each evening, it is more likely that the cause is so-called 3-month or 10-week colic (sharp tummy ache).
But, although some doctors consider that the baby has genuine physical pain, others believe that this is an example of the baby reacting to the tensions of the mother at the end of a hard day: and they believe that the crying stops after 10 to 12 weeks because by then the mother has become more competent and confident in her handling of the baby, and has communicated this new calmness to the baby.’
(The Macmillan Guide to Family Health , edited by Dr Tony Smith).
‘We in the West regard infant crying as normal, and in a thousand different ways condition our children to associate babies with bawling.
But in societies where infants are exclusively breast-fed from birth and in contact with their non-allergic, non-food-bingeing, non-smoking mothers, ‘colic’ is unknown and infant crying is seen as a sign of distress, which warrants immediate attention.
And that is exactly what it sounds like to the new mother, until she is persuaded by others, against every instinct she possesses, that this is ‘normal’ or ‘naughty’….
Crying, colic and night-waking are only a tiny portion of the range of symptoms which experienced mothers report as disappearing and reappearing with dietary changes — changes in maternal diet for the breast-feeding mother, or changes in infant diet directly.
These symptoms range  from minor oddities [See Table 8]to serious problems.
In the series of mothers followed up those who consistently reported the minor symptoms were regarded as neurotic or overprotective.
Yet these same mothers found that over months there was often a gradual increase in the severity of symptoms…
The question should be asked, would the serious symptoms ever have appeared had the mother identified and avoided the dietary allergen responsible?
Mothers were almost never taken seriously until the child had gross symptoms…
Maternal anxiety is an appropriate response to the experience of living with a crying baby — but what physiological mechanism exists to explain the notion that anxiety causes colic?
In my experience, babies are remarkably placid through all sorts of family rows, so long as they are warm and well fed; while they will infallibly disrupt the most harmonious scene if they have a pain.’
(Food for Thought , Maureen Minchin.)
TABLE 8 SOME MINOR SYMPTOMS THAT MAY ACCOMPANY COLIC
Frequent regurgitation of food (posseting)
Loose stools
Wind and bloating
Constipation
Poor appetite, stops feeding and screams after a few minutes
Stuffy or runny nose, nose-rubbing
Frequent sneezing, coughing, sniffing or snorting
Noisy breathing
Frequent hiccoughs
Frequent ear infections or colds
Bad breath
Dry, cracked skin, rashes, eczema
Constant scratching or rubbing
Sweatiness, slight fever, or cold hands and feet
Redness around mouth or anus, or on cheeks
Swelling around eyes
(Adapted from Food for Thought by Maureen Minchin, with permission)
JAMIE
Claire's eight-week-old baby, Jamie, was apparently healthy but cried a lot of the time, and seemed to be in pain.
As Claire was breast-feeding, her doctor asked about her diet and found that she was a vegetarian.
She explained that she had been eating mote cheese and drinking an extra pint of milk a day to make sure she got enough protein during pregnancy and breast-feeding.
The doctor suggested that she might avoid milk, cheese and butter for a while, to see if this had any effect, and prescribed some tablets to give her extra calcium.
He persuaded her to eat a little fish to make up for the missing protein.
A couple of days after starting this diet, Jamie's crying was noticeably less and it became easier to get him to sleep each evening.
Claire was delighted at the improvement She tried drinking a glass of milk, to see what would happen, and 24 hours later Jamie, following a feed, suffered, a severe attack of colic.
After that, Claire stayed on a milk-free diet for six weeks.
She then introduced a little milk and butter into her diet and found that Jamie could now tolerate this.
Is there any scientific evidence for either of these opposing views?
The main piece of evidence for the ‘tense-mother/crying-baby’ idea is that first babies tend to cry more than subsequent ones — doctors infer from this that the mother's inexperience is an important factor.
However, there is no data to show that first babies really do cry more — it is just a subjective impression.
One study that investigated this idea found that there was little difference between first babies and later ones.
Even if a first baby does cry more, the link with maternal anxiety is still only a speculative one, and there are other, far more plausible explanations.
The evidence for the second point of view is limited, but certainly stronger than that for the first.
A Swedish study of 19 bottle-fed babies with colic found that over 70 per cent improved when changed to formula feeds that did not contain whole cow's-milk protein.
The same research team found that cow's milk in the mother's diet could cause colic in breast-fed babies.
Another trial carried out in New Zealand, and widely quoted in the medical literature, apparently failed to find any link between the mother's diet and colic in breast-fed babies.
In fact there were several serious flaws in this trial, and its findings have been widely misrepresented anyway.
Twenty mothers were involved, and the main focus of the trial was the role of cow's milk in causing colic.
The mothers were asked to avoid cow's milk, and were then challenged with it in a disguised form, so that they would not know when they were drinking milk and when they were drinking the ‘control’ substance.
Soya milk was used for this ‘control’ without any investigation of whether the babies might be sensitive to soya proteins.
The mothers were given milk-with-soya to drink for two days or soya only for two days — there was an interval of two, four or six days between the milk challenges.
Experience suggests that this may not be long enough to detect changes in the baby's symptoms — although some babies recover within 24 hours of the mother eliminating offending foods from her diet, others can take many days, sometimes as much as two weeks, for their colic to settle down.
The whole trial only continued for 12 days.
Interestingly enough, the researchers did notice a link between the foods the mother ate and her baby's symptoms.
They observed that the colic was worst in those babies whose mothers ate all the commonly implicated foods such as milk, eggs, chocolate, nuts and fish.
The fewer foods the mother ate from this list, the less severe was the colic.
They concluded that the mother's diet ‘may influence the likelihood of infantile colic in breast-fed children, but that the source of the colic cannot be attributed to a single dietary component [ie milk].
It may however involve a variety of foodstuffs.
’Despite this clear statement of their findings ,this paper is widely quoted as showing that there is no link between colic and maternal diet .
Other evidence supporting the second point of view comes from a retrospective study of 68 children with proven sensitivity to cow's milk.
When the medical history of these children was investigated, it turned out that a very  high proportion had persistent screaming and colic as babies.
This is only circumstantial evidence for a link between food sensitivity and colic, of course, but it is of interest.
And it gives support to the idea that treating the colic is important, because the children in the study all had serious health problems as a result of their sensitivity to milk — problems that might have been avoided if they had been taken off cow's milk at an earlier age.
One aspect of colic is difficult to explain from either viewpoint — the fact that the symptoms tend to disappear or diminish at about three months of age.
The traditional explanation is that all mothers with colicky babies — regardless of what sort of people they are or what else is happening in their lives — suddenly become more confident and relaxed at this point.
This seems implausible, to.
say the least, but is there an alternative explanation that is compatible with food intolerance?
One possibility is that the colic represents an initial ‘crisis’ reaction as the child is exposed to large amounts of cow's-milk or other foreign proteins.
The child later ‘adapts’ to the problem foods, and the colic apparently clears up, but its sensitivity continues in the form of other, less acute symptoms, such as eczema, asthma or diarrhoea.
There is ample evidence from case-histories that this might happen — and the retrospective study described above supports the idea.
Lactose — the sugar found in milk
Before considering what can be done about colic, we need to look at the question of lactose and lactose intolerance.
Lactose is the main sugar found in all animal milks, including human breast milk (the name means ‘milk sugar’).
Unlike most sugars, it does not taste sweet — if it did milk would be quite sugary to the taste-buds because it is loaded with lactose.
In order to break down lactose, we have an enzyme (see p 18) known as lactase (the -ase ending denotes an enzyme) in our intestines.
Almost all babies have this enzyme, although there are rare cases in which the enzyme is entirely lacking — these babies are likely to be detected soon after birth because they are made seriously ill by any sort of milk, cow's or human.
Adults tend to lose this enzyme unless they continue taking cow's milk and milk products from the time they are weaned onwards.
In China and Southeast Asia, where milk and cheese are not part of the diet, most adults are lactase-deficient, but they can regain the ability to produce lactase if they persist in drinking milk.
If a child or adult lacks the ability to deal with lactose, the sugar passes through into the intestine, where it provides a bonanza for waiting bacteria.
They consume the sugar, giving off gas and toxic products as they grow and multiply.
These toxins then cause unpleasant symptoms such as pain and diarrhoea.
They may be at the root of colic, which is why lactose intolerance is important here.
Following a bout of diarrhoea — due to an infection or whatever other cause — the digestive processes in our intestines take a little while to get back to normal.
During this recovery period, there is often far less lactase produced by the gut lining than there is normally.
This is something that happens in both children and adults, and it may cause a continuation of the diarrhoea if milk is consumed after an infection.
Formula feeds without lactose are available, and your doctor may be able to prescribe one for you for a time, if your baby has had gastroenteritis and continues to have colic or diarrhoea afterwards.
In the case of breast-fed babies, it is probably better, on balance, to continue breastfeeding, even though breast milk contains lactose.
In general, children and adults should not be given too much milk to drink if they are recovering from a stomach upset.
Yoghurt and cheese (but not cottage cheese) are usually tolerated because they contain far less lactose.
Soya milk is lactose-free.
It is also possible that some small babies have insufficient lactase to cope with very large feeds — they can digest small feeds, but if their morning feed is larger than usual, the extra lactose overwhelms their capacity to cope with it.
This could explain why some babies only have colic in the evening, when the morning feed reaches the intestines and the bacteria that live there begin to feed on the undigested lactose.
This theory has recently been investigated scientifically, and the results suggest that it could well be correct.
In the past, it was often assumed that all babies who could not tolerate milk were lactase-deficient, and this idea is still current in some quarters.
It is now known that most children who are sensitive to cow's milk are actually reacting to the proteins it contains.
But the diarrhoea produced by this reaction may, in turn, cause lactase deficiency.
Doctors refer to this as secondary lactase deficiency .
There are readily available tests for lactase deficiency, but these do not distinguish between true lactase deficiency (or primary lactase deficiency ) and secondary lactase deficiency.
More complicated tests can distinguish the two, and these show that primary lactase deficiency is actually very rare.
So if you are told that your baby is lactase deficient after some routine tests, you should be prepared to question the diagnosis and ask your doctor to help you investigate the possibility of food sensitivity, as described in the following section.
What to do about colic
The first and most important step is to get the baby examined by a doctor, who should check for serious problems such as gastro-oesophageal reflux — acid passing from the stomach up into the gullet (oesophagus), and thus causing pain — or intestinal obstruction.
Assuming that there are no such problems, and that your doctor can suggest no other likely causes for the excessive crying, then it is worth investigating the possible role of food.
Bottle-fed babies
Try giving smaller, more frequent feeds as an initial step — if the baby has slight difficulties with lactose (see above) then this may be the answer.
Should this produce no improvement, then follow the measures described on pp 213–5.
Breast-fed babies
There are two main possibilities to be considered here: temporary lactose intolerance or other forms of food sensitivity.
If your baby only has colic in the evening, then a temporary deficit in lactase, due to the morning feed being larger than usual, is a possibility (see p 202).
There are various ways of reducing the amount of milk in the morning feed, and these are worth trying.
The simplest approach is to let the baby feed first from one breast only and then from the other — rather than keep switching breasts.
This reduces the amount of milk produced overall.
If this has no effect, try expressing some milk before the morning feed; refrigerate or freeze it for use later.
For advice on how to express milk contact one of the breast-feeding advice groups whose addresses are given on pp 336–7.
Another method is to give the baby a small amount of boiled water from a bottle before the morning feed, so that it feels full more quickly, or to feed from one breast only — this will tend to reduce your supply of milk overall, so you should only do this if you know your milk is plentiful.
For the baby who does not respond to this, or who has colic at any time of day, food intolerance should be investigated (see pp 215–7).
Smoking and babies don't mix!
One significant measure that any mother with a colicky baby should take is to stop smoking and get their partners to stop.
Whether you are breast-feeding or bottle-feeding, cigarette smoke will make your baby more prone to colic.
In the case of breast-feeding mothers, some of the toxins from the cigarettes that enter the bloodstream are passed into the milk and have a direct effect on the baby's delicate stomach lining.
DIARRHOEA IN RABIES AND CHILDREN
Diarrhoea in babies and children can have a great many causes, the most obvious one being infection with bacteria, viruses or other microbes.
But if infections and other possible causes (such as cystic fibrosis) have  been ruled out by your doctor, then you should consider the possible role of food.
Diarrhoea due to food sensitivity can come on suddenly and acutely, or it may start gradually and slowly get worse.
There may be physical damage to the gut wall, which can be checked by taking a tiny sample and examining it under a microscope — this is known as a biopsy .
However, there can also be diarrhoea  due to food without any major damage to the gut.
Where there is visible damage, this may indicate coeliac disease (see p 136) or infant colitis (see p 133).
The latter is characterized by blood and mucus in the stools.
The doctor will wish to eliminate both these possibilities before looking at other forms of food sensitivity.
An acute reaction to food may be difficult to distinguish from a viral infection that produces an attack of gastroenteritis, because the virus cannot always be detected in the baby's stools.
Even if there has been an infection, this does not rule out the possibility of food sensitivity: diarrhoea of any sort can sensitize the gut so that foods which were previously eaten without trouble now produce symptoms.
Drinking milk makes the situation worse, because there is often a transient lactase deficiency (see p 202).
Where diarrhoea is due to food sensitivity, in infants and children, the culprit food often turns out to be cow's milk.
Where milk sensitivity occurs, problems with other foods may follow, because the structure of the gut wall is altered by the reaction to milk.
It becomes more ‘leaky’ which allows other food molecules through and the body may then react adversely to these as well.
Often the reaction to other foods is only temporary — if they are eliminated from the diet for a few months they can be eaten again without difficulty.
The reaction to milk tends to be more persistent, but most children who are sensitive to milk as babies can drink it once more by the time they are three or four.
For a small number of people, however, the milk sensitivity will be lifelong.
What to do about diarrhoea
Acute attacks of diarrhoea should be taken very seriously indeed, especially in small babies.
They can lose so much water from the body that they become seriously ill.
In extreme cases they can suffer brain damage or die.
The signs of moderate to severe dehydration are little urine, which is very dark and smells strongly (or no urine at all), sleepiness, dry sunken eyes, fast breathing and dry mouth.
If you see these signs you should get medical help without delay, as the baby needs special treatment to replace the lost water and salts.
This treatment may be given by mouth (when it is known as oral rehydration therapy or ORT ) or directly into the bloodstream in more serious cases.
In mild cases of dehydration, there are mixtures of salts that can be used for ORT at home.
These are marketed under various names, including Rehidrat, Dioralyte and Gluco-lyte, and are available on prescription.
Older children and adults can also become dehydrated during severe attacks of diarrhoea, and ORT can be useful for them as well.
Given that the doctor has ruled out infection and other likely causes for the diarrhoea, then food sensitivity should be considered.
As new foods are introduced into a child's diet, there may be temporary bouts of diarrhoea in response to them, although these do not necessarily develop as soon as the new food is eaten.
Such transient diarrhoea is sometimes given the name toddler diarrhoea and is characterized by loose stools that contain some undigested food.
Toddler diarrhoea usually clears up by about two years of age, and the usual medical advice is to leave it untreated.
'Given what we now know about food sensitivity, this is not necessarily the best advice.
There seems to be a general pattern in some children, particularly with illnesses such as colic and eczema, of symptoms disappearing but other symptoms appearing later in their wake.
If this is also true of toddler diarrhoea then it might Be better, in the long run, to identify the offending foods and avoid them for a while.
In one study, six out of 21 children with toddler diarrhoea proved to be food-sensitive.
Follow the procedure outlined on p 233.
THE HYPERKINETIC SYNDROME
This is a typical day in the life of a hyperactive child, as described by an exhausted mother to Dr Doris Rapp, a paediatrician working in Buffalo, New York: ‘In the morning Matthew was stuffy and tired.
He was cranky and would get upset over homework not done, cry, call himself stupid, and pester his sister.
When he arrived home from school, he immediately took off shoes and did somersaults throughout the house.
He thumped and jumped about the house, or would lie and watch television with his hands and feet tapping and  banging away constantly.
At dinner he rapped his fork and knife on the plate, picked up and handled things on the table, turned the salt shaker upside down, kicked the table and his sister, and intermittently, throughout the meal, jumped up to do somersaults in the living room.
After supper he would try to do his homework.
He would get upset because he forgot some books and say he was stupid.
He'd write two or three words, rip up the sheet because of an error and do this about five or six times.
He'd cry, get upset again, and the next morning either lose or forget his homework.
At bedtime he would say that his muscles and belly had ached all day (a problem since his early years) and it would take an hour and a half to get to sleep.
He'd roll and toss all night with bad dreams and talking.
During the day he talked constantly about anything and would not listen.
He never ate more than half a meal, never had an appetite.
His nose was usually stuffy.’
The proper name for Matthew's condition is the hyperkinetic syndrome — although hyperactivity is often used as a diagnostic label, it is actually just one aspect of that syndrome.
Other terms used for this collection of symptoms are minimal brain dysfunction and attention deficit disorder .
The symptoms are listed in Table 9.
Estimates of the prevalence of hyperactivity range from 1 per cent to 20 per cent.
Boys appear to outnumber girls by about five to one, but it may be that girls with the problem are less overtly hyperactive, and tend to display more subtle symptoms, such as inattention, speech disorders and mood changes, which may not always be identified as hyperkinetic syndrome.
The aggressive, destructive behaviour that is often seen in hyperkinetics usually develops later than the other symptoms, and may be largely a response to feelings of frustration that stem from the other symptoms.
Hyperactive children may ‘grow out of it’ in time, but this takes a long time and their behaviour tends to get worse before it gets better.
Their inability to concentrate or order their thoughts means that they generally do not learn much at school, even though they may be quite intelligent.
Some have difficulty in writing and spelling.
There is evidence of criminality and psychotic behaviour in some hyper-kinetics when they reach adulthood, so it is advisable to try to sort out the problem sooner rather than later.
TABLE 9 FEATURES OF THE HYPERKINETIC SYNDROME (HYPERACTIVITY)
Overactive, excitable
Unable to keep still, constantly fidgeting
Poor concentration, short attention span, never finishes anything
Sudden mood changes, unpredictable, explosive
Cries easily, has emotional outbursts or temper tantrums
Gets into fights, is aggressive or bullies other children
Cannot cope with being criticized, seems depressed
Talks too fast, or is difficult to understand
Often irritable or unhappy
Easily distracted, impulsive
Quickly becomes frustrated
Clumsy and poorly coordinated
Touches everything and breaks things easily
Unaffectionate to others, has poor self-image
Sleeps badly
Constantly thirsty
The causes of hyperkinetic syndrome
One of the early theories about the causes of hyperkinetic syndrome put it down to brain damage, but research has failed to find any evidence of this.
In fact, the problem seems to be determined genetically, which means that the tendency to hyperkinesis is passed down from parent to child.
One study carried out in Canada showed that 20 per cent of cases could be attributed to true IgE-mediated allergy to food.
From the case-histories  compiled by allergists treating such children, it seems that most are sensitive to a great variety of things, including pollens, house dust, food additives and household chemicals.
So it may be that IgE-mediated allergy plays a role in more than 20 per cent of cases, when other types of allergen, besides food, are taken into account.
Hyperkinetic children may also have deficiencies in certain enzymes that break down toxic compounds found in food, or produced by bacteria in the gut.
The evidence for this is described on p 233.
It is quite probable that both IgE and enzyme deficiencies are important in causing the symptoms.
The role of food colourings, preservatives and other additives in hyperkinetic syndrome has received a lot of publicity.
This idea was first put forward by Dr Ben Feingold of San Francisco, who also suggested that aspirin might be to blame, along with naturally-occurring salicylates (aspirin-like compounds) in fruits and vegetables.
His diet excluded all these items and he claimed that 70 per cent of children improved considerably on this regime.
Subsequent studies have not endorsed this, but they seem to show that there is a more modest level of improvement.
For a small percentage of children, the Feingold diet makes a dramatic difference.
It would appear, from more recent studies, that food additives are important in a great many children with hyperkinetic syndrome, but that it is unusual to find a child for whom additives are the sole problem.
Most also show sensitivity to various commonly eaten foods, pollen, dust, other common allergens and chemicals.
The role of natural salicylates seems to be a minor one.
When food and other allergens are considered, as well as additives, 50–80 per cent of children respond, although not all of them are completely cured.
Sensitivity to unavoidable synthetic chemicals, such as solvents and the contaminants of natural gas, may account for the partial success with some patients.
Although Feingold's theory was not entirely right, he was correct to single out food additives for blame — they do seem to play a disproportionate role in hyperactivity, compared to other types of illness such as asthma or eczema.
This suggests that enzyme deficiencies may contribute to hyperkinetic syndrome, because such additives need to be detoxified by the body's enzymes.
They may also prevent some enzymes from working properly see p 233).
The involvement of additives may explain why the incidence of hyperkinetic syndrome seems to have increased dramatically in the last 20 years — a period that has seen the meteoric rise of ‘junk food’, take-aways and instant-everything.
All these convenience foods tend to be rich in colourings, flavourings, preservatives and other additives.
Recognizing hyperkinetic syndrome
The first step for any parent is to decide whether their child's behaviour really  is abnormal.
As Dr Philip Graham of the Institute of Child Health in London points out: ‘All normal children show some degree of aggressiveness, disobedience and antisocial behaviour: all at times show sadness, depression, anxiety and social withdrawal.
All are at times unusually active and  distractible .
What makes a child a cause for concern is the severity and persistence of the.
problematic behaviour in question.’
DAVID
David was very restless as a baby and slept little.
By the time he could toddle he was a constant worry to his mother, because he was ‘into everything’ and could not left alone for a minute.
Getting him to bed in the evening was almost impossible, and when he was forced to do something he did not want to do he could throw violent tantrums.
Like many children, David was fond of sugary foods and liked ice-cream, orange squash, chocolate and crisps.
Since he was still only three it was relatively easy to exclude all these items and other common foods, such as milk and eggs, from his diet On this diet he showed a dramatic improvement.
He began to sleep through the night, and became much less active — for the first time he could sit down and watch a television programme through to the end.
When he had been on this diet for ten days he was tested with various foods.
After eating a small square of chocolate he became very aggressive and rushed around the house frantically banging doors and kicking furniture.
Then he became dopey and fell into a deep sleep that lasted for several hours.
A similar reaction occurred when he was given sugar, milk and oranges.
Avoiding these foods has produced a great improvement in his behaviour.
Although a child like Matthew clearly shows abnormal behaviour, others with hyperkinetic syndrome may only be mildly affected.
In such cases, it may be quite difficult to distinguish hyperkinetic syndrome from normal' behaviour — emotional upset and misconduct may be due to family tensions, lack of discipline, an unsettled home life, difficulties at school, or a great variety of other causes.
It is very tempting for parents to attribute their child's awful behaviour to some simple external cause when the real problem lies within the  family.
Conversely, some parents may find lively, childish behaviour disruptive and label it as ‘hyperactive’ when in fact it is perfectly normal.
Parents may not always be the best judge of what is wrong with their child, and it is a good idea to discuss the problem with a sympathetic teacher, doctor or child psychiatrist, keeping an open mind about the.possible causes of the problem.
Even if the child is showing hyperkinetic syndrome, the problem may still be emotional rather than dietary, but certain clues point to food or additives as the triggers.
Physical symptoms, such as muscle aches, stomach aches, rashes, headaches or bowel problems, usually accompany the mental symptoms in those who are sensitive to something in their diet or environment.
(Such symptoms can also be produced psychosomatically however; see p 144.)
A pale, flushed or blotchy face is another indicator, and an intense thirst is seen in many of these children.
In general, it seems that those with atopic symptoms — hay-fever, perennial rhinitis, asthma or urticaria — are far more likely to respond to dietary treatment.
Differences in behaviour between home and school are not uncommon in hyperkinetic children, but they do not really help in deciding whether the problem has dietary origins.
The perceptions of parent and teacher are not always the same, for one thing.
Parents may be more critical of their child's behaviour than a teacher, or less critical.
Or it may be that one environment is over-stimulating for the child — a classroom full of other children, with colourful posters covering all the walls may be so distracting for a mildly hyperkinetic child that he or she behaves far worse than usual.
Such children need special teaching in a quieter and less stimulating environment.
Children who behave well at school but badly at home may be responding to family tensions, or they may find it easier to accept discipline in the more formal atmosphere of a school.
For some children, however, differences in food and chemical exposure between school and home may explain different behaviour patterns.
It is worth investigating what the child eats for school lunch, or how many sweets are consumed at break-time, if school behaviour tends to be worse.
For children who show chemical sensitivity, cleaning materials, disinfectants, floor wax, fumes from the heating system, marker pens and other items used in school may be to blame.
Conversely, items used around the home, such as perfumes, aerosols and air-fresheners, may make the child more unmanageable than at school.
But it makes sense to consider other explanations first, because family problems are far more likely to be the source of trouble than household chemicals.
What to do about hyperkinetic syndrome
Hyperkinetic syndrome can begin in infancy.
Babies that sleep little and cry  frequently often go on to become hyperkinetic.
If there are no obvious reasons for the baby showing this disturbed behaviour, then the role of diet should be considered.
Follow the guidelines given on pp 213–8.
For older children, there are more complex issues to think over before deciding on a course of action.
Restricted diets are socially disruptive and can sometimes be nutritionally inadequate, especially if the child is sensitive to a variety of foods.
With mild behavioural symptoms, it may be better to cope with them in other ways, rather than trying a dietary approach.
For a child who is very disruptive, however, there is little to lose by trying a diet.
Although it might seem impossible to get cooperation from such a child, given his usual behaviour, this should not put you off.
If he does respond, the early stages of the diet may produce a remarkable improvement, which makes the subsequent stages a great deal easier for all concerned.
Do not attempt any diet without consulting your family doctor or specialist .
If your child is under a child psychiatrist who is totally unsympathetic to dietary ideas, then ask your family doctor to refer you to someone else — an allergist for example, or a more open-minded psychiatrist — who will be prepared to supervise an elimination diet.
The specialist may have their own preferences as regards the diet, but if not, the three-stage diet given in Chapter Fourteen can be used.
Once they get to Stage 2, children may need a calcium supplement, to compensate for the lack of milk in the diet, and the doctor can prescribe this.
Children who also have asthma should be tested cautiously.
Any child who has had severe allergic reactions in the past should not be tested for foods at home as the reaction can occasionally be life-threatening .
Drugs used to control behaviour, such as amphetamine derivatives, can be continued during the diet.
If there appears to be an improvement in behaviour then you can try delaying the medication, or reducing the amount, but keep an eye on the situation and be prepared to top up the dose if necessary.
Drugs used to control specific symptoms such as asthma or hay-fever should not be used routinely during the diet — only use them if they are actually needed.
Needless to say ,you should discuss all these points with your doctor before making any changes to the child's medication .
Although in some children there will be a dramatic response to the diet, in others the reaction may be more subtle.
Bad behaviour may seem a lot worse on a day when the washing machine has flooded the kitchen floor than on a day when everything has gone well.
To help you assess your child's reaction to the diet objectively, you should keep a score-sheet of symptoms for each day.
An example of such a sheet is shown opposite, but the exact symptoms written in the left-hand column will vary for each child.
Draw up a score-sheet and get enough photocopies made to last for two or three weeks.
Start filling them in at least a week before you embark on the diet, so that you have a ‘base-line’ from which to judge the effect of the diet.
Make sure you sit down and fill the form in every evening, after your child has gone to bed, and try to be objective.
You will learn most from the diet if you can time it so that there are not too many parties, outings or other disruptive events, especially during the retesting period.
TABLE 10 SAMPLE SCORE-SHEET FOR A HYPERACTIVE CHILD 
NB The  symptoms shown here are just given as examples.
When drawing up your own table, you should include each of your child's symptoms, making the list as long or as short as it needs to be.
Always bear in mind that the diet may not be the answer .
If you pin all your hopes on it, you may see improvements where there are none, and in the long run this could be very damaging to your child.
Be careful, also, not to give the child the impression that the diet will ‘make everything alright’.
He may be so anxious to please you that he tries extra hard to be good.
Psychogenic reactions on food testing (see p 148) can occur just as easily in children as in adults, and if knows he is expected to go wild when he tries milk he may well oblige.
Throughout the diet, try to keep an open mind about the outcome, and do not put any ideas into the child's head about what might happen.
On the other hand, you do need the child's cooperation, especially if he is old enough to go out and buy sweets or other foods for himself.
Rather than forcing the diet on him, you should explain that it might help and ask if he would like to try it.
You need to impress on him that it will only work if it is done properly — that there must be absolutely no cheating.
Because food additives are so important in hyperkinetic syndrome, you need to be aware of other ways in which they can be consumed.
The colourings in toothpaste are identical to certain food colourings, so white toothpaste should be used.
Put any coloured toothpaste well out of reach.
Medicines also contain colourants, often in very large amounts, which is why you should try to discontinue syrups and tablets during the diet (as long as your doctor agrees) or get colouring-free alternatives.
Try to stop your child from chewing things, and from licking sticky paper or stamps.
Bear in mind that there.can be additives in unlabelled food such as bread from a bakery, fish-and-chips, other take-away food, and restaurant food eg French fries.
For more details on additives, see Appendix VI, p 305.
The timing of responses in the diet varies.
Most children recover within a week or two on the initial stages of the diet, but others take up to three weeks.
Foods should only be tested once there is a noticeable and sustained improvement.
If this does not occur, then revert to the normal diet and consider other options.
It may be that your child has chemical sensitivities — reading Chapter Nine should help you to assess this possibility.
Be prepared to reconsider the likelihood of emotional stresses and strains.
The procedure for testing foods is slightly different for hyperkinetic syndrome.
Although a few may take up to a week of daily feeding with the culprit food before they respond, this is probably fairly unusual.
The response time  for most is between 15 minutes and four hours.
Reintroduced foods should be fed in the morning, and again in the afternoon, if there was no reaction, or only a slight reaction, to the first feeding.
A normal-sized portion should be eaten, except in children who have asthma or urticaria, where a very small amount should be tried first, in case there is a severe reaction.
If, by the morning after, there is no reaction to the food, then it can be incorporated into the diet, and testing begun on a new food.
As always, in an elimination diet, it is important not to eat too much of any one food.
Assuming the diet is effective, and you discover what foods or additives cause the problems, then you have to decide on a plan of action.
Again, you should discuss this with your doctor.
Avoiding the foods in question may be quite difficult, especially at school or with friends, and you may wish to reconsider other options, especially if your child is not affected all that severely or if he reacts to a great many foods.
Drugs are one option, and you should discuss the pros and cons of these with your doctor.
Another, more controversial form of treatment, is neutralization therapy.
Although this is not accepted widely among the medical profession, there are many reports of it being used successfully for the treatment of hyperactive children.
For more details see pp 286–90.
If you decide on avoidance of the food, bear in mind that the child's sensitivity may disappear in time.
The culprit foods should be retested at one- or two-yearly intervals, to see if they still produce the same symptoms.
Although most children remain well as long as they stick to their diet, a few seem to relapse after a few years for no apparent reason.
It may be that they have developed new sensitivities to foods, or that they are becoming chemical-sensitive.
In general, any child with hyperkinetic syndrome is likely to fare better if their exposure to synthetic chemicals (see p 164 and 249) can be minimized.
They should also be encouraged to take plenty of exercise and eat a good healthy diet.
INVESTIGATING FOOD SENSITIVITY IN BABIES AND TODDLERS
You should check that your doctor approves of the measures suggested here ,and not make any substantial changes to the child ‘s diet ,or your own (if breast feeding ),without medical supervision .
Bottle-fed babies
If your baby is being fed with cow's milk or cow's-milk formula feed, and you suspect that this may be the cause of the symptoms, then ask the doctor to prescribe a ‘milk-free’ formula.
These are of three types:soya-based formula , such as Wysoy, Formula S, Prosobee or Isomil,comminuted chicken formula such as Chix, and hydrolysed formula or hydrolysate , such as Pregestimil or Nutramigen.
The hydrolysates are made up of cow's milk, cornstarch and other foods, but treated with digestive enzymes (see p 18) so that the milk proteins are partially broken down.
This makes them a great deal less allergenic, although they still cause problems in some children who are highly sensitive to cow's milk.
Do not expect instant results, especially if the baby has diarrhoea or colic — it may take up to two weeks for the baby's digestive system to return to normal.
If there is no improvement, discuss the situation with the doctor, and consider trying another type of ‘milk-free’ formula — it may be that one works for your baby while another does not.
In general, there is evidence that children who have developed a sensitivity to cow's milk may become sensitive to soya proteins as well , if they consume them in large quantities.
For a young baby who has several more months of formula to come, the hydrolysates are probably a better choice than soya formulas, therefore.
Should the baby recover on one of these alternative formulas, then cow's milk formula should be tested about a month later, to see what effect it has.
It may be that the switch to an alternative formula happened to coincide with a spontaneous recovery.
Or the sensitivity to cow's-milk could have cleared up thanks to a month of avoidance.
Either way, the baby can now return to cow's milk formula.
For babies who seem to react badly to all the different formula feeds, the possibility of some other cause, such as an infection, should be reconsidered.
If all such causes have been ruled out, and there is strong evidence for food sensitivity being at the root of the problem, then breast milk is the best solution.
Enquire about the possibility of donated breast milk from a milk bank — you may be fortunate enough to live in an area where such a bank has been established.
Alternatively there is relactation — returning to breast-feeding.
This is not possible for everyone, and it is not something to be undertaken lightly, but it may be the only answer for some babies.
Help can be obtained from breast-feeding advisory groups (addresses given on pp 336–7–.
Mothers who choose this course of action should not drink cow's milk themselves, nor should they eat butter, cheese, yoghurt or soya.
For the older baby, early weaning may be the answer, although it involves the risk of sensitizing the child to even more foods or — if all the high-risk foods are avoided — failing to give the child an adequate diet.
Early weaning is only recommended if the baby is suffering quite badly and you have exhausted all other possibilities.
It would not be appropriate, for example, in the case of a colicky baby who was otherwise well and growing normally.
If you decide to try early weaning, remember the following points:
1.
Certain foods seem to contain more potent allergens than others.
Do not give the child eggs, fish, chocolate, wheat, oranges, peanuts or other nuts for at least the first six months, and preferably for the first year of life.
If you introduce them before a year old, do not give them every day.
Test out beef and chicken cautiously, as these can cross-react with milk and eggs respectively.
If they seem to cause no problems, you can include them in the child's diet.
2.
Formula feeds commonly contain maize (corn) and tapioca, as well as cow's milk, so your child may have become sensitive to these.
Avoid these foods for at least six months and then try them out carefully.
Maize comes in many guises, including cornflour, cornflakes, corn oil, corn syrup, sweetcorn, corn-on-the-cob and popcorn.
Some medicines contain corn syrup: ask your pharmacist for advice if you are concerned about avoiding all corn products.
3.
No food should be eaten in very large quantities, and it is best not to give any one food every day.
This means using your imagination and buying some fairly unusual items.
Foods such as millet and sweet potatoes make a good basis for baby foods, and if the baby does become sensitive to them, at least they are no trouble to avoid in later years.
Appendix V, p 298, lists the main ‘rare foods’ and describes how to prepare them.
4.
Do not force the child to eat any food that is obviously disliked.
Most children reject new foods the first time they are offered, but if your child clearly finds the food disagreeable, even after trying it three or four times, then don't serve it up again.
A dislike of the taste is sometimes an early sign of sensitivity.
5.
If a child is not eating eggs, milk or fish, there is a risk of protein being in short supply.
Make sure that you include other protein-rich foods, such as lamb, pork and other meats.
Beans are a good source of protein, but they are also rather indigestible and cause wind; chickpeas (p 303) are less of a problem, and have a milder taste.
6.
Your child will probably need a calcium supplement, and the overall diet should be checked by a paediatric nutritionist to see if it contains enough of other minerals, as well as vitamins.
Ask your doctor to arrange this for you.
Breast-fed babies
With breast-fed babies who are thought to have food sensitivity, the first step is to check that it is not something other than breast milk causing the problem.
Think about what else the baby consumes, and if possible eliminate everything except breast milk, including medicines (with your doctor's approval), vitamin drops (which often contain artificial colouring), fruit juices and any solids.
If the baby needs to go on taking medicines or vitamins, ask the doctor to prescribe something that does not contain any colouring or other unnecessary ingredients.
You may need to give boiled water to compensate for fruit juices or other extra liquids that you have withdrawn.
If this has no effect, the next step is to compile a list of suspect foods from those that you are eating.
Keep a record of everything you eat, recording the quantities and times of eating as well.
Make a separate record of your baby's symptoms, with the time, duration and intensity.
Continue this for a week or two, and compare the two records to see if there are any likely suspects.
The time interval between the mother eating the food and the baby suffering symptoms can vary from one day to several days.
Don't make the mistake of thinking that it must be cow's milk, just because this is the food problem that we hear about most often in babies.
For the exclusively breast-fed baby, it could be any food.
However, babies who have received supplementary bottle-feeds (see p 244)are more likely to react to cow's milk than anything else.
Even if you have never given a bottle feed yourself it is possible that the baby received one from a nurse while in the maternity ward.
The foods that are most likely to cause problems are those that you always eat in large quantities or ‘binged’ on during pregnancy, those you have a craving for, and, paradoxically, those that you actively dislike but eat because they ‘do you good’.
You should also be suspicious of foods that are known to be potent allergens.
Apart from milk, these are: eggs, peanuts, other nuts, wheat, chocolate, fish, oranges and other citrus fruits, chicken and beef If you eat a lot of any of these foods, then add them to your list.
Anything with a drug-like action, such as coffee, tea, wine (especially red wine), beer, spirits or other drugs, is also a prime suspect, especially in the case of colic.
Try cutting out all these drug-like items, plus cow's milk, for two weeks and see if the baby improves.
Eat extra protein from other sources and take a calcium supplement, which your doctor can prescribe.
If there is no improvement, then you should try eliminating all the other suspect foods that you have listed.
Avoid them for two weeks, but substitute other foods that will fulfil your nutritional needs.
Remember to cut out all the ‘hidden’ forms of foods, especially with ubiquitous foods such as milk, eggs and wheat.
Read the labels on packaged foods carefully and see p 292 for some of the synonyms used, as these can be deceptive.
Avoid all restaurant or take-away food during this time as it is difficult to know what you are eating.
If you have cut out more than two or three foods, and your baby gets better, then you will probably wish to test the foods to see which ones were the cause of the trouble — often it will just be one food.
Wait until the baby has been well for about a week, and then reintroduce each food in turn, beginning with  those least likely to cause trouble, and testing cow's milk last.
Eat a normal-sized portion of the food to be tested, every day for a week.
If the baby remains well, discontinue that food and go on to test another one, again eating it every day for a week.
Make a note of which foods cause symptoms and which do not.
When all have been tested, those that produced no symptoms in the baby can become part of your normal diet again.
It is possible that the baby will remain well, and not respond to any of the foods — a brief period of avoidance can sometimes clear up the sensitivity.
If this happens, continue with your normal diet, but be careful not to eat too much of any one food.
If cow's milk does turn out to be the problem you can try drinking sheep or goat milk instead, after a few weeks.
But keep an eye on the baby's symptoms — it may have problems with these milks too, because of cross-reactivity (see p 295) between the proteins.
If so, give up all animal milks for a while and try soya milk instead.
Above all, make sure you are getting enough protein, vitamins and minerals, and avoid any drastic changes in your diet.
If your list of suspect foods is very extensive, it may be better to split them into two groups and try eliminating each group in turn.
Consult your doctor to see if your diet is adequate.
If none of this works, then you could try a full elimination diet as a last resort — but you must ask your doctor first.
The elimination diet is fairly stringent, and there is a risk of being undernourished because milk-production makes heavy demands on your body.
You should eat plenty of meat and fish while on the diet to ensure you get enough protein, and a vitamin and mineral supplement (see p 330) may be necessary.
Chapter Fourteen outlines the procedure for the elimination diet — you should have already completed the equivalent of Stage 1, so you can go straight into Stage 2.
If you manage to resolve the baby's problems, but find yourself on a quite restricted diet, then you should retest foods after a month or two.
It may be that the baby's sensitivity has cleared up of its own accord, and you can then return to normal eating.
If the symptoms recur, go back to the restricted diet.
Older babies and toddlers
For older infants, who are taking some solid food, try cutting out different foods in turn, but replace them with others that are equally nutritious.
Begin with the most common offenders: milk, milk products and chocolate, cutting out beef at the same time as this can sometimes cross-react with milk.
If the child is eating any food or drinks containing additives, then these should be avoided as well.
Next try eggs and chicken, then nuts and peanuts, then citrus fruits, then fish.
Omit each food or set of foods for about two weeks before going on to the next set.
If the child gets better when certain foods are excluded, then they should be reintroduced to check that they were the source of the trouble.
Begin with a very small amount and watch carefully for reactions — these can sometimes be severe.
Some doctors recommend that no foods should be reintroduced until the child is over a year old, to minimize the risk of future sensitivity.
This is probably a good idea, but it means that you may never know if the food you avoided was indeed the guilty party, because the child is likely to have outgrown the sensitivity by the time the food is eaten again.
If these measures are unsuccessful, then it may be worth carrying out an elimination diet, as described in Chapter Fourteen.
In no circumstances should you do this without help and advice from your doctor —restricting the diet of small children can be very dangerous .
In the case of eczema, it may be better to start with a simplified form of the elimination diet.
Rather than cutting out a whole range of foods, concentrate on the foods that are known to be problematic in eczema: milk, eggs, beef, chicken, food additives, oranges, lemons and other citrus fruits.
These should be avoided during the exclusion phase of the diet (see pp 269–74) and then, if the eczema clears up, tested in the normal way during the reintroduction phase (see pp 274–7).
If there is no response to the exclusion phase, then cut out nuts, fish, wheat, tomatoes, lamb, peanuts and soya as well.
Should this produce no results, then you could consider trying Stage 3 of the elimination diet (see p 277), if the eczema is bad enough to justify this, and if your doctor agrees.
Staying well
Once you have established a diet on which the child remains well, be careful not to allow too much of any one food.
Most children do grow out of their sensitivities gradually, and it is important not to keep them on a restricted diet any longer than necessary.
Retest foods once or twice a year to see if they are still a problem.
If the child has ever had a severe reaction, or suffers from asthma, then the retesting must be done very cautiously.
Parents who have had one food-sensitive child will want to minimize their chances of having another, and some useful preventive measures are described in Chapter Thirteen.
KEEPING THINGS IN PERSPECTIVE
It is natural to worry about children, especially when they are ill, but worrying too much can be very harmful to them.
Children need to feel safe and secure about the world they grow up in, and it is unwise to give them the idea that everything they eat or come into contact with is a potential threat.
Parents of allergic children have to walk a tightrope — on the one hand they need to warn  their child about things to avoid, but on the other hand they must not make the child over-anxious.
Sometimes they must conceal their own fears to avoid alarming the child.
In some families, the question of the child's health becomes entangled with other problems — a tense relationship between husband and wife, for example, or friction with grandparents or other relatives.
It is not uncommon for one parent to ‘use’ the child's illness for their own purposes in these domestic problems.
For the child's sake, it is vital to try to keep these issues separate from the question of illness and treatment.
If there is disagreement over how seriously ill the child is, or how the illness should be dealt with, try to discuss these matters quietly when the child is not there, and agree on a common approach.
Arguing things out in front of the child may give him or her the idea that the illness can be used to manipulate difficult family situations — which can create vet more trouble in the future.
Talking the matter over with a sympathetic doctor, teacher or other professional may be helpful.
As children grow older, and start going to school, it is very important that they feel as ‘normal’ as possible.
Anything that makes them different is likely to lead to teasing by other children.
So you should try to minimize restrictions about diet and environment as much as possible.
If you can keep the home free from allergens and other offending substances, your child's health may be good enough for him or her to tolerate limited exposure at school.
This may be less damaging overall than the psychological effects of feeling alienated from normal school life, by constantly having to avoid certain classes or not eat school food.
Make sure your child gets enough exercise, so that he or she Is fit and not overweight.
This will make integration with other children a great deal easier.
A well-adjusted, happy child is less likely to be physically ill (see Chapter Eight) so it is important to get the balance right.
If the child is allergic to certain foods, and if the reaction is not too severe, then the drug sodium cromoglycate (see p 315) maybe useful, although it does not work in all cases.
The drug can be taken before special events such as birthday parties or Christmas dinner, and allows the child to eat forbidden foods without any symptoms.
Unfortunately, it is not usually effective if taken long-term.
Munchausen-by-proxy and Meadow's syndrome
Baron von Munchausen was an eighteenth-century Hanoverian soldier who greatly exaggerated his prowess in war — and his battle-scars.
‘Munchausen's syndrome’ is the name given to attention-seeking patients who feign illness or deliberately fabricate symptoms.
There are instances, fortunately very rare, of mothers simulating illness in their children in order to get medical attention — this is known as ‘Munchausen-by-proxy’ or ‘Meadow's syndrome’after Professor  Roy Meadows, who first described two cases in 1977.
Doctors are far more aware of this possibility in children than they once were, and any parent attempting to fabricate symptoms is likely to be found out very quickly.
The question of Meadow's syndrome in relation to food sensitivity is a difficult issue.
Various doctors have described cases of children whose parents believe them to have food sensitivity, but where no consistent reaction to a food can be shown.
If those parents seem over-anxious or over-protective, and have obvious emotional problems of their own, then they have often been labelled as ‘Meadow's syndrome’.
Eleven such cases were reported in 1984, in an influential article that has coloured the outlook of many doctors, and led to the belief that Meadow's syndrome is quite common in relation to food sensitivity.
However, there were several important differences between the cases described in this article and Meadow's syndrome proper.
For one thing, the children involved all had genuine symptoms, and there was no suggestion that the parents had attempted to fabricate any symptoms.
Unlike Meadow's syndrome mothers, these women did not seem to relish their child's hospital stay, nor were they willing to subject them to any investigation, however painful and unpleasant.
Such differences are important and must raise serious doubts about the conclusions reached — was the label ‘Meadow's syndrome’ really justified?
These parents may have been disturbed or overwrought, but this does not necessarily mean that they were mistaken about their child's illness.
The elusive nature of the reactions seen in food intolerance makes it difficult to rule out this diagnosis without very thorough testing, and there seems to have been undue reliance on skin-prick tests in this study, despite the fact that these are unreliable indicators in most cases of food sensitivity.
Despite the doubts over this study, the idea of ‘Meadow's syndrome’ has become a popular one, especially among those doctors who are sceptical of food intolerance generally.
This is unfortunate for parents, especially when such a diagnosis is made without proper testing for food sensitivity, and without any firm evidence of fabrication.
There undoubtedly are cases of parents who exaggerate their child's ills, and who are determined to blame them on some physical cause, when family.
tensions and emotional problems are actually the true source of the symptoms.
But unless there is gross exaggeration or fabrication of symptoms ,these should not he described as Meadow's syndrome .
From a parent's point-of-view, it is important to be honest about family problems, to yourself, to your partner, and to others.
Seeking help from a professional counsellor, when things begin to go wrong, may help to avert more serious problems.
Try to insulate children from arguments and rows, and to protect them from tense and difficult situations until they are old enough to cope with them.
Children are just as susceptible to psychosomatic illness (see  p 144) as adults are, and sometimes physical symptoms are an expression of their distress.
If your child is ill, try to think about that separately from your other problems, and to deal with it as rationally as possible.
Be prepared to consider the possibility that it is nothing to do with food.
Never exaggerate the child's ill-health to anyone, and resist the temptation to manipulate other people by imposing special diets or other restrictions.
Facing up to your own problems, and trying to resolve them, may be the best thing you could do for your child.
It has to be said that the existence of self-help books, such as this one, is regarded as part of the problem by some doctors.
Munchausen's syndrome is usually seen amongst those with some medical knowledge, such as failed medical students or nurses.
Consequently, some doctors believe that ‘ignorance is bliss’— if medical knowledge were more widespread, there would be more cases of Munchausen's and Munchausen-by-proxy.
So books that seek to inform the public about illness are simply adding to the problem.
Our own viewpoint is that genuine cases of Munchausen's or Meadow's syndrome are very rare because these people are seriously disturbed.
If they had not had medical knowledge, their mental problems would have surfaced in some other form.
In the same way, many suicides jump from tall buildings, but removing all the tall buildings in the country would not stop people from killing themselves.
Presenting the average man or woman in the street with medical knowledge does not turn them into cases of Munchausen's syndrome: if it did, the problem would be far more widespread.
On the other hand, lack of knowledge about food sensitivity has led thousands of children to suffer unnecessarily from symptoms such as colic, diarrhoea, asthma, eczema and migraine.
Improving their lot is, in our view, far more important.
We hope that parents using this book will read it carefully, try to understand it fully, and use the information responsibly.
Above all, they should consult their doctor and make every effort to work with him or her.
The human body is very complex, and the human mind even more so — a book such as this can only provide a glimpse of the factors that may be involved in your child's illness.
If you feel that the doctor regards you as an overanxious or ‘difficult’ parent, then try to stay calm and state your case clearly.
Remember what Kipling said: ‘If you can trust yourself when all men doubt you, but make allowances for their doubting too…’
It is ‘making allowances’ that is difficult, but bear in mind that the doctor does see parents who are genuinely harming their children, either mentally or physically, and it is part of his or her job to consider all the possibilities in every case.