

THE INESCAPABLE NEED FOR A DEITY
Human Life has Always Encompassed Worship in Some Form or Other
Wherever the records of mankind's history and prehistory are to be found, whether in the ancient and strangely charactered, but nevertheless understandable by the learned, writings of bygone civilisations, or in the numerous findings of decades of archaeological investigations into the past history of human life, there is always evidence of belief in some form of ‘god’.
It seems that there has been no period of time during which man has endeavoured to conduct and control his affairs without providing for himself a  worshipable  entity or being to whom he can appeal, and to whom he has attributed powers of control over all that happens in the universe, particularly on earth  .
This being must have been in some way necessary to humanity, it is inconceivable that this is not so, for surely there would have been evidence of at least one enduring civilisation that had neither ‘god’ nor temple.
That some of these ‘gods’ have been presumed to require sacrifices and acts of extreme cruelty from the worshippers does not alter the fundamental evidence of the need, however badly interpreted.
The Manifestations of the Creative Instincts
It is a fact that the creative instincts in man have found some of their most impressive outlets in producing poetry, music, beautiful writings, paintings, sculpture, buildings and other splendid things of many kinds, all for the glorification of a ‘god’ in some form or other.
All human history is loaded with a progression of various religions and god worship, each exhibiting its own manifestation of this.
The stupendous amount and quality of ecclesiastical music alone is testimony to the importance of this aspect of human life.
Almost all people, atheists and believers alike, will admit to being spontaneously moved by at least some of it.
This capacity for creating beautiful things developed in the human race is a product of evolution combined with civilisation in the manner suggested in the chapter on The Created God.
The inexorable way in which it became directed towards, or associated with a ‘god’ of some sort, can be regarded as having no other significance than to be a source of evidence that without a god and religion in some form, there would be for man an intolerable vacuum in his existence  .
It would seem that there was no other way in which the urge to enshrine and secure the things that give joy and satisfaction could be satisfied.
Moreover, the tendency of the instinct to create beauty rather than ugliness can be protected only by the power that a ‘god’ and religion can provide.
‘The Created God’ described in a later chapter embraces all the needs and provides all the power.
Motivation and Reward
However, the motivations behind the actual physical building of churches and places of worship are not the outcome only of simple faith.
The architect takes pleasure in applying his art, and often his genius, to the design.
He, along with the artists, masons, carpenters and other craftsmen frequently permeate their work with signs of a love of the task they have undertaken, which leaves the beholder in no doubt that they have given something of themselves over and above the requirements of loyalty to the paymaster and the desire to enjoy applying their crafts.
An intelligent interpretation of the word ‘god’ must take account of this aspect of the human character  .
Payment for the work is sometimes met by individuals, sometimes by kings, sometimes by organised churches and sometimes by nations through the taxpayers.
The motives of the instigators might be anything from pure love of a believed-in ‘god’, to nothing more than an ignoble desire to surpass in magnificence the work of a rival religion or area of influence.
In the end it makes no difference, it is all part of the manifestation of the existence of an area of human life that cannot be ignored.
Whatever the motives behind the truly stupendous achievements in the field of religious building by people of all races and creeds throughout the centuries, there can be no doubt that those motives must be extremely powerful.
The conclusion must be, once again, that the need to worship a ‘god’ and to have a place for that worship is of paramount importance, and must be satisfied and be regarded as an essential part of any society of whatever political persuasion.
The Religious Element in Rejoicings, Public Holidays Etc.
In times when there is occasion for rejoicing as, for example, in the gathering of a successful harvest, a happy emergence from trouble or natural disaster and on many other occasions there is always to be observed an urge to offer thanks to someone or something.
Likewise when serious troubles threaten and sorrow comes, a compelling need to believe that there is help or relief available from a source of much greater scope than that neighbourly help which meets the lesser needs of day to day discomforts, shows itself to be experienced by, in some measure, nearly all humanity.
The yearning for a ‘god’ would seem to be all-embracing.
It is notable that public holidays have become established in most parts of the world either as religious feast days, still treated as such, or have their origins in such occasions.
In some countries where religion is not acknowledged to be in any way a necessary part of life, and also to a lesser degree in some where it is, the very important regular holidays, i.e. the single days or short periods of relief from work, which are spaced throughout the year, and which are additional to the long summer vacations, are fixed by arbitrary law and not by reference to religious feast days.
Where such arbitrary holidays have been established in religion-tolerating countries, as additions to the religious feast days, they have not generally  been as successfully absorbed into the holiday sequence as might be expected.
It would seem that, for a holiday to be enjoyed, it must have a reason more compelling than that it shall simply fill a gap, or satisfy some politically motivated demand.
Perhaps humans may be aware that they enjoy themselves most when they feel that their pleasure is approved of by some overall authority.
There is no reason why an understanding of the term ‘god’ should not ultimately embrace a meaning to satisfy that requirement for approval.
The Urge to Perform Some Sort of Ceremony on Specific Occasions
It is sometimes said, particularly by those who are members of the clergy of an established religion, that very many people seek to use the administrations of a church, particularly a Christian church, but three times during their lives.
First to be christened, second to be married and third to be buried.
Most people would agree that the first of these could be dispensed with without much regret or difficulty, but the others do seem to call for some sort of ceremony.
The individuals most concerned on these three occasions do not usually instigate them except in the case of the marriage.
The babe at the christening has no more say in the proceedings at the christening than does the deceased at the burial, except that in this latter case, instructions in the deceased person's will can be used to influence the form of burial.
It is only at the wedding that the two people most concerned are actually fully involved in the decision to have a religious ceremony, albeit not always as a result of a happy consensus, but nevertheless under pressure from some influence which inculcates the belief that some benefit will accrue to the marriage from the involvement of a believed-in ‘god’.
At the christening it is the parents who have felt the need for religious involvement in the naming ceremony; at the burial it is mainly the bereaved who are concerned and at the wedding it is the parties themselves who seek the ministrations of a church.
Whether these urges are instinctive or the products of generations of indoctrination it is difficult to decide, but the fact remains, they do exist and survive through the centuries despite the ceaseless disapproval and discouragement of those individuals who would have the world abandon all gods and religion.
Such dissenters insist that human experiences are not improved, embellished or made any more endurable or enjoyable by invoking ‘god’ in some form or other.
This would seem to be completely at variance with human expectations; the requirement for a ‘god’ survives all.
Political Efforts to Suppress Religious Activities Always Fail
From time to time there have arisen political factions whose leaders have sought to base their power on the doctrine that there can be no peace and prosperity on earth so long as mankind harbours religious thoughts and worships ‘gods’.
These leaders have tried the forceful suppression of such activities, but inevitably have failed to maintain the state thus established and eventually have been obliged to retract.
By some means or other, people  who have been forced to deny their beliefs, have eventually re-established their acts of worship either openly or clandestinely at whatever cost.
The message that again and again comes through the pages of history, is that humanity must arrange its political affairs in such a manner that there is always room for a religious life in some form for those who want it  .
The form of that life and the machinery by which it is prevented from supplanting the political power accepted by the populace, can be settled without strife only when the basis of the religion has been firmly established by men and women using that glorious power of reason which is life's greatest gift.
The denial of the use of that gift to evaluate and perpetuate the nature of the ‘god’ of the religion, and therefore its very foundation, is something which humanity must resist at all costs  .
The Need for a Source of Comfort in Old Age
It is a fact that when people grow old they often turn to the church of the teachings of their early lives as a source of comfort.
Just how much they obtain there from is known only to themselves, but this could well be a final act born of an inextinguishable instinctive knowledge that there is somewhere a source of power available to the individual whereby he can supplement his capacity to face a fading future, or any other of life's unwelcome experiences, at least with less apprehension, if not with absolute serenity.
The sterility of absolute atheism completely denies the realisation of any hopes of the existence of such a power, and this cannot be acceptable.
Some meaning to the term ‘god’ must be found to take account of this human need.
A Defined ‘God’ Could be Vital in Sickness and Healing
There is yet another vast area of human experience wherein the need to condense many vague and widely varied beliefs and hopes into a single credible interpretation capable of being incorporated into a definition of ‘god’, which is of immeasurable importance.
This is that area of physical life which is associated with sickness and health; an area wherein the interplay between the subconscious healing operations of the bodily functions, on the one hand, and the power of the human mind or will to help those functions on the other, would offer immense possibilities for medical practice if the practitioner knew for sure that in the mind of the patient there was the certain knowledge that successful self-help generated from faith in a fully believed-in ‘god’ could be achieved.
For many centuries a ‘god’ in some form or other has been called upon to heal the sick when doctors and others, using all knowledge, power and skill available to them have failed.
At times, apparently as a direct result of some manner of ‘divine’ intervention resulting from organised praying, there have been cures thus effected against all expectations and in defiance of the deepest scepticism.
Running concurrently with this there have also been experiences of other forms of ‘faith healing’, not always exclusively associated with a ‘god’ or religion.
This existing history of ‘miraculous’ cures is just a hint of what may be available to the human mind struggling to find a way to greater self-help in coping with ill health and adversity, if only the vitally necessary ‘faith’were more easily grasped and held on to.
A mind with a clear understanding of what it means by ‘god’ when making a call on that ‘god’will have access to a physical response of immense scope, controlled only by the limitations put upon it by the processes of evolution.
To achieve this end, however wide the variety of ways in which ill-health is dealt with, it is vital to establish a single focal point of faith for all that area of healing which involves some power of the mind, and this is probably, most of it.
Moreover, that focal point could be established as a definition of ‘god’ sufficiently broad for it to be accepted as the believed-in entity covering all the diverse forms of the totems credited with the power to heal.
Furthermore, the definition could be sufficiently rational to warrant credence among all those who are concerned with human ailments.
The production of such a definition is a goal of considerable ambition, but is, nevertheless well within human ability to achieve.
Later on in this book, in the chapter headed ‘The Created God’ such a definition is proffered.
Somewhere between the extremes of all-embracing miraculous healing on the one hand, and the complete absence of any mental power to assist healing on the other, there must lie an area of immense medical potential.
It is probably not coincidental that there  exists these two areas of human interest, namely, the areas of religion on the one hand and that of the healing power of the mind on the other, where there is a similar absence of that clear-cut knowledge or faith the attainment of which is so sought after.
It is more than likely that the emergence of a truly acceptable definition of ‘god’ would provide the necessary connecting link, and open the door to the development of ‘faith healing’with a future of undreamed-of promise.
If the meaning of ‘god’ can be developed to be as flexible and free from the restrictions and constraints of earlier teachings and convictions as has been the development of medical science, then the future could be looked to with confidence and hope.
It may be argued that many forms of ‘fringe medicine’ are not dependent upon any belief in any religion or ‘god’.
This is possibly correct where the interpretations of those two terms are consistent with orthodox religions.
It is the purpose of this book to show that there is a possible meaning to the historical word ‘god’, which involves an amalgamation into one central understanding, of all the known facts of evolution with many of the manifestations of unexplained mysteries which also affect human life.
Some of these mysteries are absorbed into some form of religion, others are accepted as unexplainable.
They should not be thus divided.
Rationalisation can be achieved through a truly viable ‘god’.
Statute and Common Law Alone Cannot Control Nations
Quite apart from the individual personal considerations relating to the need for an established religion based on genuine ‘god worship’, there are equally important social ones, of great importance to all the various communities of the world.
There is abundant evidence from every country, and under every conceivable form of government in the world, that every effort to legislate for the control of all the many aspects of human behaviour fails dismally.
When questions of the rightness or wrongness regarding a particular situation arise, there must be a constant appeal to the human conscience, supplementing appeal to human respect for constitutional law  .
To this end there must be an ultimate established standard, in reference to which the embryo human conscience from the very beginning of life can be developed.
The absence of such a universally adopted standard whereby the human conscience could have been developed to have a significant influence on human behaviour, has been the cause of much failure in efforts to administer justice.
This is because, in the absence of the power of a conscientious regard for right and wrong deeply rooted in all the people concerned, and used by them in arriving at verdicts otherwise the product of constitutional law alone, the road to impeccable administration of justice cannot be taken.
It is the creation of a ‘standard’ enshrined in a ‘god’that can be accepted by people from all countries and of all races that is utterly vital.
The chapter in this book on ‘The Created God’ puts forward, for serious consideration, the basis of a possible way to define such a ‘god’.
The worship of, or professed belief in, a god of some kind is to be found in varying degrees of sincerity all over the world.
It is the fragmented state of these religions that is so tragic, for, whilst  the need for a god would appear to he overwhelming, no convincing description of what ‘god’ is, or can be, is as yet available for all to accept.
This is what is so badly needed, and what has prompted the production of this book.
However, what is of paramount importance and cause for hope, is the fact of the very existence of this human need for a ‘god’ to worship.
It has always been found.
and is still to be found in all races throughout the world.
Nevertheless among these peoples there are sometimes individuals, frequently sincere, who claim to have no belief in a ‘god’ of any kind, but who, notwithstanding this, will often be found to be living a life in accordance with at least some part of an organised religion, and doing so often quite unbeknown even to themselves.
This further strengthens the indications that the need for a ‘god’ is truly an intrinsic part of human life applying to all mankind.
That this is heartening, and cause for hope for the future, is due to its existence being unaffected by all the philosophies, religions, superstitions, political systems and cults that have ever been formulated.
It has survived with the tenacity of life itself, and  thereby becomes the justification for the creation of a ‘god-based’ religion that would ultimately appeal to all people  .
Acknowledgement of the fact of this fundamental need for a ‘god’, and the need to provide for it in any social order, can be the vital factor in finding a way to ease the sufferings of the world.
What must never be forgotten is that the meaning of the word ‘god’ shall be such that its definition can be accepted by all the leading and reasonable people of all races, taught to all children, and be so firmly entrenched within the powers of reason and logic that it becomes inviolable  .
It must be impregnable, especially if attacked by the adherents of those long established religious beliefs that confer privileges.
The oft-quoted claim that ‘All men are created equal in the sight of God’.
can be given a new and believable meaning, provided that this troublesome word ‘god’ and all its variations can be refined and enriched to embrace all those manifestations of good, whether from evolution or civilisation, that have emerged since the beginning of life and.
furthermore, that it be stripped of every vestige of superstition however disguised.
That the production of such a definition of ‘god’ is a truly formidable task.
cannot be denied, but it would seem that man's instinctive awareness of his mastery of his own destiny, is influenced by an equally instinctive awareness that he cannot peacefully and successfully control that destiny unless he can locate, or himself create some supreme form of guiding influence which is recognised by all.
So far there has emerged, not a single entity.
but a plethora of ‘gods’, none of which has been remotely successful.
An understanding of ‘god’ which was derived from the timeless story of evolution and life experience, and not from the results of the mindless suppression of the products of developing intelligence, would be a treasure indeed, and the very important first step in the establishing of this ‘god’is the full acceptance of the premise that no such ‘god’is already in existence, nor ever has been.
The need is absolute, the responsibility to fill the gap is man's and man's alone.
There is no extra-worldly ‘god’ who will save mankind from misery and destruction.
This is the inescapable responsibility of humanity as a whole, and government alone, in whatever form, will never successfully achieve this.
The need for a ‘god’ in some universally acceptable form, and a religion to go with it, forces its way into the human conscience inexorably.
The Inevitable Conclusions
The foregoing submissions do not by any means exhaust the sources of evidence that leave no doubt that belief in a ‘god’ in some form, and a corresponding religion, is absolutely necessary to mankind.
The evidence is quite overwhelming, and is in no way exclusively associated with the past.
Neither is it, nor will it ever be, affected by the advances of human knowledge on whatever frontier, for further consideration of the position in these last highly scientific decades of the twentieth century, reveals that the need for a ‘god-dominated’ religion not only remains but has become almost desperate.
THE FAILURES, FUTILITIES AND ANOMALIES OF ORGANISED RELIGIONS
‘Gods’ and Their Relationship to War
If all members of the human race had arrived roughly at the same time at the point when the need for a ‘god’ had started to influence human behaviour, it may well have been that the existence of a disastrous diversity of ‘gods’, all of whom according to their worshippers conferred privileges, would never have become established.
As it so happened, emerging civilisation created communities in various parts of the world, spaced at intervals covering long periods of time, each community being unaware of the others, and each developing some form of religion and worship.
Eventually some pressure or need caused the migration of one or more into already occupied territory.
This created the conditions which were to set the pattern of religious justification for strife for centuries to come, and there is little doubt that nearly all, if not all wars in historic time have had some kind of religion or ‘god’ put forward as requiring the human race, or parts of it to engage in bloodshed and misery.
The Insistence on ‘gods’ Being Extraterrestrial
There has always been one factor which has dominated the convictions of those who have sought to establish a religion, or its equivalent under whatever name.
It is the persistent belief that whenever the religion involved a ‘god’ to be worshipped, which was almost invariably, that ‘god’had to be an extraterrestrial being over whom mankind has absolutely no control.
The use of idols in any of their manifold forms, to give physical substance to the ‘god’, made no difference, the ‘god’ which the idol represented was considered beyond human influence.
This belief, or something similar, is to be found as the basis of almost all religious writings, which are, after thousands of years still holding millions of people completely committed to their acceptance.
The Anomaly of Unreasoned Belief
This blind adherence to ancient beliefs dating from times when all nature was a mystery and man's efforts to penetrate the enigma of his beginnings quite beyond his mental capacity, is even more difficult to understand when viewed in the light of his advances along all other frontiers of knowledge.
These advances have been accorded full acceptance with ready abandonment of firmly held convictions on all those matters which are now covered by the sciences, and which were in their earlier interpretations considered unquestionably true.
There is no evidence of a willingness similarly to abandon unreasoned faith in matters of religion.
This attitude must change, for man's progress through time must inevitably confer upon him the right to use his powers of reason and logical thinking to build for himself a satisfying religion based on a credible ‘god’.
The word ‘god’ must, in the minds of all, be divorced for ever from all its varied historical associations and be given a new meaning.
‘God’ Can Be a Product of Human Intelligence
There can be little doubt that there is available to humankind meanings to the words ‘god’ and ‘religion’which are based on reason and the intelligent interpretation of the limitless amount of information on the course of evolution and civilisation which can be gathered through the study of history and prehistory.
The meanings thus arrived at would be far removed from the realms of mysticism and superstition, and be wholly free from the false claims of unchallengeable truth attributed to so-called holy scripture.
They would be the outcome of human endeavour, and subject to human control.
Influential advocates of existing religions have persistently resisted the use of reason being applied to the word ‘'god’, and have thus inevitably ensured the ultimate failure of those religions  .
Belief in Irrational ‘Gods’ Gives Power to the Unscrupulous
The successful introduction of a rationalised and acceptable meaning to the word ‘god ‘would destroy the dominance of those people, often of superior intelligence, who from time to time have come to power in nearly all civilisations, by exploiting the fear of the unknown among their fellows.
The pattern has usually been for such people to establish themselves as privileged representatives of a ‘god’ who has the power to punish or destroy those who do not conform to the rules which they, the privileged, have themselves formulated, but have attributed to the ‘god’.
The repeated use of this road to power has been a major factor in perpetuating primitive beliefs in ‘gods’ and superstitions within the human race.
Considered against the proud advances made in the arts and sciences whereby humanity improves the quality of life on earth, the conclusion must be that this is a shameful situation.
The result has been the stimulation of the perfectly natural reaction for those who rely on the priesthood for guidance in these matters, to become suspicious of the integrity of that hierarchy and, as more enlightened thinking proves to be less of a sin than is often implied, lose what faith had been generated.
Disunity a Fatal Weakness in Any Religion
As humans believe, so also do they think, and as they think, so ultimately do they act.
This is the underlying truth which provides the reason for the failure of the world's great religions to provide harmony on earth.
For it is the vast number of differing denominations within those religions, each with its own interpretation of the teachings of its ‘god’ or chief philosopher, and each thus guiding its adherents along its own course of action, almost invariably in conflict with another, which has again and again sown the seeds of dissension and ultimately of war.
This great weakness of vulnerability to fragmentation, is to be found in all established religions and it is this which has prevented any of them ever  being able to offer to the rest of the world anything even approaching a promise of the universal happiness that is so desired.
It is that failure of all religions from the very beginning, to satisfy the needs of mankind and command universal acceptance, which must inevitably reinforce the evidence that the very foundations of those religions and their associated ‘gods’ are based on false assumptions. 
If more than one rendering of ‘truth’ is claimed to survive, then it is probable that real truth is absent entirely  .
The Meaning of ‘Failure’ as Applied to Religion
If a religion is deemed to be a ‘failure’, the meaning given to that word in that context should be made clear.
Here, it is quite simply that the religion has not lived up to the expectations of its followers, that is, it has provided for them none of the benefits that they were led to expect when they were first introduced to it.
For most people this introduction took place in early childhood, and the failure is made manifest by the steady disillusionment which, all too often as the years go by and adulthood brings the inevitable struggle of innate common sense to prevail, leaves them either cynical and faithless, or constrained to join some form of sectarian cult.
Such cults, whilst satisfying a few do not meet the paramount need of humanity as a whole.
This is failure, and it is not only failure of the religion, but also of the system of dogmatic child indoctrination which perpetuates the failure.
The Palestine Story and Judaism
One excellent example of the failure of a religion has been very well provided by the history of Judaism.
This faith could be said to rely, at least to some extent, on that part of the teachings of the Old Testament which claims that a ‘god’ had promised sovereignty over the Promised Land, or what is now Palestine, to the descendants of Abraham.
When the history of that unhappy place is considered it may well be asked, ‘What kind of a ‘god’ is it that has failed so abysmally to make good the promise?’.
For surely it can never be accepted by any normal thinking person that the bloody battles and massacres that have been necessary to establish even a tentative hold on any part of that unhappy, and anything but‘holy’, land can possibly represent a successful implementation of that promise.
To this extent, Judaism could be said to have failed, and failed tragically.
Further, as far as Judaism is concerned, the ‘promised land’ aspect alone of its teachings, with its built-in potential for everlasting conflict, precludes its ever becoming, in its complete historical form, a religion for humankind as a whole.
In any case, it is doubtful if its present followers would give much support to such an extension, for it is a religion which claims to confer privileges, including territorial ones, and privileges, by definition, cannot have universal application.
Admittedly, it does seem that whilst there are many Jews and others whose unquestioning acceptance of the Old Testament as a source of irrefutable knowledge remains absolute, there are many who seriously doubt the wisdom of insisting on this literal translation of those scriptures.
This is the source of yet another major religious split, the division of the Jewish faith into Judaism and Zionism, Zionism being that part associated with the claim that the territorial and other privileges are inviolate.
This is just another example of the ever-repeated tendency of the long established religions to produce dissentient sects.
This tendency must inevitably cast doubt on the probability of any of the great religions, in their present form, ever being of really beneficial service to all humanity.
Thus it would appear that Judaism, however interpreted, has not very well served its followers despite its devout and sincere advocates.
It is tragic that it is most unlikely that the Jewish race would ever seriously consider that its terrible sufferings can in any way be attributable to it's religion, even in part. 
Did their own Jesus Christ foresee the course of their history, and was he warning them  ?
However, the teachings of the Hebrew bible and other scriptures derived from the same remote writings and philosophies, have had a profound effect on the events of the past several thousand years.
Furthermore, there is little doubt that within the Hebrew scriptures, there are recorded some of the most valuable pieces of wisdom and rules for righteous living, as are to be found anywhere, and it is these particular tenets and doctrines, which need to be separated, completely and utterly from the dogmatic claims of ‘god-given’ rights and superiorities which have always been, and always will be, unacceptable to the rest of the human race.
Claims of rights to unearned privileges, in any of the manifold walks of life, will always be a source of much conflict and, above all cannot be allowed to form part of any religion.
The history of Judaism provides an example of how an organised religion can completely fail to live up to its promises and yet be stubbornly adhered to, its followers being prepared to accept and support with blind acceptance, whatever excuses or explanations are offered for those failures by the hierarchy.
In no circumstances whatsoever will there be any admission that the real basic cause of the failure is the one that is most feared to be true. 
That is, that the ‘god’ representing the fundamental origin of the religion does not really exist, and never has existed,; at least not in the form required to be believed in  .
The Arrival of Christianity
However, as far as Judaism is concerned, there must have been some indication of inherent righteousness within it which made it desirable to people who were not born Jews, and the arrival of a form which seemed to satisfy that inexorable need for a ‘god’, and which was available to all, gave Christianity its initial impetus.
It rapidly became established because of its immediate appeal to masses of people who were either ‘pagan’, that is, people thus labelled primarily because they had not acquired knowledge of, or held allegiance to, the ‘god’ of the Hebrew scriptures, or others who were already questioning the absolute authenticity of the Old Testament as it then was, and were therefore ostracised.
Christianity however, continued to uphold the doctrine of the one ‘god’, creator of the universe.
But, it made the theology even more difficult to comprehend by introducing the ‘divinity’ of Jesus Christ, and then further increased the difficulties of the common masses to understand, by introducing the concept of the Holy Ghost.
This completed the mysterious Trinity to the satisfaction of the prevailing priesthood but merely added to the confusion of thoughtful people for generations to come.
It would seem that these moves, the deification of Jesus Christ, and the introduction of the Holy Ghost, were the outcome of the obstinate intention to apply to the new religion the utterly unalterable condition that the ancient ‘god’ of the original scriptures must, at all costs be retained.
Thus, a false start to Christianity was assured.
As a result, it has never convincingly been able to counter the criticisms, which inevitably arose, when commonplace human capacity to apply intelligent questioning to proffered articles of faith, had become widespread and powerful enough to prevail above all dogma and superstition.
This state of human ability was reached centuries ago, but the power of the hierarchy was such that it made the application of reason to religious belief heretical and punishable, and has successfully delayed its application even into this late twentieth century.
Christianity, in common with other religions, depended for its spread on several concepts.
One of these was the promise of reward in an ‘after-life’ to be spent in eternal happiness in an extraterrestrial ‘heaven’.
This migration into bliss was offered in return for the living of a life according to the relevant teachings.
Another concept implied rights of access to miraculous healing for the sick and crippled.
There can be little doubt that the appeal was extensive among those people who now would be designated ‘the underprivileged-’.
It is possible, however, that Christianity's greatest early influence was on those of the Jewish faith who were already questioning the manner in which the scriptures were being used to justify the establishment of secular privileges, and were being cited in support of other controversial practices such as the use of the Temple for financial purposes.
It was this group of active questioners which made up the hard core of the evangelists who spread the new Christian teachings or ‘Gospel’ to many parts of the northern hemisphere.
The closing decades of the twentieth century tell a story that would bitterly disappoint those early preachers.
If they were now able to hear that story, and be able to make an overall and broad appraisal of that one-time promising religion as it now is, they would be appalled.
They would see that it has inherited the cruel and violent tendencies inherent in the origins it  shares with Judaism.
The gentleness and kindness which they preached as the very foundation of its teaching, and as insisted on by Jesus Christ himself, now stands starkly contrasted with the history of cruelty and violence perpetrated over the centuries in the name of Christianity.
The Inevitable Break-up of Christianity
Christianity, following in the inevitable course of illogically based religions, ultimately became sharply divided into two major ‘churches’, Roman Catholic and Protestant, with numerous subdivisions.
A ‘church’ in this context really means an organisation which has acquired, in addition to the trappings of ritual and mysticism with which it seeks to impress its followers, all the nature of a corporate business with all the appurtenances, paid staff, premises and property which is appropriate to a public company.
Any organisation which handles large sums of money, yet has no need to produce evidence of substantial measurable benefits accruing from its activities, is wide open to corruption.
Religion, above all things, should be utterly free from any suspicion of such shame, but few are in this latter end of the twentieth century.
The Christian Religion with its accent on the virtue of eschewing the ownership of worldly goods, is particularly vulnerable to accusations of insincerity.
There are millions of people who admit to being members of the two Christian churches and their various sects, but who do little or nothing to give substance to that admission.
The explanation of this is to be found in the matters propounded in Chapter One, that is, that members of the human race have a deeply felt need for a ‘god’ and a religion, and as almost everybody is reared within a family or group with some kind of religious background, each has at least a lingering allegiance to some form of established religion.
It is this, sometimes tenuous connection, coupled with the vaguely but certainly felt need for a ‘god’ that makes people reluctant to break away entirely, and claim to be completely atheist.
Thus the religion is adhered to, not because it fully meets a need, and can provide a source of actual enjoyment in worship and other activities, but because it provides a lifeline to be used in emergencies, when all other hopes of help have failed.
This is not a satisfactory state of affairs as far as a religion is concerned, and when this condition is reached it is in decline.
There is however, as always, a number of devoted and sincere people who believe all the teachings and claims of the associated church, and give it complete support, that is, attend the services and other gatherings, provide funds to the limit of their abilities and endeavour to preserve something of that precious atmosphere which pervades all ancient places of worship.
This atmosphere will ultimately emerge as something of immense value when ‘the kindly light of reason’ finally sweeps away all the incredible and stifling nonsense, which has been introduced from time to time in futile attempts to counter the inexorable demand that reason and common sense shall ultimately triumph, and replace superstition and blind senseless faith.
Despite the constant, untiring efforts of the devoted few, by the late twentieth century it has become increasingly clear that, in all probability, neither the Protestant nor Catholic Churches would have continued to exist if existence depended only upon such efforts.
They appear to survive simply because they are businesses, and it is their commercial structure alone which keeps them alive.
This is a sad state of affairs, particularly to be deplored when it is not too difficult to see that a church organisation might well find itself put into the category of a nationalised business.
This title might be especially applicable to the Protestant Church, because of its ‘established’ status, that is, as the church which is instituted by law and supported by the state, the government and the taxpayer.
Although all denominations within Christian and other churches have provided a measure of religious service for many people, it is difficult to avoid the conclusion that this is because such people have been unable to find an acceptable alternative.
None of these religions has satisfied its real purpose, which is to provide fully acceptable and uncontentious guidance in human discrimination between right and wrong, and in the behaviour that should stem from that discrimination.
The history of unceasing conflict and division within provides ample evidence of the failure to give that guidance.
Within the Christian religion, the division between the two great branches, Protestantism and Roman Catholicism, is deep and almost unbridgeable.
This in itself gives strength to the contention that neither can be based on beliefs of real substance.
If real truth is eventually arrived at, its reality will be self-evident, and will therefore not admit of controversy.
Any enquiry into the causes of the failures of the Christian religion, must disclose that the existence of the two great divisions and of the numerous minor ones, is not the main issue, and not the cause of the failure of the religion to establish itself as wholly acceptable to all mankind.
The reason is that it is based, not on discernible facts, but on stories and writings that have been created by man himself in an era of his history obtaining long before he had learned that, if he were so minded, he could use his intellectual power to establish facts on which to build the structure, not only of his religion, but of the whole of his society.
This applies not only to the Christian religion but to all others as well.
Whatever the differences between Protestantism and Catholicism there is little doubt that financial matters play far too important a part in their affairs.
For when a religion is put into a position where its, albeit necessary, business activities appear in the eyes of its followers, to be outweighing in importance its original purpose, it ceases to be of the slightest use in so far as it is able to fulfil one of its most important reasons for existence, that is, to provide a satisfactory code of behaviour to be observed in that area of human conduct which can be considered as being subject to moral law.
It is in this area that a political government, using statute law, can never operate successfully and peacefully.
A government and a church should be complementary in the management of human affairs, the government as elected within a nation, and the church based on a world-wide acceptance of a defined ‘god’—, and removed from control by government except in so far as its necessary commercial structure, and its adherents, must obey the laws of the prevailing administration.
Religious Degeneration
Most religions, Christianity among them, would appear to have degenerated to a point where they can be used to provide, at one extreme, a justification for intense civil turmoil by violent and cruel people, and at the other, justification for luxurious globe-trotting and conference-attending by a ritual-ridden and pomp-loving hierarchy.
Mankind needs a religion, but not this.
To what extent the long drawn-out sufferings in Ireland are actually due to the rift between Protestants and Roman Catholics, and to what extent to the ruthless exploitation of the rift, is extremely difficult to determine.
But what stands stark and clear, above all speculation, arguments, discussions and justifications, is the fact that anything which allows itself to be used to sustain such atrocious misery cannot possibly be anything but a travesty of a ‘religion’ within the meaning of that word that all right-minded and honourable people intensely desire  .
The Trap of a War with Religious Origins and the Escape Route
Once a nation or race is embarked on a course of action, particularly violent action, such as the waging of war or its undeclared equivalent, that action having its source far back in national religious history, it becomes extremely difficult for any retraction to take place.
In these situations there is no hope for an end to these ‘holy’ conflicts unless there becomes available some completely new religion which rejects all existing ‘gods’, and offers an alternative form of religion and deity with viability so well reasoned and convincing that it inexorably eliminates all others  .
If such an attractive new influence could be spread abroad in the world, where so many people long for a religion which has that ring of truth, the detection of which is a priceless human ability acquired down through the ages and not to be denied, there would be a growing number of adherents rallying to it.
By its very existence it would start to replace the existing faiths.
The fact that this may take centuries is of little importance, for mankind has limitless time if it uses it wisely.
No amount of modification to any of the existing faiths could ever have the so greatly longed for effect, only a completely new religious concept based on a credible ‘god’ can be successful.
The growing strength of such a new religion would gradually undermine the power of warmongering leaders, who so frequently use entrenched religious beliefs to instil into their sometimes reluctant followers, the will to continue a conflict.
There would also be the valuable situation where conflicting parties would be able to resolve, without humiliation, the impasse  into which they are locked, for none would be required to accept the religious justification of the other.
Instead, as time went on all would find that their followers were gradually accepting the new philosophy leaving the old orders to die.
This alone is a powerful reason why one new religion should be allowed to develop to replace all the old.
It cannot be too often repeated that there is no reason whatsoever why humanity should be made to believe that its religion must have origins in the literature and man-made traditions of the remote past.
The truth is, that the whole long history of religion is littered with evidence that it is this very failure continually to revise, supplement and, where necessary to ruthlessly reject the scriptures, that has brought about, in this late twentieth century, some of obvious that there can be no real hope of salvaging the old order.
A reappraisal of the fundamental need is essential and a new understanding found.
The Alternative Religion of this book offers a possible way to establish that new understanding.
The Exploitation of Religious Rivalries
Rifts persistently occur within the human race, and one important cause could well be found in the tendency of human beings to group themselves together and rally around a particular banner for no other reason than to be able to identify another group as an ‘enemy’ upon whom can be laid the blame for hardship and misery suffered; suffering which it has not been possible to attribute to any obvious cause.
All too often the divisions become rival religions.
Such rifts deepened by violence, intolerance and cruelty create ever more bitter hostility and make it increasingly difficult for persons brought up in one faith to transfer allegiance elsewhere.
This human willingness to lay the blame for harsh and unhappy conditions of life upon some identifiable enemy, without pursuing with sufficient persistence, evidence to support the action, has frequently become a powerful tool in the hands of people in positions of power who, mindful of their own shortcomings or wrongful behaviour, direct attention elsewhere and turn wrath upon innocent people, adding still further to human dissension.
Examples of this kind of manipulation are discernible throughout recorded history and occur at all levels of control, from the actions of the relatively insignificant leaders of quite small groups formed for almost any reason, religious or otherwise, to the governments of nations who become powerful enough to dominate the world.
That almost all, if not all religions have become sullied with this kind of behaviour is something that must be branded as totally unacceptable.
Any form of religion which can be thus manipulated is basically unsound and will not meet the fundamental need for unassailable integrity.
The Use of Religion as a Pretext for Waging War
Despite the overwhelming evidence that the established religions of the world have profoundly failed the human race, there still remains the fact that millions of people, for various reasons, show unswerving allegiance to some faith or other and to the religious leader or leaders associated therewith.
The wars which so frequently rage in the Middle East are almost invariably born of such allegiances and are frequently claimed to be necessary to protect one particular religion or version or derivative of it.
To many observers in the outside world it would appear that the religion is in little danger.
It is the positions of the international boundaries and access to natural resources that are the real bones of contention.
It would appear that the insistence on claiming that these and other similar wars are ‘holy’ wars, is, and always has been, but a ploy necessary to provide a reason for the establishment and use of forces for material advantages.
This is yet another example of how this word ‘religion’ can be degraded to embrace anything that suits the immediate purpose.
Many wars have been started or sustained by the exploitation of religious beliefs, but even if this method of prolonging wars could be removed by a rationalised attitude to ‘god’ and religion, it does not necessarily follow that wars would never be started, but nevertheless they might well be greatly shortened.
It will be a very long time before the actual causes of war are entirely removed, if ever, but a truly human religion would change the historic misuse of long established religions, and serve as a counter to war, not provide justification for it.
A later chapter in this book suggests that there could be a ‘religious’ purpose to conflict, but it would be directed against crime organised on a global scale, and as defined in that chapter.
The conflicts in the Middle East are a clear example of how wars, started by territorial or other worldly disputes, are, as the origins become obscure to the rank and file and possibly to the world outside, sustained by being gradually and sometimes surreptitiously changed by the leaders into ‘holy’ wars, that is, wars being fought to protect the religion.
In what manner the ensuing sacrifice and suffering benefits the protagonists is never satisfactorily explained.
Any who dare to question this are quickly dealt with by being accused of faithlessness, invoking that frighteningly powerful guilt feeling instilled into the human mind whilst the individual is still very young,and it is just this abuse of childhood which is so surely the primary cause of failure to reduce the constant renewal of the horrors of war  .
The invocation of religious fanaticism as a means of sustaining war, is itself a much more vicious and evil crime against humanity than anything attributable to the war itself.
That some form of religion is essential to human life is indisputable but, to use blind faith instilled since birth, to sustain conflict and hatred is intolerable.
Surely the whole hope and yearnings of humanity is that its religion shall be a bastion against such things being allowed to happen on earth, not that it shall be the very instrument used to bring them about.
Most historical religions have been thus used.
That they  are vulnerable to such abuse is itself evidence of their inadequacy and weakness.
The Moral Issues Relevant to the Falklands War
At the time of the writing of this book there is still fresh in the minds of people the world over, memories of the Falklands War.
A comparison of this conflict with the long and bloody histories of the Middle East and elsewhere provides a startling illustration of the fact that wars are fought, and are believed to have been justifiably fought, without the need of religious pretext or of ‘divine’ acquiescence.
This war was undoubtedly started as a result of a territorial dispute followed by invasion, and then by resistance to the invasion.
What is of considerable interest and of value in assessing the rights and wrongs of it, is the fact that it was conducted from beginning to end entirely on the one issue, that of the sovereign rights of the inhabitants.
The justification of the invaders, based partly on the doubtful assumption that proximity gave sovereign rights, but more specifically on the claim that the islands had belonged to them at some time in the past, bears comparison with the Zionist claim to Palestine.
Conflicts spread over thousands of years have still not resolved the problems arising from that claim, and justification of it from the scriptures, has proved completely ineffective, and surely this is bound to happen, for the human race, whether in part or as a whole will never meekly submit to having a religion or political system simply thrust upon it.
The Zionists used the pretext of divine approval in their past history for their invasions.
Any suggestion that the Falkland Islands were similarly the subject of a ‘holy’ war would never have been mooted, let alone taken seriously.
For one thing, the British people at that stage of history were not regarded as a nation still reliant on divine approval for their acts, and for another, they did not have any ancient writings purporting to endow them with territorial rights.
The actions of both the Zionists and the Argentinians were, however instigated, straightforward take-overs of already occupied territory and no amount of alleged ‘divine’ involvement will alter the fact that, until all mankind adheres to a single set of rules on sovereignty, territory will belong only to those strong enough to hold it.
This is humanity's oft-repeated experience, and in the long run it is experience which really teaches, and no amount of scriptural citation of divinely allocated land will ever alter that.
The Israelis must, in their hearts, know this, and it would be to their everlasting credit to acknowledge it.
Their enemies may well then start to temper their hatred with a little respect.
This would not end the wars, but it would in effect be a declaration from the Israelis announcing that whilst they intend to fight to keep the disputed territory, they are nevertheless admitting that their right to it is no different from that of anyone else, and until the world  produces some better way than fighting, this is how they will-operate.
This would be nothing more than an admission of the truth as it actually is, and would thereby be an important refutation of ‘god-given’ rights.
Warfare Will Remain Final Arbiter Until Something Better Emerges
That humanity will find something to replace war is certain, but it will never come to light until the suffocating mass of claims based on unbelievably primitive and stubbornly adhered-to religion and superstition, is swept away in its entirety.
The Palestine problem is no different from any other, no lasting solution can be found until basic truth is brought into the light, stripped of all superstition and religious trappings however disguised, and wholeheartedly admitted to be the truth by all parties.
This applies to all disputes, but it is the territorial disputes with religious backgrounds that are causing so much suffering, and which so badly need a completely new criterion against which they can be judged.
Until it is universally accepted that nobody whatsoever has title to property other than that held under rules to be agreed and laid down by all humankind, as distinct from those alleged to have been the product of some ‘god’ or other, will the first step towards formulating those rules have been taken.
Further steps can follow only when there is at least some measure of agreement on the question of what is right and what is wrong.
Progress here can come about only when the deeply rooted doctrine which claims that an extra-worldly ‘god’ had already established this has been abandoned absolutely, and superseded by the conviction that this is a task for humanity itself.
The performance of this task will require among other things, constant reference to the effects and demands of evolution.
This very important subject of the relationship between evolution and right and wrong, and its inevitable effect on the development of a viable meaning to the word ‘god’, will be pursued in a later chapter.
Long-Established Religions Contain the Seeds of Self-Indictment
The acquiescence by the religions derived from the various ancient scriptures in the ugly acts of war, revenge and violence is sufficient in itself to condemn them as having degenerated beyond redemption, and to be justifiably rejected.
The ritual, mysticism, animal blood-letting and involvement in unnecessary political and financial dealings, are merely additional undesirable activities, and are none of them essential to the needs of the god-hungry masses.
Once humanity can formulate for itself a truly superstition-free religion, such activities would die a natural death, as for example, has the burning of ‘witches’, although even this hideous ritual would be not entirely free from revival if a godless, religious vacuum were allowed to form.
The formation of such a vacuum is a dangerous possibility which will be avoided only if the nations of the world make a concerted effort to clean up the religious chaos once and for all.
If this is not done, a return to  pre-civilisation conditions could be mankind-s fate, and all the sufferings of thousands of years would have been in vain.
All Religions Eastern, Western and Others Suffer Similar Defects
The religions based on Judaism are broadly categorised as western, and the other great religions of the world as eastern.
Many of the shortcomings of the eastern type are similar to those of the western, but it cannot be denied that it is the immensely complicated nature alone of the eastern Buddhism, Hinduism and their derivatives that is sufficient to make them equally useless as a basis of a religion of the character that mankind needs.
The same may be said for Confucianism, which has dominated Chinese philosophical thinking from times BOO years before the birth of Christ.
Scholars of Confucianism are agreed that it is not so much a religion as a guide to a system of political organisation, and as time went on, it too fell victim to divisions and disputes.
This crumbling of unity has always been a feature of philosophical systems, whether religious or political, or a combination of both.
The invasion of China by western culture has had a number of far-reaching effects on Confucianism.
Among these is the irreversible movement towards western attitudes regarding women and the equality of the sexes, and towards moral issues in general.
Furthermore, China has been compelled to accept western technology by that universal and all-powerful human trait, which can be summed up thus:—‘Human beings are satisfied with the status quo only so long as nothing more attractive is experienced’.
As basic Confucianism does not require a belief in a ‘god’, its acceptance of western science-based thinking has been relatively easy, for there is no irresoluble conflict between science and religion.
For the same reason it has been successfully refined and modified to accept communism.
Over the centuries all the world's religions have accumulated vast amounts of scriptures, as generation after generation struggled with the problems of defining an ever-growing variety of gods; of endeavouring to explain the origins of the earth and the universe,; of setting out independently the rights and wrongs of almost everything,; of justifying caste systems and privilege by birth; of seeking to instil a belief in an afterlife; of explaining the complexities of simple and compound reincarnation,; of building an hierarchy, sometimes with well-paid officers,; of introducing rituals, rules and forms of worship, and combating ever growing scepticism until the whole world and all life would seem to be in existence solely for the purpose of providing space for this monstrous dumping ground for the products of centuries of speculative and ineffective effort  .
The Morass of Religious Thought Compared With the Ocean
The result of all this can be likened to a vast ocean, teeming with fish of which only one in a million is edible, and just as this would present a monstrous task to fishermen entrusted with the responsibility of feeding a  hungry populace, so does the almost unbelievable quantity of religious teaching and literature by its very size and complexity make it impossible for it ever to serve a serious purpose in satisfying the undoubted universal desire for a respected and well-beloved religion.
Religions Have Been Allowed to do Much Harm
Most of the criticisms levelled against the world's religions are criticisms of failure.
There are also the possibly more serious accusations that positive harm has been done, and this, particularly to the children.
The atrocious cruelties committed in the name of ‘god’ and religion which have blackened religious history, are all too well known, at least in the west.
This, of course, could hardly be otherwise, for the children are introduced to the ugly and cruel acts recorded in the history of Jewish and Christian conflicts from a very early age.
At the same time (to their confusion and bewilderment), they are taught about the gentleness of Jesus Christ.
All comes from the Bible, which is offered to them as proof of the truth of what they are told, and gives them the impression that both extremes of behaviour are correct and righteous.
This treatment of children which is uninhibited indoctrination, is evil and is a further outcome of the unyielding intention to retain the ancient ‘gods’ at all costs.
Later on in life those same children may be expected to regard that Bible with such reverence, that the placing of a hand on a copy of it automatically makes their obligation to tell the truth more compelling.
The establishment of the idea that the telling of the truth is thus subject to standards set by the use of a volume which is part history and part fiction, is almost tantamount to condoning the telling of untruths when the ritual is omitted, or at least making it much easier to justify such behaviour.
There are numerous examples of the manner in which distorted religious teaching has done harm.
Some are to be found in the bad effects of traditional ‘god-worship’ on the ethical behaviour of the individual.
One of the most serious of these has been the undermining of personal responsibility.
Personal Responsibilities
Every human being has duties to others which he must accept.
He must acknowledge the fact that he is not an isolated, self-sufficient being, but is dependent on others.
This is a condition brought about by the combined effect of evolution and civilisation and for everyone it is quite unavoidable.
The very first indications of it are to be seen in the helplessness of a baby.
In historic time, the case of a married man with children represents a common enough situation where duties are involved.
The seriousness with which such a man takes those duties, and the manner in which he arranges them in his mind as regards their priorities depends entirely on how, from early childhood, he has been taught and influenced by his home life, schools and religious training, if any.
In short his attitude is moulded by civilisation.
Were he equipped with nothing but his hereditary instincts, unaffected by the influence of the centuries of the civilising process, it is very probable that he would instinctively distribute the allocation of his abilities first to the ensurance of his own personal well-being, then to the provision of a home of some sort, next to the care of his mate, then to his children and finally to the community in which he exists.
These things are fundamental, and are the natural outcome of the evolutionary process operating the laws of survival, and the order outlined above may be regarded as self-evidently constituting the best that would be achieved by very early man.
The pre-civilisation human family, in existence before any kind of personal care replaced the primitive laws of survival, would, by its very nature have been spared many of the divisive burdens which break up modern family life.
This evolutionarily-induced primitive acceptance of individual responsibility appears to have gradually lessened as the centuries since the dawn of civilisation have passed, until now, in this twentieth century there are indications of widespread irresponsibility on the part of the individual.
Civilisation, which is wholly controlled by man himself, should never have been allowed to develop without the unquestioning acceptance of the inexorable power of the evolutionary process itself to lay down the basic pattern of human behaviour.
This pattern must inevitably reflect the fundamental fact that all forms of life involve some kind of family life, however primitive, in which the main burdens of happy survival lay within that family.
In the human species those burdens are represented by the acceptance of personal responsibility.
All the indications are that man's efforts successfully to modify and refine the product of the evolutionary process by the introduction of civilisation, have been almost destroyed by the tangled mass of religious absurdity and rubbish which he has allowed to enter into it, and reduce it to but a tragic travesty of what it should be  .
Belief in the Unfailing Providence of an Imaginary Deity
If the very young, and sometimes the educationally very backward, are taught, or perhaps more accurately indoctrinated, with the idea that there is a ‘god’ who approves the teaching, who is caring for them, and who will provide for their needs, they will believe this,even when a state of intense deprivation confutes this every day of their lives  .
They have yet to learn what thinking people who are honest with themselves already know, namely, that all history shows that none of the worshipped ‘gods’ has ever directly provided anything.
This would be untrue of course, if ‘god’ were just another name for the natural processes which provide food, but such a limited definition of the word would serve no purpose in the establishment of a religion, and it has never been thus used.
Much more has always been claimed for it.
Claiming that natural processes are carried out by ‘god’ and then further claiming that  evidence of the process is proof of the independent and prior existence of the ‘god’, is an example of the ‘circular logic’that is sometimes advanced as proof, and often can be quite difficult to expose for the fraud that it is.
On those occasions when dependence on the providence of some undefined ‘god’ has apparently been effective and some relief from troubles apparently obtained, it could have been shown that the relief came, in reality, from a human source.
The contention would then have been put forward that it was the ‘god’ who motivated the human being or beings who actually provided the relief.
This particularly devious and invidious form of argument can be endless, and it denies credit to human beings where it is due, and gives an excuse to those who, intending to avoid their obligation to contribute towards the world's work, cite the doctrine, ‘god will provide’.
In reality, of course, such people are shamelessly exploiting the naivety of others who genuinely believe the doctrine and allow themselves to be thrust into the role of ‘god-motivated’ providers — actually doing the work attributed to the ‘god’, whilst the exploiters enjoy the fruits of it.
Stripped of its deviousness, the doctrine can be interpreted to imply that ‘god’ will supply the wants of the improvident by taking from the provident.
This is unacceptable.
The giving of the necessities of life from one who has the goods to give, to one who has not, is the province of charity, and charity, relieved of its religious trappings and admitted to be a matter of free will, is a wholly commendable human virtue. 
‘God-compelled’ charity is expropriation  .
No reliance on the imagined generosity of a mythical ‘god’ can provide escape from the natural order that ultimately insists that responsibility for the provision of the needs, for example of a family, lies primarily with the parents.
This is a fact of life itself, and no amount of political or social manoeuvring will remove it.
Nevertheless, within controlled limits and in certain circumstances, civilised life must provide room for a certain amount of transfer of that responsibility to the social and political structure, but human beings must never forget that parenthood is first and foremost a personal responsibility  .
Since the arrival of civilisation, providing for a family does not necessarily mean the direct production of food, clothing and shelter, but of making an adequate effort to provide these things by using the organisation of the society lived in.
That, for most people, means obtaining employment, which in its turn means accepting the necessity of acquiring adequate personal ability compatible with the standard of life expected.
This demands sincere and sustained effort by the individual.
From the earliest possible age children should be appraised of this so that they know the importance of accepting any education offered them.
There is no other route to real human progress than through the correct teaching of young children, and humanity ignores this at its peril.
The chapter on ‘The Created God’ puts the foregoing into a logical religious context.
Any action on the part of a religious or other teacher which undermines an individual's awareness of his personal and family duties and leaves him with the means to claim that a ‘god’ will relieve him of them, is an action which is utterly irresponsible.
It is the underlying implication of the existence of a providing ‘god’ which lies at the bottom of a great deal of the world's misery.
Except where the generosity and charity of his fellow creatures must play their rightful part, each individual, as master of his own destiny must be a provider to his utmost ability.
This must be a foundation-stone of his life.
Missionary Teaching with Misguided Emphasis
In the matter of misguided teaching, it may well be asked to what extent the missionaries of the western world have contributed to the immense amount of suffering endured by underdeveloped peoples.
The preaching of the existence of a provident god who would supply all needs, was no doubt generally of good intent, but such preaching has been taken far too literally, especially by uneducated peoples, and the outcome has been a reduced sense of personal responsibility permitting, among other things, the production of large numbers of children for whom the progenitors had not the slightest hope of providing.
How different the world may have been if long ago those missionaries who set out to convert the world to belief in an all-providing benevolent ‘god’, had themselves been aware that the human race, sooner or later, would have to control its rate of procreation, for the world can never provide for unlimited human life.
They may then have made that  a major guiding light in their teaching, introducing the concept carefully but firmly, whilst at the same time concentrating on improving the agriculture and amenities.
Had these been their primary concerns instead of biblical indoctrination, it is possible that the tragic famines and misery now prevalent would never have occurred.
Unfortunately, those well-meaning missionaries, almost certainly believed in the ‘god’ themselves and therefore had no idea of what they were really doing.
The message is:—The giving of help to ‘backward’ peoples must be based on a genuine desire to share the quality of life enjoyed by the givers, and not on an intention to indoctrinate with some orthodox religion  .
Leaders of such religions, whose pronouncements undoubtedly influenced those missionaries, have persistently refused to accept the truth of the fact that,there is no ‘god’ with powers to override the laws of survival, these are inexorable and do not include any element of compassion  .
Those leaders have tried to keep their empires isolated from the Darwinian laws of survival, despite the fact that none of the ‘gods’ as presented by them has ever been able to set aside the inexorable operation of those laws.
The foregoing illustrates but one way in which the instilling of a belief in the existence of a ‘god’ with powers to provide for all human wants without effort on the part of the beneficiary to contribute, can do harm instead of good.
Were it not for human judgement and conscience being clouded by  such a comfortable belief, and fears of retribution being removed by the further endowment of the ‘god’ with a power to forgive transgressions, many of the unwise human acts which lead on to unhappiness, would never have been undertaken.
As stated repeatedly in this book, there is no real evidence that such an able and well-endowed ‘god’, beyond human influence, has ever existed, and those who teach otherwise perpetuate the induced temptation to abandon personal responsibility.
Such teachers stand accused, for indeed such teaching might well set the scene for the continuation of a sinful and unhappy world for as long as life continues.
Man is master of his own destiny and must make his god accordingly, i.e. the Created God of this book.
The Unhappy Picture Presented by the World's Religious History
If it were possible to unfold the entire long history of the world's religions in such a manner that it could be scrutinised, assimilated and judged in a single all-embracing operation, the verdict would be that it had strayed so far from the basic human need, and so far from the intentions of those good and sincere people who have throughout that history struggled to maintain its integrity, that it might well be condemned outright as a story of failure unmatched by anything else that has ever happened on earth.
There would be revealed the incredible amount of effort which in the name of ‘god’, has been expended on all those evil things that it should be the objective of the kind of religion that the human race hungers for, to banish from the face of the earth.
It would reveal not only the acceptance of cruelty, suffering, destruction, fighting, massacring, torturing and other terrible acts that humanity as a whole instinctively condemns, but also the corruption, superstition, misrepresentation of the truth and love of pomp and elaborate ritual that has been allowed to flourish within the powerful hierarchies built up to control the various churches within the religions.
The scrutiny would further reveal the utter confusion created by the phenomenal amount of — holy’ writings or scriptures produced over the centuries.
Whatever excuses or explanations may be offered in mitigation of the numerous indictments that may be levelled against the organised religions, surely nothing can vindicate their apparent widespread abandonment of responsibility to denounce the decline of standards on all moral fronts.
The late twentieth century has seen this decline accelerate and become firmly established as an acceptable part of the social scene.
This statement about declining standards is not made with particular reference to sexual behaviour.
That is a very complex matter indeed, not easily reduced to a clear-cut issue, but which nevertheless can be separated quite clearly from all other aspects of human behaviour.
It will be dealt with in a later chapter, when it can be related to the idea of a ‘Created God’, which it is the primary purpose of this book to put forward.
It is in respect of bad  human behaviour generally that the almost complete absence of condemnation from organised religion is so deplorable.
The outcry from the pulpits and from religious broadcasters should be heard throughout the world.
Instead, the speakers for the religions seem to be almost indifferent to the lying, cheating, devious commercial practices, the usury, the violence of petty and major crime, the unbridled selfishness manifest among some of the multitudes using the roads, the odour of the suspicion of bribery and corruption rising above the town halls and other organisation headquarters and many other evils.
The Tragically Diminishing Role of the Human Conscience
Nearly all the foregoing are in some measure examples of transgressions against the laws of the country, and subject to punishment, but are rife mainly because the forces of law and order are stretched beyond capacity, and do not get the help they should from that all-important first line of defence against evil, the constraints of the individual conscience.
This power, above all things should be the unfailing ally of the forces trying to maintain law and order but it has been allowed to become weakened to the point that it is almost non-existent in the mental make-up of a great many people.
The legal profession is not always entirely blameless in these matters, for there is often left in the minds of interested people the suspicion that, in the courts of law the scoring of points and the winning of cases takes precedence over the desire to administer justice and establish truth.
Lying behind this is the almost complete acceptance of the doctrine that if there is no legal proof of guilt, then the act was, in fact, not committed at all.
The accused is able to assume an air of absolute innocence, and no matter what harm he has done to another human being, sometimes appalling injury, he frequently appears to be completely insulated from qualms of conscience.
The proposition that, ‘There is no proof, therefore there was no act seems, in some instances to have the acceptance normally accorded a proven mathematical certainty.
It is not possible to overestimate the importance of the role of the conscience in human affairs.
It represents the only available medium whereby effect can be given to the instinctive need to control its progress that mankind seeks.
This control has been named ‘civilisation’.
The Religion Must Teach Development of the Human Conscience
A major requirement of a religion then, must be that, above all, it shall be capable of a simplified, but undistorted interpretation capable of being taught to the very young in such a way that it will instil in them the stirrings of what will become their consciences, that is, they will harbour a subconscious awareness of the fundamental nature of right and wrong as these are applied to those areas of human aspirations where they are beyond dispute.
A later chapter will seek to enlarge upon this.
Whatever else may be done to improve public respect for law and order and a love of the truth, it is utterly vital that the sowing of the seeds of conscience be started in the young at the very beginnings of their lives.
The very first thing that parents should be compelled to realise is that no baby is born with an inbuilt conscience.
It is a product of organised human life, and it is primarily their responsibility to start and watch over the process.
Religion Must Be Understandable by All People
It is an additional requirement of the religion, that it shall be in some logical form which can be accepted by all kinds of people, from the academically minded who need to be satisfied with its innate sound reasoning, to those who are prepared to let faith take over where the tedium of logical study is not wanted or not within their individual capacities to undertake.
This latter group of people will inevitably form the great majority, and it is mainly they who will provide the justification for the establishment of a clergy for the ‘Alternative Religion’, and it is they who will prefer to put their faith in carefully chosen leaders, possibly elected from among the others, and on whom they can call for guidance.
The desired religion therefore, must be acceptable, on the one hand to those who follow it because their belief is founded on logic-induced conviction, and on the other hand to those who come to believe, because tentative faith has been given them by others and who have reached conviction through experience.
A form of religion which can be rationalised to meet the needs of the foregoing, is not to be found anywhere in the whole vast accumulation of religions and sects that the world has yet produced.
Failure on such a scale can be attributable only to some major underlying cause, which has stubbornly defied discovery, or has been equally stubbornly kept hidden by those who, whilst being aware of it, are interested only in its continued existence.
The Underlying Cause Restated
This underlying cause is the persistently instilled belief that the universe was created by a ‘god’— and this ‘god’ is the maker of humanity and must be worshipped, appeased and generally held responsible for everything; to be credited with, and thanked for all that brings enjoyment, and outrageously excused for all that brings suffering.
The truth is almost certainly quite different.
The undeniable fact is that all worshipped ‘gods’ have in the past been man-made, either imagined or physically made in the form of idols.
In other words, despite all the efforts of people anxious to prove otherwise, the fact is that man's need for a ‘god’ has always been met as a result of his own efforts, and at no time supernaturally.
This fact is of great importance, for it carries within it irrefutable evidence that whatever definition of ‘god’ is finally accepted, mankind must be, if not the sole architect of it, then at least to have had a very considerable influence  on it.
There is no other source of a ‘god’.
Surely, if there really were a knowable pre-life creator, such would have long since become truly known to humanity, and would not have remained a subject of speculation after many thousands of years.
Further, acknowledgement of the fact that ‘gods’ have always been man-made, would also acknowledge that what has happened in the past has no binding effect, in short, humanity can at any time reconsider its ideas of ‘god’and keep them abreast of its progress in all other fields.
The task is to define the ‘god’ and lay down the precepts whereby the corresponding religion can be disciplined and protected from the kind of exploitation for political or financial advantage which in the past has corrupted or destroyed so many of the world's religious activities.
In the chapters which follow there will be put forward a reasoned basis for religious thinking that is not excessively influenced by orthodox theology or by organised religions of any creed, denomination or national identification.
It will seek to show that it is possible to build a faith in a ‘god’ which will remove the negative approach of atheism, satisfy the deeply rooted need for a ‘god’, and yet make no impossible demands on human intelligence.
The Precious Wisdom Buried in Religious History
The vast amount of literature covering religious history has created for scholars and others, opportunities not just for interesting reading, but for whole lifetimes' careers of study.
This may well be a pleasurable and interesting occupation but it will not in any way further the quest for the universal philosophy so urgently needed, unless those students and specialist authorities use the opportunities afforded them to serve humanity more widely and wisely than by merely producing yet more literature for yet more students.
It is beyond dispute that all the religions of the past contain vast amounts of wisdom that can be of service to humankind.
The task is to extract that wisdom from its vast and varied hiding places, and to integrate it into a much simpler rationalised philosophy, which can be accepted by all.
It would be a very great help towards that end if the studies and work of theologians, doctors of divinity and other such people could be regarded as being related to specialised history, and not at all as being directed towards the regeneration and bolstering of established religions.
A religion cannot possibly serve the world if it can be understood only by people who have been especially educated.
Theology in all its guises should step down from its exalted position and take its place alongside all other human activities and contribute to an autonomous religion only what is relevant, and that with no more authority than is accorded any other sphere of human endeavour.
All  human occupations must help to formulate a new and acceptable religion.
Theologians and others should have no special influence, except that, from them would be expected the contribution of those ‘pearls of wisdom’ which they, by virtue of their training and studies, are best equipped to extract from the religions and scriptural writings of the past.
Moreover, through their well directed efforts, that vast resource of past literature and scriptures, every item of which is capable of innumerable interpretations, could be saved from that ultimate oblivion and loss to humanity which could result from its sheer overwhelming quantity and complexity.
It could, instead, come to be cherished as a limitless source of hidden wisdom for gradual extraction and incorporation into a rational universal religion.
That is, it could be made to yield a wealth of ‘Units of Goodness’.
These are introduced in the next chapter which brings to the reader the concept of ‘The Created God’.
THE CREATED GOD
Two Basic Assumptions which Must Be Accepted
As expounded in Chapter One, mankind's need for a rational definition of ‘god’ is obvious, but before it becomes possible to produce an interpretation with any real meaning, there are two assumptions, already enlarged upon in this book, which must be accepted as fact.
They are:—(a) mankind must have a ‘god’, and (b) there is no evidence that the kind of incontrovertible ‘god’ that is needed actually exists in an eternal, ready-made form, or has ever thus existed.
The acceptance of these two assumptions as fact is all-important.
The New Premises on which ‘The Created God’ is Founded
To instigate a completely new meaning of the word ‘god’, new basic premises must be established and all the old superstitions and religious privileges abandoned.
That there will be fierce opposition to such changes is fairly certain, and there will be vociferant arguments against them, and whilst these must be listened to, they must be allowed to have influence only if they can help in the process of bringing into being the new philosophy or religion.
In no circumstances whatsoever must the objections be allowed to hinder the process.
The new premises are:–
(1)
A ‘god’ which mankind can worship is in no way identical to that power which created the universe, if indeed it were created at all within humanity's understanding of that word.
The universe itself is timeless, and, in so far as human religion is concerned, godless and irrelevant.
(2)
The terms ‘good’ and ‘evil’must be regarded as having had no meaning whatsoever in the infinity of time that preceded life on earth.
These two terms relate only to life, and their applications and meanings are neither pre-established nor unchangeable.
(3)
The ‘god’ to be worshipped evolved with life and must be regarded as having had common origin with it.
These three premises can be regarded as together forming a possible new creed to be used in the search for a new meaning to the word ‘god’, and hence for a new religion.
The truth of this creed would then become accepted as axiomatic and be regarded as an article of faith, although, to those who closely examine the propositions they may well appear to be self-evidently true.
The suggested form of creed is included at the end of the Preface, and is repeated here.
A CREED
I believe that the creation of the universe and all that that involves, is still a mystery and forms no part of the conception of a god and a corresponding religion that can fulfil the human need.
Further I believe that there is one  concept and one only that can satisfy that need, and that is the concept of a Created God with origins founded, as are those of mankind itself, in the very beginnings of life on earth.
Therefore I believe that man and his God have evolved together over that immense period of time which started with the advent of earthly life, reaches right through to the present time and will continue onwards forever, or until there is no longer life on earth.
I believe that should earthly life cease to exist, then will ‘God’, however defined, also cease to exist.
It should not be difficult for any human being to assent to the adoption of this new creed if he compares it with what is otherwise available.
The almost incredible hotchpotch of superstitions, beliefs and ‘gods’ which are promoted by the hierarchies of all the great organised religions in their ceaseless struggle to obtain and hold on to adherents, leaves the earnest seeker after a true spiritual haven bewildered and unsatisfied.
The axiom which the creed creates takes the believer back millions of years beyond the period of controversial claims of ‘revelation’ by a ‘god’who created all the universe.
Its claims on human credibility are infinitely less.
The Power of Human Logic Must Prevail Over Blind Faith
The acceptance of the first of the three premises, that the god to be worshipped is not to be identified with the power which is assumed to have created the universe, will bring about a change from long established practice and is of great importance.
The belief that ‘god ‘preceded life and was responsible for it, is deeply rooted in the history of time long past, and will be tenaciously held even in the face of ‘That kindly light of reason’— which orthodox religions teach is a gift from ‘God the Creator’, but the use of which is nevertheless often vigorously denied, especially if such use threatens to throw doubt on the basic creeds already long established.
If there has been one major impediment to successful religious achievement by humankind throughout the ages, it is surely this completely false assumption that the god to be worshipped was also creator of all matter, and of all life.
There is not the slightest reason why this should be so.
The assumption is based on religious writings, which in their turn are probably based on the primitive beliefs which early man formulated in pursuance of that almost uncontrollable urge to find something beyond himself to which he could ascribe the origins of the many mysterious things around him.
As time went on and the primitive physically competitive urges were becoming supplemented by the more devious mental ways in which one being could gain ascendance over another, the opportunities to use those beliefs were exploited by the more skilful members of the society.
The ultimate outcome of this is, that without any exception whatsoever and despite all so-called ‘revelation’, all religious writings have been produced entirely by man himself countless  millenniums after the advent of life on earth.
The paramount mistake has been that the intelligence of the individual has been permitted to be clouded by childhood teaching to such an extent that he has been persuaded that the religious writings came from some other source which renders them inviolate.
This is unacceptable, man made them and therefore has the right to modify or discard them.
This right he must acknowledge and exercise to the utmost, and not be deterred by any power, religious or otherwise.
The power of human reason must take precedence over all presumption of ‘truth’.
It may be conceded however, that there is, or was, a power or some other kind of influence beyond man's comprehension, which was responsible for the start of life, but that influence must be identified with the timeless universe itself.
There is no reason why it should be identical with the one and only ‘god’ that can serve man and be exalted by him.
If there were a relationship between that hypothetical influence and the concept of a created and worshipped ‘god’ of the post-life world, then that relationship must be regarded as part of the same great mystery which shrouds the origins of the universe itself.
Mankind must keep an open mind on this, but must also make quite sure that the worshipped ‘god’, herein called the ‘Created God’ remains a separate creation of the post-life world, that is, a product of life, equally with humanity itself.
There can be no understanding of the idea of the Created God unless that concept is in every respect isolated from the ancient teaching of a ‘god’ which created the universe.
This, the First Premise, must be fully accepted.
Science May One Day Provide Evidence of Eternal Life
It is possible that in the course of time scientific advance will be able to offer at least an hypothesis which will throw some light on the mystery of the origin of the universe and give substance to the belief that life, in some form or other, does have an ineradicable and eternal place in the universe.
It would seem that it may be the sober and exciting reality that in truth it was never otherwise.
It may even be fair to say that if this were not so, then surely there would never have been any life experience at all.
This thought can be entertained only if it is accepted that the universe is eternal and timeless, and the theory of a once only chance association of circumstances causing life, be abandoned.
The arrival of scientific evidence of everlasting life would in no wise alter the position of the concept of the Created God, for it is only in the conduct of human life that the need for a  worshipable ‘god’ arises.
Moreover, the concept of the Created God is by no means rigidly unchangeable.
As will be shown as this book progresses, adaptability to human advance is a very important and essential part of it.
The Three Premises Must Be Accepted
The acceptance of the first of the three new premises on which the philosophy of the Created God rests, that is, that ‘god’ is a product of life and not the creator of all things, implies the acceptance of the truth of the  second and third.
These are, that good and evil are not predetermined conditions, and that the ‘god’ to be worshipped evolved with life.
The belief that these premises are founded on truth is essential to the conception of an understanding of the word ‘god’ that does not demand blind faith flying in the concept of the Created God accepts the truth of them without question.
The Three Periods of the Development of the Created God
In order to simplify the task of explaining how that understanding can be achieved, it will be expedient to consider that the long aeon in which the development of the Created God has taken place can be divided into three periods.
These are defined as follows and will then be expanded upon and considered in turn.
The First is that period which recedes from the very beginning of life on earth and reaches far back into the unknowable depths of the timeless universe.
The Second period is that which starts from the beginning of life and reaches onward to the time when the law of the survival of the fittest with its ruthlessness could no longer serve the aspirations towards increasing happiness that were beginning to creep into the dawning consciousness of primitive man.
This is the time when what was to become known as civilisation could have been detected, and is the period to which the origins of the concept of ‘goodness’ can be attributed.
The Third period reaches from the end of the Second period, right through to the present time and on for ever, or until there is no longer life on earth.
The manner in which these three periods have influenced, and will influence, the development of the conception of the Created God will be considered in turn.
The First Period of the Created God
It follows from the First Premise introduced at the beginning of this chapter, that it must be an article of belief in the Created God that this first pre-life period in the story of the universe made no contribution to the creation of the God which was to be born, as was mankind, out of the life to come, except that it may have been the source of the basic origin of life.
The existence or otherwise of this origin is, as yet, unknown in this twentieth century, and may remain so forever.
It is of no consequence once it is accepted that the God to serve humanity originated at the moment that life first became manifest, and combined with the material of the universe to start the long process of producing living creatures with the capacity to enjoy life and all that that involves.
The meaning of ‘the capacity to enjoy life’ within the Alternative Religion will be enlarged upon in the final chapter of this book.
This first period then must be considered as being completely ‘godless’ in so far as it would be able to provide any kind of being that could fulfil the human need for a ‘god’.
During this period it is probable that prior to the emergence of the first living cell, there was an immense span of time in which purely chemical changes were taking place, these changes were pre-life, and pre-‘god’, that is, before the Created God which it is the object of this chapter to introduce.
(From here on, the use of the capital ‘G’ for ‘god’will make it clear that it is the Created God that is meant and not ‘god’in any of the historic meanings of that word).
Concerning those chemical changes, which were of fantastic magnitude, taking place during the first of these periods, it is probably true to say that most established religions do now, perhaps reluctantly, accept as true the scientific theories governing the associated processes of evolution.
But, nevertheless, that acceptance is rendered of no consequence by the claim that the theories were merely detailing the process of creation as already produced by the orthodox ‘god’ or ‘gods’of antiquity.
In other words there was no change in the attribution.
Thus is perpetuated the unanswerable myth whereby all mysteries are explained away by the simple process of ascribing them to some remote and inaccessible ‘god’ who created everything.
The all-embracing claim, that all that has happened, or ever will happen is attributable to such a ‘god’, acting in mankind's interest, has done much to alienate thoughtful people from all the proffered religions of the past.
Human experience provides no support whatsoever for it.
If God cannot be identified with man as a product of evolution, and thereby given a credible definition, then any effort to create a new and successful conception of God will founder on the same rocks of contention that have wrecked every religion that was ever believed in.
The Second Period
This is the period in the long history of the evolution of man and his God, which started with the beginning of life on earth, and ended with the dawning of civilisation.
It is the time during which the evolutionary process was producing the human form as it now is, and laying down the pattern from which man, in remote retrospect, can now extract the necessary information on which to lay the foundation of the concept of the Created God, and to understand how he must develop that concept.
For, if man is to continue to nourish that vital part of human civilisation, which is the control over the future of life on earth,it is necessary that his definition of morality, good social behaviour, and understanding of right and wrong uses the evidence to be found within the evolutionary story and which he can then enshrine in a viable ‘god’ .
Defining ‘The Beginning’
There came a point in the timelessness of the universe when life began.
This is the moment which humankind must accept as the beginning of all things as far as human life is concerned.
That is, the beginning of life, the beginning of time, the beginning of man and also the beginning of the Created God.
The Meaning of an ‘Event’ Within the Concept of the Created God
The beginning of life was an ‘event’ which produced a living cell and every change involving that cell that occurred thereafter was a further ‘event’in the evolutionary process.
It must be conceded that the process had for its ‘desired end’, the production of a being capable of experiencing what was eventually to become the enjoyment of life.
Therefore each of those ‘events’ either helped, or did not help, the attainment of the desired end.
The Purpose of Life
It is the definition of the ‘desired end’ that is the crux of the whole mystery of life.
It is impossible to imagine that there is any purpose to life that makes any sense at all other than that life is to be enjoyed.
Just to what extent that enjoyment can be universally experienced is the greatest question of all, for t indoctrination will place it anywhere else.
All that follows will be based on the assumption that the desired purpose of life is that it should be enjoyed, and that this is an irrefutable fact.
Therefore, those ‘events’ which enhanced the desired end must be designated ‘good’, and moved into the position where they are acknowledged to be the very origin of the concept of ‘goodness’.
Thus it is that the evolutionary process itself has provided mankind with the means to produce that first vital element in the search for a ‘god’— a first definition of ‘goodness’.
‘Good’, ‘Bad’ and ‘Evil'
Those ‘events’ of primitive evolution which did not qualify as ‘good’should not be termed ‘bad’, but simply ‘not good’, because ‘bad’implies the existence of ‘evil’, and this did not exist during the first two of the three periods into which this book assumes universal existence to be divided.
Evil is a product of civilisation, and is confined to the third period.
‘Goodness’ and the Created God
It is at this stage, with a primary definition of ‘goodness’ established, that the relationship between ‘goodness’and the concept of the Created God can now be considered, so that the full contribution to the definition of that God which can be attributed to the Second Period, can be evaluated.
That first event, or biochemical action, itself a physical thing, has been adjudged to be ‘good’.
It can therefore be regarded as divisible into two distinct parts, its intrinsic biochemical nature, which is its physical nature, and its ‘goodness’, an abstract word provided by man millenniums after the event, to describe its quality.
This decision to specify that remote evolutionary event as ‘good’ must be regarded as utterly inviolable if there is to be any belief at all in basic ‘goodness’ .
To ensure that this is so it must be agreed that it is regarded as  being beyond the capacity of the individual to alter  , that is, it has to become ‘sacred’, or enshrined in a ‘god’.
This is mankind's only way to achieve such a goal.
Thus it is that human efforts to provide basic understanding and protection of ‘goodness’, lead immediately to the necessity to create a ‘god’.
This can be achieved by regarding the act of sanctification of the ‘goodness’ of the very first ‘good’event of evolution, as an abstract concept which corresponds to the ‘good’physical event.
This concept can then be designated the first ‘unit’ of that God.
Thus is provided the connection between ‘goodness’ and the Created God.
Accumulating ‘Goodness’
That very first event started the train of countless numbers of such events and each of these, occurring at its own relevant time, provided a corresponding addition to what millenniums later, man is able to interpret as countless millions of ‘units’ of ‘goodness’.
These, accumulating during this second period created an almost limitless reservoir of units and it is this reservoir which can be regarded as being identified with the state of the Created God at the time of the dawn of civilisation.
It was at this time that man's dawning awareness of it, stimulated his need to preserve his acceptance of the innate goodness of the evolutionary process, that is, his need to have a ‘god’ of some sort, that is to ‘create’a God.
Thus it is that the extraction of the origin of the first fragment of ‘goodness’ and the indelibly labelling of it as such, led to the creation of an entity with a presumed existence and endowed by mankind with the power to hold inviolate the human decisions on ‘goodness’— which will continue to be taken for as long as life continues.
In this way was the Created God established,originating within mankind's knowledge of evolution  , and therefore entirely rational.
The extension of ‘evolutionary goodness ‘into the ‘goodness’ of civilisation is the subject matter of the third period.
The reader is reminded that all that has been written so far has been dealing with the First and Second Periods into which the development of the Created God has been divided.
It has had for its end the production of a convincing explanation of the writer's understanding of the origin of the Created God, that is, a God that man can endow with recognisable origins to be found far back in time and with qualities from which the desire to have an absolute standard of human behaviour can ultimately be evolved.
The next stage in the story is the Third Period.
This is the vital and trouble-torn time following the dawn of civilisation.
Before going on to it however, the writer wishes to recapitulate as a means of recording further  thoughts on the ideas so far put forward.
These, among others, are connected with the somewhat mathematical concept which may have been generated by the introduction of the use of the word ‘unit’ as applicable to ‘goodness’.
Some of the following may be repetitive to some extent, and the reader is asked to excuse this as the writer finds it difficult to avoid repeating some of his thoughts in a subject so fraught with difficulties of explanation, and covering such a wide field.
On the other hand, if the reader can find the patience to continue, he may find the variations in the repetition interesting and even helpful.
Further at this point, the writer thinks it may be expedient to include a paragraph on the subject of human ability to acquire and retain a faith, or religion.
Individual Responsibility in Acquiring a Religion
It does not require a great deal of imagination to accept that the unit of physical matter could be the product of a ‘good’ event if it contributed towards the desired end of a happy human race, but it does require a measure of mental effort to accept that each unit of ‘good’produced a corresponding unit contributing towards God, that is, a unit of Godliness.
It is the ability and willingness to make this mental effort that is at the very heart of the success or failure of the human race to create a viable religion.
role that interested persons could play in relieving a would-be believer of the necessity to make a detailed study of the underlying reasoning.
The Power of the Origin of the Created God
To return to that single item of ‘goodness’.
This came into being when the very first change in the first cell took place, and that change, which was the first biochemical action, ultimately proved to have been, or must be acknowledged to have been, taken to initiate the process which would continue indefinitely to produce a living being with an ever-increasing capacity to enjoy life.
The reader is reminded that for the purpose of establishing the Created God, that mysterious ‘something’ which initiated the process must be firmly relegated to the pre-life infinity of the universe, and its study left to science, as discussed later.
From the time of that first evolutionary change, and onwards through the whole of the Second Period, that is, from the start of life to the dawn of civilisation, millions of evolutionary events took place which from the very beginning were moving towards the creation of an ever more sensitive, complex and capable physical being, and this being, ultimately to become man, was always at the head of the process no matter what had gone before.
It is possible that the entire animal kingdom is the inevitable by-product of the process.
Each one of those millions of evolutionary changes by means of which the single cell multiplied and diversified into the vast complexity of all living things, was either ‘good’, and contributing towards the development of the human being of today, or ‘not good’ and was therefore continuing the  development of what was, or would become, a non-human species, or lost to evolution by bringing about the extinction of a species.
Each of the ‘good’ events can be considered as either adding to or modifying a unit of living physical matter contributing to the ultimate man, and by so doing, at the same time created a unit of ‘goodness’contributing to the ever-growing power of the developing God.
The word ‘power’ is introduced at this stage because the sheer vastness of the amount of ‘goodness ‘being produced by evolution according to the formula put forward earlier, has produced a situation where mankind, seeking its God could not ignore it.
Mankind will have to accept that this product of immense periods of time was indisputably in existence inside the evolutionary story, waiting to be taken up as the only source available from which could be acquired a foundation for the God that man must ultimately have, and which was not completely imaginary, and therefore subject to unlimited interpretations.
Mankind's failure to recognise with conviction that this basic source of ‘goodness’ represents the first premise from which to define God, would mean that the only way in which civilisation can prosper is barred, for there is no other identifiable source available.
This is the power which evolution has over man's ultimate interpretation of God, he must have a definable criterion of ‘goodness’, and only evolution can supply it.
Primitive Pleasure and Desire
If life has developed for the enjoyment that it brings, and it started with the existence of a single cell, then it is reasonable to suppose that the single cell was capable of the detection of an extremely small measure of ‘pleasure’ which it could experience by satisfying some ‘desire’.
In this instance it could be the desire to divide.
Therefore the first cell division could be the first manifestation of the motivation of all living things, which was to become the enjoyment of life.
Thus the ‘Joie de Vivre’ could be said to have its origin contemporary with the origin of life.
This is probably the reason for its universal acceptance as something to be cherished, and for its survival despite all religious disapproval which from time to time has endeavoured to denigrate it, as did for example, some of the teachings of Puritanism.
The origin of that primitive ‘desire’ is in all probability the same as the unknown origin of life, which in this book is relegated to that first pre-life period which made no contribution to the Created God except that it may have been the source of the basic origin of life.
It may be true that ‘desire’ is, as closely as human words can state, synonymous with life.
The assumption that the primitive cell experienced ‘desire’ is not as absurd as at first it might appear to be, for there is no reason why the magnitude of the capacity of all living creatures to experience pain and  pleasure, in any form, should not be considered measurable into hypothetical units. 
These units could then be regarded as repeatedly subdivisible to the point that the final dimension is so minute that it stands in the same relation to the highest human capacity for feeling as does the single cell to the supreme achievement of cellular development, which is the physical human being  .
The Threefold Nature of the Basis of Earthly Life
Thus it was, that at some momentous point in the immensity of time there came into being three initial units which can be taken as the true beginning of the story of earthly life.
The first of these units is the unit cell of life.
The second is the unit of ‘desire’ contained within that cell.
The third is the unit of ‘goodness’ which was the origin of God, or the unit of Godliness.
Of these three, it is only the existence of the ‘unit of desire’ that can reasonably be challenged.
Our very existence proves the first, and the third is acknowledged to be a product of human life.
The ‘unit of desire’ however, is admitted to be a presumption, but if it were possible to prove with scientific exactitude that it really existed then it would not be within the province of religion at all, but of science.
There is always a point at which the limitation of science, albeit forever progressing, introduces the need to make an unproved assumption about the mystery of life, and it is at this point that a religion becomes a necessity and must take over.
The Alternative Religion needs no other unproved assumption than the existence of the ‘unit of desire’.
Darwinism and the Created God
The Second Period was the time during which was laid down the evidence the nature of which has been revealed by men such as Charles Darwin and others, who gave to the world an understanding of the way in which evolution has operated through thousands of millions of years.
Unhappily their revelations ran sharply counter to the teachings of the organised churches which contended that the human being was the designed product of an extraterrestrial being bearing the name of ‘god’.
If either the Darwinians on the one hand, or the religious leaders of that time on the other, did make any effort to reconcile the theories of evolution with the doctrines of religion, they made no progress and the two factions became hopelessly opposed, and the religious leaders set up intense opposition to the teachings on evolution.
There is a very marked difference between the two doctrines.
The facts of Darwinism are capable of scientific verification, whereas the beliefs of religion are based on ancient writings, which, all through the centuries of civilised time have been contentious.
The fact of Darwinian evolution and the fact of the irrefutable need of mankind for a ‘god’ are capable of complete harmonisation within the tenets of the Alternative Religion.
This applies only if there is full acceptance of the proposition that mankind's need for a ‘god’, can be completely satisfied by the concept of a ‘god’ developed with developing life, and therefore definable.
Such acceptance would make it possible to bring to an end the constant friction and disagreement between science and religion; for religion, with its ‘god’ defined independently of the origin of the world or of life, would not be concerned with those origins, and would be completely unaffected by scientific advance.
Any definition of ‘god’ and its associated religion which is too vulnerable to criticism from scientific and other disciplined sources would not survive.
Scientific Training Could Support the Concept of the Created God
This is not to imply that scientists, and others in challenging occupations, should not be concerned about the human desire to seek better understanding of what is meant by ‘god’, or with any consequent religion.
On the contrary, the deep concern for things described as spiritual, which many of such people frequently exhibit, strengthens the contention that humanity as a whole needs a ‘god’ and a religion.
Scientifically informed people with their analytical minds and powers of observation have much to offer in the search for truth, whether this be concrete or abstract.
The Created God Must Appeal to People of All Occupations
What must always remain paramount is that the definition of God shall be so formulated that followers of occupations of every conceivable kind will be able to accept it, without any particular calling provoking in its members reason to doubt its value.
It should have the same meaning for each person, whatever his contribution to the world, whether it be that of a labourer or that of the highly qualified expert in, for example, quantum mechanics or any other of those disciplines for the erudite which, to the laity border on unreality.
Science must pursue its course secure in the knowledge that it will not be challenged by dogmatic superstition posing as religion, and religion, for its part, must be able to develop unthreatened by science.
The Conflict Between Religion and Science
Whenever the affairs of men are in a sorry state, it will always be found that beyond the immediate manifestations of trouble, there is a root cause.
Thus it is with the apparent conflict between religion and science.
In truth there should be no conflict, because it is the very existence of the conflict which provides the proof that there is something basically wrong.
In this instance it is the eternal quarrel over what is meant by ‘god’ that indicates where the nature of that basic wrong may be found.
Study of the religious story shows that it has always been organised religion which has eventually retreated before the inexorable advance of science, and religious leaders should acknowledge that this retreat provides the living proof of the falsity of their position.
They should abandon their insistence on the worship of the mythical creator of the universe, and seek their understanding of God within the confines of human knowledge.
The Right to Enjoy Life is Enshrined in Evolution
The realisation that the motivation of life is enjoyment, came into the evolutionary story long after the arrival of the first living cell.
That realisation  is a product of the power of rational thought which came to the emerging ‘human'’ being in the course of the evolutionary process, for it is in remote retrospect that man can now see that the division of the first cell was a ‘good’event, and had to be defined as such for the unanswerable reason that it could not have been anything else, otherwise there was nothing that could be defined as the origin of ‘good’that was not dependent on dogma and superstition.
The wonders of earthly life cannot be enjoyed by mankind if there is one vestige of doubt about the human right to do so.
The Second Period established that right, it is the Third Period which has provided the near total destruction of it.
The Inevitable Cruelty of Evolution
From that first manifestation of life the evolutionary processes continued all through the countless ages of this Second Period, that is, the period from the beginnings of life to the dawn of civilisation, and life developed by virtue of the laws of survival as disclosed by the Darwinian school.
To twentieth century man the operation of these laws appears to be based on necessary events of great cruelty.
The survival of the fittest meant that the struggle for life condemned millions of living creatures to starvation or violent death from many causes, not by any means the least important of which was the provision of food for other species.
However, that part of evolution which to modern man appears to be extremely cruel, must not be condemned and relegated to the depository of ‘evil’ for evil has no meaning in respect of evolutionary processes.
It would not have been possible for the long progression towards the perfect physical being, to have ever occurred at all, if it were encumbered by the constraints of compassion, an emotion which, by the very nature of evolution was completely non-existent before the dawn of civilisation.
The Axiomatic Nature of the Original Premise
All that has gone before in this book has been based on the premise that a  worshipable ‘god’ is not the creator of the universe, but is an entity extracted by human intelligence from the evolutionary story.
It, of course, cannot be taken as scientific fact.
It is an hypothesis put forward for acceptance or rejection by any individual, and at this stage of this book, acceptance will, most probably, be only tentative.
The arrival at the point where an hypothetical statement has to be accepted as fact in order to support efforts to rationalise a proposition, in this case a religion, is inevitable.
The position bears comparison with the development of geometrical reasoning by Euclid.
His logic had to start somewhere, and his axioms were described as ‘self-evident truths’.
For example, that ‘the shortest distance between two points is a straight line’, would appear to be such a truth without the need of proof.
This axiom among others, has faithfully served science and technology for two millenniums, but was ultimately shown to be untrue, in cosmic terms, by Einstein.
However, this revelation did not bring about the destruction of Euclidean geometry, it  simply added to it.
Likewise it is reasonable to accept that a rationalised religion must have a starting point that is based on acceptance of an unproved statement, provided that such a statement, if later proved to need modification, has not permitted the development of a religion that will collapse, if that vital primary premise comes into question.
The Inherent Strength of the Alternative Religion
The hypothesis of the nature and origin of the Created God as has been expounded herein provides a means whereby God can be defined and given an origin in evolutionary terms, and from there on in broader terms to embrace human civilisation.
There is no doubtful premise which can be easily discredited.
Therefore it is this God, created within the period of earthly life, and free from superstitious speculation about the origins of the universe, that provides the potential strength of the Alternative Religion.
The Created God, developed with life, could serve mankind's ‘spiritual’ needs as the sciences serve his physical needs.
Scientific changes come about, but they do not destroy science.
Similarly a God derived from mankind's need and not from ancient superstitions, can be so developed and adapted to the changing requirements of ever-advancing life, that there will be no danger of destroying the associated religion or of weakening its appeal.
The ‘Spiritual’ Reality
The reader may find that the continuing story of evolution in this Second Period, gradually strengthens his original tentative acceptance of the initial premise that the Created God of this book started with a unit of evolutionary ‘goodness’.
This strengthening will reach a point whereat that dawning faith will cease to be the questionable link in the chain.
The chain, that is, of reasoned progress towards the goal of belief in a strong religion, which is quite safe from the destructive power of superstition, dogma and misdirected scientific thought.
He may then come to believe that the Created God can be fully capable of fulfilling the need for a ‘god’ in some form or other, and of being of immense value to humanity.
The limiting factor of that value for each individual will be the amount of mental effort that he is willing or able to make, either alone or with help, in order to acquire a mental image of, and subsequently a conviction about, the reality of the Created God.
This reality, produced by mental effort to capture it, is, as nearly as the shortcomings of human language can put a name to it, the ‘spiritual’ reality.
It is in fact a belief that, because there is a logical basis for it, the imagined entity becomes real in the sense that it can be of value in dealing with the joys and sorrows of life.
The chapter on ‘Sickness and the Alternative Religion’ suggests how practical substance can be given to this statement.
Thus, for the purposes of this book, there is established a meaning to the word ‘spiritual’.
It applies to all those thoughts of the human mind which are  real enough to the thinker, but which cannot be converted to physical things and detected by the five senses of sight, hearing, touch, taste and smell.
Spiritual things are, therefore, the intangible products of the human mind, and are necessarily of human origin, that is, they have their origins in the period of evolution which started with the advent of life on earth.
It is just possible that, because these spiritual things are produced by the mind and are therefore peculiar to individuals, varying little or much from person to person, they represent the real and absolute fact of individuality.
The observations on immortality in Chapter Thirteen may be seen to have some bearing on this.
If in the course of time science produces evidence, from within the infinity of the universe, of some previously unknown and completely indestructible influence which caused life to commence, then that influence must not be designated spiritual'.
It would, by virtue of the fact that it was scientifically detectable, be concrete.
The word ‘spiritual’, for the purpose of the Alternative Religion, has been defined above and refers to a characteristic of developed human life.
Science may be obliged to find a new word free from religious associations.
Summary of the Origin of the Created God in the Second Period
From the very first tiny beginnings, the steady development of life continued, through countless aeons of time, controlled by no other influence than the ruthless laws of the survival of the fittest, and this was the process which was inexorably bringing about the development of the being which was to become man.
Occurring spontaneously with this was the creation of what man, millions of years later is able to look back on and recognise as myriads of units of ‘goodness’ being produced from those ‘good’events which were controlling evolution, and which he can now understand as being the origins of his well-being.
The effect of that correlation between the production of each unit of living matter and the corresponding production of a unit of ‘goodness’, each ‘event’ contributing to the ultimate goal of a happy humanity, will operate as long as life persists.
This massive build-up of ‘goodness’ which can be considered as the sum total of all the ‘good’of the favourable events of evolution, is the origin of the Created God, an origin which has been established by evolution, and which man must designate sacred.
The reader is reminded that the foregoing hypothesis concerns only the origin  of the Created God.
The Third Period concerns its further development.
It is important that the temptation to ascribe the ‘good’ of the process to any kind of an imaginary ‘god’of the pre-life period must be fully resisted.
A  worshipable God must belong to the period of life on earth and be acknowledged to be non-existent before then.
An understandable connection between God and evolution could not otherwise survive the probings of intelligence.
The End of the Second Period
The foregoing chapters bring the story to that crucial time in the long history of earthly life when emerging man would find himself unwilling to accept that he must for ever be on his guard against the uncontrolled violence that ruled the evolutionary scene.
This brings us to the Third Period, which started with the very first human emotions which heralded the dawn of civilisation.
The Third Period of the Development of the Created God
This is the most difficult period and the one which introduced ‘evil’ into the world and hence contains the worst of its history.
Right from the start of the period and up to this present time late in the twentieth century, it has provided numerous examples of the manner in which mankind has failed again and again, in his efforts to mitigate the suffering inherent in the ruthless laws of evolution by replacing them with something better, something which it called ‘civilisation’.
All efforts have so far merely substituted the controlled violence of the struggle for existence with behaviour which introduced measures of cruelty unknown on earth before the ‘dawn of civilisation’.
The Limitations of the Pleasures of Early Life
It has already been stated that one of the most important premises underlying the theories and conclusions of this book, is that earthly life exists to be enjoyed.
However, during the first Two Periods of the development of the Created God, the pleasures of life were confined to those of a purely physical nature and were born of the ruthless competition for life.
But there came a time when that struggle could no longer increase life enjoyment as far as the adult population was concerned.
For them the satisfactions of life were probably limited to the pleasures of eating, the gratification of the sexual urge and the uplift experienced in the physical triumph over another creature.
This triumph could be due to the outcome of a fight for a mate, or over territory or for food, or over some other issue.
The pleasures were predominantly physical and the strongest enjoyed most.
For the young, there must have existed an inherited inborn enjoyment of life, for it can fairly safely be assumed that the pleasure experienced by them when at play, so obvious to modern man, must have been observable all through evolution.
This pleasure would appear to have been remote from the adult satisfactions mentioned in the previous paragraph and is a manifestation of the ‘joie de vivre’ which is at the very heart of the urge for life, which is itself the product of ‘desire’as introduced and discussed in the Second Period.
The ‘joie de vivre’ then, observable in the very young, could well be the logical outcome of the satisfying of the initial unit of ‘desire’.
It may be recalled that it is suggested that the origin of ‘-desire’ could be also the origin of life, and is one of the timeless mysteries relegated to the pre-life period of the story of the universe.
That is the period which is irrelevant to the development of the Created God and man's religion.
It could well be that it was the very fact of the fading of life enjoyment which is experienced with the responsibilities of adulthood and parenthood — and this could have affected the very primitive man just as much as it does modern man — which precipitated the very first of man's attempts to take control of his future and the progress of evolution, by becoming ‘civilised’.
In short, the origin of ‘civilisation’ might well be traced to man's dawning understanding that the ‘joie de vivre ’experienced in childhood was being lost to the individual as his life went on.
It was this dawning understanding, forcing itself into the consciousness of the developing human species which started to produce individuals who recognised that the enjoyment of life would be forever circumscribed if ways to mitigate the ruthlessness of the laws of evolution were not found.
‘The Dawn of Civilisation’
Thus began, for developing man, the most important part of his existence in the universe, and this is the Third Period which started with the dawn of civilisation, and continues to the present day.
The actual historical time when that momentous dawn could be said to have occurred is unknown as an historical fact.
Religious writings provide no real evidence and must be ignored.
It has been put variously, at anything from one half to one million years ago, and even then is admitted to being only speculative.
This is understandable for actual evidence can be only archaeological, and that means that such evidence would have to be of a concrete nature.
The origin of civilisation was probably the arrival of a mental process in the evolving human being which, for the first time, was not a purely instinctive one.
For it to have left archaeological evidence it would have been necessary for it to have been manifested by a physical act of some kind, which would necessarily need to result in the production of something capable of preservation in the archaeological context.
That this should have happened, within a period of a few generations for example, and therefore in evolutionary terms, immediately, is palpably unlikely, for the mental development which heralded the beginnings of civilisation could have started long before man's activities were such as would leave archaeological evidence.
There is, of course, no reason at all to suppose that civilisation is associated purely with physical skills.
The beginning of civilisation was almost certainly a mental development which came long before it affected man's physical abilities, and it could well have been the moment when for the first time, a primitive creature found that he could override and control the instinctive urge to act, which up to that time would have been the only source of motivation.
The natural corollary to that would be that the ‘dawn of civilisation’ can be interpreted as the beginnings of the power of early man to think rationally.
As this may well have occurred millenniums before that dawning power could produce an act of a nature that would leave the kind of evidence that archaeologists seek, then it must be that the true dawn is virtually  undatable .
Thus it would seem that the ‘dawn of civilisation’, so often quoted in a context suggesting that it represents a fairly finite occurrence taking a relatively short space of time, did, in all probability cover a very long time indeed, perhaps many thousands of years.
It would be during this period that those first stirrings of mental activity in the mind of primitive man which were ruthless evolution, were having a profound effect on the development of his mind, long before he was able to give practical effect to them.
The Meaning of the Word ‘Mind’
The mind is the word used for that still mysterious part of living creatures that controls the time, intensity and direction of physical and mental activity.
Its mystery does not affect the understanding of the Created God, for, to accord with the aims and claims of this book that mystery still rests in the pre-life period; furthermore, it is possible to associate it with the concept of ‘desire’ put forward in the hypothesis associated with the Second Period.
The Beginning of ‘God-Worship’ and its Association with ‘Desire’
It is probable that it was during the period which is termed the ‘dawn of civilisation’ that the first primitive acts of homage or deference to a ‘god’occurred, and if this were so it could be an indication that the need for a ‘god’is fundamental to the civilising process.
It was also during this period that primitive man undoubtedly arrived at the time when he was able to communicate with his fellows with developing abilities more effective than those available to the rest of living creatures.
It is just conceivable, however that, even at this time he may have started to indulge in a very simple form of god worship entirely on his own as a single individual, group worship following much later.
Only speculation is possible in offering a reason for the initial action, which could be described as the first rite.
The reason could very well have been that he simply desired  to do it.
The search for the motivation leads back to the hypothesis put forward earlier, that life itself could be held to be synonymous with desire, therefore to have life was to have desire.
As life developed, so desire became ever more demanding, and more complex.
In this context, as elsewhere in this book, by ‘desire’ to do or have something is meant to ‘want’to do or have something, which in its turn means to seek the satisfaction of responding to an urge.
From this it could well be said that life motivation stems from the perpetual satisfaction of recurring desire.
The Inevitably Mammalian Nature of Man and its Connection with God.
The wish for a ‘god’ may have been the unavoidable outcome of the fact that the developing human being, in his desire-motivated influence on evolution, had to reproduce himself through the mammalian process.
This meant that his early life made him totally dependent on his parents, particularly his mother, to a degree far beyond that necessary to any other living creatures.
When parents ceased to be available, primitive man could well have felt the loss, and the need to transfer the dependence elsewhere and this led eventually to some form of imagined substitute, or ‘god’ as the surrogate.
The mammalian process may not have been the safest way to perpetuate the species, but as the emerging man was, by virtue of the very nature of the evolutionary process, developing a body capable of the enjoyment of life to a degree equal to that of all other forms of life in total, he was restricted to what was biologically possible.
For example, he could not enjoy the power and obvious pleasures of flight, in all probability experienced at some evolutionary stage and retained as a residual ‘desire’, and at the same time be strong enough to do other desired things.
The very nature of the earth itself, gravity for example, restricted this.
Nevertheless, the mammalian form of life provided the greatest potential.
The limitation of the power of flight and of many other capacities surrendered as a result of the insatiable appetite of the developing man for ever more ability, was to be at least partially compensated for by the advance of technology in a remote future.
This is another story, but it underlines the contention that ‘desire’ could be the ultimate motivation of all the activities of life.
As already implied, the content of the foregoing speculations on the source and scale of man's capability for life enjoyment and all that it could mean is, of course, hypothetical, and in any case the development was spread over millions of years, but it does however provide a basis for thought which does not require the invocation of the supernatural.
The First ‘Gods’ Were Essential as Substitutes for Parents
To return to the possible origin of man's wish for a god; his mammalian nature ensured that after birth he was helpless and utterly dependent on his parents, and the father, mother and child situation ruled.
This early dependence on the parents had, among other things, its effect on the child mind, as it still does.
This produced an implanted need, on occasion, to seek comfort and safety from some source, subconsciously endowed with power to provide.
Even after adulthood and the break-up of the family, the parents would themselves certainly have retained, from their own babyhoods, those residual longings for the comfort of the father figure.
These could, probably more easily in early, rather than in later man, have been powerful enough to  cause him to seek a substitute for his natural father or mother when they were no longer available to him, and he was in need.
This substitute would most likely have been an animal, and it is reasonable to assume that by this time animals were, to some extent at least, tamed if not domesticated.
In the absence of an animal, or even in addition to it, it is quite possible that some form of comfort was found at a particular place or sanctuary, and even within the minute span of evolutionary time measured by a single generation, it is possible for such a retreat to have become a very special place for a whole family, or even a tribe.
It would have assumed a place similar to that of the forerunners of the churches and chapels of historic times.
There is a parallel to the foregoing to be seen in child behaviour.
From time immemorial children have raised playthings, particularly dolls, to a place in their lives not unlike the place that ‘gods’ occupy in some aspects of the lives of adults.
Also, to some extent copying adult places of worship, children have provided for themselves hideaway places that they treasure, and to which they can go when they can get no comfort from the adults around them.
It is a very short step for a human being, endowed with imagination as humans undoubtedly are, and possessed of a belief that some creature or possession can bring comfort to him, to start to call upon that object of his belief, from a distance.
The need to do this could arise when time and space prevent him from having immediate contact with his source of succour, as would occur for example, on hunting expeditions.
Thus could the very first and important step in the rise of god-worship have been initiated, by making it unnecessary for there to be an actual physical connection between the objects of faith and the believer.
The way would then be open for a totally imaginary ‘god’ to displace the physical objects, and become the principal object of entreaty.
The next step would be to offer thanks when there is reason to believe that the ‘god’, or its more mundane forerunner had fulfilled the expectations of the supplicant.
Thus it can be shown that religion and god-worship could have come to man, more or less inevitably, as a product of the very nature of his evolution.
It is very difficult to find a reason for that early forebear making a ‘god’ for himself in the first place, if it were not a result of the pressures of dependence originating from mammalian childhood.
Early Awakening to the Pleasures of Life Not Purely Physical
It was probably at some time during that same period when the dawning need to rely on a ‘god ‘first disturbed the developing human being, that he started to enjoy pleasures which were not the result of simply satisfying the desires associated with his physical evolution.
It is probably true to say that these new sensations were at first quite undetected, as such, by himself.
For example, his eyes were necessary for the finding of food and the locating of enemies, to name but two of many purely necessary functions, but there must have been a time when he first began to enjoy the visual beauty all around him.
This capacity to enjoy beauty could have had its origin in the elaborate effects of association between, to quote just one possibility, the peace and beauty of a woodland retreat, and the relief to be felt in being there after suffering, for example, the pain of a lost battle.
The nature of the relief may not, of course, have been within the understanding of the primitive intelligence, but the experience could have had its effect in giving birth to a new appreciation.
Such experiences would need to be repeated many times before there was a lasting effect, but this, of course is irrelevant in the context of the immensity of evolutionary time.
There could have been another contributory factor having a bearing on the origin of man's appreciation of beauty.
It follows from the supposition, mooted earlier in this book, that whilst all other species are capable of the enjoyment of sensations, both pleasant and unpleasant, peculiar to their kinds, the human species is capable of experiencing all sensations, of all kinds, and from all sources.
That is, the human species is capable of experiencing sensations equal in total to those experienced by all other species put together.
This could have come about by virtue of the fact that at every stage of evolution the original life force (whatever it may have been and relegated in this book to the pre-life period) was always carried by the species at the head of the chain, and this was the species which would ultimately become the human race.
Hence, the human race would carry a residual capacity to experience the sensation which attracts the remote forebears of, a bee or butterfly for example, to the colourful flower.
The creature is attracted because it has the pleasure of satisfied desire, in this case its own particular form of hunger.
It soon learns to associate the pleasure with colour and seeks the flowers.
This is one example illustrating the hypothesis that, because of his inheritance of the capacity to experience the sensations of all life, man has acquired an appreciation of colourful things from evolutionary sources, this example being but a part of it.
Similarly the sense of hearing, much needed in the battle for survival, ultimately gave pleasure through the earliest kind of music.
Early man's relationship with the birds offers a fairly obvious route to a possible understanding of this.
Likewise, all the remaining senses can be shown to have instigated the arrival of appetites, the satisfactions of which were not directly necessary to survival.
The foregoing hypotheses are capable of almost limitless expansion.
They are included here to suggest examples of a possible connection between mankind's first awareness of beautiful things and his evolution, which does  not rely on the barren statement that a supernatural ‘god’ arranged it all.
Human intelligence, by its very nature, never fully accepts statements that appear to have no plausible foundation.
The existence of man's ability to enjoy beauty is not a contentious subject and it is universally accepted as ‘good’.
It therefore provides a further source of ‘goodness’ to add to the store which is the Created God.
This contribution to the accumulating ‘goodness’ may be regarded as the first which is not due to the ruthless survival laws which belong to the second period of this book.
A First Example of Human Contribution to the Created God
It was at some time within this period of dawning civilisation that the creatures at the head of the biological chain, that is, man's early forebears, first experienced the effect of an intellectual development that directed their behaviour towards what was to become the origins of human cooperation.
For example, it could well have been that families of cave dwellers came to realise that it was possible that they could agree to respect the privacy and boundaries of their respective homes, and by so doing relieve themselves of the eternal vigilance likely to be necessary in the absence of such agreement.
This can be assumed, quite fairly, to be the beginning of the acknowledgement of the rights of ownership, generally agreed to be a good thing when protected from definable abuse.
The increased happiness which would be experienced by the accord would have a profound effect and become a very important influence on the progress of civilisation.
As a primary source of good, and subject to whatever rules may be agreed from time to time, this early example of human cooperation could be an unquestioned source of ‘goodness’ to be assigned to the keeping of the Created God.
It could be one of the first of the man-made units of goodness to be added to the existing store already laid up by the evolutionary process.
The Right to Own Property
The foregoing would, of course, mean that property rights were not for the dispensation of some imagined ‘god’ of early superstitious religion, but existed by virtue of the fact that human beings have, in the course of time, generally agreed that such a right was ‘good’, for the reason that without it there could be no peaceful existence and no contentment.
The rules and conditions would themselves be subject to the same human scrutiny and debate as the basic right, and not be adjudged Godly until agreed.
Nevertheless it could be a long time before any human decisions acquired sufficient accord to be entered as units of ‘goodness’ and assigned to the Created God.
The implication of the foregoing is that the right to own property, a contentious subject even in this late twentieth century, could,subject to agreed rules and conditions  , be raised to an important place in human affairs and be established as a Godly institution.
That is, it could be a contributed part of the Created God, sacrosanct, but nevertheless entirely under human control.
The Alternative Religion, therefore accepts that carefully regulated individual rights to ownership can be fully justified on the grounds (among others) that such rights have been established deep in the story of human evolution.
The contention that the human species can experience the sensations and instinctive urgings of all others put together, automatically implies that they carry the leanings towards the communal living such as is evident in the colonies set up by, for example, the social insects.
It may be argued that therein lies evolutionary justification for the belief that some modified form of such living can suit humans.
This is not so.
The difference is that the insects live that way because they are following their only instinct in that sphere  and this excludes them from all other forms of living.
Human beings, on the other hand, are not instinctively  compelled to accept any social order.
They, exclusive of all other species, are free to choose, and in the final analysis, that instinct which has its origins in the mammalian family life is most likely to take precedence, and humans will choose to live with the relatively small family group as the ultimate refuge.
If this is the decision, then such a way of life can be specified as Godly and incorporated into the Created God for as long as a consensus desires it.
The foregoing example illustrates the manner in which a human decision accepted as good, can be designated a unit of ‘goodness’ and be assigned to the store which is the Created God.
Thus was introduced the time when the Created God ceased to be produced solely from all that was good in the struggle for existence, and entered the period, still going on, when mankind itself began to influence the nature of that God.
Sadly, this influence also introduced what man was to term ‘evil’.
The Introduction of Evil
Evolutionary sources of ‘goodness’ have been defined earlier as arising from beneficial changes, changes which were not beneficial being simply designated ‘not good ‘because they were not intentionally harmful.
When man himself started to make decisions which were to become contributions to the substance of the Created God, there arose individuals who could not accept the decisions which were designated ‘good’ by the majority, and who therefore started moving towards behaviour which was specifically harmful to others.
It was the first of such actions, however vague it may appear in remote retrospect, which introduced the concept of ‘evil’.
The difference between evolutionary influence and human influence is quite clear, evolutionary actions were either good or not good, and human actions became either good or evil.
The distinction lies in the actual intention to do ‘evil’ on the one  hand, and the absence of ‘goodness’on the other.
Time inevitably brought situations where a clear-cut distinction was not possible, and behaviour of some kinds would have no effect on the development of the Created God.
These, by agreement, would be designated neutral.
A Resume of the Portrayal of the Created God So Far
It will be assumed from here on that the evolutionary events which provided, for the seekers after truth, that area of knowledge from which modern man could, millions of years later, extract a viable foundation for a Created God, do in fact do that, by providing the substance of an acceptable hypothesis.
Put as simply as possible the hypothesis is:— From the start of life up to a certain time which is designated the Dawn of Civilisation, ‘goodness’ was being created from one source only, that source being the endless stream of infinitely small but favourable evolutionary changes or events, producing an infinite number of minute units of what, by virtue of its favourable nature, has been termed ‘goodness’, the outcome of each favourable event being regarded as one unit.
Such a unit of goodness has been defined as the result of the slightest favourable evolutionary change that could occur  .
Unfavourable events brought about extinction of species and were lost to evolution, and so provided no ‘goodness’.
Thus the hypothesis provides a meaning to primitive ‘goodness’ and also suggests the period during which it can be said to have originated.
During this period there was no such thing as ‘evil’.
The ‘Dawn of civilisation’ produced events of a different kind, different because they were, for the first time, modified by man himself to provide a new source of ‘goodness’to be added to the storehouse that is the Created God.
A probable example of the first of these man-made events was a primitive effort at cooperation to establish a right to exclusive use of an area by an individual or family.
This can now be identified as the first signs of the creation of a source of ‘goodness’ additional to that due to the ruthless forces of the struggle for survival.
It represented the probable beginning of human involvement in the creation of God.
The foregoing reminds the reader of the salient ideas so far written to introduce the idea of the Created God.
The Unit of Goodness and Its Relation to ‘Truth’
The method used in this book to define a unit of goodness, is plausible and, to some extent, in line with scientific practice whereby when a unit of any sort is thus defined, it first becomes accepted, and then quite soon it is unquestionably ‘true’.
Thus some ‘truth’ can be created, and rank equal in human esteem with truth which can be observed to be such, or proved in some other way.
It follows that it is reasonable to assume that a unit of goodness can exist in the mind of man to aid him in understanding the origin of his God, just as the scientific unit aids human thought directed towards physical activity.
If and when the time comes for the Created God to become a reality, the substance of the foregoing paragraph could be removed from the area of speculation and be accepted as truth.
For in those matters which are beyond the reach of absolute knowledge, it is within the province of man's own responsibility to decide what, for the time being, can be or cannot be accepted as truth, and, as there can be a Created God, so can that God be the product of created truth.
Moreover, created truth can be modified as time and human intelligence demands, as also can the definition of the Created God.
The creation of truth has, from time to time been manifest in religious thinking, but it has been either not recognised as such, or deliberately not admitted to be such.
The Realisation of the Limitations of the Laws of Survival
With the coming of civilisation and the beginning of this, the third of the Three Periods into which the reader is reminded the explanation of the Created God is divided, man was on the threshold of the era of his greatest testing, even though at that time he may not have been aware of it.
It was the time when he had to choose between, on the one hand, learning to limit the purely sensual pleasures offered him by his physical evolution, and on the other hand, accepting that failure to do so would either destroy or delay the enjoyment of the much broader and deeper pleasures which were becoming available to him by virtue of the developing emotions within him.
Of all these expanding emotions, the one which we call compassion, may have been the first to emerge and could be the one of greatest importance, but the origins of all of them could almost certainly be found far back in evolutionary time.
The task of examining this and extracting the full mechanism would be nearly impossible of achievement.
It is sufficient to say that the feelings and emotions experienced by modern man are well known, are more or less universal, and the measure of their diversity and intensity not in dispute.
Therefore the details of their origins are not of paramount importance.
The Created God has a substantive beginning, which is the vast store of accumulated ‘goodness’ which produced and developed the human body to its present physical form.
This, in all probability, was approximately the state of man's physical development when he first became aware that he had the power to partake to the full of the golden opportunities before him, and increase the richness of life by gradually controlling the residual violence which was an unavoidable by-product of his evolution.
Such control was obviously necessary if he were to develop within himself the capacity to enjoy the vastly increased range of pleasures that could be derived from his expanding emotions.
However, this is where human troubles and sorrows started.
Mankind as a whole, or much more probably a tribe or race more advanced than others, had reached the conclusion that some less harsh substitute for the laws of survival which produced the human body had to be found in order to bring  about the necessary control.
This required the acknowledgement that there would be the obligation to suppress, at least in some degree, many of man's inherited instinctive urges and the need to introduce rules for all to observe.
Unhappily, the suppression of the greed and lust of evolution, innate in all individuals was not to be easily set aside.
It was to be the source of seemingly endless conflict for centuries to come, and it is still the greatest of all impediments to human progress.
y
The Most Important Decision in Human History
This conflict, it would seem, has come about because, broadly speaking, the human race has divided in its response to the vital choice that has been introduced in the foregoing paragraphs, and which can best be summarised as being between the following two major propositions.
The First Choice
Humanity shall remain content to cut off further hopes of increased life enjoyment by permitting the continued dominance within the human race of the evolutionary law that requires for its operation that (a), all surplus life must perish and (b), the strongest shall be entitled to all that physical dominance permits them to take, regardless of the source of what is taken, and the cost to others.
The suffering which inevitably follows shall be deemed to be of no consequence, because physical evolution itself disregards suffering, or regards it as an essential part of the process.
The Second Choice
Humanity will insist that individuals must accept their personal obligations by acknowledging that they do have within them impulses and appetites which are a legacy from millions of years of ruthless evolution, and that the time has come when they must introduce into their lives the concept of a high standard of self-discipline to control those impulses and appetites.
In addition they must also accept that they have within them emotions and feelings which, properly nurtured and utilised can provide, not only compensation for the surrender of unlimited sensual pleasure, but also a road to unlimited human happiness, a road which would be blocked if the choice were the first proposition.
Through the centuries of developing life, the need to choose one or the other of the two routes indicated in the Choices has faced all human races.
The ideological differences which have emerged no matter how defined by warring factions, are nevertheless traceable, in general, to the differing responses which they have made at those times in their histories when the need to make the decision became manifest  .
These differing responses, the fundamental cause of most of the wars of history, were not necessarily taken with a knowledge of the effect that they would ultimately have, for at the relevant time the choice would not have been as clear to those making them, as it would be to minds educated to standards prevailing centuries later.
Therefore there must be no automatic  condemnation of their responses and actions, but there must also be no question of their being automatically right because they are recorded in writings designated ‘holy’.
There is plenty of ‘scriptural’ evidence that the viciousness of evolutionary dominance was, for long periods of history, and among many of the peoples of the earth, in no wise eschewed.
On the individual level, a decision to adopt the Second Choice, would introduce the overriding need for two new elements in human development,(a), personal self-control, and (b), the requirement to develop a response to the emotions which does not damage, more than can be avoided, the happiness of others.
A searching inquiry would almost certainly reveal that most, if not all, fully acknowledged human virtues are,to a greater or lesser extent, founded on the personal acceptance of those two very important responsibilities  .
The Continuing Development of the Created God.
It is a fact that whatever actions are being taken at any one time, the individuals concerned are rarely, if ever, aware of the effect they may be having on events and the conditions of life in the remote future.
Thus it was in the case of the development of the Created God.
All those individuals who supported the adoption of the Second Choice above, were, unbeknown to themselves, bringing about events the effect of which could, many years later, be adjudged either good or evil or neutral in accordance with the rule proffered earlier, and therefore be available for incorporation as units of ‘goodness’ into the Created God.
The rule referred to is based on the proposition that all events, from the very beginning of earthly life and from whatever source, must ultimately be for the promotion of the enjoyment of life; therefore the classification, good, evil or neutral reflected the measure of the effect on human happiness attributable to each event.
The reader is reminded that according to the reasoning of this book, the ‘events’ have always been the direct result of the satisfying of ‘desire’, the existence of which is the basic presumption relegated to pre-life and therefore having no direct relevance to the Created God.
The foregoing is fully applicable to the motivation of all those individuals who influenced the events which were creating the religious climate and who, unbeknown to themselves were contributing to the Created God.
That they were moved, in the ultimate analysis, by a need to satisfy a ‘desire’, in this case to promote the creation of ‘goodness’, detracts not one iota from the credit due to them, or from the value of their contribution.
Among these people must be numbered those who are identified as the heroes and heroines of religious conflict.
Their  particular contributions are special to them because they were aware of the religious nature of their activities, but it is the actions of millions of people outside the specifically religious scene who, in their everyday lives, have in all probability created the bulk of the vast store of ‘units of goodness’ by their numerous kindly acts.
Most of these acts can be attributed to the emotion of compassion, referred to earlier in this book as probably being one of the earliest of human emotions to emerge from the dawning of civilisation.
Some individuals have made minute contributions, each measured as equal to the single unit of ‘goodness’ which is defined herein as the unit contributed by evolution.
Others make no contribution at all.
The numbers of those who have added to the ‘goodness’ on earth are legion, and they are to be found among all the races of the world, from origins of the humblest to the most exalted.
Among these people must be included all the great religious leaders and teachers of all time, whether it be Jesus Christ, Muhammad, Confucius, the Buddhas or any of the others, all of them mortal, none of them ‘divine’.
They were, of course, associating themselves with a variety of interpretations of ‘god’, but their actions can very easily be identified as a fight for the adoption of the Second Choice.
In which case allegiance to any particular ‘god’ would be of no significance.
Whatever may have been the cause of that allegiance to the ‘gods’ of their beliefs, does not really matter, for the teachings of all of them contain items aide wisdom which are available to all humanity, and can be used to provide further units of ‘goodness’for the minds of men to assign to the store which is the Created God.
These leaders provided truly great contributions to the items of ‘goodness’ which can thus be enshrined, for not only did they themselves set the seal of ‘good’, for all time, on numerous human actions, but they influenced millions of others to do likewise.
It is the work of the resulting army of dedicated and sincere reformers who through the centuries have fought to make mankind accept that the Second Choice is the right one, that has provided, and will go on providing for ever, the real power for the production of the good that will be assigned to the storehouse that is the Created God.
For it is the kind of work that these individuals carried on with the knowledge that they were seeking to improve life on earth, that set the example for the vast mass of the human race to follow and thereby perpetuate, albeit largely unknowingly, the strengthening and augmentation of the Created God.
The Erosion of the Power of the Created God by Evil Acts
However, there will be, for a very long time, others who will believe that their interests and ambitions can best be served if the First Choice were to be retained as the basic guide to human development.
Such people ensure the persistence of evil on earth by believing that the power of physical might shall prevail uncontrolled with complete disregard of the general good.
As the Created God can be made ever greater by the actions of people creating goodness by living within the constraints of the Second Choice, so can that greatness be reduced by the actions of others operating within the evolutionary licence of the First Choice.
For example, let it be assumed that at some time an individual has become entitled to the ownership of some goods, by virtue of an approved process designated ‘good —.
This would be the result of a majority decision won by individuals upholding the Second Choice and would therefore be a unit of ‘goodness’ contributing to the Created God.
Later, a change comes about, and a consensus supports the First Choice, which allows the forceful seizure of the goods, and the action, in accordance with the definition proffered earlier, is labelled ‘evil’.
The ownership is now dependent only on the physical ability of the individual to retain possession.
The original decision is reversed and the value and influence of the God is reduced.
The reduction comes about because something that was ‘good’— had been removed from the store, and the total value is therefore less.
If units of good were constantly being cancelled by units of evil, ultimately mankind could be reverted to any point in time past, even to as far back as the beginning of life.
First his own contribution to the definition of the Created God would be destroyed, and then the evolutionary contribution which produced the human body, and which is acclaimed wholly good, would follow.
The result of such a calamitous ascendance of evil would again make the world Godless and lifeless.
This latter event is all too obviously possible now that man has produced the means, inherent in nuclear warfare and other means of mass destruction, to destroy all life.
The sobering thought emerges here that, although it is contended that ‘evil’ did not exist before ‘civilisation’, once it had been established it could nevertheless exist in a reversal of the civilising process right back to a restoration of the pre-life condition of the earth.
The Task of Identifying Good, Evil and Neutral.
It is fairly easy to envisage the value of human acts as being capable of definitions falling on, above or below a neutral line between good and evil.
It is the task in front of humanity to arrive at a definition for all controversial acts and to set a value on them; acts decided as ‘good’ contributing to the Godhead, acts decided as ‘evil’detracting there from, and acts of an innocuous nature as ‘neutral’—, and having no effect.
The decisions arrived at are at the very heart of the success or failure of the Created God to be the foundation of the Alternative Religion.
If this religion becomes the powerful complement to lawfully elected government, which would be a very desirable development, then those decisions would settle many controversial issues which at present are successfully resolved by neither statute-law, nor, to the slightest degree by a respected and accepted moral code.
Later chapters will consider some of these issues as they could be affected by the Alternative Religion.
The Continuing Production of Good, Evil and Neutral Events
The original store of ‘goodness’ which was created by evolution, and which must be axiomatically accepted as ‘good'’within the minds of men if the Created God is to become a reality, acquired its first unit of man-made ‘goodness’as the first product of civilisation.
That first incident started the never-ending process of strengthening and sanctifying the Created God.
Ever since that time, there has been going on throughout the world a series of struggles which have ranged from very minor quarrels at one extreme, to the uttermost ferocity of human warfare at the other.
In the course of this unrelenting conflict there has arisen every possible grade of human degradation and cruelty on the one hand, and every possible grade of human nobility and sacrifice on the other.
The first of these two extremes of human behaviour is the deteriorated outcome of the human exploitation of the First Choice, and the second the product of the noble acceptance of the Second Choice.
To remind the reader of the nature of these two choices they are repeated below.
The Two Choices Restated
The First Choice
Humanity shall remain content to cut off further hopes of increased life enjoyment by permitting the continued dominance within the human race of the evolutionary law that requires for its operation that (a) all surplus life must perish, and (b) the strongest shall be entitled to all that physical dominance permits them to take, regardless of the source of what is taken, and the cost to others.
The suffering which inevitably follows shall be deemed to be of no consequence, because physical evolution itself disregards suffering, or regards it as an essential part of the process.
The Second Choice
Humanity will insist that individuals must accept their personal obligations by acknowledging that they do have within them impulses and appetites which are a legacy from millions of years of ruthless evolution, and that the time has come when they must introduce into their lives the concept of a high standard of self discipline to control those impulses and appetites.
In addition they must also accept that they have within them emotions and feelings which, properly nurtured and utilised can provide, not only compensation for the surrender of unlimited sensual pleasure, but also a road to unlimited human happiness, a road which would be blocked if the choice were the first proposition.
To return to the source of good, evil and neutral; whatever, in the conflicts referred to, may have been the intentions or hopes of the protagonists, the fact remains that over the centuries they have produced a constant flow of individual human decisions which can be examined and specified as either good, evil or neutral.
It is fairly certain that there will always be a majority of people who will recognise the precious stream of units of goodness arising from the turmoil, and who will stubbornly refuse to be suppressed.
It is they who will ensure that the stream will inevitably be incorporated in the goodness which is the Created God.
Moreover those units will relentlessly force themselves into the human conscience as being of a wholly desirable nature, that is, good.
The survival of the evil will always be vigorously resisted, and the neutral label will always be available to provide a means of temporarily or permanently disposing of troublesome issues.
These will be resolved or abandoned in the course aide time, and in the meantime will have no moral standing.
The Traditional ‘Gods’ of Antiquity Must Be Kept at Bay
Although religious history may be interpreted to indicate that this struggle has been undertaken at the behest of, or in support of, some extraterrestrial ‘god’, this is not really correct, and none of those ancient ‘gods’ must be allowed to usurp the rightful place of the emerging Created God.
In reality what has been happening is that humanity, driven by the inexorable power of the primordial desire for earthly happiness, has been producing a constant stream of decisions from which the good, which will ultimately help with the building of the Created God, have been extracted.
The resulting human condition, forever changing, is the product of life, not of a ‘god’ of pre-life origin.
The substance of all that has so far been written in this chapter illustrates how there can be established a firm belief that God and man have developed from a common origin, the origin itself being irrelevant.
It is this concurrent development which provides the source of what much later is destined to become the relationship which binds man to his God, first, by the processes of evolution, and then by man himself struggling to bring into his life the enrichment available to him if only he can control the legacies of ruthless evolution.
This process of control is called civilisation, and to fit into the theory of the Created God, is reduced to a series of events which are designated good, evil and neutral, only the good being used for the substance of the Created God.
This process of civilisation has, within the vastness of evolutionary time, hardly started.
In the minds of men the Created God could, in the course of time, become personified as the immortal keeper of the good which ensures the continuing development of life in accordance with the desired pattern, but that personification should never be allowed to cloud the origins of the Created God, which came from life.
The Created God can have existence only in the minds of men, for it is only there that things without material substance can exist, and are therefore spiritual.
It follows that the Created God is everlasting only as long as there is  life on earth, the endurance being twofold.
In the first place by virtue of the ‘goodness’ of the evolutionary process, and in the second by virtue of man's own efforts to contribute.
Man, for his part will become the short-lived individual who will strive to safeguard that pattern by exalting the keeper that is his Created God, and this God will endure for as long as there is life on earth and no longer.
The foregoing chapter has described the manner in which the Created God can be given a place in the minds of human beings as a feasible entity capable of a spiritual kind of existence.
The nature of that existence has been partly influenced by the actions of those millions of people who have lived during the period which began with the dawn of civilisation, and extends into modern times.
Some people were outstanding and became the deified men and women of the great religions, and their lives can be shown to be relevant to the conception of the Created God.
Jesus Christ and the Created God
There is little doubt that some of the greatest sources of evil in the world can be traced to the gross abuse of that area of human activity which is termed ‘religion’.
Somewhere in the period between the time that early man first made for himself a ‘god’, and the time when evidence of ‘god’ worship was left for later generations to find, the use of ‘gods’for purposes which were largely intended to create unfair privileges, and were therefore a source of evil, gradually crept in and became a widespread part of the social scene.
This period probably started quite soon after the beginning of ‘god’ worship and eventually stretched over many thousands of years.
The actual time of the start is difficult to arrive at, and is not important, but whatever the historical facts may be, it can be taken as fairly certain that the misuse of religion had become well established at the time of the advent of Jesus Christ.
Setting aside the mass of controversial mysticism which, over the centuries has surrounded this man, the fact remains that his life has made a tremendous impact on the religious and political history of a large part of the world.
His teaching, or the teaching that over the centuries has been ascribed to him, brought into being the highly influential religion of Christianity.
This may have held great promise in its early years but it soon became divided and then fragmented, due largely, if not wholly to the same age-old misconception whereby the basis of the religion is the assumption of the existence of a completely undefined ‘god’, in this case the ancient ‘god’ of the Jews.
The fragmentation led inevitably to violence and misery.
It is often the case, especially in religious matters, that wherever controversial premises are stubbornly adhered to, and crystal-clear reasoning and all human intelligence cries aloud in protest but is ruthlessly suppressed and ignored, then an endless supply of written matter is assured for evermore.
Scholars, theologians and a host of other people can spend their whole lives  delving into the chaos of unlimited literature, and yet never produce anything which could be an acceptable basis for a viable religion.
Such futile efforts can only bring something close to contempt and suspicion among the millions of human beings who crave nothing more than a simple faith based on a credible ‘god’.
The persistent failures can always be traced back to the original false premise that all existence is controlled by an undefined and unassailable ‘god’.
In the case of Christianity, the ‘god’ is the Yahweh, or Jehovah of the Hebrews.
Jesus Christ professed, according to the writings which are still currently accepted, that he believed in this ‘god’.
This in itself sets the scene for the unbelievably complicated efforts of religious leaders and scholars to define just who Jesus Christ was.
Was he Jehovah, the son of Jehovah or a complicated combination of the two?
Was he human, semi-human, immaculately conceived or was he just a human being who recognised that evil was becoming widespread in the world, and that mankind was in danger of becoming dominated by those who had much to lose if it were suppressed?
This last alternative is almost certainly the truth of the matter.
Although he undoubtedly did not see it as such, what Jesus Christ was really doing was fighting to uphold the Second Choice as specified in this book.
At least one strong appeal inherent in Christ's teaching lay in its promise of a life of happiness to be enjoyed at some future date.
This can be construed as being in accord with the important premise of this book that life is to be enjoyed.
The accord exists because all promises of a ‘happy’ after-life are related to ‘happiness’with the meaning it has acquired in the worldly sense, for indeed, it can mean nothing else, as human beings can neither experience nor envisage with any real conviction, any other kind of happiness.
In the final analysis, there can be only one conclusion to be drawn, and that is that the Christian promise of happiness in the ‘hereafter’ was in reality an appeal to ‘selfishness’, which is also the appeal of the teaching of one of the basic premises of this book, namely, that life is to be enjoyed here on earth.
Christianity will deny that it condones selfishness, but it serves no purpose to promise something which can have no appeal unless it satisfies a desire, and then in another context to label that appeal the product of a baser instinct.
Christianity is fraught with such anomalies.
In respect of the foregoing it must be understood that the interpretation put upon the word ‘selfishness’ in this book is one which does not necessarily brand it as a vice.
The meaning will emerge as the book progresses.
The manner in which the human race has, over many centuries ascribed to Jesus Christ a host of teachings, miraculous powers of healing, identity with a'-god’, the power of survival after death and other extraordinary qualities, consistently supports the contention, reiterated herein, that humanity is instinctively aware that it must itself produce its God.
All that has been going  on since the dawn of civilisation is that man has, in effect, been doing just that.
That is, he has been struggling to extract and create ‘goodness’ from his earthly life and to find some way to preserve it.
To this end, unbeknown to the millions who have brought about the event, Jesus Christ has been cast in the role of a surrogate Created God, and by ascribing to him all that goodness that they wish to preserve, those who profess the Christian faith, have been doing just what the concept of the Created God requires, and what this book advocates, except that they have deified a single historical individual, Jesus Christ, instead of an abstract conception drawing its being from a myriad of sources.
If the foregoing representation of Jesus Christ can be accepted, it would be the end of the mysticism surrounding him, and a much more acceptable understanding of his role on earth be produced and given credence.
His contribution to the Created God has been tremendous, probably greater than that of any other person in the whole of Christendom, if not of the world.
That he himself became deified lends credence to the concept of the Created God as herein defined, and to the assertion that mankind needs a ‘god’.
To some extent, little or much, the Created God has been in course of production all over the world for all time.
However in order to cling with grim determination to the ancient beliefs which quite unavoidably preceded intelligent religious thought, religious leaders have refused to accept the fact.
Alternatively of course, in their blindness, they have failed to perceive it.
The Virgin Mary and the Created God
Exactly the same unconscious human intention that has been made manifest by the deification of Jesus Christ, can be seen in the cult of the Virgin Mary.
The urge to find a kind of treasure chest for all that humanity must preserve as precious at all costs, has also found its expression in this other sequel to the rise of Christianity.
That these two interpretations of the same religion should involve for their figureheads one person from each of the two sexes is most revealing.
It is as if humanity has once more been motivated by its instinctive awareness that its ‘god’ was not entirely satisfactory, and as a reaction against the exclusiveness of the male Christ, the female Mary has been taken in an effort to correct an imbalance which represented a completely unacceptable division of the human race.
The concept of the Created God completely rules out the exclusion from the Alternative Religion of any part whatsoever of humankind, whether it be by reason of race, colour, sex, or for any other reason at all which may create an identifiable group or individual.
The truth must be that the Created God is not human or living as earth-s creatures are, but is without sex, exists only in the minds of man, and is undeniably and truly abstract.
All Past ‘Gods’ are Basically Alike
This urge to preserve the valued and precious non-material things that seem to come inevitably into human life, has found its expression in the setting up of idols in every conceivable form.
This can only be rationalised by accepting that whatever form ‘gods’ may take, whether they be solid images or heartfelt beliefs in the mysticism of such figures as the Virgin Mary, there can be no gainsaying that they are all, without exception, the product of the human endeavour to satisfy this deeply felt need to place its hard-won ideals into secure keeping.
They are, in effect, all man-made.
The concept of the Created God can absorb them all, sanctifying the good, and rejecting the evil  .
The Created God and Religions Other Than Christianity
All that has been written above about the identification of the goodness of Christ's teachings with the objectives of the creation of the Created God, can be applied equally to the teachings of the outstanding figures of all religions and of all religious history.
The canonising of many of these into ‘sainthood’, and its corresponding condition within non-Christian religions puts them temporarily into a surrogate position relative to the Created God, which is similar to that into which Jesus Christ may be put.
They become the guardians of decisions, some of which accord with the criteria for units of goodness which make up the substance of the Created God, and can therefore become part of it.
The decisions are often the outcome of sometimes terribly bitter quarrels, and frequently the guardians of them suffer and die, rather than deny that they are good.
Goodness Can be Regarded as Being Measurable
According to this book, contributions of goodness have been made to the Created God, albeit unknowingly, by the countless thousands of individuals who, through many centuries have deliberately lived their lives constantly expanding, supporting and practising those human traits universally acknowledged as virtues.
These contributions can be measured in degrees of magnitude varying from a single unit of goodness, as defined earlier in this book, to truly stupendous numbers.
The people concerned fall into two main categories.
There are those who are identified, more or less, as ‘religious’ leaders and who uphold all the abstract things which a vast majority of the human race are agreed on as being good, and there are those who have risen above their fellow men and women in the activities of the arts and sciences, and have therefore made their contributions to goodness by providing human happiness through the material gratification of the senses.
All the individuals referred to have contributed to the creation of goodness to a degree above that which is being created by millions of people in their ordinary day-to-day dealings.
Each contribution, from whatever source, is capable of assessment in terms of units of goodness, and when that  goodness is accepted as such by a large majority, it can be enshrined in the Created God.
It thereby becomes inviolate until an equally vast majority decides otherwise.
This applies to both the concrete and abstract contributions, but it must be taken to imply that all goodness is to be regarded as being capable of reduction to a single mode, created in units.
It can therefore be argued that the virtuous conduct of which mankind is capable can be regarded as varying from individual to individual by quantity only.
By this reasoning it is possible to set a positive numerical value on the contributions of all saintly people, and a corresponding negative value on the contributions of all evil people.
To forestall any immediate and hasty rejection of the foregoing method of assessment of the value of human virtue by the reader, he is reminded that there is at present no rational way in which this can be done.
Therefore, if the acceptance of the Created God is to be considered, and as the doctrine has already produced the original unit of goodness defined in evolutionary terms, and further, as some form of assessment may ultimately be wanted, there is a case for its acceptance.
Moreover, it must be remembered that the unit is extremely small, and also that by the time that man was struggling with the birth pangs of civilisation, it had already been produced, by the wondrous process of evolution, in astronomical numbers.
This must be born in mind if and when the allocation of units is under consideration.
Some scientifically-minded people might agree that the foregoing is not unreasonable because mathematics has a way of intruding into human affairs whether we like it or not.
Moreover, the complete absence of mysticism from the doctrine of the Created God makes the use of numerical evaluation of the abstract element of it, by no means intrusive.
Whatever the method of evaluation, man's conscious contribution to goodness, and therefore to the Created God, made by his efforts to civilise himself is, by the twentieth century, utterly minute compared with the corresponding contribution of evolution.
It does not require much imagination on the part of a person contemplating, on the one hand the evolutionary product that is the marvellous human body, and on the other hand the mess that is religious history, to bring his agreement with this.
It is an interesting thought that the numerical approach could be strengthened and made more acceptable if the number of units of good credited to a ‘good’ decision and then added to the Godhead, could be a factor of the numerical majority of individuals in sympathy with that decision.
The value of the factor would be a matter for debate, and related to the ultimate unit of goodness of evolutionary origin.
The reasonableness of this is manifest when viewed in the light of the fact that a great many of the most  important human decisions do, after all, ultimately have to rely on mathematics for their resolution, if only by virtue of the principle of the majority vote being allowed to prevail in, for example, political matters.
SUMMARY OF THE MAIN PRECEPTS SUPPORTING THE CREATED GOD
All that has so far been written in this book, has been directed towards instilling in the reader a curiosity about the ideas behind the concept of ‘The Created God’, and in offering justifications for, and explanations of, the various arguments and assumptions put forward, and virtually for justifying the writing of the book at all.
This chapter will summarise the main precepts which form the basis of the book, and so far introduced.
1)
Man has an undeniable need for a God and for a religion corresponding to that God.
He needs to pray and praise, and to give thanks.
Also he needs to provide places of meeting so that those activities can be pursued communally when required.
2)
At the present time, the late twentieth century, the world is possessed of an incredible number of organised religions and cults of immense complexity.
The history of these is one of utter failure to bring peace and happiness to humankind.
3)
There is not the slightest justification for the supposition that, to be valid, religious writing and belief must have originated in the past, preferably in the remote past.
4)
The power of such sources of information, or alleged information, lies in its unprovability, whether true or false.
It has always been man-made in its entirety, for there has never been a supernatural source of information.
5)
Religious writing must be ongoing, as is life itself, and subject to constant revision.
6)
The underlying cause of religious failure is the tenacious adherence to belief in ‘gods’ of time long past.
These gods have no relevance to progressive life.
7)
All speculation or philosophising about the nature and existence of a ‘god’, before the arrival of life on earth is futile.
8)
A ‘god’ and corresponding religion that can serve the human need, must be produced by mankind itself, that is, the ‘god’must be created by life and man's intelligence, not life created by ‘god’.
9)
Mankind must abandon all belief that the unknown power which created the universe, if it were created within the meaning of that word as generally understood, is to be identified as the ‘god’ that must be worshipped.
(10)
The concepts of ‘good and evil’ are associated with human life, they have not been predetermined in any sense whatsoever.
11)
The actual source of life is not known and is not to be attributed to the God that mankind can worship, that is, a definable God developed with life, and therefore not responsible for its origin.
12)
Life is to be enjoyed.
Evolutionary motivation, in all its complexity, is primarily directed to that end.
13)
God must be explained or defined in terms that can be understood, or at least readily believed, by the masses of the populace.
14)
It is useless for religious understanding to become the exclusive province of theologians and scholars and thereby create an academic enclave which excludes the mass of people whose business is other than theological studies.
15)
The Created God is the mental image of a storehouse of ‘goodness’ which has been extracted from two sources, evolution and civilisation.
16)
These two sources have together provided mankind with a viable concept of a ‘god’ by decreeing that all changes that contributed to ultimate human happiness were ‘good’, and can be conceived within the human mind as persisting forever to build a vast ‘granary’of ‘goodness’.
This ‘granary’ is the ‘Created God’.
17)
The first source of ‘goodness’ is to be found in the millions of years of evolution up to the time of the ‘Dawn of Civilisation’.
18)
No matter how ruthless and cruel the evolutionary process may appear to be, it nevertheless must be regarded as having been inevitably so.
It could not have been otherwise for the attainment of the required goal of the perfect human being was possible by no other means.
19)
When in the fullness of immense periods of time, emerging man found that he needed a ‘god’, and a logical conception of ‘good’ and ‘evil’, he had no alternative but to accept that the countless millions of operations which make up the law of the ‘survival of the fittest’, had necessarily to be designated either ‘good’, if they furthered the cause, or completely disregarded if they did not.
20)
There is no alternative to (19), for otherwise the production of man could not, of itself, be designated ‘good’.
21)
This first of the two sources of the origin of ‘goodness’ was outside the power of the emerging human being to influence, and, for the purpose of creating ‘God’, it must be accepted as an axiomatically true source.
(22)
Man himself has to decide on the nature of ‘goodness’, and to accept that it has to be found within the life on earth as it actually is.
23)
The second source of ‘goodness’ is from the centuries of human struggle which has endured since the dawn of civilisation.
24)
The emotions which grew within emerging humanity brought conflicts due to the widely varying natures of different peoples and different individuals.
These were the inevitable outcome of the random selections of genetic processes, and of the varying stages of development of various races.
25)
The source of these conflicts was the differing measures of willingness or otherwise of individuals or groups to suppress and control the inborn tendencies to satisfy the evolutionary appetites.
26)
This control was vitally necessary if there could develop within the human race an area of activity which would provide far wider and ultimately greater satisfactions and happiness than could be obtained from purely physical gratifications.
27)
The history of the battles on the interracial scale and of lesser conflicts on the individual scale, has provided a vast store from which humanity can obtain limitless examples from which to extract actions which are universally acceptable as ‘good’.
28)
These ‘good’ actions which are independent of race, creed or nationality can then be used to increase the ever-growing might of the Created God.
29)
However it may appear to modern man, the measure of ruthless cruelty that may be manifest in the evolutionary processes, cannot be labelled ‘evil’.
30)
Evil came into being with civilisation.
Evolutionary decisions were either ‘good’ or ‘not good’, whereas the decisions instigated by civilisation are either ‘good’or ‘evil’.
31)
Every action which is accepted as kindly, every individual act of devotion and sacrifice, whether made in the havoc of war or in times of peace, every act of generosity and in fact every good thing which has resulted from the endless struggle to uphold the decision to master the violent and lustful urges which are a legacy from the evolutionary process, will play its part in providing units of goodness to be enshrined in the Created God.
32)
The process will continue for as long as earthly life endures.
33)
It was the relatively long period of life from birth to the end of physical dependence on the parents that built into the human being, an  eradicable awareness of his vulnerability and a deeply-rooted instinctive expectation that his needs will be met from a source outside himself.
34)
It was this natural assumption that he was entitled to some form aide service, that compelled man to seek succour elsewhere when the parental attendance ended, from whatever cause.
35)
Childhood instincts caused the individual to turn, on those occasions when his self-confidence failed him, to animate and inanimate objects to which he ascribed comforting powers similar to those originating in his parents, and these real objects eventually gave way to the imaginary ones that became the first ‘gods’.
36)
In the course of time, because they developed from human imagination to which there are no limits, the powers ascribed to the first ‘gods’ became exaggerated beyond all reason.
37)
Man's early faith in the original ‘god’ forerunners came from the apparent success which on some occasions appeared to attend the involvement of them in the troubles that beset him.
It required but a single coincidence, whereby an apparent answer to a prayer arrived at the appropriate time, to make him believe that his objects of supplication had powers beyond himself, and had brought him relief.
38)
Incidents such as that in (37) brought about a false start to the era of human religion, because the apparent success of an event attributed to the ‘god’ was a happening that would have taken place anyway, for example, a natural occurrence such as rainfall.
39)
Alternatively the ‘success’ in (37) could have been the product of into him by evolution, thereby providing him with the power to bring about the desired result himself.
40)
The Created God must be such that it can be envisaged as a focal point on which thoughts can be concentrated when a problem or need requires it.
For example, to help in making decisions in matters of dispensing justice.
41)
All bodily functions, particularly those related to the healing processes need the help of the mind, and the mind requires knowledge of thought processes which can produce the desired result.
These thought processes can be brought into use at will once they have been transferred into faith in the Created God.
42)
Man's need for a ‘god’ can be met in total by his own efforts.
Unrealised by himself, he has in fact been striving to do this since the dawn of civilisation.
(43)
The Created God can supply the human need to have an agreed authority to supply the justification for the way in which people are allowed by their fellows to behave, and can thereby become a rationalised replacement for the ‘Oracles’ of old.
44)
The ancient belief in ‘The Oracle’ indicates the antiquity of the human need for a source of accumulated wisdom.
The main difference between the ‘Oracles’ and the Created God is that the former were believed to be of ‘divine’origin, whereas the latter would be of mankind's own creation, and therefore under human control.
45)
The placing of the concept of the Created God entirely in that period of the earth's history which follows the advent of life, means that science and religion do not need to be at variance.
Both can be developed within human knowledge, and appropriately influence life free from attack by the other.
46)
All the evolutionary changes or events, however defined in relation to time or magnitude, became locked into the unchangeable process of creation and re-creation.
They either furthered or retarded the aim of evolution, which was and always will be, the constant increase in the ability of the being at the head of the evolutionary chain, that is man, to enjoy the experience of life.
47)
Those events which furthered the process in (46) are forever preserved, and will in the course of time become acknowledged to be rightly designated ‘sacred’, and be enshrined in the Created God.
Thus does the sanctity of the Created God come about.
48)
The Utopia that has eluded humankind for so long, and which has so frequently been proffered as a possible gift from ancient ‘gods’, has always been attainable, it became so when that first ‘good’ event in the far-off beginning took place.
49)
If Utopia is to become a reality then humanity itself must create it.
There is no other way whereby it can be reached.
50)
The attainment of the happy state of Utopia requires vastly more personal discipline and co-operation between peoples than is to be found in this late twentieth-century.
51)
If man does not bring to the universal conscience the paramount importance of self-control, monitored with reference to some all-powerful influence such as the Created God of this book, there is a grave danger that he could send his earth back to its pre-life state.
52)
That the human product of the evolutionary process was wholly ‘good’ up to the time of the start of civilisation has to be designated an unalienable ‘truth’.
This is essential, for to suggest that this is not so, is to destroy any hope of man ever having a God truly appropriate to his needs.
(53)
It follows that, if the proposition in (52) is rejected the ruthlessness of the laws of survival can only be designated ‘evil’.
This cannot be accepted, for there was no other way in which evolution could have prospered.
54)
The only conclusion that is possible is, that until satisfactions other than those provided through the physical desires became necessary to enrich life, all that went before and contributed to the human body was ‘good’, and any new philosophy or religion which emerges must be adapted to this.
55)
The challenge to take hold of the world and mould it into the Utopia so desired has so far not been seen by humanity to be what it is.
The intrusion of the false belief that there was an extraterrestrial ‘god’ in some form who was controlling earthly development has caused it to abandon completely its responsibility in this respect.
56)
It is almost certainly true to say that there never was any significant period when god worship and religion were as modern man would wish them to be, but instead, that they have always been corrupted, to some extent, to support greed and excess.
57)
It should be the aim of humanity ultimately to abandon all existing organised religions, and make a completely new start.
This must be done with the object of replacing them with a single rational religion compatible with human needs and unrelated to blind and futile faith in unproven ‘gods ‘.
Such a religion could be securely based on the concept of the Created God.
58)
From that time which here and elsewhere has been vaguely defined as the dawn of civilisation, to the time when the need to have a ‘god’ had reached the point where traces of its implementation were left for modern man to find, must have been many thousands of years.
There was therefore a very long period during which the need for a god was having its effect on the developing mind of man, but during which no god worship as now understood was practised.
It was not until relatively modern times that the now prevailing terribly malevolent form of god worship had its origin, and became a deeply rooted human activity.
59)
It is of the utmost importance for individuals to understand that the acceptance and comprehension of the origin of the Created God demands mental effort, or alternatively, faith in the ability of others to comprehend and instruct.
The foregoing summarises some of the ideas and premises so far written about, and on which the conception of the Created God rests.
Expansion and application of some of those ideas will be pursued in the following chapters.
CHILD INSTRUCTION AND THE HUMAN CONSCIENCE
What is ‘God?’
If a child of the late twentieth century asked this question of a parent, it is unlikely that he would receive an answer that would be intelligible to him.
Moreover, it is also unlikely that it would be intelligible even to another adult.
There cannot be a satisfactory answer to such a question which is short enough for the circumstances, and informative enough to be of any value.
Yet this childhood query, already asked and not answered millions of times, is of profound importance, for it is that very question, and its non-answer, or obviously insincere answer that, quite probably, has undermined child respect for adults to a greater degree than has all other causes put together.
Moreover, the way that question is answered can change the course of history, it can condemn millions to bloody war, or it can do much to ensure that they are spared that misery.
Suggested Answer
Based on the assumption that the child has been in contact with at least some of the usual and varied sources of instruction and indoctrination, an answer from the parent along the following lines might carry for the child a ring of truth sufficient for him to accept, and be reassured.
Normal children are usually quite easily satisfied when they know that adults are being honest with them:–
We talk about ‘god’ sometimes here at home, and you have been told at school to sing hymns and say prayers to ‘god’, and you hear ‘god’spoken about on the radio and television, also your friends talk and argue about ‘god’, but nobody at all will tell you who or what ‘god’really is, and this is because ‘god’is only imaginary just as fairies are.
So of course nobody can describe ‘god’ to you.
It is also why so many different religions are taught, so many different kinds of churches are built and so many different kinds of hymn and prayer books used.
The real cause of the trouble is, that parents and teachers always pass on to us, as children, what they themselves have been told, and this has been going on for hundreds, or even thousands of years.
Fortunately there are now many people who think this is wrong, and they do so mainly for the same reason, that is, because the ‘god’ spoken of has never been explained in a manner which they themselves can easily understand and believe in.
These people are often thoughtful and clever, but so far they have not been able to bring about worthwhile changes.
The best thing for me to tell you is that you must listen to what you are told about ‘god’, but try to remember that as you get older, you will have to  make up your own mind what to believe.
But, whatever you do, you must never forget that there are a lot of very important things which are said to come from ‘god’, and which nevertheless, we all believe to be good.
Things such as telling the truth, being absolutely honest, being kind and helpful to other people and animals, avoiding the use of words which offend or hurt people.
As you get older, these and a lot of other things will become clear to you as being good, and you will understand that you must control your behaviour accordingly, whatever you believe about ‘god’.
Thus could a parent make a fairly reasonable answer which would acknowledge that the child is not silly, and has a perfect right to be treated in an adult way when he asks a serious question.
That particular question is, of course, one that should never have arisen. 
It illustrates the fact that the child is puzzled or confused about a subject on which he should have had reasonably clear instruction as soon as he was old enough to be taught anything at all  .
The fact of the child's puzzlement is due to his being a victim of the way in which the dogmatic religions of the world have been used for child indoctrination, resulting in the perpetuation of the inherent superstitions and subsequent evils that have shamed religion throughout civilised time.
The child starts off with an in-built certainty that sooner or later his intelligence will clash with his religious teaching.
The shameful manner in which adult humans have forced religious rubbish into the minds of their children will one day dawn on the human race, and it will be horrified.
Religious Freedom Starts in Early Childhood
Because any religion must, at the root, be dependent upon at least one unprovable assumption, it is utterly wrong for any person to instruct a child about ‘god’ or religion without also leaving him in no doubt that the instruction is so based.
Moreover, the child should be made fully aware that he will be expected to satisfy himself later in life as to what extent he accepts the instruction.
This also gives him an introduction to what he will later come to realise is an example of personal freedom.
Human Behaviour can be Controlled Only Through Child Training
The only way that the behavioural development of the human race can be controlled, is through child education.
In this respect, adult responsibility, in its true magnitude, is frightening, for it is only they who can perform this onerous task.
It is self-deception on a frightening scale which pretends that there is an extra-worldly ‘god’ overseeing all things and putting right human mistakes.
Thus, it is utterly vital to the well-being of humanity that the child-training element of human liability is given its overwhelmingly important position.
Child instruction has always been hampered by the age-old problem posed by constraints of religion.
Almost from the very beginning of the rearing process, parents and teachers are liable to find that these create a  smothering blanket of difficulty, discouragement and disagreement.
Almost all the harrowing experiences of indecision that can arise almost daily for conscientious parents, are like that for no other reason than that they, the parents, have not themselves been trained in the light of a reliable and respected source of guidance.
The point is repeatedly made in this book, that mankind's control over its affairs cannot be maintained by statute-laws alone.
It must have the additional power of a moral code based on a religion, and there is no part of human affairs in which this applies with more force than it does in the matter of child rearing.
Nevertheless, to bring about the desired end, the ultimate goal must be the establishment of but one religion world-wide based on a well-defined ‘god’ that can be justified in all languages.
The Created God of this book can meet the requirement.
Parental Speculation on a New-born Child
It is most unlikely that a mother or father looking at a new-born child will be saying:—‘We have here a potential villain, who could, in a few years time be getting a living by robbery, violence or some other criminal activity.
If he does, it could well be our fault, for he is at present, as are all the new-born, quite uncivilised.
He does not have a conscience, it is our job to provide him with that.
He will naturally expect to take what he wants wherever he sees it.
He may very soon be trying to use that enormous power endowed by evolution to ensure parental acceptance of responsibility, to ensure that we pander to his every whim — if we let him, probably by screaming and indulging in ‘tantrums’.
He will very likely be quite ruthless about this.
We must not blame him for this for he is a product of the evolution which used that very ruthlessness to make him just what he is, and what we all are at the beginning of our lives.
We have quite a job on our hands, how can we tackle it?’
Thus might the parents ponder but, as already stated, it is very unlikely that they will do so.
Parenthood is the Greatest of All Human Responsibilities
Nevertheless the foregoing does express the nature of the situation as it really is and people should be very well aware of it before they decide to start a family or indulge in sexual activity likely to produce a child.
Parental responsibility should be treated as the greatest and most important undertaking of human life, albeit the one potentially holding out the promise of the greatest happiness.
An understanding of this should have been well and truly introduced into the minds of children by the time they are old enough to play such games as those which simulate parental behaviour.
Careful explanations at this time could give them at least an inkling of the importance of the game, and some  measure of preparation for the time when it will be no game, but a reality of great promise.
Furthermore such preparation would be of value when the time came for serious sexual training.
The Question of Baptism or its Equivalent
However, despite the absence of a single world-wide consensus on religious observance, once the child is born there will be, for the majority of parents, a decision on religious ritual to be taken.
For the affirmed Christian there will be the question of christening or baptism in some form or other.
This must be settled quite soon after the birth, for the christened child carries for the whole of its life a record of its parents' religious belief.
Or, as is much more likely to be the truth of the matter, evidence of the parents' fear that they might be depriving the child of some advantage if the ritual is omitted.
In making the decision the parents should bear in mind that once any kind of commitment to a religion is made, it is always more difficult for there to be a change of course, even when the commitment is made on behalf of the individual when a helpless baby.
Belief in the Created God Gives Freedom from Ritual
Parents who have read this book and find themselves in agreement with the concept of a religion based on the Created God will realise that ritual has no part in it.
They will know that their maturing children need not be committed to anything that they will not be free to abandon in later life if they so wish.
Further, they will know that their children can be spared any of the residual guilt feelings which result from the teachings of long established religions, and from which they might themselves suffer.
The Idea of the Created God can be Understood by Children
It has to be accepted that there need be no difficulty at all in teaching children about the Created God.
A parent or teacher who accepts the concept, could use the word ‘God’ from the very beginning, and need have no fear that he will be faced with awkward questions, for he knows that there is a perfectly sensible answer available.
This is because the basic logic of the concept of the Created God is just as capable of being offered in a truthful, but simplified form without the use of misleading statements, as is for example, mathematics.
‘The Created God is the name we give to all that is good’, is a statement which makes no demand on the credulity of a young mind.
Neither does the statement, ‘All those coloured glass pictures of people which you see in the windows of churches, have been put there to remind us of the good which those people did during their lives.
Their goodness has helped to make up the huge amount of goodness which has been accumulating for thousands of years and which we call the Created God.’
The Christian Saints
Questions about specific pictures, which could, for example, be about specific saints, can be readily answered from the standard works which abound, provided such answers treat the works as history books, and make it quite clear to the children that the stories about a ‘heaven’ and miracles, which are to be found in those books, are not now really believed.
Nevertheless, despite the necessity to protect children from being misled by the stories of ‘heaven’ and miracles, it should be made quite clear to them that most of the stories of good works attributed to the people involved are most likely to be true, and as these people are believed to have done much more good than most, they have been given a place in the windows of the churches and in paintings and elsewhere.
The goodness which their behaviour has created and which has given them their special places, may now be regarded as part of the Created God.
The Difference Between a Healthy Conscience and a Guilt Complex
For those who rear children, one of the most difficult tasks if not the most difficult, is learning the art of instilling and developing in the young mind that mysterious thing which we call the conscience.
That is, how to give a child a knowledge of what has been accepted as right and what has been accepted as wrong, or, in other words, of good and evil; and further, how this can be so well rooted in their minds that it produces in them an inclination to act automatically in accordance with what must be designated civilised behaviour.
But, at the same time this training must in no circumstances produce in them that destructive feeling of guilt, known as a ‘guilt complex’.
Where the concept of the Created God is accepted, it is not difficult to differentiate between a healthy conscience and a guilt complex, for the criterion will then be known to be based on a single undisputed source of ethical knowledge.
If the conscience indicates to the individual, child or adult, that he must reject a proposed action which his teaching tells him is wrong because it has not been incorporated into the Created God by the process advocated, or has been classified as evil, then that is the action of a healthy conscience.
If, on the other hand the conscience demands the rejection of a proposed action which has been incorporated into the Created God, and which has not been classified as evil, and is therefore acceptable behaviour, then that is the effect of a guilt complex.
In other words it is the product of a misguided training which has caused a fear of a course of action which has not been outlawed by society.
The Source of a Guilt Complex
This latter is the product of teaching which uses for its arbiter of right and wrong, contentious standards which have been produced from long established religions which in turn claim to have mystic knowledge of right and wrong supplied by some extraterrestrial and undefined ‘god’.
Right and wrong established from these sources is utterly vague and capable of unlimited alternative interpretations.
Children must be protected from indoctrination from such sources.
No healthy conscience can be produced from it, for, above all things, the child mind must be uncluttered with doubts, and have its religious content kept quite simple.
It is humanity itself which must establish that which it wants to be right, and that which it wants to be wrong.
The human being has within it the physical and mental capacity to do this, and must accept that there is no alternative way for it to be done.
Right and wrong must be standardised, or there will always be people who have the burden of guilt complexes.
Sowing the Seeds of Conscience in the New-born Child
If parents had it firmly in their minds from the day the child was born, or even before, that their child was, or will be, basically uncivilised, then right from the beginning they would be aware of what they had to do.
They would know that mother-love and father-love, which could be over-protective, must at times yield to the demands of civilisation.
The chapter on ‘The Created God and Human Rights’ has some relevance here.
They should also know that it is very important that there must be established in the child's mind at a very early age a dawning awareness of the fact that for all his life he will be required to submit to control from some source or other.
This awareness is the beginning of a conscience.
A firm conviction of the truth of all this, secure in the minds of the parents by the time the child is born, is the best insurance that the process will start with birth just as surely as does the process of feeding.
Failure to start the civilising process soon enough, is the underlying cause of much of the uncivilised behaviour which bedevils the human race.
In considering the development of a conscience in the newborn child, the first thing is to acknowledge that, as far as is known, he is not born with any such facility.
By some means or other the natural tendencies instilled by evolution, have to be brought under control, and the child must learn at a very early age that if he is to grow up and be happy, he must behave in accordance with rules and regulations.
He must also be made aware that although his parents or guardian will help him to do this, sooner or later he will have to manage to control himself without their help, and this should be explained to him as soon as he is able to understand.
Those who teach and train children must constantly remind themselves that they were themselves once in the position of the children, and the children will in their turn, one day be in the position of the teachers.
Such thoughts should help them to understand how attitudes, right or wrong, can persist unchanged for endless generations if they are taught to be dictated by unassailable imaginary ‘gods’ who are never  ‘wrong’.
That crucial time in a child's life when he has the ability to understand that his parents and teachers are trying to prepare him for his adult life, will not necessarily be related to his age.
It will however, be obvious to the dedicated teacher or parent, and it will be sooner than is often expected.
Endeavours to explain to a child the reasons for the restraints put upon him, may appear to be setting too much store on his intelligence, but this will not necessarily be so, for there is much evidence that adult training of children is very often obstructive rather than progressive.
This is due to a number of misguided actions, the chief of which is the yielding to a deep-seated wish on the part of some parents to prolong the babyhood stage for as long as possible.
But, as many observers will agree, all the evidence is that the tiny infant is not interested in babyhood, on the contrary, it is striving to reach the adult stage with all its might.
The chapter on ‘Human Preoccupation with Immortality’ makes some interesting speculations on a probable origin of this.
The Place of Reward and Punishment in the Training Process
It is the purpose of training to instil in the child mind a conscience that will be his guide, and this training is best done, and usually is done, by the various processes involving reward, and in this respect it must always be remembered that there is little greater reward that can be offered a child than the knowledge that it is loved.
Physical expressions of affection following an obedience which needed a little coercion to achieve, can be most effective.
Nevertheless, the training is sometimes unavoidably accompanied by the infliction of punishment in some form or other, but as is very well-known, this should never be done as a result of a fit of anger.
In such circumstances the punishment may be unjustified, and if it is, the parent should be able to admit this to the child and be able to apologise later when the tension is lessened.
This may be difficult for a parent who, as a child, had never been apologised to when the occasion warranted it, but it would come naturally to one who had.
Such parental behaviour can have a very good effect on a child.
It implies a tacit admission of equality which can be almost priceless.
It is well known that parents tend to treat their children as they themselves have been treated by their own parents.
What seems to be less well-publicised is the fact that this applies just as surely to good treatment as it does to ill treatment.
All investigations into the perpetuation of evil point ultimately to the conclusion that the human race has never placed anywhere near sufficient emphasis on the importance of training its members for parenthood.
If civilisation is to control the violence of evolutionary forces, mankind must come alive to the fact that the task is inextricably bound up with the establishment of right and wrong, and parenthood holds the key.
In this period of the last decades of the twentieth century there is much evidence of a decline in the standards of human behaviour, and this, unquestionably, can be attributed to faltering human consciences.
In everyday life there are countless occasions on which people are confronted with the need to make a decision which, in its resolution, should be motivated by a healthy conscience and thereby result in a kindly, productive or generous act.
Unfortunately on these occasions, all too often the prick of conscience, if it has operated at all, is instantly suppressed before it can take control, and it is this which appears to have become the normal response.
This is the inevitable product of a period during which the adults have failed to instil in the children truly effective consciences, resulting in an increase in uncivilised behaviour in all its endlessly varied forms, from the unfair ‘jumping’ of otherwise orderly queues waiting for goods or services, to acts of great cruelty and violence.
The only way this deterioration can be halted and reversed, is, as has so often been propounded in these pages, through childhood instruction.
The human conscience should be respected and revered as the most precious and effective thing that the human race, in its struggle to civilise itself, has available, and it can be used only by giving it the utmost priority in child training  .
The Pressure Required to Civilise
If the matter were investigated deeply enough it could well be established that the pressure required to civilise a human being, and thereby generate a conscience, increases enormously as the time from the birth to the start of the process lengthens.
This pressure is manifest in the gentle coercion of the baby by the parents at one end of the scale to the severe treatment of recalcitrant children and adult criminals at the other.
After childhood there is often nothing left but increasingly severe punishment.
The chapter on ‘The Created God and Crime and Punishment’ enlarges upon this, and introduces a new approach to the subject.
Human Love and the Human Conscience
Granted that it is possible to initiate the civilisation of a child by giving it a knowledge of right and wrong, the question arises ‘How does this knowledge become an automatic power of conscience which enables or compels the child, and later the adult, to act accordingly?’.
The question takes for granted that there is no ‘divine’ source from which a ready-made human conscience will be provided for each new-born child.
The answer to the question lies with that strange emotion which we call ‘love’.
This seems to be a word which is used loosely the world over, but nevertheless can be seen to have five fairly easily defined applications or meanings.
The first and possibly the widest of these is its use to indicate feelings of pleasure and happiness, of general well-being and even of personal security, which comes from an association between two or more of earth's creatures, and which attracts them to one another.
These creatures may be just human beings, or just animals or a mixture of both, but which, in this instance, and ignoring for the purposes of this chapter those deviations which we call perversions, are not affected by any element of sexual attraction.
This relationship is expressed by the word ‘friendship —, and includes many manifestations of it among the denizens of the earth both human and otherwise.
The second meaning attached to the word ‘love’ is the one conferred on it when it is applied to the manifestation of the primitive uncontrolled mating urge as it applies to human beings, and also sometimes to animals.
This latter is possibly a misplaced human foible.
The third meaning of this word ‘love’ is the one which is applied to the intense physical attraction between the sexes, known as falling in love, and which can be described as an intensification and beautification of the mating urge.
This can be the basis of the most wonderful experience that life can offer the human being.
As far as it is possible to ascertain, this particular meaning appears to manifest itself only as a purely human phenomenon
The fourth meaning appears to be a combination of the first and third meanings where non-sexual and sexual attraction are combined, and which seems also to be applicable to human beings only.
Ideally, this is the kind of love that should be the most important of the many elements which form the basis of human marriages.
Finally there is a fifth meaning, which possibly has some evolutionary connection with the fourth meaning, and it is used for the instinctive affection of parents for the offspring.
This love seems to vary in intensity from near non-existence in some creatures, turtles for example, to the intense feeling which can reach its highest value in the love of the human parent for a child.
It would appear that this parental love exists throughout the animal kingdom, including homo sapiens, in degrees of intensity varying from near nothing to the immeasurably great.
It is this all important human love between parent and child, particularly the mother, that could well be the origin of the power which has made it possible for there to be established within the human mind this thing we call a ‘conscience’.
The following hypothesis suggests the manner in which this could have come about.
Parental Love and the Human Conscience
There seems to be no way in which the human race can bring about the civilisation of its members without using to some degree that same power of evolution which inevitably needed for its effect the imposition of some measure of discomfort, pain or unhappiness in some form or other.
This  power can be regarded as an unavoidable element in the evolutionary process, which will always be a part of ongoing life.
It follows that this can also be the only source of power available to parents or guardians faced with the task of civilising a new-born infant.
The gentlest way of doing this is to use the effect of the deprivation of something desired, and where the training of children is concerned, that something need be nothing other than the temporary withholding of manifestations of love.
It is believed, as already mentioned, that one of the greatest pleasures for a child comes from the security it feels when it knows that it is loved, and it is the ability to withhold manifestations of that love for a little while, or threaten so to do, that provides a non-violent means of securing acquiescence when it is required.
To advocate the starting of the process on a very young child might appear to be heartless, but the overriding need to generate within the child mind the beginning of a conscience and the instinctive urge to activate it, must be the guiding factor.
The accusation, ‘that person has no conscience’, carries a condemnation of character, but the real culprit is the society which has failed to raise to a position of the utmost importance in the public mind, the fact that the human conscience is the very rock-bottom foundation on which civilisation rests.
The control which the withholding of love gives to a parent emphasises how tremendously important it is that a child should be genuinely loved in the first place.
The very first effect of the absence of parental love is that the parent has no gentle sanction whereby the civilising process and the ensuing conscience can be started.
Where there is no love to start with, there is nothing of an abstract nature to withhold.
This means that there is no sanction available to the parent which does not rely to some extent on either, the giving or withholding of some physical satisfaction, for example sweets, or the use of physical punishment.
The inescapable conclusion is that a parent who has no love for the child is greatly handicapped in the task of undertaking its rearing.
If the withholding of manifestations of parental love is used as a first measure of initial disciplining, then it must be remembered that the measure of the distress necessary to be imposed, need be very small indeed if the imposition is started early enough.
It is its delay that can store up trouble, for there can be no escape from the reality that society will eventually exact civilised behaviour from its members at whatever cost.
The expedient of the withholding of manifestations of love from the very young child amounts to the instilling of the first tiny measure of fear, and fear, used in conjunction with reward provides the fundamental tools which the adult population must have if it is to maintain steady progress towards the civilisation it desires.
Fear and reward are the two most powerful influences available to man for the purpose of controlling the resistance to the civilising process, the resistance being an inevitable product of evolution.
The skill to use them wisely must be learnt by all who would aspire to the role of parents, for it is they who control the future.
It is vital that they must by some means or other plant the seed of conscience in the young from the very beginning of life, and until some better means can be found, fear and reward must be available to parents for that purpose.
The importance of effective parenthood cannot be overemphasised if civilisation is to progress.
The Effect of the Loveless Childhood
In the matter of the loveless childhood it is possible to see that the measure of the deprivation bears a direct relationship to the measure of uncivilised behaviour that can derive from it.
If it could be measured in units related to time, the quantities may be found to be proportional to  the distance back in the evolutionary chain to which an individual may revert.
His behaviour may be such as to demonstrate that his reversion has taken him right back to the use of the ruthlessness which preceded civilisation.
This gives great emphasis to the contention that it is only through the teaching of the children that there can be any progress towards a better world, and by which the complete breakdown of man's fragile and very young civilisation can be avoided.
The vital role of the parents is to do all they can to ensure that the loss or diminution of love and friendship, will be the worst thing that can happen to their children if they transgress the legal and moral codes that control the society in which they will be living.
The need for greater punishment might arise, but correct teaching and training at a very early age can reduce the risk.
The power of the conscience can be built up from very early childhood by nothing more harmful than the temporary withholding of manifestations of love.
Failure to create the embryo conscience at this time will leave society with no alternative but to use the power of punishment when correction becomes necessary.
The Conscience and a Knowledge of Right and Wrong
From all the foregoing, the connection between the knowledge of right and wrong and the creation of a conscience becomes clear.
It is the fear of losing love, friendship, or both that provides the means whereby the conscience warns the individual of the consequences of performing acts which are in some way hurtful to other creatures.
The conscience, in common with all things associated with life, grows from small beginnings.
It is to be hoped that in the course of time the word ‘fear’ used in the context of the foregoing will be abandoned in favour of the word ‘foreboding’, for the conscience, once properly developed should give warning rather than frighten, and therefore enable the individual to avoid that which could give rise to real fear.
It follows from the foregoing observations that a knowledge of right and wrong has of itself no power to control behaviour.
Such knowledge has to be coupled with further instinctive knowledge that the perpetration of acts known to be wrong will bring some kind of retribution.
Thus is the need to develop a conscience parallel with a knowledge of right and wrong made manifest.
The Concept of the Created God, Offered to Young People
If a group of young people, from all races, all countries and bearing all creeds were gathered together after having been introduced to the concept of the Created God, and were able to set aside, for the time being, their own taught beliefs, they would find that they had been offered an area of religious discussion which would be on completely neutral ground.
They would be able to see that the doctrine could provide criteria whereby they could settle for themselves their own problems, such for example, as that of differentiating between the prickings of conscience and the spiritual crushings of a guilt complex.
They would know that they are free to evaluate the religious teachings of past generations and choose their own allegiance, and seek truth where they wish.
They would know the real meaning of religious freedom, something which has never really existed throughout religious history.
What is the Pricking of Conscience?
It has been shown that the human conscience is a product of civilisation, and its existence the responsibility of the human race.
It may be asked what it is that disturbs a person when he feels the ‘prick of conscience’.
The answer is that he is almost certainly afraid of something.
Further investigation will show that the fear is not just the threat of punishment for the act or thought which instigated the feeling, for that fear can be there in those who are not worried by consciences; it will emerge that the fear is really that of falling into disfavour with fellow beings and loved ones.
This displeasure can range from mild disapproval to outright ostracism.
The question then arises, ‘Would this fear be there if the individual concerned knew for absolute certainty that no-one will ever know that he is guilty?’.
The answer to this is almost certainly ‘Yes it would’, for humans are well aware that those who have guilty secrets, rarely enjoy true peace of mind.
This establishes the soundness of the contention that, if human behaviour is to be effectively controlled, there must be a moral code, based on a viable religion, as well as statute-laws.
It is the former which produces the conscience, the latter benefits from it.
The doctrine of the Created God offers a basis of establishing such a moral code which starts free from the ingrained false premises of long-standing religions.
Parents will not concern their very young children with the details of the doctrine, as that is quite unnecessary for the establishment of the early conscience, but they should at least give them some introduction to it as soon as the need becomes obvious from their inevitable questions.