

Equilibrium and Economic Growth
Reproduction in the Economy is a Process of Equilibrium
As we have seen, equilibrium was central to Bukharin's approach relating to social, political and economic problems.
With reference to the economy he said: ‘To find the law of this equilibrium is the basic problem of theoretical economics and theoretical economics as a scientific system is the result of an examination of the entire capitalist system in its state of equilibrium.’
It is here, therefore, that we shall examine Bukharin's use of the concepts of simple and expanded reproduction (which Marx used in volumes I and II of Capital ) in the exchanges between society and nature.
Bukharin first posed this exchange as follows: ‘Considered as a whole, we find that the process of reproduction is a process of constant disturbance and re-establishment of equilibrium between society and nature.
Marx distinguishes between simple reproduction and reproduction on an extending scale .’
In the case of simple reproduction there is no growth, either of means of production or of the total social product.
Marx was of course examining reproduction in its particular capitalist form, and hence tended to emphasise this aspect.
Bukharin, on the other hand, was initially posing the problem in a more general manner.
Yet there is sufficient relationship between the two to consider the similarities.
Marx made the point that: ‘Production in general is an abstraction, but a sensible abstraction insofar as it actually emphasises and defines the common aspects and thus avoids repetition.’
And in the specific case of capitalist production, and simple reproduction in particular, he said:
If we study the annual function of social capital — hence of the total capital of which the individual capital forms only fractional parts, whose movement is their individual movement and simultaneously integrating link in the movement of the total capital — and its results, i.e., if we study the commodity-product  furnished by society during the year, then it must become apparent how the process of reproduction of the social capital takes place, what characteristics distinguish this process of reproduction from the process of reproduction of an individual capital, and what characteristics are common to both.
The annual product includes those portions of the social product which replace capital, namely social reproduction, as well as those which go to the consumption fund, those which are consumed by labourers and capitalists, hence both productive and individual consumption.
It comprises also the reproduction (i.e. maintenance) of the capitalist class and the working class, and thus the reproduction of the capitalist character of the entire process of production.
From the above passage we can see that an examination of the production, circulation and consumption of the total social product presents different problems from those posed by the movement of a single capital.
For the individual capital the external relations are given in a narrow manner, that is, its main problem is seen as that of the transformation of its commodity-value-product into the money-form of value.
It is assumed that it will find on the market, readily available, the correct quantity and quality of means of production and labour-power necessary for it to restart its production cycle.
In other words, the assumption is that the transformation from money-capital to commodity-capital and back to money-capital again will find no external barriers, other than the market.
When we examine the reproduction of the total social product, however, other problems emerge.
What was previously assumed to be given for a single capital now needs to be explained.
The renewal of one production cycle now depends upon the results of the previous one, i.e., to start this production cycle there must be produced means of production of the correct quantity and quality with which to repeat the process.
Marx posed the question as follows:
How is the capital consumed in production replaced in value out of the annual product and how does the movement of this replacement intertwine with the consumption of…the capitalists and…the labourers?…
So long as we looked upon the production of value and the value of the product of capital individually, the bodily form of the commodities produced was wholly immaterial for the analysis, whether it was machines, for instance, corn, or looking glasses.
It was always but a matter of illustration, and any branch of production could have served that purpose equally well…
This merely formal manner of presentation is no longer adequate in the study of the total social capital and of the value of its products.
The reconversion of one portion of the value of the product into capital and the passing of another portion into the individual consumption of the capitalist as well as the working class form a movement within the value of the product itself in which the result of the aggregate capital finds expression; and this movement is not only a replacement of value,but also a replacement in material and is therefore as much bound up with the relative proportions of the value-components of the total social product as with their use-value, their material shape .
[emphasis added]
Marx resolved this question by positing that the total social productive capital and the total social product is divided into two major departments of production.
Department I produces all means of production and Department II produces all means of consumption.
In his schemata of reproduction Marx suggested that if equilibrium is to subsist for total social production, then there must exist definite proportions between the two departments and proportionality in the exchanges between the two departments.
Although Marx highlighted the necessity of the proportionality between use-values in such exchanges in the passage just quoted from, in his own analysis he still concentrated upon the creation of value and surplus-value in his examination of the capitalist production process.
This concentration, upon the value aspects, can be misleading, and in fact has led to a certain neglect by many Marxists of the material, use-value, aspects of reproduction and the centrality of this use-value in the reproduction schema.
Bukharin was not one of those who neglected the material aspects of the reproduction schemata.
On the contrary, he began by examining the material aspect of production in general, and the exchange aspects of this material production, saying:
We have seen that in the process of production, the means of production are used up (the raw material is worked over, various auxiliary substances are required…machines themselves, and the buildings in which the work is done, as well as all kinds of instruments…wear out); on the other hand, labour-power is also exhausted (when people work, they also deteriorate, their  labour-power is used up, and a certain expenditure must be incurred in order to re-establish this labour-power).
In order that the process of production may continue, it is necessary to reproduce in it and by means of it the substances that it consumes.
He then proceeded to elaborate what he meant by this consumption, for example, that cotton is turned into fabric, so new cotton must be grown; fabric is worn out, so that new fabric must be woven, etc.
And the same applies to all material aspects of production.
Therefore: ‘If this replacement proceeds smoothly and at the same rate as the disappearance, we have a case of simple reproduction, which corresponds to a situation in which the productive social labour remains uniform, with the productive forces unchanging.’
And, Bukharin concluded:
It is clear that this is a case of stable equilibrium between society and nature.
It involves constant disturbances of equilibrium (disappearance of products in consumption and deterioration) and a constant re-establishment of equilibrium (the products reappear); but this re-establishment is always on the old basis.
Looking at extended reproduction, he said:
But where the productive forces are increasing, the case is different.
Here…a portion of the social labour is liberated and devoted to an extension of social production (new production branches; extension of old branches).
This involves not only a replacement of the formerly existing elements of production, but also the insertion of new elements into the new cycle of production.
Production here does not continue on the same path, moving in the same cycles all the time, but increases in scope.
This is production on an extending scale , in which case equilibrium is always established on a new basis; simultaneously with a certain consumption proceeds a larger production; consumption consequently also increases, while production increases still further.
Equilibrium results in each case on a wider basis; we are now dealing with unstable equilibrium with positive indication .
In so far as Bukharin was discussing the relationship between society and nature he focused his attention almost wholly upon the material aspects of the exchanges.
Yet it is clear that his approach  was overwhelmingly based upon Marx's reproduction schemata, and it would seem to be an entirely legitimate use of the concepts embodied in Marx's work.
The schemata of Marx concentrate upon equilibrium between the elements of social production and assume that the equilibrium between social production and nature is pre-established.
Bukharin, since he was writing for a somewhat different purpose — at that point in his exposition — did not assume or leave implicit the equilibrium between society and nature, but instead desired to show that it is a necessary basis, precondition, for the situation that Marx dealt with.
In this respect there is a difference of emphasis between the two writers, but at the same time there is a fundamental unity of purpose and method between them.
I would suggest that it is probable that Marx, as a materialist, would not have disagreed with Bukharin's exposition of the case, since Marx's own illustrations of simple and extended reproduction were implicitly based upon the same assumptions.
Indeed, the only correct way to read Marx's reproduction schemas is to firmly grasp the interconnection between the value and use-value aspect of the model and the relationships they seek to demonstrate.
In one respect Bukharin's presentation of the reproduction process is superior to Marx's since he also included the necessity for a proportional distribution of labour within it.
This is not to say that Marx was unaware of the need for such a proportional distribution of labour, but this was not directly discussed in his own exposition of the schemas of reproduction.
Marx's Reproduction Schemas
Marx formalised his ideas about simple and extended reproduction in Vol.
II of Capital (Chapters XX and XXI), but did not live to put this part of his work in order for publication, so it was left to Engels to prepare the various drafts for the printer.
An examination of Volume II will quickly reveal the unfinished nature of parts of the material, but there is sufficient there to enable the reader to arrive at an understanding of Marx's ideas.
It is the unfinished nature of those parts dealing with the schemas of reproduction that has given rise to a number of controversies regarding the interpretation of them.
Possibly the most famous controversy was initiated by Rosa Luxemburg in 1913 with the publication of her book The Accumulation of Capital .
Luxemburg was vigorously criticised by a number of leading Marxists at that time, such as Otto Bauer and Karl Kautsky, and while she was  in prison during the First World War she wrote a reply to her critics.
This Anti-Critique was only published after her death, and Bukharin joined the debate only in 1924 with his own book Imperialism and the Accumulation of Capital .
Let is look briefly at Marx's presentation of his schemas before examining Bukharin's ideas.
Marx built a model of simple reproduction upon the following assumptions:
Only two departments of production; Dept.
I produces all means of production and Dept.
II produces all means of consumption.
There are only two classes considered who play a direct economic role: workers and capitalists.
All revenue passes through the hands of these two classes in its first movement.
The fact that some of this revenue passes through other hands, particularly after the first movement, is ignored.
Thus the division of surplus-value into industrial profit, commercial profit, interest, rent, etc., is ignored.
Also those classes or groups that provide services in exchange for revenue are similarly ignored.
All production is carried out upon a capitalist basis; exchanges with non-capitalist economic forms are excluded.
Foreign trade is excluded from consideration, since it is assumed that such trade will not affect the value of production, but merely affect its material form.
There is the same organic composition of capital in both departments of production.
Therefore we are dealing solely with an exchange-value schema, not a prices of production one.
There are no changes in technology or productivity of labour, hence no change in the organic composition of capital.
All capital, constant and variable, has one turnover once per production period.
The rate of surplus-value, s/v, is assumed to be 100 per cent, or 1, in both departments.
All commodities are sold, or realised, at their exchange-value.
The only relation between the two departments of production is that of exchange, i.e. there is no movement of capital from one department to the other.
Under simple reproduction all surplus-value is consumed unproductively by the capitalists.
These are a set of highly restrictive constraints, and Marx set out his schema for simple reproduction as follows:
It can readily be seen that the sum of constant capital (C) used up in the two departments is equal to the sum of means of production produced in Dept.
I; and the sum of capitalist consumption (S) plus workers' consumption (V) is equal to total means of consumption produced by Dept.
II.
But since Iv + Is exists in the form of means of production (constant capital), whilst IIc exists in the form of means of consumption, for production to continue these two quantities must be exchanged.
This is because the capitalists and workers of Dept.
I cannot consume the products of that department in their natural form, whilst the products of Dept.
II cannot be used as means of production in their natural material form.
Therefore the condition of equilibrium between the two departments is that an exchange should take place, and that IIc = Iv + Is.
Moving on to extended reproduction, all previous assumptions hold except that now a portion of the surplus-value will be accumulated in the form of constant and variable capital, that is, as c or v.
For purposes of exposition we shall assume that the surplus-value is divided equally between accumulation and unproductive consumption.
A numerical model will take the following form:
It can now be seen that the sum of constant capital used up in the two departments during the production cycle is less than the total means of production produced by Dept.
I. Moreover, the sum of v + s is greater than the product of Dept.
II.
It follows that with extended reproduction a part of the surplus-value is embodied in the physical form of means of production.
Therefore, for  equilibrium to subsist a part of the surplus-value must be accumulated as constant capital, and only a further portion may be accumulated as variable capital.
On the assumption that 50 per cent of the surplus-value is accumulated, we would have:
A quick calculation will show that the sum of constant capital used up in the production cycle — 5454.5 — plus the constant capital accumulated from surplus-value is equal to the product of Dept.
I, i.e., 6000.
Similarly, we now find that the sum of variable capital advanced in production plus the variable capital accumulated from surplus-value added to the sum of unproductive consumption (uc) is equal to the product of Dept.
II, i.e., 2181.5.
Further, if we designate the surplus-value accumulated as variable capital as Δv, and that accumulated as constant capital Δc, we find:
And this is the basic condition for equilibrium assuming extended reproduction.
Bukharin's Algebra of Reproduction
Rosa Luxemburg, in her discussion of Marx's reproduction schemata brought forward a number of criticisms of them.
These criticisms were basically of two kinds: the first was that there would not be sufficient demand within the system for accumulation to take place; the second is that if the organic composition of capital rises then again there will be insufficient demand for all the surplus-value to be realised and hence accumulation will be choked off.
The essence of Luxemburg's critique is that for accumulation to proceed there must be a third market, that is, petty commodity production, feudal economy, etc., for the whole of the surplus-value to be realised.
And it was this need for a ‘third market’ that Luxemburg regarded as the driving force behind imperialism.
Interesting as Luxemburg's ideas are, they need not detain us here seeing that what I am concerned with is Bukharin's response to them and the results of that response.
Bukharin was the most sophisticated of Luxemburg's critics, and in the process of writing his critique of her work he developed a more refined version of Marxist accumulation theory than had  obtained hitherto.
And it is this aspect that I wish to deal with, rather than the controversy surrounding Luxemburg.
Bukharin gave us the first fully algebraic exposition of accumulation in the Marxist tradition; and as such his contribution marked a turning point in discussions of the reproduction schemas, since he was able to formulate general conditions of capitalist development.
Let us, therefore, examine what he said:
As is well known, Marx outlined in general terms the course of the total social reproduction, proceeding from a whole series of premises to simplifying the situation…
How is a mobile equilibrium possible in the growing capitalist system?— this is how Marx formulated his question.
By and large, the most abstract (supremely theoretical) solution is as follows.
And here we may summarise Bukharin as follows:
For simple reproduction:
Subscripts refer to Marx's departments of production, therefore 
By elimination equations (5) and (6) may be reduced to:
Equation (7) is the fundamental one for simple reproduction.
Turning to extended reproduction, Bukharin said:
If we let  indicate that part of the surplus-value which serves for the personal consumption of the capitalists, and  that which is turned into capital, thus, it we make  and correspondingly , if we further let  indicate that part of the surplus-value which is accumulated as a part of the constant capital, and  that part of the surplus-value which is to be accumulated as a part of the variable capital, and thus posit    and correspondingly  thus the general formula for the product of both departments takes on the following form:
From the above the following equations may be derived:
By elimination (8) and (9) may be reduced to:
And equation (10) is the fundamental one for expanded reproduction.
Thus, for the first time, Bukharin formulated a set of simple, yet sophisticated, equations for illustrating the reproduction of capital in the algebraic manner.
The simplicity is self-evident; the sophistication lies in the possibility of considerable elaboration in discussions of growth theory.
These equations were a major advance, since they generalised Marx's formulation, and incorporated both equilibrium and proportionality.
Since he first published his equations there has been a considerable literature developed which is devoted to expanding and refining this algebraic approach, but it was Bukharin who helped lay the foundation for this later work.
It should be said, of course, that in the 1920s Bukharin was working in a particularly rich culture for this type of intellectual endeavour.
It was a period of intense debate, not only amongst politicians but also between many outstanding economists working within the Marxist tradition.
What was implicit in Bukharin's work can now be stated explicitly.
Starting with Dept.
I, and using the following equations, we find:
This means that with a given rate of profit margin and a given rate of unproductive consumption of surplus-value, there is determined the rate of accumulation in Dept.
I; and with a given production function the rate of growth in that department is also determined.
Therefore, given  and , it is also possible to determine the proportions for Dept.
II which will lead to equilibrium.
Let us look at a numerical example, giving Dept.
I a numerical value of:
Sweezy's and Rosdolsky's Critique of Bukharin
Paul Sweezy, in his book The Theory of Capitalist Development , criticised Bukharin's equations as follows: ‘Bukharin in his formal presentation of the expanded reproduction scheme, makes the error of assuming that capitalist consumption always remains the same…he seems incapable of imagining an increase in capitalist consumption.’
Roman Rosdolsky, in his work The Making of Marx's ‘Capital' , picked up and elaborated Sweezy's critical remarks, spelling out the details of Bukharin's supposed error, to wit:
…it was Bukharin who first formulated the general relation of equilibrium for extended reproduction .
However, he derived two other, totally incorrect formulae from this one, namely:.
It is in fact correct that in the initial year of Marx's first scheme  and also .
However, this is only the case because Marx was not able to ascertain the correct proportions between .
In the succeeding years of the first scheme, and in all the years of the second, cII is necessarily smaller than , and  greater than .
In other words, Bukharin completely forgot that the extended reproduction…must not only lead to growth of c and v but also to that of α, i.e. to the growth of the individual consumption of the capitalists.
Nevertheless, this elementary mistake remained unobserved for almost two decades.
However, both Sweezy and Rosdolsky failed to notice a clear statement to the contrary of what they asserted, made by Bukharin himself.
Bukharin, in formulating his equations for extended reproduction, assumed that the ‘economy’ under consideration was moving from a state of simple reproduction to one of extended reproduction.
Therefore it is logical that, at that point, there would be no growth of α.
That Bukharin was capable of ‘imagining’ that capitalist consumption would grow, along with c and v, is stated explicitly two pages later (In the English text) than the reference cited by his critics:
In the following cycle the capital of the starting stage is reproduced again, the unproductively consumed part of the  surplus-value grows —for the first time — the part of the latter which is to be accumulated even more and so on.
So it is clear that Bukharin did not make the elementary mistake that Rosdolsky attributed to him.
However, this does not dispose of the problem presented by the secondary equations that Rosdolsky brought forward.
Could it be that Sweezy and Rosdolsky were correct?
The answer must be yes.
The problem arises because of the undifferentiated nature of α.
As far as the constant and variable capital is concerned the values which are replaced —— are clearly distinguished from the increments  and , and these latter represent additional values and use-values.
Sweezy resolved this problem by the introduction of further algebraic notations which distinguished between unproductive consumption of the level pertaining to the previous production period and that which is additional, new, unproductive consumption.
Let us call these two quantities a and a' respectively, then .
We may now amend Bukharin's secondary equations in line with the above to read: and .
It is obvious from Bukharin's written statement that he was considering a transition from simple to extended reproduction, and he visualised .
Thus Sweezy's and Rosdolsky's criticism on the main point — does or does not unproductive consumption increase through time — can definitely be rejected.
The criticism of Bukharin's secondary equations is sustained because he failed to distinguish between a and a', but in the context of his assumptions this was not strictly necessary.
The fact that Bukharin's secondary equations gave rise to these criticisms indicates that he should have spelled out his intentions much more clearly.
There is one aspect of Bukharin's treatment of the assumed change from simple to extended reproduction that both Sweezy and Rosdolsky failed to notice or comment upon.
The aspect in question relates to the problem of where the extra means of production for accumulation would come from.
Given that the original model is assumed to be both closed and in equilibrium, there is no surplus constant capital to draw upon.
This being the case, if the production of constant capital is to increase — an absolute necessity for accumulation to occur — then this can only be done by a transfer to Dept.
I of part of the constant capital normally allocated to Dept.
II.
This would lead to a decrease , in the initial stages, of the production of the means of consumption.
That is, of course , unless one assumes a big leap in productivity in Dept.
II sufficient to compensate for the loss of the constant capital transferred to Dept.
I.
It follows that — unless the capitalist class were prepared to be altruistic and reduce its own unproductive consumption — there would be a decline in real wages for the productive workers.
But to pursue this point further at this stage would take us beyond our immediate concerns, since it impinges upon questions related to money, prices, rates of realised surplus-value, and to the problem of crises.
All I will say here is that Bukharin was far too sanguine in his treatment of such a transition, even allowing for the fact that it was being treated at a purely abstract level.
Equilibrium and Effective Demand
The problem raised by Rosa Luxemburg regarding an unrealisable surplus arising in Dept.
II, stemming from an increase in the organic composition of capital, needs to be touched upon here.
She argued that Marx's schema of reproduction became unbalanced if one assumed such an increase in the organic composition of capital.
This particular answer was arrived at by taking a schema that was built as an equilibrium model and then changing one of the terms: naturally it produced dis-equilibrium.
Marx, in his schemas, assumed an organic composition of capital of  or , and also that Dept.
I always accumulated 50 per cent of its surplus-value, whilst Dept.
II adjusted its unproductive consumption and accumulation of surplus-value to accommodate to this pattern.
In the schema with a different organic composition of capital in the two departments, in Marx's illustration both departments still accumulated capital at the same rate, even though their rate of unproductive consumption was different.
Luxemburg suggested that, whilst leaving only one half of the surplus-value to be consumed unproductively, the other half should be accumulated at an increasing rate of organic composition of capital; that it should rise progressively from 5: 1 to 6: 1 to 7: 1, etc.
Now, leaving aside the case where there were different organic compositions of capital, we can see what happens.
To remind ourselves, the basic equation for extended reproduction is:.
With a given rate of profit margin, and a given rate of unproductive consumption of surplus-value,, there is obtained a specific , i.e. rate of accumulation.
Moreover, with an unchanged organic composition of capital we find:.
And, if we say that G = the rate of growth of the total social product W, then on the assumption of  an unchanged organic composition of capital we find that:.
It now becomes clear that if, as Luxemburg suggested, the rate of increase in unproductive consumption remains constant, but the
rate of increase in productive workers' consumption declines, whilst G remains constant, then there will emerge the surplus of unsold consumption goods that she postulated.
However, if we drop the highly restrictive assumptions of Luxemburg, equilibrium is possible.
if instead of a constant rate of unproductive consumption of surplus-value we now assume  and that  then, if , the basic equation for extended reproduction can hold.
This is not to dismiss the problems of realisation and effective demand that Luxemburg pointed to, rather I merely point out that equilibrium growth is possible even with a rising organic composition of capital.
Growth Theories Compared
The reason I touched upon the problem of realisation and the related questions of a rising organic composition of capital is that they relate to both growth and crisis theory.
Here we shall deal only with growth theory and shall tackle crisis separately, even though they are intimately connected.
In this section I want to compare a Marxian approach to growth — based upon Bukharin's equations — with that of Harrod.
To enable us to do this I shall introduce some new notations and categories.
Up to now we have ignored the specific role of fixed capital; this we shall now rectify.
It will be seen that g' is dependent upon two variables, the rate of profit (i.e., the social rate of profit p') and the proportion of surplus-value consumed unproductively. if we assume, as in more orthodox models, that savings equals investment — and that investment and accumulation are analogous — then we can see that savings are a result and not a precondition.
That is to say that savings are a function of the rate of profit and unproductive consumption.
This is a valid assumption when using a purely exchange-value model, but may present problems when dealing with a model that uses current monetary units of account.
The next problem is that of the capital-output ratio, since output is measured as Y in the Harrod model and not W. And the same problems arise when determining the aggregate production function.
These differences arise from orthodox economics treating its subject matter as being a purely technical problem, whilst the Marxian approach is one that is based upon an analysis of class relationships.
My term  can be seen as being analogous to the propensity to unproductive consumption, but this is not the same as the Keynesian propensity to consume.
The nearest approximation that we can find between our g' and  is:
However, it will be noted that the above depends upon the propensity to save and not the propensity to unproductive consumption.
The difference is critical, since total productive consumption has a relationship to unproductive consumption, whilst the Harrod equation is indiscriminate as to the nature of consumption; nor does it take into account the rate of profit.
In our equation if the rate of profit declines and all other factors remain constant, then the rate of accumulation will also decline.
Similarly, if the rate of unproductive consumption declines, then —cet. par .
— accumulation increases.
The significant difference is that our interpretation of the capital-output ratio includes variable capital, not merely fixed capital stock.
Since our v is advanced to purchase labour-power,then the rate of exploitation will have a determining role in the outcome for output .
I must stress that the equation  is not one that Bukharin himself put forward, but has been derived by myself from his set of simple equations for equilibrium conditions.
What I have been concerned about in this short section has been to compare some simple forms of growth equations deriving from quite different traditions.
It can be seen that in terms of the formal equations it is possible to make some juncture, but in so doing it is also possible to lose sight of the quite different perspectives from which they derive.
There are two aspects of contradiction combined in the equations derived from Bukharin which are not present in the Harrod formulation.
It is obvious that the aggregate demand for  consumption goods must Brow at the same rate as the production of such commodities if equilibrium is to be maintained; but there is an inherent drive within the capitalist system to reduce the amount of variable capital advanced or employed for the purchase of labour-power as a proportion of the total capital advanced.
In other words there is a contradiction between the need to expand markets and the need to reduce costs, which implies a conflict between the micro and the macro needs within the system.
The second aspect of contradiction within Bukharin's equations is that between accumulation and unproductive consumption.
At first sight this appears as a simple conflict of competing demands upon a given quantity of surplus-value.
However, on closer inspection, the problem becomes more complex.
The fundamental equation for extended reproduction is, as we know:.
The c's of Dept.
II are necessary productive consumption of constant capital, whilst only v and & beta : of Dept.
I are necessary productive consumption, the α part of the equation (i.e. ) are unproductive consumption.
This suggests,given the assumptions of the model , that the unproductive component is a necessary one for expanded reproduction.
Therefore the simple conflict between accumulation and unproductive consumption which appears at the micro level may be transformed into its opposite at the macro level.
Thus this contradiction is an essential element in Bukharin's equilibrium growth model.
The tradition of which Bukharin was a part, and helped to develop, was the forerunner of much post-1945 growth theory in the capitalist world, if often unacknowledged.
The Soviet debate of the 1920s was the first in history to face the problems of growth in a conscious manner, and they were not merely theoretical discussions since the results could have had a profound effect upon the actual outcome of events.
However, what actually happened was something quite different to that visualised by nearly all the participants.
Bukharin's contribution to analysing growth theory has, by and large, remained underplayed in the existing literature.
Whilst a number of writers have commented upon his contributions to debates upon current policy problems, little has been said about the theoretical basis of these contributions.
That Bukharin argued for balanced and proportional growth can be seen to arise from his earlier work on equilibrium theory and in his formulating an algebraic approach to the problems of analysis posed by Marx's reproduction schemas.
These points will be amplified as we proceed.
Equilibrium and Crisis Theory
Theories of Crisis
Since Marx did not live to articulate a comprehensive theory of capitalist economic crisis, after his death there developed a number of theories of crisis which drew upon various aspects of his writings.
These various theories may be defined in a number of ways.
The greatest division among them is:
a)
crises as seen to be leading to the collapse of the capitalist system.
This is usually referred to as the catastrophic version; and today this has few, if any, adherents.
b)
cyclical crises, which may provide the conditions for a revolutionary overthrow of capitalism, but are not sufficient in themselves to bring about its automatic collapse.
However, there are still to be found undertones of catastrophism in many Marxist writings, even though the authors would reject any explicit adherence to such ideas.
The second variant is the one that has produced the greatest number of specific theories of cyclical crisis.
And these maybe categorised as:
1.
Excess commodity theory (underconsumption)
2.
Excess capital theory
3.
Disproportionality
4.
Crises arising from the decline of the rate of profit.
Of course, all the theories propounded incorporate all of the above elements, but each gives pre-eminence to one particular factor.
Bukharin's own theory of capitalist crisis can be said to be one of disproportionality.
And, indeed, his theory is firmly rooted in his conception of equilibrium.
The loss of equilibrium is seen as being both a root cause of the crisis when it occurs and its manifestation.
There does, however, appear to be some confusion among various commentators as to Bukharin's basic position: some, such as Itoh, place him in the underconsumptionist school, while others place him — correctly — in the disproportionality school; but the latter, e.g. Sweezy, Mandel, Day, do not always attribute the same meaning to this.
Bukharin's Contribution
We shall therefore examine what Bukharin said, and then appraise its coherence.
Let us start with the following:
In his theoretical grasp of the capitalist system of relations of production, Marx proceeds from the fact of its existence .
Since this system exists, it means that — whether well or badly — social needs are satisfied…[therefore]there must be a definite equilibrium of the whole system…
There may well be all sorts of deviations and fluctuations here; the whole system expands and becomes complicated, develops and is continuously in motion and oscillating but, taken as a whole, it is in a state of equilibrium.
To find the law of this equilibrium is the basic problem of theoretical economics and theoretical economics as a scientific system is the result of an examination of the entire capitalist system in its state of equilibrium .
The important point to note here is that for Bukharin this state of equilibrium contained deviations and fluctuations, thus what he was postulating is not a static equilibrium nor even a dynamic one — dynamic in the sense of an orderly balanced growth.
On the contrary, as we noted earlier, his equilibrium model is a mobile one.
He said:
Gradually, complicating factors are introduced, the system starts to oscillate, and becomes mobile.
These oscillations, however, still conform to laws and, despite the most severe violations of the equilibrium (crises), the system as a whole remains…a crisis does not overstep the limits of the oscillation of the system…through all the movements and oscillations, the equilibrium is restored time and again.
Even though it was suggested that such crises may at some point lead to a collapse of the system, this is not inevitable nor even highly probable.
In capitalist society:
The development of the productive forces is by no means a  smoothly rising curve.
On the contrary, it must be clear,a priori that in an antagonistic society, a society based on productive and social anarchy, there cannot be an uninterrupted development of the forces, for in such a society the laws of equilibrium are and can only be realized by means of continual or recurrent disruptions of the equilibrium.
Consequently, the starting point for the restoration of the equilibrium must be its disruption, the function of which in the present case is to restore the balance, but at the same time on an even more deeply contradictory basis.
And since every violation of the equilibrium is inevitably bound up with a decline in the productive forces, it goes without saying, that in an antagonistic society, the development of the productive forces is made possible only by means of their periodic destruction .
Now this does not merely pose the cyclical nature of development under capitalism, although of course this is implied, but rather it suggests that even in those periods of upturn or growth there will be oscillations and deviations, so that the cycle itself is contradictory.
This is the difference between seeing growth as depicted by a statistical average on an ascending curve, or as a trend line indicating upwards motion and growth but which includes decline and ascent combined.
It is this conception of uneven and combined development, in which the whole may be growing at some point in time, but within that overall growth there will be sectors in decline.
So capitalism develops in this combined and uneven manner, and crises are not merely periods of ‘no growth’; on the contrary:
Capitalist society…can maintain a relative equilibrium only at the price of painful crises; the adaptation of the various parts of the social organism to each other and to the whole can be achieved only with a colossal waste of energy.
[This is why]…the examination of the social and, moreover, irrational and blind system from the viewpoint of its equilibrium, has nothing in common…with harmonia praestabilitata .
Given these suppositions, Bukharin maintained that ‘the law of crises is the law of the inevitable periodic disturbance of equilibrium of the system and its restoration.’
And ‘…as is well known, the crises we are talking about here are crises of overproduction .’
The question remains as to the cause and the manifestation of  these crises, since merely to assert that crises are the result of the disturbances of equilibrium does not in itself locate the precise nature of the process — it merely poses it.
Bukharin arrived at the following conclusion:
Marx, as you know, gave us a theory of capitalist crises .
These crises he showed to be caused by a general lack of planning (‘anarchy’) of the capitalist methods of production, by the impossibility of attaining correct proportions between the various elements of the process of reproduction under capitalism, especially between production and consumption.
In other words he showed the cause to be the incapability of capitalism to maintain an equilibrium among the various elements of production.
This does not, of course, mean that Marx avoided the problems of class and the class struggle .
Mass consumption, its level, the value of labour-power itself — according to Marx the factor of the struggle is inherent in all these.
The whole mechanism of contradictions developing between production and consumption, between the growth of production and the relations of distribution,contains in itself , the class struggle, taking the form of economic categories.
Therefore, basing himself on Marx, Bukharin rejected the idea that there can be no general overproduction; instead he argued that there is a causal relationship between the various branches of production which offer each other markets for their respective goods.
He thus posited a chain of relations:
This chain, however,ends with the production of means of consumption which no longer enter in material form, i.e. as use-values, directly into any process of production but into the process of personal consumption…
As a result, one can indeed envisage a situation in which we have before us an over production in all links of the chain which expresses itself in an over-production of means of consumption, i.e. in an overproduction in relation to the consumer market , which is precisely the expression of a general over-production .
Such over-production is only a relative one, that is, relative to effective demand, effective monetary demand being the only form of demand that the capitalist market recognises.
Having disposed of these points, Bukharin then moved on the question of whether such a general over-production is one of the over-production of  capital (excess capital) or the over-production of commodities (excess commodities).
His answer was:
It is…obvious that there can be no over-production of capital it there can be no over-production of commodities .
For what does the production of capital mean?
The process of the production of capital is clearly nothing other than the process of capitalist production; in other words, of the production of commodities under conditions of capitalist production, not under conditions of simple commodity production.
The production of capital is, therefore, a production of capitalistically produced commodities.
Hence, an over-production of capital is also an over-production of commodities.
Nor can there be permanent over-production; this over-production is relative and cyclical.
Moreover, over-production is not the cause of such crises, ‘rather it is the expression of crises.’
Therefore, the basic and fundamental cause of crises for Bukharin was the ‘disproportion of social production.
The factor of consumption, however, forms a component part of this disproportionality.’
Thus disproportionality was seen as being of a different order to that of merely being a disproportionality between individual branches of industry (as, for instance, Hilferding suggested).
Disproportionality between the branches of production was therefore seen as a result of the basic disproportion, i.e. that between production and consumption.
This was not an ‘underconsumptionist’ position, however, since Bukharin located this underconsumption in the over-production of capital .
On this point he said:
capitalism is continually promoting the tendency to develop production quickly on the one hand…and to depress the wage on the other (pressure of the reserve army [of the unemployed]).
In other words: it is the tendency of capitalism to push production beyond the limits of consumption .
For this kind of disproportionality only appears if an over-production of means of production has taken place and manifests itself externally as an over-production of means of consumption.
And since this over-production of capital arises from the anarchy of capitalist production, Bukharin asked:
where is the planlessness of the economy, its anarchy expressed?
In the fact that there is no proportionality between the individual branches of production and the scale of personal consumption.
This is precisely why Marx speaks about the proportional application of capital (1) 'in the various spheres of production' and (2)‘according to its [society's]needs’.
Both factors belong to the concept of the proportionality of social production.
Or to express it in more popular terms: let us assume that we had a complete proportionality in every branch of production, in the sense of their unilateral connection in one direction: from means of production to means of consumption…
Would we then have a guarantee against the occurrence of a crisis?
No.
For it can happen that more cloth is produced than is used, and, as a result, also more machines, iron and coal than is necessary.
In other words: the disproportionality of the entire social production consists, not only in the disproportionality between the branches of production, but also in the disproportionality between production and consumption.
How does such disproportionality come about according to Bukharin?
He related his answer to the production of labour-power as a commodity.
Posing the problem in terms of the equilibrium equation for extended reproduction —— he asked what would happen if the value .
The answer Bukharin gave was that there would be over-production of consumption goods, because there would be ‘a disproportion between production and consumption.
It is obvious that, in the production of means of production…the level of the wage is not determined by a calculation of the values which will be produced in the production of the means of consumption.
Having come very close to the heart of the matter, Bukharin then slid off into a discussion of the role of workers’ consumption in the circulation of capital; all of which is correct, but he failed to explicate the mechanism by which such a disproportionality comes about.
Then, whilst resolutely throwing underconsumption out of the window he allows it to creep in through the back door again with his discursive discussion of the role of labour-power as a commodity and its place in the circulation process.
Although he maintained that crisis is the result of the over-production of capital the actual mechanism, he suggested, is located in the circulation process.
In fact Bukharin came very close to Rosa Luxemburg's proposition regarding a surplus of consumption goods arising from
We have already seen that at the formal level Luxemburg's thesis  of the need for a ‘third market’ to realise the value of these consumption goods is not necessary.
It was pointed out that if unproductive consumption is increased equilibrium may be maintained.
Bukharin's reference to the level of wages paid in Dept.
I indicated a possible line of enquiry that would have been much more fruitful had he pursued it more vigorously and had begun to examine the role of fixed capital in the cyclical process.
Many of the elements of a rounded theory of capitalist economic crisis were present in Bukharin's writings, but overall they remained too disconnected to rise to the level of a coherent theory.
Therefore it remains for us to sketch out a more articulated theory based upon Bukharin's ideas of disproportionality and dis-equilibrium.
Bukharin's Presentation: A Reformulation and Critique
As a preliminary statement we can say that the equation: is at best only ever achieved as a momentary or fleeting condition.
Such an equation is basically made up of two parts: viz  which indicates that business conditions are good, and  which indicates business conditions are poor.
The equation for equilibrium conditions is, in reality, a combination of these two dis-equilibrium conditions.
Or, put another way, the equilibrium equation represents an average of a graph of fluctuations.
The critical question is, what forces are at work that will push the economy away from this average, either in an upward or downward direction?
In so far as we deal with cyclical fluctuations here, they will be those which were characteristic of an unregulated capitalist economy typical of the nineteenth century.
That is to say we shall not attempt to consider changes induced by monopolisation or state intervention on the scale we have witnessed since, say, 1945.
To try to encompass these modifications would be beyond the scope of our present remit.
Let us accept Bukharin's proposition that the final cause of capitalist economic crisis is the fundamental contradiction between the social character of production and the private appropriation of wealth.
This means that the capitalist system is the cause of the crises encountered, and therefore such crises must be ascribed to endogenous factors.
Such crises do not have an accidental character, they are a part of the very process of capitalist production and reproduction.
I shall also argue that crises have a material basis, which relates to  the periodic replacement and expansion of fixed capital.
However, there is no intention of dealing with the question of long-waves.
Linked with this periodic replacement and expansion of fixed capital will be the proposition that the direct cause of the outbreak of crises is that the sale of means of consumption falls relative to the volume of their production.
The last statement may seem to imply that a variant of the underconsumptionist thesis is being adopted, but as Marx pointed out, consumption by workers almost invariably reaches a high point immediately before a crisis breaks out.
Crises of the ‘classical’ type which we are going to consider usually involve a sudden and sharp deterioration of business conditions — not a gentle decline.
Therefore it is not a feature of such crises that they were immediately preceded by a lack of effective demand on the market for consumer goods.
(However, credit had normally been greatly extended.)
Moreover, at the beginning of such crises the production of consumer goods either remained at a high level or actually continued to increase.
Concomitantly the production of raw materials normally continued to be maintained or increased.
The point being emphasised here is that it is only possible to understand the suddenness of the onset of the downward spiral by keeping in view the production of fixed capital.
And in particular the role played by this element in such cycles.
Rather than attempt to start our exposition of the cycle from the point of crisis, we shall be able to understand the role of fixed capital if we begin at the point of depression.
It is characteristic of fixed capital that it has an assumed lifespan — without taking into account the problem of technological obsolescence — and therefore its replacement may be said to be time-proportional.
This time-proportionality determines the value of depreciation in the value of commodities produced with the aid of such fixed capital, that is to say, it is an element of the total value of the commodities.
Now, if the depression has been preceded by a particularly deep-going crisis, equilibrium may be established at such a low level of activity that the volume of fixed capital currently being produced may well be considerably smaller than that which would allow for the time-proportional replacement of fixed capital at the previous average rate.
That is to say, in the depths of a depression there may well be a negative reproduction of fixed capital if the wear and tear is greater than its replacement.
This may in turn lead to a build-up of idle money-capital arising from unused depreciation funds.)
In the classical trade cycle, which is agreed to have been  normally of between nine and twelve years, the time proportional factor was of the same order.
Whilst it is true that, in the main, the replacement of fixed capital is usually accompanied by an increased production capacity because of advances in technology, we do not have to take this into account when dealing with the basic theory of the cycle.
The reason for this is that the renewal of fixed capital is normally to maintain existing production levels.
The fact that such increased production capacity is the result of replacement is of no immediate consequence, since that capacity may not be used fully in the initial production period.
The mere replacement of productive capacity means in reality, however, that during a depression there will be an increase in the demand for consumer goods.
Why this occurs is as follows: if Dept.
I, particularly those sections producing fixed capital, starts increasing production to meet replacement demand, then more wages are paid out in that department.
Then, with a given volume of consumption goods being produced and a relatively stable demand by capitalists for consumer goods, the increased demand in the form of extra wages being paid in Dept 1, will tend to push up the price of these consumer goods, produced by Dept.
II.
At the same time, since there is an increase in the production of fixed assets, which by definition can only be a part of surplus-value, this means that the volume of surplus-value and its rate begins to increase.
The increase in the price of consumer goods is thus accompanied by a faster rate of growth in Dept.
I than in Dept.
II.
However — and here we come to the point that Bukharin was attempting to make — a growth in production by Dept.
I does not necessarily lead to an increase in the price of consumer goods.
The growth in the sum of  will only lead to an increase in the price of consumer goods if the sum of  grows too.
The possibility of this latter sum of value lagging behind the growth of the volume of production in Dept.
I occurs if there is an increase in the organic composition of capital at a rate which is faster than the rate of growth of the volume of production.
However, if the crisis has been particularly sharp and the depression of sufficient duration then it is more likely that the total of  will increase sufficiently to push up the price of consumer goods.
if the impulse from Dept.
I is sufficiently strong then there will develop a Period of prosperity.
In such a period the sum of money wages will increase and so will the demand for labour-power.
This will provide a better climate for the workers to push for higher wage rates.
None the less, the decisive reason for the increase in the price of consumer goods is the rapid growth in  the production of fixed capital goods.
Thus the mere replacement of fixed capital can lead to an increase in the overall level of economic activity.
And it follows from this that an acceleration of this replacement will have the same effect as if there had been an increase in fixed capital.
We now have an outline of the reasons for an upswing in economic activity and for an increase in the rate of surplus-value.
But the faster the upswing, the more bunched replacements will be and the sooner a new crisis will loom on the horizon.
It is clear that the bunched replacement of fixed capital requires a considerable growth in the rate of the production of fixed assets, but after a few years the need for such replacement will decline rapidly.
This means that for the boom to continue it would be necessary to undertake capacity increasing investment, that is, increase the stock of fixed capital.
It is at this point that the system is heading for a new crisis.
The first possibility is that such an increase in productive capacity is not undertaken.
Perhaps the capitalists in Dept.
II are satisfied with the level of profits they are currently obtaining and do not therefore increase production.
Obviously, because of the previous excessive growth in the sectors of Dept.
I producing fixed capital, there would be a precipitate decline in those sectors.
Such a decline would lead to a decline in total money wages being paid out and hence a decline in the demand for consumption goods.
Inevitably there would follow a contraction of activity in Dept.
II, thus leading to a further reduction in total money wages being paid etc.
The second possibility is certainly more ‘cheerful’.
Let us assume that as a result of the increased prices obtained for consumer goods, there is induced an increase in capacity in Dept.
II.
Contrary to expectations this growth in the production of consumer goods merely postpones and then magnifies the problem.
The nub of the problem resides in the fact that an increase of consumer goods as a share of the total social product decreases the share of surplus-value in the net national income.
Moreover, it will lead to a decline in the ratio of surplus-value to the capital that is advanced.
Why is this so?
The reason falls into two parts: the first relates to savings and the second is to do with the nature of .
Consumer goods occupy a much more contradictory place in the circulation and realisation of capital than do fixed assets.
Out of the total value and volume of consumer goods only α and  have the character of being surplus-value, since the sum of Dept.
II's production is by definition .
It follows, therefore, that  out of this sum only  have the character of being realised surplus-value. if we recognise that capitalist consumption — α — is a limited quantity which is relatively inelastic, represents that part of surplus-value embodied in consumption goods which is ‘saved’.
This saving does not have the character of savings ‘in general’, that of being saved for future consumption, but is saved by capitalists .
Such saving is specifically used to increase productive capital and future profits .
So long as does increase and the organic composition of capital is not increasing rapidly, it will represent future consumption by productive workers, but will still be considered as a part of the surplus-value.
However, if this  is invested in labour-power producing consumption goods, then this will lead to an increased volume of consumer goods.
And in the following production period the maintenance of an increased volume of consumer goods will require the maintenance of an adequate level of v&sub2;: but v is not surplus-value.
So what is invested as surplus-value in one production period is not seen as surplus-value in the following production period, but rather as a cost.
From the above we can see that so long as investment goods, particularly fixed assets, are being produced on an increased scale the effect on business conditions is favourable.
But as soon as they are used to expand the production of consumer goods they will actually cause business conditions to deteriorate.
The reason for this is that as soon as the opportunities for investing in fixed capital begins to diminish — mainly because the capacity for producing consumer goods has been substantially expanded — any further growth in the production of consumer goods would reduce their price, and —cet. par .
— the profits of the capitalists producing them would also decline.
The net result is that the slowdown in the production of fixed capital will also cause a reduction in the rate of growth of , or even its reduction to zero.
At the same time, because of the expansion of capacity in Dept.
II, stocks of consumer goods may be growing or their prices no longer rising — or no longer rising as rapidly as before — and the new productive capacities are possibly just going to enter the production stream.
All these signals would be sufficient to slow down the expansion of Dept.
II.
if that happens at the peak of the boom it would be sufficient to precipitate a sudden and spectacular crisis.
The conditions would then be created for a rapid decline in the rate of surplus-value on capital advanced, the growth of unsold stocks of consumer goods, which would lead to a cessation of the  expansion of fixed capital in Dept.
II, and a further dramatic plunge in the production of fixed capital in Dept.
I. Thus there begins a downward spiral into depression.
This, then, is an approximate sketch of Bukharin's theory of disproportionality crisis.
It contains all the elements that have normally been placed at the centre of crisis theory in the Marxist tradition, i.e. the falling rate of profit, excess capital, excess commodities.
But instead of attempting to place any one of them in opposition to the others as the key feature, it integrates them all as being the expressions of the basic contradiction of capitalism, that is, the striving continually to expand production, and in particular the production of surplus-value, as opposed to the relatively restricted consuming power of the population.
As I have indicated, the material basis for this contradiction resides in the role of fixed capital in the classical cyclical movement of the capitalist economy.
In so far as we consider Bukharin's theory of equilibrium in relation to his ideas on the theory of capitalist economic crisis we can see that contradiction is a key element in explaining it.
Perhaps we can say that capitalist equilibrium is made up of a series of moments of dis-equilibria.
This being the case, a crisis of capitalist economy is not a crisis of society in terms of the catastrophic visions of some of the early Marxists, but, on the contrary, crisis is a normal condition of its longer term equilibrium.
How long is that longer term is still a matter for debate.
The major weakness in Bukharin's presentation of crisis theory lies in his lack of appreciation of the role of fixed capital in the cyclical process.
This lack of appreciation was to have an adverse effect upon his stance in some of the debates in the 1920s; something he came to realise and rectify later on.
However, given his equilibrium theory, Bukharin was able to escape the monocausal trap that beset a number of other Marxist theorists on the question of crisis theory.
War Communism and the New Economic Policy
Bukharin's work The Economics of the Transition Period has a special place in his writings and in relation to the period in which it was written.
Any study of the man and the period must locate and take into account this book.
The work itself has maintained an almost subterranean existence in footnotes and references in many other works, yet it was not until comparatively recently that it became accessible to the non-specialist reader.
It has only ever had one edition in the Russian — in 1920 — and one German translation in 1922.
The English translation had to wait until the 1970s.
Because of this the title of the work was well known but its content very much less so.
The book was a pioneering effort and has all the faults, as well as the merits, of such an enterprise.
Before the Russian revolution of October (November) 1917, very few Marxists were prepared to talk or write, in any other than the most general terms, on what the outline of a future socialist society would be like, or discuss the nature of the transition period to such a society.
Bukharin wrote his book on the basis of his own lived experiences within the revolution then in progress.
if he dared to predict, it was on the basis of the evidence around him.
That he should have been proved wrong on a number of points should occasion no surprise.
It is indeed rare for the participants in such epoch-making events to have a complete understanding of them and their consequences.
We should, however, acknowledge Bukharin's intellectual audacity in his attempt.
Alfred Rosmer gave an amusing but enlightening insight into Bukharin's character and role in 1920, and let it be recalled that he was only 32 years old in that year.
When Rosmer attended the second congress of the Third International he spoke to Trotsky about Bukharin, and reported the following:
Trotsky [said]‘Bukharin is always in front, but he's always looking over his shoulder to make sure Lenin isn't far behind.’
When I got to know the two men well I got a visual image of these  judgements — Lenin, solid and stocky, advancing at an even pace, and the slight figure of Bukharin galloping off in front, but always needing to feel Lenin's presence.
Rosmer's anecdote gives us the measure of the role that Bukharin played, not only in relation to Lenin, but also to the whole Bolshevik Party.
He acted as the intellectual cavalry, seeking out new fields, harrying the enemy with his pen and probing unknown territory.
The Economics represented a landmark, indeed a turning point, in Bukharin's own career.
Up to and including 1920 he had been consistently on the left of the Bolshevik Party, and this particular book was his last major offering from that stance before his subsequent evolution to the ‘right’ of the party.
Yet any study of the book and Bukharin's subsequent writings indicate more continuity than is usually allowed for by those commentators who have only a cursory knowledge of his works.
And, let it be noted, if 1920 marked the high tide of Bukharin's leftism, then it can be said to be equally true of the Bolsheviks as a whole, Lenin included.
The rigours of the winter 1920–1 and the Kronstadt rebellion stripped away the exuberance and illusions about ‘war communism’ for all but a tiny minority within the Bolshevik Party.
The Background
What then was the period in which The Economics was written?
It was one of revolution and civil war, following on from Russia's collapse during the First World War.
The war that had begun in August 1914 had thrown an intolerable burden upon the industry of the Russian Empire.
Agriculture and the transport system were likewise soon staggering under the strains imposed by war.
Although there had been considerable growth in Russian manufacturing industry between 1880 and 1914, by any criteria it was still quite inadequate to cope with the strains imposed on it by modern industrialised warfare.
In terms of production and transport facilities the Russian Empire was far behind any of the other major participants in that war.
Although much of the industrial production was carried out in large modern units, these were still comparatively small islands in an ocean of small-scale production and a very backward agriculture.
In this respect it could be said that there was considerable unevenness within the economy as a whole.
In the first stages of the war production rose, but as the war dragged on it declined  rapidly.
Food and raw material shortages reached famine proportions in the cities by the winter of 1916–17.
The revolution of February 1917 further aggravated this situation and brought about disruption of industry.
Therefore by the time of the October revolution, when the Bolsheviks assumed power, the whole economy was in a state of chaos.
Large areas of Western Russia were under German occupation until the collapse, in turn, of the Central Powers in November 1918.
Since the areas under occupation contained rich grain lands as well as the industrialised sectors of Russian Poland as it was then, the food shortages in the towns and the goods famine in the countryside were further exacerbated.
It was in this situation that the Bolsheviks assumed power.
Until the start of the civil war, in the summer of 1918, there was a relative lull in the social conflicts during which the Bolsheviks shared power with the Left Social-Revolutionaries and at the same time attempted to obtain the collaboration of some sections of the bourgeoisie and industrial managers in their efforts to revive industry.
There was no immediate move to take into state ownership the major manufacturing industries, although there was a vigorous campaign to extend what was called workers' control, i.e. the supervision of owners and managers by rank-and-file committees.
The Bolsheviks, on the insistent urging of Lenin, moved with caution in relation to nationalisation during this period.
It is true that certain measures of nationalisation had been undertaken in the first months of Soviet government — for example, the Merchant Marine had been taken over in January 1918 and the sugar industry nationalised in May of that year — but the main efforts had been directed towards a stabilisation and regularisation of the tottering economy on the existing basis of ownership.
Lenin's theme in this early period was the need to install an efficient system of accounting and control, and to bring all factories and mines back to full production as soon as possible, even if this meant employing former owners and managers at high salaries.
The most radical measures had been initiated from below, the workers seizing factories and, above all, the peasants dispossessing the landlords and sharing out the land among themselves.
The latter move was endorsed by the Soviet government, but it was an acknowledgement of an accomplished fact over which it had little or no control.
The reason for the caution on the part of the Bolsheviks can be found in their expectation of an early revolution in Germany and  in other countries of Europe.
They reasoned that if such events occurred, particularly in Germany, the problems regarding supplies of industrial and processed goods would be solved, if not immediately, then at least fairly quickly.
This policy was not without its critics within the Bolshevik Party, and the Left Communists — among whom was Bukharin — pressed for more and far-reaching measures to be taken against capitalist property.
Such were the tolerant conditions still prevailing that the Left Communists were able to publish their own journal —Kommunist — and Lenin had to argue policy questions with them publicly; just as had been the case over the Brest Litovsk peace treaty.
The situation changed radically in the summer of 1918.
First, civil war began in earnest, fuelled by Western intervention, and second, there was a fear of further German intervention.
These threats came on top of sabotage and flight by the owners of industry, and these factors themselves led to further complications.
There was a wave of factory seizures by workers' committees, very often on a local and fragmentary basis.
These were followed by a Soviet Government decree on 28 June 1918 which nationalised all branches of industry.
Later, in November 1918, all internal and foreign trade was nationalised, the latter having little practical significance at that time, since foreign trade had by then all but ceased in those parts of the country in the control of the Soviets.
However, the state monopoly of foreign trade was to become of critical importance later on.
Thus the civil war was powerfully to reinforce the centrifugal tendencies at work within the economy, and as Carr noted:
the machinery of exchange and distribution established by recent decrees was quickly pushed aside; and for some time the most effective instruments in extracting grain from the peasant were the ‘iron detachments’ of workers from towns and factories reinforced by the local committees of poor peasants.
Another source, and consequence, of the economic chaos was inflation: like all the belligerents in the war, a part of the Russian expenditure upon arms and munitions had been met by an increase in the note issue of the central bank or treasury.
There had been a budget deficit ever since 1914, rising in the case of Russia to 81 per cent in 1917.
The budget for the first half of 1918 had been estimated at 17.6 milliard roubles expenditure, but revenue at only 2.8 milliard.
So, although the Bolsheviks did not start the inflationary process, they were unable to stop it either, despite their wish to do so in the first few months of Soviet rule.
Given this chaotic situation, the Bolsheviks, when faced with the necessity to fight a civil war as well as combat foreign intervention, had to take urgent and drastic measures to supply the towns with food and the fledgling Red Army with weapons and munitions.
There was evolved — it would be wrong to say planned — a system for the production of war materials, and the provisioning of the towns which subordinated all else to survival.
Victor Serge succinctly summarised the system of ‘war communism’ that emerged as follows:
War communism could be defined as follows: firstly, requisitioning in the countryside; secondly, strict rationing for the town population, who were classified into categories; thirdly, complete ‘socialisation’ of production and labour; fourthly, an extremely complicated and chit-ridden system of distribution for the remaining stocks of manufactured goods; fifthly, a monopoly of power tending towards the single Party and the suppression of all dissent; sixthly, a state of siege and the Cheka.
The first official steps on the road to ‘war communism’ came in May 1918 with the decree which conferred upon the Commissariat of supply extraordinary powers for the collection of grain.
This was to be the legal basis for the armed detachments of workers who were supposed to confiscate surplus grain and the hoards of speculators.
This was later changed to requisitioning fixed amounts of grain, which often went beyond taking surpluses.
Thus began the process which eventually led to the peasants ceasing to sow grain and ultimately to the New Economic Policy.
In the towns money soon ceased to circulate in a meaningful manner; workers were given rations; all state services were provided free; school meals were given free to the children, even theatre tickets were distributed among factory workers free.
Many Bolsheviks saw in all this the realisation of their aims as communists, but the reality was far from what the founding fathers of Marxian socialism had envisaged as being communism or socialism.
It was in this feverish atmosphere of gunsmoke and (if one was lucky) subsistence rations that Bukharin tried to peer ahead and formulate some theoretical propositions regarding the transition to socialism.
Much of what he wrote was, essentially, a defence and even a celebration of ‘war communism’.
However, Bukharin's ideas were not formed solely by what was currently happening in Soviet  Russia; rather he viewed what was happening there as a part of a much larger upheaval on a world scale.
Imperialism: Apogee and Collapse
To understand Bukharin's particular views on the transition period to socialism it is necessary to understand how he viewed the then current stage of capitalist development.
In 1915 he had written his book Imperialism and World Economy , and the first few chapters of The Economics is taken up with a summary restatement of that work, particularly in the light of German experience during the 1914–18 war.
He took as his starting point the capitalist world economy:
Contemporary capitalism is world capitalism.
This means that the capitalist relations of production dominate the entire world and connect all parts of our; planet with a firm economic bond.
Nowadays the concrete manifestation of the social economy is a world economy.
The world economy is a real living unity.
As we have seen previously, Bukharin distinguished between arithmetical sums and what he called ‘real aggregates’, or perhaps what we might call totalities.
He argued against those who saw the world economy as being merely a summation of national economies, and instead he posited that the world economy is a system with its own particular equilibrium.
However:
The question now arises: just what are the consciously functioning parts of the world capitalist economy?
In theory one can conceive of world capitalism as a system of individual, private enterprises, but the structure of modern capitalism is such that the economic subjects are the collective capitalist organisations —‘the state capitalist trusts’.
What then was qualitatively different about the imperialist epoch, as compared to the previous era of capitalist development?
Among the crucial features was the fact that:
Finance capital did away with the anarchy in production within the major capitalist countries.
Monopolistic employers' associations, combined enterprises, and the penetration of banking capital into industry created a new model of production relations, which transformed the unorganised commodity  capitalist system into a finance capitalist organisation .
The unorganised relationship of one enterprise with another, through buying and selling, has to a considerable extent been replaced by an organised relationship through the ‘controlled holding’ of shares, ‘participation’and ‘financing’, which find personal expression in the ‘Dirigenten’of the banks, industry, the enterprises and trusts.
By the same token, the exchange relation expressing the social division of labour and the separation of the socio-production organisation into independent capitalist enterprises is replaced by a technical division of labour within an organised ‘national economy’.
Here we see how Bukharin viewed the changes wrought by finance capital in the national capitalist economies.
It is not merely that ‘state capitalist trusts’ compete on the world market, but that their creation has brought about a new and different model of production relations.
Commodity circulation has been replaced by the circulation of products within the national economy, in much the same manner as products circulate within an oligopoly or conglomerate firm.
In this respect his view of the division of labour is quite important:
one should not confuse…two things: the fragmentation of social labour, which arises from the fact of the social division of labour on the one hand, and the fragmentation of social labour, which negates this very division of labour on the other hand…‘enterprises’…stand in various relationships to each other: either they are bound to each other by buying and selling (heterogeneous enterprises), or they are in competition with each other (homogeneous enterprises).
These two types of social division of labour represent very different relationships: the heterogeneous enterprises form a complementary division of labour, whilst the homogeneous ones are antagonistic.
And since capitalist commodity production is spontaneous — that is, unplanned social production, they are anarchic.
But Bukharin pointed out:
Usually, the anarchy of capitalist production is seen in the light of market competition and of that alone.
Now, we can see that market competition expresses only one part, only one model of the ‘life’ of separate commodity producers, i.e., that model of relations which is not connected with the division of social labour.
Here Bukharin was pointing out that even enterprises which are not directly in competition on the market, are in reality in competition with each other for the division of surplus-value in the form of profits.
He therefore suggested three forms of competition:
1.
Horizontal competition between homogeneous enterprises.
2.
Vertical competition, the struggle between heterogeneous enterprises.
3.
Finally, by combined (complex) competition we mean the struggle that is waged by combined enterprises, i.e., capitalist units which amalgamate various branches of production, i.e., which transform the social division of labour into a technical division.
Therefore, in Bukharin's view:
the units which make up the system of the modern world economy are not individual enterprises, but…complexes, state capitalist trusts…
The capitalist ‘national economy’ has changed from an irrational system into a rational organisation…
This transformation has been made possible by the growth of finance capitalism and the cohesion between the economic and political organisations of the bourgeoisie.
At the same time, neither the anarchy of capitalist production in general, nor the competition of capitalist commodity producers, have been…destroyed.
Not only do these phenomena still exist, they have been intensified by being reproduced within the framework of a world economy.
The world economic system is as blind, irrational and without subject as was the former system of national economy.
Without doubt Bukharin was correct in the above, in so far as there was and is such a tendency at work within capitalism.
However, he mistook certain war-time conditions in the main belligerent states as being irreversible changes.
In this he was mistaken, since state control over industry was considerably reduced once the war was over, even if it did not wholly return to pre-war conditions.
Moreover, even today allowing for the enormous growth in monopoly, or oligopoly, in the advanced capitalist countries, the national economies have not yet reached that condition of ‘rationality’ or planning in production that Bukharin assumed had been already achieved.
Given the actual conditions prevailing in 1920 Bukharin went on to say:
The 1914–18 war raised the question of state power point blank…from the moment the imperialist state threw tens of millions of people onto the stage of history and instantly revealed its colossal significance as an economic factor, the analysis of state power became a matter for theoretical and practical discussion.
But not only did the war raise the question of state power and economics; for Bukharin and the Bolsheviks it signalled the beginning of the end of imperialist capitalism, the first act in the collapse of the system as a whole, a collapse that had been hotly debated in the pre-war Marxist movement in Europe.
Bukharin asserted that:
The actual economic situation in Europe in 1918–20 clearly shows that this period of collapse has set in and that the old system of relations of production shows no signs of revival.
Quite the reverse, the concrete facts all indicate that the elements of decomposition and the revolutionary severance of relations are progressing with every month that passes.
The apocalyptic vision of Bukharin and the Bolsheviks was clearly stated when he wrote:
The object of this work is to demolish common, vulgar and quasi-Marxist ideas about the nature of the Zusammenbruch (collapse) of capitalism predicted by the great authors of scientific communism and the nature of the process of transforming a capitalist society into a communist one.
He who imagines the revolution of the proletariat to be a peaceful transition of power from one set of hands to another, and the revolution in the relations of production to be a change in the leadership of the organisational apparatus, he, who pictures the classic model of a proletarian revolution in this way , will recoil in horror from the tragedy mankind endures throughout the world.
Amidst the smoking, charred ruins and the roar of civil war, he will be unable to discern the grand and stately outlines of the future society.
But what is the process of collapse?
What is the mechanism that brings capitalism crashing down?
Obviously, war is seen as an engine of destruction, not merely in the physical sense, but also in the sense of the destruction of all those social bonds that constitute the equilibrium of capitalism as a social entity.
In his discussion Bukharin introduced a quite new and novel  concept when he examined the effects of war production upon the economy and society.
He pointed out the illusory nature of much of the growth in the gross national product to which war economy gave rise, and to the fact that it masked a decline in real wealth .
Although it will be easily grasped that war destroys large amounts of material means of production and means of consumption, he went further and analysed its effects upon the forces of production and the accumulation of capital.
He introduced a concept that he termed ‘expanded negative reproduction’.
Starting from the assumption that capitalist equilibrium is a mobile one, it is possible to precipitate dis-equilibrium not only in an upward direction, but also in a downward direction:
the position of the development of the productive forces is closely related to that of reproduction: the growth of the forces of production corresponds with expanded reproduction, when static they correspond with simple reproduction and their decline is expressed in the fact that an ever diminishing share of the periodically consumed products is replaced.
In the last instance we have social regression.
With this view Bukharin was challenging the ‘truly monstrous theoretical construction that drew the conclusion about the beneficial (!) influence of war on ‘national economic’ life.’
Also, by implication, Bukharin was challenging the views of Rosa Luxemburg, and all who since followed her in this matter, in her assumption that arms production is a field for the creation of surplus-value.
Bukharin argued that armaments production ‘has an altogether different significance: a gun is not transformed into an element of a new production cycle: gunpowder shot into the air does not appear in a different guise in the next cycle at all.
Quite the reverse.
The economic effects of these elements in actu has a purely negative value.’
He pointed out that when armaments production and war reaches a certain point, when larger and larger quantities of material goods and labour-power are sucked into this process, it will begin to destroy the very basis of production itself.
Thus ‘what we have…is not expanded reproduction, but an Ever-increasing under-production .
This process may be called expanded negative reproduction .
This is what war is from an economic point of view.’
What Bukharin was doing was to describe the actual situation in Soviet Russia during the period of ‘war communism’ and civil war.
the gigantic military effort was sucking out of the economy, not only surplus products, but the  very means of replacing means of production and means of consumption.
In 1920 the Red Army consumed one quarter of all available wheat in Soviet held territories.
Moreover, it was also draining the working class: in 1917 there had been three million workers employed in Russian industry, by the winter of 1920–1 the number had declined to 1,480,000.
And by 1921 the population of Moscow had declined by one half and that of Petrograd by two-thirds.
Because of the flooding of mines in the Donets valley the supply of fuel to industry was reduced to a trickle, as Deutscher noted:
Deprived of fuel and raw materials, the industrial centres…were paralysed.
Even towards the end of 1920, the coal-mines produced less than one-tenth and the iron-and-steel works less than one twentieth of their pre-war output.
The production of consumer goods was about one-quarter of normal.
The disaster was made worse by the destruction of transport.
This was a situation which could only last a short time before complete economic and social collapse ensued.
It seemed as though Bukharin's expanded negative reproduction was going into free-fall.
Bukharin envisaged negative reproduction taking place even before such a catastrophic situation was reached, however, and he applied this concept to the capitalist countries.
One of the forms of regression was inflation:
The huge quantity of accumulated paper values are tokens, the realisation of which lies wholly in the future and depends, on the one hand, on the conditions of capitalist reproduction and, on  the other hand, on the very existence of the capitalist system.
Clearly, the huge flood of bits of paper in various forms may become totally incommensurate with the real labour process, and in conditions of a capitalist structure, this will be one of the indications of its collapse.
Thus, negative expanded reproduction runs parallel to the accumulation of paper values.
He suggested that such a situation was inherently dangerous for the capitalist system, because ‘the process of reproduction is not only a process of reproducing the material elements of production’, but also a process of the reproduction of the very relations of production.
Given the regression of reproduction then, there would be a lessening, an atrophy of those relations , not merely of  material reproduction but of all class relations.
Thus expanded negative reproduction carries with it the seeds of revolution.
The process of expanded negative reproduction, then, reacts upon the political and social equilibrium; and should it be pushed too fat, this in turn will react upon the productive forces, giving a further twist in the downward spiral.
Bukharin argued that just as there is a period of political disintegration, so too will there be a period of technical and productive collapse.
He argued, moreover, that this was historically inevitable.
This meant that there would be an inevitable reduction of the productive forces and ‘in this way the process of expanded negative reproduction is greatly speeded up.’
What was posited was a series of reciprocal acts which reinforce each other, and so create a multiplier effect in a downward direction.
Here then was Bukharin's view of the world he attempted to theorise about and in which to locate the transition period to socialism.
Capitalism had been transformed into a world economy composed of competing state capitalist trusts, with rational, planned organisation internally, but still anarchic as a world system.
And by 1920 this system was allegedly in the process of disintegration and revolutionary collapse.
This posed the question: if capitalist equilibrium had been disrupted beyond recall and expanded negative reproduction had been set in motion, how was a new socialist equilibrium to be brought into being?
There were three main aspects to Bukharin's ideas on the transition period leading to a new socialist equilibrium:
1.
The relationship between town and country;
2.
The naturalisation of economic relations, i.e. the destruction of commodity circulation and the substitution of product circulation.
3.
The use of coercion in the transition period.
I shall deal with these items in the above order.
Dis-equilibrium: Town and Country
In the first instance Bukharin noted that the process of expanded negative reproduction was at work in agriculture just as in industry, but its material effects were mitigated by the very primitiveness of agriculture as compared to industry.
But: ‘the collapse of the state-capitalist system…also entails the collapse of this system in respect of agriculture.’
The decay of the system was manifested by  speculative trading in agricultural produce, as against the orderly methods of the state-capitalist trusts.
Within the revolutionary upheaval envisaged, relations between town and countryside are disrupted.
This takes three forms:(1) the rupture of credit relations,(2) the breakdown of national and local government; and (3) the breakdown of the exchange of material use-values between town and countryside.
With the collapse of the capitalist production apparatus, the process of production almost comes to a standstill; people live on old stocks which have survived the war and have been inherited by the proletariat.
Money, which in ‘normal times’ represented a value in itself, finally reveals itself as an intermediary symbol, without any independent value.
Consequently, for people in command of large quantities of agricultural produce, almost every incentive to deliver it to the town disappears.
The social economy disintegrates into two autonomous spheres: the famine-stricken town, and the country, which despite the partial destruction of the productive forces, has a fairly considerable quantity of unmarketable ‘surplus’ produce.
Alongside this process, and as a part of it, was the revolution in the countryside, with the dispossession of the landlords, ‘and the less highly developed capitalist relations are, the greater its significance.’
Therefore ‘the struggle can be, and usually is, accompanied by a tremendous waste of resources and the breaking-up of the physical production base (partially by dividing up large estates, implements, livestock, etc.), by a further reduction in the productive forces.’
Bukharin then asked ‘how is a new equilibrium possible, an equilibrium within agriculture itself, and also one between town and country’?
And then, with considerable foresight, he added: ‘It is a decisive question for the fate of mankind, for it is a most important and highly complicated one.’
This was to be a problem which plagued the Soviet government throughout the 1920s and even today remains a problem of the first magnitude.
(On an international scale one could also say that the so-called North-South division is a form of this problem.)
Given that the land had been distributed to the peasants, Bukharin suggested that without the intervention of the state, that is, the proletarian state, the scene would be set for a ‘new American-style cycle’, by which he meant the development of capitalist commodity production in agriculture with a process of  centralisation taking place and the development of agri-factories.
However, he immediately rejected such a possibility because:
with the abolition of a commodity economy in the town and with the socialist organisation in industry…the dictatorship of the proletariat is inevitably accomplished either by a hidden, or more or less open, struggle between the proletariat's tendency towards organisation and the tendency of the peasantry towards commodity anarchy.
And, on the assumption of the superiority of socialist organisation, the victory would go to the proletariat.
How then would the new equilibrium be achieved?
Bukharin replied: ‘It is obvious that only the real process of exchanges of substances between town and country can serve as a firm and stable basis for the influence of the town to be decisive.’
It is clear that what Bukharin had in mind here was that the ‘town’ must provide consumer goods and means of production to agriculture on such a scale as to make it worthwhile for the peasants to produce more than for their own immediate needs.
For this real exchange to take place it was necessary, of course, that industrial production should be revived.
And given the conditions obtaining this posed an almost insuperable problem, since ‘the rebirth of industry is itself dependent on the flow of vital resources into towns, the absolute necessity for this influx at any price.’
It was this ‘any price’ which indicated the unequal relationship between town and countryside.
Bukharin argued:
This minimal ‘equilibrium’ can be achieved only (1) at the expense of the resources left in the towns, and (2) by use of force on the part of the proletarian state.
This state coercion (the removal of grain surpluses, tax in kind, or some other form) is economically funded: in the first place, directly, since the peasantry itself has an interest in the growth of industry, which supplies it with agricultural machines, implements, artificial fertilisers and electric power, etc.; in the second place, indirectly, since the state power of the proletariat is the best means of protection against the restoration of the economic pressure of the large-scale landowner, banker…
Now, in the conditions of 1920 in Soviet Russia, to write about all those things that industry could supply to agriculture was the ‘music of the future’ and the reality was that coercion was the main means  of provisioning the towns.
Nevertheless, Bukharin was attempting to look beyond ‘war communism’ to a situation where a genuine exchange could be achieved.
In this respect it is very important to understand just what he meant by exchange.
Bukharin envisaged a situation where large-scale agricultural production would be organised by the state and therefore the state ‘would directly organize the production process’.
But for the small producers:
their involvement in the organisational apparatus is primarily made possible through the sphere of circulation .
Hence, nominally in the same way as under the system of state procurement are the chief apparatus of the new system of equilibrium.
It is important to recall that Bukharin had already argued that under the system of state capitalism commodity production had been abolished in the internal relations of such states.
Therefore when he refers to the sphere of circulation here he does not have in mind market relations, but rather a system of planned production and exchange, which may or may not have included some form of monetary accounting.
(To suggest otherwise is to imply that Bukharin was suggesting that a proletarian state would regress back beyond state capitalism.)
However, Bukharin did acknowledge that there would be a long period when petty commodity production would spontaneously arise, and that the struggle between state organised agricultural production and petty commodity production would — as he saw it — be a struggle between socialist and capitalist tendencies in the economic arena.
In the towns, the main struggle for the economic model comes to an end with the victory of the proletariat; in the country…it is resurrected in other forms as a struggle between the state planning of a proletariat which embodies socialised labour and the commodity anarchy, the speculative licence of a peasantry which embodies scattered property and the anarchic element of the market…a simple commodity economy is merely the embryo of a capitalist economy…
Clearly, then, Bukharin did not adhere to any idea of ‘market socialism’, since he directly counterposed plan and market.
However, he then proceeded to say: ‘there resides two ‘souls’ within the bosom of the peasant himself and the poorer he is, the greater will be the significance of the proletarian tendency.’
Here Bukharin raised one of the questions that would be consistently debated throughout the 1920s.
The idea of the two ‘souls’ of the peasant would become one of the hallmarks of his attitude in the decade of the 1920s.
Thus, despite the fact that he had dealt with the relationship of town and countryside at a very abstract level Bukharin did try to grapple with some of the fundamental, enduring and concrete problems arising from the revolutionary transformation of the economy.
He pointed to the necessity of a reciprocal relationship, one that had ultimately to be beneficial to all participants, and not merely based upon value money exchanges but one that entailed an exchange of real use-values.
He argued against market exchanges, and instead pointed to the need for planned production and exchange.
Lastly, he pointed to the danger of the spontaneous revitalisation of petty commodity production if the peasants were not drawn into the planned economy via the process of exchange.
And, concomitantly, the possibility of a class struggle between workers and peasants was pointed to in deciding which model or relations would prevail.
Naturalisation of Economic Relations
As we have already seen, Bukharin argued that with the domination of state capitalist trusts in the period leading to the internally by the rational organisation of production.
Therefore the process of the naturalisation of economic relationships had already begun before the transition period was embarked upon.
And, in the determination of a new equilibrium between town and country this displacement of commodity production and circulation by the production of use-values and the circulation of products was further extended.
The question arises, why was this process of naturalisation considered necessary?
Bukharin had already indicated a part of his reasoning when he proposed that political economy as a subject of study would disappear under socialism, because:
Theoretical political economy is the study of a social economy based upon the production of commodities , i.e. the study of an unorganised social economy…as soon as we take an organised social economy, all the basic ‘problems’ of  political economy  disappear: problems of value, price, profit and so on.
Here ‘relations between people’ are not expressed as ‘relations between things’, and the social economy is regulated not by the blind forces of the market and competition, but by a consciously followed plan…the end of a capitalist commodity society will also see the end of political economy.
Therefore, according to Bukharin, commodities as an economic category exist because of the social division of labour and the anarchic manner of production and distribution.
The abolition of commodity production therefore presupposes the development of a system which retains the technical division of labour combined with associated social labour .
In an analysis of the economics of the transition period, one must not only deal with ‘pure’ forms and categories.
This analysis is therefore difficult, because there are no stable quantities here.
If knowledge in its present state is generally concerned with fluid ‘processes’ and not with fixed metaphysical ‘essences’, it is in the transition period…that the categories of being are replaced by categories of ‘becoming’.
In this situation the categories of political economy no longer suffice for analytical purposes:
The old categories of political economy continue to take the form of practical generalisations about a continuously changing , living, economic reality.
At the same time, these categories do not enable one to penetrate the ‘surface of phenomena’…to understand the process and development of economic life as a whole …
By their very nature these elementary relations, which in ideological terms are represented by the categories of commodity, price, wages, profit, etc., simultaneously exist and do not exist.
It is as if they are non-existent.
They drag out a strange kind of illusory real, and really illusory existence…
Therefore, the old, tested tools of Marxist thought, coined by Marx on the basis of the very real existence of the appropriate relations of production, begin to misfire.
But in everyday practical life, they continue to be uncritically regarded as a means for a true understanding of the phenomena of economic life.
Why do these ‘tested tools’ no longer correspond to everyday life?
Bukharin answered:
The law of value is the law of equilibrium in a simple commodity system of production .
The law of the costs of production [plus the average rate of profit]is the law of equilibrium in a transformed commodity system, i.e., the capitalist system.
The law of market price is the law of oscillation in this system.
The law of competition is the law of the continual restoration of the upset equilibrium.
The law of crises is the law of the inevitable periodic disturbance of the equilibrium of the system and its restoration.
But if the market is no longer operative in large parts of the economy, and therefore is no longer anarchic; if costs plus average rate of profit do not determine production and investment, all of the above falls to the ground.
This is despite the fact that economic calculations are still carried out in ‘prices’.
As Bukharin pointed out: ‘The limits to the applicability of these categories will become instantly clear if we define the basic conditions of existence for the real relationships which correspond to them (i.e., to these categories).’
He argued that once conscious control of production is established at the macro level, the result of this production loses its commodity characteristic.
And:
Value emerges when we have true commodity production.
Here, a constant and not a chance model of anarchic relations via exchange is obligatory…the law of value is merely the law of equilibrium of an anarchic commodity system…
Consequently, value as a category…is least useful of all during the transition period, where commodity production to a considerable extent disappears and there is no equilibrium.
Since value is no longer a viable category in the transition period, this in turn will react upon money and prices:
One must distinguish from the cases of the imaginary form where price does not rest on a value correlation.
Here price is absolutely divorced from value.
Consequently, in the transition epoch, the case of the imaginary form inevitably comes close to the typical case.
From the above Bukharin deduced that the monetary system would collapse, money would be devalued and ‘the distribution of paper money is divorced from the distribution of products.’
From this it  follows that wages ‘become an imaginary value without content’.
Therefore ‘under the dictatorship of the proletariat the ‘workers’ receive a socio-labour ration and not wages.’
It was by developing such a line of reasoning that Bukharin reached the conclusion that it was necessary to conceptualise the naturalisation of economic relations.
This naturalisation consists in the fact of planned production and distribution in the economy by means of material quantities and not by prices plus market exchanges.
Prices in such circumstances become an administrative convenience or merely irrelevant.
Here as in a number of places in his text, Bukharin appeared to be confusing different conditions, for example, money becomes valueless with the introduction of planning under conditions of material abundance.
The should arise because of the lack of any compulsion to labour, brought about by a huge increase in productivity coupled with the transformation of labour into a free spontaneous activity.
Such ideal conditions contrast sharply with the actual experiences of ‘war communism’: money became valueless because of the disappearance of goods, wages were replaced by rations — the rations of abject poverty not abundance — prices became imaginary because money no longer had any value, and paper money was issued by keeping the printing presses working day and night, amounting to hyper-inflation!
As a result of this confusion Bukharin was led into a contradictory position on the question of coercion.
Coercion During the Transition Period
It is in the chapter headed ‘Non-Economic Coercion in the Transition Period’ that we can see the confusion engendered by the foregoing circumstances being translated into a hymn of praise for violence.
Bukharin started out correctly by noting the use of force in historical change, and its use in the class struggle.
He rejected the idea that there can be any revolutionary change in society without force, even if that force is merely latent or potential:
In the transition epoch, when one production structure is giving way to another, the midwife is revolutionary violence.
This revolutionary violence must destroy the fetters on the development of society, i.e. the old forms ‘of concentrated violence’ which have become counter-revolutionary…the old  state and the old model of relations of production…
Revolutionary violence must actively assist in the formation of new relations of production, after it has created a new form of ‘concentrated violence’, the state of the new class…
Hence, on the one hand, violence plays a destructive role and on the other, it is a force for cohesion, organisation and construction.
So far there is little here that would run counter to what would be considered orthodox Marxist views.
Bukharin went on, however, to make a leap that did not necessarily follow from his previous line of thought.
He said:
The greater the magnitude of this ‘non-economic’ force which in fact is an ‘oekonomische Potenz’, the smaller the ‘costs’of the transition period will be (other things being equal, of course), the shorter this transition period will be, the more quickly social equilibrium will be established on a new basis and the more rapidly the curve of the productive forces will begin to rise.
What he missed here was any consideration of the degree of resistance by the dispossessed classes and those sections of the population which follows them; this surely is the determinant of the level and degree of violence necessary to reorganise social and economic life.
Moreover, there seems to be an element of moral righteousness in Bukharin's attitude, in so far as he sought to clothe what could be considered necessary violence with an aura of positive good, thereby turning necessity into a virtue.
And having sanctified violence as a positive good, Bukharin then proceeded to argue for coercion to be applied to the working class also:
In so far as this political power, as ‘concentrated violence’ against the bourgeoisie, is itself an economic force, it is the force which severs the capitalist relations of production, by putting the proletariat in charge of the material and physical framework of production…on the other hand, this same ‘concentrated violence’is partly turned inward, where it is a factor in the self-organisation and compulsory self-discipline of the workers.
Bukharin argued that this self-organisation and compulsory self-discipline was a part of the process of transforming a ‘class in itself’ into a ‘class for itself’.
However, he did not seem to comprehend the possibility that self organisation and compulsion are mutually exclusive.
He attributed the actual cohesive organising  role to the vanguard of the working class (read Communist Party) which led the various strata of that class with their differing levels of consciousness.
Therefore: ‘compulsory discipline is absolutely inevitable, and the less voluntary internal discipline is, i.e., the less revolutionised a given section or group of the proletariat is, the more strongly its compulsory nature will be felt.’
And what would the concrete form of this compulsion take?
One of the main forms of compulsion of the new model, operating within the working class itself, is the abolition of the so-called ‘freedom of labour’.
‘Freedom of labour’ in capitalist society was one of the many myths of that society, since in reality the monopolisation of the means of production by the capitalists forced the workers to sell their labour-power.
This is what that ‘freedom’ amounted to: in the first place, to the relative possibility of choosing your own master (moving from one factory to another), the possibility of being ‘fired’and getting ‘the sack’; in the second place, this ‘freedom’implied competition between workers themselves .
In this latter meaning, ‘the freedom of labour’ was already partially overcome by the workers' organisations in the capitalist period, when the trade unions partly abolished competition between workers by uniting them and making them stronger in their struggle against the capitalist class…
Under the proletarian dictatorship, the question of an ‘owner’ no longer arises, since the ‘exploiters have been expropriated’.
On the other hand, the remaining disorganisation, lack of solidarity, individualism, parochial narrow-mindedness and the defects of capitalist society are apparent in the form of the failure to understand general proletarian tasks, which are expressed most forcibly in the tasks and demands of the Soviet dictatorship, the workers' state.
Since these tasks must be accomplished…from the proletariat's point of view, the abolition of the so-called ‘freedom to labour’ is essentially in the name of the real and not mythical freedom of the working class…
Hence, a regime of compulsory labour service and state distribution of workers…already shows a comparatively high degree of organisation throughout the entire apparatus…
What we have here is a process of logical reductionism.
The abstraction ‘working class’ is opposed to ‘backward’sections of the real class and the needs of this abstraction are to be imposed upon reality.
Thus the new reality is that a small group of people substitute themselves for the class as a whole and decide what is  best for all.
This is, of course, in a situation where there is a ‘dictatorship of the proletariat’, where the proletariat itself is only a small minority of the whole population.
Thus we have a recipe for the dictatorship of the leadership of the ruling party, since they are presumed to know what the historical tasks of the proletariat are.
This particular passage is Bukharin at his sophistical worst, since he rails against the ‘freedom to labour’ in a manner that dodges the real freedom that workers can obtain by forming trade unions; this was not a negation of the ‘freedom to labour’, but rather a redefinition of that freedom in a positive manner.
Moreover, Bukharin greatly underrates the real freedom involved in the freedom to ‘choose one's own master’, since it sets limits to the exploitation of the class as a whole.
The result of this conception and the actual use of coercion in the Soviet Union at the time under consideration was an acceleration of the disintegration of the real working class and a further twist in the downward spiral of labour productivity.
By the winter of 1920–1 the application of compulsion to the workers and peasants had become absolutely counterproductive, and had become a factor in the general collapse of the economy facing the Bolsheviks.
NEP and the market: A New Equilibrium
The most critical and decisive breakdown of the economy was that of the rupture between town and country.
This manifested itself in the falling returns in grain collections for provisioning the towns and the Red Army.
This decline was partly masked in 1920 by an increase in deliveries, but this was because requisitioning was by then taking place over a larger area of the country as a result of the defeat of the White Guard armies.
But through the autumn of 1920 there was a series of peasant uprisings directed against the forced deliveries of grain.
As early as February 1920 Trotsky had put before the Central Committee of the Bolshevik Party a plan to end grain requisitioning and replace it with a fixed tax in kind; also to allow the peasants to sell their surpluses on the (to be revived) market.
He pointed out that despite the increase in the quantity of grain collected ‘the food reserves are in danger of drying up, and against this no improvement in the requisitioning machinery can help.’
However, these proposals were rejected at that time.
But throughout 1920 there were abundant signs that Trotsky's prediction would be fulfilled.
By the spring of 1921 sufficient evidence was available to convince the overwhelming majority of  the ruling party of the need for a change of policies in relation to agriculture.
Following on from the Kronstadt sailors' revolt in that year, Lenin introduced a resolution at the Tenth Congress of the Party in March 1921, which in substance adopted Trotsky's earlier proposals.
What at first sight appeared to be limited concessions to the peasantry opened the way for a fundamental revision of Soviet economic policies and structures.
As Carr pointed out, it was impossible to restore market relations in agriculture without doing the same for industry.
And this is what happened.
A wave of de-nationalisation of small enterprises (employing 20 or less people), followed by the introduction of ‘economic accounting’ for the majority of industry, plus the cessation of direct supplies of food to factories, meant the return to wages payments for workers.
This meant that profit and loss became the criteria upon which the majority of industry had to operate (the defence industry being the exception).
Despite the drought and ensuing famine of 1921 it was clear by 1922 that the policy had been successful in generating increased production both in industry and agriculture, even though large-scale, heavy industry was slower to recover than other sectors.
The New Economic Policy, or NEP, was obviously a reversal of the naturalisation of economics that had been a fact during the period of ‘war communism’, and which Bukharin had lauded in The Economics .
With the return to market relations for the bulk of the economy there also arose the need for a stable currency; this was effected over the next few years with the introduction of a new, gold based rouble, alongside the paper Soviet rouble which was finally driven out of circulation.
Thus there emerged in Soviet Russia what was to become known as a ‘mixed economy’.
What was Bukharin's attitude towards this drastic reversal of policy?
We know from an article he wrote entitled The New Course of Our Economic Policy' that he enthusiastically endorsed NEP as early as August 1921.
In this article there was a degree of modification of his views on ‘war communism’, since he was arguing in it that it was an emergency policy, rather than the high-road to socialism.
Our economic policies in the epoch of so-called ‘war communism’…could not be policies aimed at developing the productive forces.
The urgent and indeed all-embracing task was the Red defence of the country.
Everything was directed towards this: material resources, organisational strengths, in short all the skilled  elements of management.
With regard to the national economy in such a state of affairs, the principal slogan was not concern for its lasting restoration…but the immediate securing of produce ,even at the cost of undermining the productive forces .
Not to ‘produce’, but to ‘take’; to take in order to supply the Red Army…and so on, in the shortest possible time.
He pointed to the conflict that such a policy engendered in the countryside:
This had a very striking effect on agriculture.
Our economic policy here amounted to almost solely…the requisitioning system of food and distribution.
Under this system, however, the individual producer, the peasant, lost all interest and the incentive to expand production…
So there was a conflict here between the requirements for the development of the individual farm and those of our policy.
But since Russia's agriculture is a peasant agriculture…our economic policies objectively conflicted with the development of agriculture as a whole.
The agricultural crisis was bound to intensify, as indeed it did.
But since agriculture forms the basis of our industry, it was by and large also an intensification of the crisis in the national economy in general .
Thus there was a frank recognition of the disaster facing Soviet society if such policies had been continued.
Not surprisingly the question of equilibrium was posed by Bukharin:
This inevitably gave rise to the following: that equilibrium between the classes which was established during the civil war and which depended not on the ‘normal’ economic processes but on the mutual military interests of the proletariat and the peasantry…
But at the same time, it is clear that as soon as the war was over the purely economic contradictions were bound to be excessively aggravated.
Standing in the queue were problems of the economy, of the development of the productive forces, which, with regard to agriculture, was conceivable only in a form of the growth of petty-bourgeois economy.
Such an equilibrium could only have been a temporary one, being based upon the fear of a common enemy, rather than on a positive material joint interest.
The realities of the necessity for an ‘exchange of substances’ between town and countryside immediately  became pressing as soon as the external pressures on the alliance subsided.
It was this longer-term exchange that Bukharin recognised as being the central contradiction in the then current situation.
Now, contrary to what he had said in The Economics , he acknowledged that this exchange could only be effected via market relations, i.e. ‘petty-bourgeois economy’.
Given that the long-term aim was the establishment of a communist society, Bukharin argued that it was necessary to develop large-scale, particularly heavy, industry:
But as soon as we bring up this question…we come up against a ‘sore subject’.
To consolidate heavy industry one needs ‘funds’(funds of food-stuff, raw materials, additional equipment and so forth).
And this is where we are in danger of finding ourselves in a vicious circle: for industry one has got to have products and to get products one has got to have industry…
Thus it is clear that to develop heavy industry one must increase the supply of products at all costs and by all means.
At all costs !
Because otherwise we shall not even have the most elementary preconditions for this development…
By all means !
Because the additional quantity of products which must flow into our heavy industry has to be taken from outside , not from within the sphere of heavy industry itself, which is in the hands of the workers' state, but from elsewhere, from other external sources, whatever the price we have to pay.
Bukharin thus posed the problem facing the Bolsheviks in its starkest form, a problem that was to be hotly debated for nearly a decade to come.
The apocalyptic vision of a rapid transition to socialism was reduced to the more pressing and mundane problem of the extraction of the necessary food and raw materials for the barest survival of the towns and industry.
The precise methods of extracting these necessary ‘products’ from this ‘external’source was also to be one of the major practical and theoretical problems of the 1920s.
Up to this point Bukharin still regarded the peasantry as being ‘external’ to the working class,and a source of ‘petty-bourgeois economy’, a position he was later to modify.
He had raised the question of the ‘two souls’ of the peasants in The Economics , but here he recognised that in the given situation then facing the Bolsheviks the ‘petty-bourgeois’aspect would dominate.
He argued that the ‘increase in the supply of goods is the supreme law of the present economic situation’, and suggested that one of the main  sources for this supply must be the peasantry.
However:
$ The peasant farm is, as everyone knows, an individualistic, petty.bourgeois farm.
But we have already seen above that we cannot do without an intensification of growth, the development of this petty-bourgeois farm.
On the contrary its development is an essential condition for the growth of our heavy industry…
The extraction of an additional amount of products from this sphere pre-supposes its growth, which — temporarily, in the present phases of development — is none other than the growth of bourgeois relations.
But this growth makes it possible to obtain an additional supply of goods.
He admitted that — from a communist point of view — such a development had great dangers and what was involved was the ‘competition of economic forms’.
Indeed, strengthening the petty-bourgeois economy means none other than apportionment on the basis of commodity circulation of the buyer-up, the trade capitalist and owner.
The capitalist tenant, the concessionaire and so forth will similarly have a firm base in the growing economically petty-bourgeois element.
The political embarrassment that such admissions created for the Bolsheviks were smoothed over by presenting the necessity for NEP in terms of an analogy with the Brest Litovsk peace treaty with Germany in 1918, that is, as being a breathing space.
In the case of the treaty it gave the opportunity for the Red Army to be created, which at a later date was able to go on to the offensive.
In the same way NEP was presented as a breathing space for the creation of socialist industry with which later to mount an economic offensive against the petty-bourgeois elements in the national economy.
If NEP was presented as a retreat, however, giving ground to capitalist economy to gather strength for a later offensive, this suggested that ‘war communism’ was desirable, even if not immediately practicable.
In this respect Bukharin displayed the same indecision — one might say double thinking — that was evident on the part of many Bolsheviks when faced with the necessity of NEP.
They did not want to repudiate totally their previous policies, yet had to recognise the disaster of which they had been part.
Later on Bukharin was to present NEP, not as a retreat, but as a return to the early policies of 1918.
In Russia we started not with War Communism but with the so-called New Economic Policy.
This was followed by intervention, by an…intensification of the class struggle, which assumed the form of civil war.
This gave rise to War Communism.
Then followed the return to NEP.
Despite this somewhat shilly-shallying attitude, Bukharin was very clear in one respect: ‘We can see the new course of our economic policies as a mighty strategic operation…intended to last for a number of years.’
The strategic aim, for Bukharin, was the development of large-scale industry as a springboard to communism:
Once we have achieved this, we shall…‘turn the rudder’.
But this new turn of the rudder in the opposite direction will not signify a return to the previous situation, that is, to the appropriation of surpluses and so forth .
For these methods, used to regulate consumption on the basis of a drop in the economic power of the town relative to the village, will be quite inappropriate to a state of affairs whose basis lies in developing the productive forces…
The ‘turn of the rudder’ will be the gradual economic liquidation of the large private enterprises and the economic subordination of the small producer to large scale industry.
The small producer will be drawn into a socialised enterprise, not by means of non-economic coercion, but chiefly by the economic advantages which will provide him with a tractor, electric light bulbs, agricultural machinery and so on.
He will be enmeshed for his own good in the electric wires which bring with them life-giving energy to make the farm fertile.
Thus, in 1921, Bukharin was developing his theory of equilibrium both in the theoretical aspects and in its application to current questions.
As we have seen, his view of the transition to socialism was one of the breakdown of the fundamental equilibrium of capitalism and the creation of a new equilibrium by the establishment of the dictatorship of the proletariat.
For Bukharin, the transition period encompassed two distinct phases.
The first can be encapsulated in his term expanded negative reproduction.
This took the form of the disintegration of social, political and economic equilibrium, with all the waste that accompanied such a process.
And this process was not immediately halted by the accession to power of the Bolsheviks.
On the contrary ‘war communism’ gave further impetus to the economic decline, yet at the same time provided the framework for a new  social and political equilibrium.
This new social and political equilibrium had no solid economic foundation, however.
Only NEP, with its circulation of commodities and the laws of the market — not merely the exchange of products — could provide this economic foundation.
And in essence this was an equilibrium on a contradictory basis.
At this point Bukharin did not suggest in any detail how the new equilibrium was to be achieved; but he was willing to move more cautiously and pragmatically.
Given this overall approach it was clear that the question of the so-called worker-peasant alliance was to be one of the main economic, social and political problems in the period that lay ahead.
And, given the view held by Bukharin (and the majority of the Bolsheviks) that the peasants were, by definition, a hot-bed of ‘petty-bourgeois anarchy’, a sort of bubbling yeast out of which constantly emerged petty capitalists, such an alliance (equilibrium) had latent dangers of a renewed bout of violent class struggle.
In his article ‘The New Course of Our Economic Policy’ there had been a retreat from some of the more blatantly utopian ideas of The Economics ; gone was the euphoria; it was now acknowledged that product exchanges and naturalisation of the economy were not an immediate prospect.
Instead it was understood that there would be a long period of commodity circulation and all that that implied .
This in turn implied that the transition period was now viewed, not as a relatively short, chaotic time, but as an epoch that would develop its own laws of equilibrium.
A further implication of the necessity of NEP was the need for the lessening of coercion, particularly in relation to the peasantry but also generally.
But this was not taken to mean any loosening of the monopoly of political power by the Bolsheviks.
Nevertheless, within the framework of NEP, Bukharin was seeking the means for establishing the necessary equilibrium of social and political, as well as the economic, factors.
The introduction of the ‘mixed economy’ did not imply any acceptance by Bukharin of the notion of ‘market socialism’; on the contrary, he saw the market as a means to achieving socialism within the framework of the ‘mixed economy’in which the state and state-planning dominated.
And if the ‘mixed economy’ was seen only as a framework, then like the scaffolding surrounding a building, it would be dismantled when the task in hand had been completed.
But for Bukharin the market had no place within the fully developed socialist economic system once that condition had been achieved.
The long-term aim of the naturalisation of  economic relations was still central to Bukharin's view of socialism.
And since for him the market implied commodity production, and value as a mediating form in social economic relations, the idea of ‘market socialism’ would have been anathema.
The path to socialism, for Bukharin, consisted of using the market, as a means of eliminating the market and the gradual naturalisation of human relations.
How he worked out the details of this path emerged in his debate with the opposition, particularly Preobrazhensky, in the mid-1920s.
Unproductive Consumption and Expanded Negative Reproduction
War and Economic Decline
In his book The Economics of the Transition Period Bukharin discussed the effects of war and war production upon the economy, pointing to the illusory growth of the national product — measured in current prices — to which a war economy gave rise.
As we have seen in a previous chapter, he argued that such an illusory growth could in fact mask a real decline in values and use-values.
Bukharin pointed out that:
Development of the productive forces is the basis for human development in general and so it is necessary to examine every fact of social life with this in mind.
The position of the development of the productive forces is closely related to that of reproduction: the growth of the productive forces corresponds with expanded reproduction, when static they correspond with simple reproduction and their decline is expressed in the fact that an ever-diminishing share of periodically consumed products is replaced.
In this last instance we have social regression.
Since means of production and means of consumption normally re-enter the productive process, their consumption can be called productive consumption.
That part of the total social product which does not re-enter the productive process, either directly or indirectly, can be considered unproductive consumption.
Therefore:
Military production has an altogether different significance: a gun is not transformed into an element of a new productive cycle: gun powder is shot into the air and does not appear in a different guise in the next cycle at all…
The economic effect of these elements in actu has a purely negative value…
If we take means of consumption which is supplied to the army, we observe the same phenomenon here.
The means of consumption do not create labour power, since soldiers do not feature in the  production process…
[So]…a considerable part of the means of consumption will not serve as means of production of labour power.
Thus, Bukharin argued, if total unproductive consumption is greater than the total surplus product/value regression is set in motion.
And this is the case when ‘What we have…is not expanded reproduction, but an ever-increasing under-production .
This process may be called expanded negative reproduction .’
The fact that paper ‘values’, the quantity of paper money and near money in circulation greatly increases only masks this decline in real production.
Although Bukharin was primarily concerned with a war situation, in which there was not only a direct diversion of a large part of the GNP to the production of means of destruction, but also a direct destruction of the forces of production, his formulation can also be applied to ‘peace time’ capitalism.
The phase usually used to cover this situation is ‘permanent arms economy’.
It is not the purpose of this chapter to explore all the ramifications of the debate on the ‘arms economy’, rather I want to focus upon Bukharin's ideas in relation to the main question, that is, unproductive consumption and the conditions for equilibrium.
Marx on Unproductive Consumption
The question as to what is, or can be considered to be, productive and unproductive labour, and productive and unproductive consumption, has been the subject of hot debate, going back to Adam Smith and beyond.
But whatever definition one accepts, let us agree that there are such categories, and for the purpose of this work I shall define productive labour as being: labour which is exchanged with capital and produces a surplus-value, a surplus-value moreover which is embodied in material commodities, the form of which is capable of being used as capital for the reproduction and extension of capital.
It will be seen that such a definition excludes the production of the means of destruction (armaments).
In this respect we have to examine the question of luxury goods and their production.
This is necessary since there appears to be some confusion about what Marx classified as luxury goods and the character of the labour embodied in them.
Is the labour embodied in luxury goods productive or unproductive labour?
Marx's definition of luxury goods was fairly straightforward; they  were ‘all goods which are not necessaries and which are not commonly used by the labouring class.’
We should not collapse luxury goods production and their consumption, however, into unproductive consumption, since unproductive consumption covers a wider spectrum.
There are many instances of necessary unproductive consumption, both in the absolute and historically determined sense.
Similarly much social labour may be necessary but not productive.
But it is not always possible to state a priori if labour is productive or unproductive, since it is the particular circumstances which determine this.
In other words, it is not merely the circumstances of the immediate production process which determine if labour is productive, but the total social circumstances, including the use to which products are put, which determine post hoc whether the labour involved has been productive or not.
The material form of the surplus-product has an important bearing upon this.
Bukharin's theory of expanded negative reproduction is one that takes both value and material aspects of commodities into account: ‘It is exceedingly important to note that the analysis of…enlarged reproduction given by Marx in his famous arithmetically formulated schemes in the second volume of Capital brings in both the value (economic) and the natural (technical) aspects of reproduction.’
In Chapter XX of Vol.
II of Capital Marx discussed the relationship between luxury goods production and consumption and the production of necessary means of consumption.
In this discussion he used a model of simple reproduction to illustrate the relationship, dividing Department II into two sub-departments.
Dept.
IIa produces all necessary means of consumption, which are consumed by both workers and capitalists; whilst Dept.
IIb produces only luxury goods which are consumed solely by the capitalists.
It must be recalled that Marx was using a very abstract model, in which only workers and capitalists appear as economic persona .
Therefore surplus-value is equated with profits, since he did not consider the division of the surplus-value into various sub-categories, i.e. rent, profit on money capital, industrial profit, etc.
Moreover, since all unproductive consumption is considered to be capitalist personal consumption, the question of the unproductive consumption of the state does not arise in his discussion at that point.
Marx used a numerical model of simple reproduction, which we have seen in Chapter 3, and suggested that Dept.
II be divided into a and b along the following lines:
In constructing the scheme we have assumed that the division of surplus-value between unproductive consumption and accumulation would be 50 per cent each; and also that the unproductively consumed part would be divided in the same proportions as Marx used.
And this defines the theoretical equilibrium conditions.
All the above holds on the assumption that Dept.
III does produce a material product and the workers in that department do provide surplus labour and thus surplus-value.
However, what we need to know is, to what extent can Dept.
III be considered truly productive on a social scale?
Dept.
II produces a total of 2,100 necessary means of consumption.
From this total there is a call upon it of  which is necessary to maintain production at the existing level.
Secondly there is the product/value which goes to maintain the extra workers if production is to expand, i.e.,.
Next there is the capitalist consumption of necessaries, i.e.,
The total of these three categories is 2030.
We have total value for Dept.
II of 2,100, therefore , and which is also equal to .
Similarly in Dept.
I we have a value of 6,600.
The necessary productive consumption to maintain and expand production in Depts I and II is 6,380; and .
The result of this examination indicates that it would be possible for Depts I and II to decrease their respective production by approximately 3.3 per cent, and providing Dept.
III was abolished they would still be able to grow at 10 per cent per cycle.
Alternatively, if the resources which went to Dept.
III were used for accumulation in Dept.
I and Dept.
II they would be able to increase their accumulation to 13 or 14 per cent per cycle.
Therefore, in terms of the total social capital accumulation and social reproduction, Dept.
III has no function .
So, when looked at from the point of view of total social production, Dept.
III does not produce surplus-value; on the contrary, it consumes it.
This view would actually seem to accord with Marx's own  expressed view that ‘although all surplus-value takes the form of surplus product, surplus product as such does not represent surplus-value.’
He also considered that ‘the production of surplus-value is the chief end and aim of capitalist production.’
And, given this overall consideration, 'surplus-value is convertible into capital solely because the surplus-product, whose value it is, already comprises the material elements of new capital.’
it follows from this that ‘it is characteristic of all unproductive labourers that they are at my command…only to the same extent as I exploit productive labourers…however, my power to employ productive labourers by no means grows in the same proportion as I employ unproductive labourers, but on the contrary diminishes in the same proportion.’
Certain conclusions may be drawn at this point.
First, one cannot crudely equate surplus labour, surplus product and surplus-value.
Secondly, given the condition of expanded reproduction, a part of the social surplus-value will be embodied in use-values whose material form makes them suitable for use as means of production, i.e., they appear exclusively in Dept.
I. Lastly, if use-values which do embody surplus-value are used by unproductive workers they cannot be productive of further surplus-value, even though the material form makes them suitable as capital.
The usual approach to discussion on the role of armaments in modern Marxist literature has been to allocate a third department of production specifically for such production.
For purposes of exposition there is nothing wrong with such use of the schemas.
But it is often assumed that so doing is to be following in the footsteps of Marx, when he gave his example of luxury goods production, basing himself on the premise that the sub-department lib produced only goods for capitalist consumption.
A number of objections can be raised, however, against both Marx's method and the subsequent use made of the third department for arms production.
As we have already seen, there are different results once one modifies Marx's original assumption of simple reproduction to that of extended reproduction.
Obviously if the whole of the surplus-value is consumed unproductively it makes little difference how it is consumed, either as necessaries or as luxuries.
And, from the capitalist's point of view, the workers in the luxury goods producing department appear to be as productive as those engaged in the production of necessary means of consumption or means of production.
But once one assumes that accumulation is taking place — and Marx asserts that this is the chief aim of capitalism — then the  proportion of surplus-value which is unproductively consumed has quite a different significance.
And in this case the workers engaged in the production of luxury goods should now be seen as a social cost.
This brings us to the question of how we should consider that portion of the surplus-value which is unproductively consumed.
Marx assumed that this portion is capitalist personal consumption, but this is a highly simplifying assumption that does not hold once we move only marginally away from the very highest level of abstraction at which he was working.
To suggest that all unproductive consumption is solely capitalist personal consumption is to go beyond the bounds of credibility.
Out of the surplus-value which is unproductively consumed there will obviously be a portion which goes on personal consumption.
And we may concede that in the modern era of capitalism the volume of such personal unproductive consumption has increased greatly, compared with, say, a hundred years ago.
As to whether it has also increased proportionally is a matter that could only be determined empirically, although one could surmise that it has so increased.
Nevertheless, with luxury goods we have a definite species of personal consumption: jewellery, large houses, certain kinds of motor car, luxury yachts, etc., as well as personal services.
On the other hand, none of these items can be considered to be collective consumption, as are roads and street lighting, for example.
And to complicate matters somewhat, historically many items that first appeared as luxury goods later became items of mass consumption and thus entered into the determination of the value of labour-power; these include motor cars, vacuum cleaners, washing machines.
Therefore the dividing line between luxuries and necessaries is a shifting one, in time and place, even today.
But the distinction between personal and collective consumption remains fairly clear.
In the modern era the state is the provider of the collective or general conditions of capital valorisation and accumulation, as opposed to particular conditions.
When we consider the nature of many items that only the state uses (or hopefully does not use!)
ICBMs, nuclear submarines, tanks etc., it is highly unlikely that they will ever become items of mass personal consumption as marketable commodities.
Therefore it is wrong to collapse arms production into the same category as Marx's luxury goods in Dept.
IIb: in economic terms they are qualitatively different.
And, as Bukharin pointed out, such products — armaments — are non-reproductive, and this combined with the fact that they are paid for out of surplus-value makes them  non-productive of further surplus-value.
Such collective ‘consumption’ must be viewed as a cost levied upon current production.
But since capitalists' profits are seen as being constituted by accumulation and personal consumption, the sum of realised profit will be perceived as being smaller that the actual social surplus-value.
Taxes paid out of profits will be seen as a cost for the particular firm, and will not be included in net profit.
similarly, workers view their real money wage as being what they actually collect, i.e., their net wages.
However, from the capitalists' point of view it is gross wages that are computed as costs.
So what should we consider the difference between gross and net wages?
Does this difference constitute a part of the variable capital or should it be considered as being part of the social surplus-value?
If one divides all newly created value into v + s it follows that if v only represents that portion which workers actually receive, then all monetary deductions from wages belong to surplus-value.
But from the point of view of the capitalist profits will be less than S. These brief remarks by no means exhaust the discussion of such problems, but they do suggest that the problem posed by collective consumption, and particularly unproductive collective consumption, is much more complex than Marx's original propositions allowed for.
Therefore, in what now follows, since we shall be examining social reproduction, I only count as variable capital that which is actually apportioned to the workers, and surplus-value will constitute the whole of the social surplus-value.
Expanded Negative Reproduction: an Algebraic Model
We shall consider Bukharin's propositions in the light of the above considerations, and examine them at the most abstract level possible.
Initially we shall do this using an algebraic model.
In the first instance we shall consider total social production being constituted by the division into two main departments of production.
As before, Dept.
I produces all means of consumption and Dept.
II produces all means of consumption.
Therefore:
In the above I have assumed that we are dealing only in values, and that we are not considering how prices of production, average rate of profit, etc., are formed by the introduction of ‘Dept.
III’, which as we know is unproductive of surplus-value.
This being the case, we only indicate the means of production and means of consumption used up for the production of the means of destruction.
Expanded Negative Reproduction: A Numerical model
Let us now consider a numerical model illustrating these points:
Thus we can see the expanded negative reproduction appearing, as Bukharin posited. if we compare the progress of the schemas above with the results if g' had continued at 0.1 we should find that in PP4 W = 23,958 as opposed to the actual 19,073.
Even if we were to include the value attributed to armaments in PP4 we would only arrive at a total of 21,019.
But to do this would be double counting, since the value embodied in the arms production was actually produced in PP3.
What we have seen from this investigation is that the concept of proportionality is an essential component of Bukharin's theory of equilibrium, particularly when applied to the dynamics of the economy.
This proportionality not only applies in the relationship between Dept.
I and Dept.
II, but also imposes limits upon unproductive consumption.
Moreover it imposes limits upon the proportion of labour-power which can safely be devoted to unproductive labour.
Bukharin was one of the first, if not the first, to recognise that arms production, far from being productive of surplus-value, was in fact value and surplus-value consuming.
Because of his firm grasp of the relationship between the material elements of reproduction he was not hoodwinked and thus saw all armaments as being essentially unproductive consumption and wasteful.
This concept of proportionality was to become one of the key issues in the debates in the late 1920s regarding the formulation of the Soviet First Five Year Plan, as we shall see.
The Laws of the Transition Period: Bukharin versus Preobrazhensky
The Dispute on Method
In 1926 E.A. Preobrazhensky, a close collaborator of Leon Trotsky and a one-time collaborator of Bukharin, published his book The New Economics .
in this work he set out his basic theoretical ideas on the Soviet economy, as then structured in the period of NEP.
This book had been preceded by the publication of one of its chapters, in 1924, in The Communist Academy Herald .
The book was an elaboration of the idea in the original article along with a reply to critics, foremost of whom had been Bukharin.
The dispute between the Central Committee majority, represented here by Bukharin, and the opposition, in this instance represented by Preobrazhensky, was conducted at two levels of polemic.
The first level was of abstract theory and method; the second was centred upon current policy questions.
The more abstract aspects of the discussion arose from, and in some cases came later than, the disputes around current policies, but the former provided the underpinning for the latter.
Moreover, the two aspects of the debate were not always synchronised in the same people or at the same time.
There were, of course, many participants in this discussion, but Bukharin and Preobrazhensky stand out not only for the number of contributions they made but also because of the quality of these interventions.
Because of this I shall concentrate upon the debate between them and in particular on the abstract theoretical aspects, only touching upon the practical policy implications.
The most contentious ideas advanced by Preobrazhensky were those relating to his theory of ‘primitive socialist accumulation’.
But before he stated his ‘law’ on this subject in his book he proceeded to examine the methodological basis of his opponents and in the process stated his own premises.
It was, therefore, this aspect that Bukharin dealt with when coming to criticise Preobrazhensky's book.
Preobrazhensky argued that:
In theoretical economics, abstraction begins with the very principle on which investigation proceeds, since this science begins with the basis.
This is not to belittle the role of the superstructure and the importance of studying that side of men's relations in commodity economy; but investigation does not begin with the superstructure.
In Marx's first draft of the plan for Capital there was a section on the State, but he proposed to approach this question from afar, after analysing capitalist economy in the strict sense of the word.
Why is it not possible to begin with the basis in a theoretical analysis of Soviet economy.
And he concluded:
I devote myself to the modest task of first abstracting from the actual economic policy of the State, which is the resultant of the struggle between two systems of economy, and the corresponding classes, so as to investigate in its pure form the movement towards the optimum of primitive socialist accumulation, to discover the operation of the conflicting tendencies, as far as possible in their pure state, and then try to understand why the resultant in real life proceeds along one particular line and not another.
This, then, was Preobrazhensky's argument: that one must first abstract from state policies in examining the relations between the state sector of the Soviet economy and the private sector.
In this sense he was predicating his examination upon the operation of a self-regulating system for both state and private economy.
He recognised the law of value as that law which regulates the private commodity economy, and insisted that the law of primitive socialist accumulation is the one that regulates not only the internal workings of the state sector but also its relationship with the private sector.
In so far as he argued for the separation of economics from politics for the purpose of analysis, in a theoretical examination of the Soviet economy he seemed to be following in the footsteps of Marx.
However, Bukharin keenly contested this claim, pointing out that:
It is not hard to see what comrade Preobrazhensky's mistake here is resting upon.
It is resting upon the fact that he completely fails to see the originality in the correlation between basis and superstructure under the reign of the proletarian dictatorship.
As  is generally known, true Marxism lies in the fact that he examines models of production and their superstructure from the standpoint of their specific historical features (model features).
But in this instance, comrade Preobrazhensky has completely forgotten about this fundamental methodological demand of Marxism.
We can see that Bukharin had put his finger upon a central problem.
Preobrazhensky was claiming to be an orthodox Marxist, and indeed claimed that his opponents were vulgarisers, but he was attempting to apply the method of historical materialism in an un- historical manner.
Preobrazhensky not only forgot that it is necessary to examine each mode of production in its specific, if general, forms but also that the manner of investigation will be conditioned by these forms.
The content and form of social and economic formations along with institutions cannot be properly investigated by projecting preconceived notions.
Marx's abstractions were not of such an order, rather his abstractions were concrete historical ones.
Bukharin pressed home his attack, saying:
Indeed, ‘classical capitalism’, the analysis of which in its abstract form was given by Marx, was a sort of socio-productive structure where the economic subjects , from the viewpoint of their economic functions, did not take part directly in the apparatus of state power.
The state was by no means a constituent part of the productive relations, which economic theory has been called upon to study.
The state served the processes of capitalist reproduction, exerted influence on it, as the corresponding political integument —and only thus , whilst the economic regularities took shape on the basis of the spontaneity of the entire process as a whole.
Therefore, because capitalism as a system posited a separation of state and direct economic power — in its classical form — it was possible to examine the regularities of economic processes and development by abstracting the role of the state from this process.
This was not to deny, of course, that the state did intervene in the economy.
Even the ‘nightwatchman’ state of nineteenth century England did this, but not as an active and necessary persona .
it was quite possible for a capitalist to operate his business without consulting any state agency.
The state might impinge upon such a business through taxation, import duties etc., but not in the  actual production process and the creation of surplus-value.
In the production of surplus-value the state played no direct role, merely intervening in its division.
In this lay the historical peculiarity of the capitalist mode of production.
There are two salient features of this historical peculiarity: first, the historical uniqueness of the capitalist mode of production in the manner of its extraction of the surplus product from the direct producers.
The money-form of value mystifies this extraction to a considerable extent; moreover it seems not to require the intervention of the state.
Yet in reality the state sets the ‘external’ framework for this surplus extraction to operate within.
This dichotomy of surplus extraction and extra-economic coercion in the capitalist mode of production, although giving rise to a variety of state forms, has tended to detract from the role of the state, ideology and all other aspects of the ‘superstructure’ within the totality of this mode of production.
Secondly, and equally important, the various modes of production predating capitalism were all methods of direct appropriation of the surplus product, even when this was transformed into money-forms of payment of rent (commutation of feudal labour service to money rents).
Given this situation, the particular configuration of state, ideology, custom, kinship etc., can be seen as having a significance previously underrated in determining the precise nature of a mode of production.
This is particularly important since it locates a mode of production as an essential totality, and is thus not dependent upon this or that outstanding feature to arrive at a determination.
Accepting the uniqueness of capitalism in the disjunction between the extraction of economic surplus and extra-economic coercion also suggests that in post-capitalist societies the correlation between base and superstructural form is highly significant, i.e. that ‘pure’ economics do not exist in such societies.
This correlation must then be a major factor in determining the totality of such societies.
It was precisely along such lines that Bukharin advanced his objections to Preobrazhensky's attempt to remove the state and its policies from theoretical analysis, even at the high level of abstraction that had been suggested.
In relation to the Soviet state-trusts Bukharin pointed out that:
our trusts and syndicates do take part in the combined state apparatus, and their policy forms a most important part of state power.
The apparatus of our state economy forms a component  part of the production relations of Soviet society , that is, it is itself wholly included in the ‘basis’.
It is this ‘small’ peculiarity to which comrade Preobrazhensky simply pays no heed…
But let us pose the question with all real Marxist sharpness.
What is typical of Soviet economic as distinct from all previous structures?
The fact that the working class also plays a leading role in the production process : that the old production hierarchy is turned upside down ; that the old ‘relation’ of domination and slavery…is absent.
It receives concrete expression in the first instance in the proletarian control of industry, in general— in the proletarian leadership of the entire economic life of the country.
The economic organs of the state apparatus are the apex of our specific basis.
Bukharin, then, correctly defined the peculiarity of the Soviet economy in the above passage, in fact — even in the mid-1920s — the ‘base’ and ‘superstructure’were inextricably interwoven, and to abstract the state in the manner suggested by Preobrazhensky was to attempt to examine Soviet society in an unhistorical fashion.
Preobrazhensky was in fact trying to analyse Soviet economy without reference to the specific historical features of that formation.
As Bukharin said:
To abstract oneself from them, means to abstract from…the fundamental characteristic of the ‘new economics [since]the fundamental,decisive relationship of production is the relationship of the working class leadership in production both towards every stratum of the proletariat taken separately and towards the technical intelligentsia…it is possible and permissible to abstract yourself from whatever you like, but to abstract yourself from that which determines the content of an historical production model is something not permitted to the Marxist.
To make such an abstraction is to remove oneself to so rarefied a plane that the object of one's interrogation becomes an eternal category and is therefore a pointless exercise.
The specifics to which Bukharin referred were:
The state of the proletariat in its economic functions (economic policy) is a rational principle, the collective economic subject.
Throw that away ‘abstract yourself from it and you thereby abstract yourself both from the plan and from the development  of the spontaneous into cognised laws, and from the development of political economy into a science…
Comrade Preobrazhensky, however, contrives to perform such a conjuring trick: he categorically insists on the ‘plan’ and other good things, and at the same time even more categorically insists on abstracting from the functions of state power in the sphere of the economy.
He has a plan, but a plan without subject; planning, but without any planning organs, the rational principle but without any definite place to accommodate that principle.
Thus, at the formal level of the debate, on method, Bukharin roundly trounced Preobrazhensky and exposed his opponent's confused methodological analysis.
In this respect Bukharin's grasp and use of historical materialism was superior to that of Preobrazhensky.
However, as I shall indicate in my concluding chapter, there were faults in Bukharin's own work.
Economic Regulators
The next point of contention was the question of the economic regulator or regulators of the Soviet economy.
In so far as Preobrazhensky claimed that there was a law of primitive socialist accumulation in the Soviet economy which operated along with the law of value, he denied that there could be one, single, regulator for the whole economy.
He said:
The second methodological objection has been directed against the proposition developed in this book that economic equilibrium in the Soviet economy is established on the basis of conflict between two antagonistic laws, the law of value and the law of primitive socialist accumulation which means denial that there is a single regulator of the whole system.
Bukharin rejected this method of posing the question, since he rejected the concept of a law of primitive socialist accumulation.
But this does mean that he thought that the law of value was the regulator of the Soviet economy.
Bukharin began his critique by quoting from a letter written by Marx to his friend Kugelmann on 11 July 1868, and since it is a keystone in Bukharin's case it is well worth reproducing the same extract here.
This what Marx wrote:
Every child knows that a country which ceased to work, I will not  say for a year, but for a few weeks, would die.
Every child knows too, that the mass of products corresponding to the different needs require different and quantitatively determined masses of the total labour of society.
That this necessity of distributing social labour in definite proportions cannot be done away with by the particular form of social production, but can only change the form it assumes, is self-evident.
No natural laws can be done away with.
What can change, in changing circumstances, is the form in which these laws operate.
And the form in which this proportional division of labour operates, in a state of society where the interconnection of social labour is manifested in the private exchange of the individual products of labour, is precisely exchange-value of these products.
Bukharin commented that ‘the law of proportional labour expenditure or, for short the ‘law of labour expenditure’ is a necessary condition of social equilibrium in all and every socio-historical structure .’
A question might legitimately be raised here: is not Bukharin (and Marx) guilty of suggesting ‘eternal laws’ such as he had criticised in Preobrazhensky?
One could answer this by suggesting that here we are on the borderline between social and physiological laws.
Since the human species is distinguished from other animals by — amongst other things — the capacity to plan and execute the use of tools and produce its own means of life, it follows that such activity involves labour.
Therefore all activity that is characteristic of people involves the expenditure of labour and the need to apportion that labour to different tasks.
Obviously, both the concrete and social forms of this labour change through time.
And the human species cannot be considered to be eternal either, as we know it did not always exist in its present form, nor can we expect it to have an infinite existence.
Bukharin was not therefore proposing an eternal law, but indicating that the law of labour expenditure was an historical feature of human interaction with nature.
Bukharin maintained that ‘it may take different ‘forms of manifestation’.
In particular, in a commodity (both a capitalist commodity and any commodity ) society it wears the fetishistic costume of the law of value.
The law of value is a historically relative law; it is a specific form ‘on the face of which is writ large’ that it ‘belongs to the kind of social structure where the productive process masters (‘hemeistert’) men and not men the productive process’.
(Marx)’.
He was quick to point out, however, that one should not  therefore equate the law of value with the law of labour expenditure, since to do so would be to lose sight of the specific historical form and character of value relations.
Nevertheless, whatever the particular historical form the law of labour expenditure takes, be it patriarchal, slave-owning, feudal, capitalist or communist it ‘turns out to be the compulsory and universal regulator of economic life.’
As we have seen, Bukharin maintained that the law of value is the capitalist form of the law of labour expenditure, at least in its prices of production guise.
But, far from seeing the question in relation to the Soviet Union as being one of confrontation and only confrontation between the law of value and ‘primitive socialist accumulation’ he viewed the matter as being more complex than that.
He assumed that ‘the law of value cannot develop into anything other than the law of simple labour expenditure’.
And:
The development process of the law of value into the law of labour expenditure finds its expression in the fact that by way of a plan, ‘prices’ in their semi-fictitious function (i.e. no longer as prices determined by the ‘barometric fluctuations of the market’) consciously turn out differently from how they would spontaneously.
Therefore:
When we speak of our economic growth on the basis of market relations (this is the ‘meaning’ of NEP from a certain angle), we thereby disprove the thesis of the opposition of socialist accumulation (even) to the law of value.
Figuratively speaking, we also make the law of value serve our aims.
The law of value ‘helps’ us and — strange as it may sound — thereby prepares its own downfall.
What Bukharin was doing here was pointing to the unity, as well as the contradiction, within the commodity-socialist economy — as Preobrazhensky called it.
Moreover, he saw Preobrazhensky as arguing for the violation of the material essence of the law of labour expenditure and not merely for violating the social form of the law of value.
Bukharin stated this forcefully, as follows:
the proletarian plan, according to comrade Preobrazhensky consists in systematically disturbing the equilibrium of society, systematically breaking down the socially necessary ratio between  the different branches of production, i.e. systematically fighting what is the most elementary conditions of society's existence.
Well, I declare, a fine ‘regulator’.
This was Bukharin's main concern here: he posed the question of the relationship of planning to the law of value as being symbiotic, a gradual process whereby the law of value withers away, and the greater the conscious control of society exerted over economic processes, the faster this withering will be.
He saw Preobrazhensky as viewing the problem only in terms of struggle and confrontation, which would have been disruptive of social equilibrium.
Preobrazhensky says in his reply to his critics, in the foreword to the second edition of his book, that Bukharin is too general, and not specific enough, since he ‘merely’ talks about the law of labour expenditure and not the form it would take in the transition period.
But the view of both sides in this debate hinged upon how they viewed the so-called law of primitive socialist accumulation.
And it is to that aspect that we shall now turn.
Primitive Socialist Accumulation
Preobrazhensky defined his law of primitive socialist accumulation as follows:
By socialist accumulation we mean the addition to the functioning means of production of a surplus product which has been created within the constituted socialist economy and which does not find its way into supplementary distribution among the agents of socialist production and the socialist state, but serves for expanded reproduction.
Primitive socialist accumulation, on the other hand, means accumulation in the hands of the state of material resources mainly or partly from sources lying outside the complex of state economy.
And:
By the law of primitive socialist accumulation we mean the entire sum of conscious and semi-spontaneous tendencies in the state economy which are directed towards the expansion and consolidation of the collective organisation of labour in Soviet economy and which are dictated to the Soviet state on the basis of necessity:(1) the determination of proportions in the distribution of productive forces, formed on the basis of struggle  against the law of value inside and outside the country and having as their objective task the achievement of the optimum expanded socialist reproduction in the given conditions and of the maximum defensive capacity of the whole system in conflict with capitalist commodity production;(2) the determination of the proportions of accumulation of material resources for expanded reproduction, especially at the expense of private economy, in so far as the determined amounts of the accumulation are dictated compulsorily to the Soviet state under threat of economic disproportion, growth of private capital, weakening of the bond between the state economy and peasant production, derangement in years to come of the necessary proportions of expanded socialist reproduction and weakening of the whole system in its conflict with capitalist commodity production inside and outside the country.
The following are inevitably subordinated to the law of primitive socialist production: the amount of surplus product alienated from private economy; the level of wages in the state economy; prices policy; the regulation of internal and external trade; the tariff system; credit policy; the structure of the budget; the structure of import plans; and so on.
It is interesting, in the light of the above, to note what Preobrazhensky said about the law of value: ‘The law of value is the law of spontaneous equilibrium of commodity-capitalist society.’
We can see that he had two views of what constitutes a ‘law’, or perhaps we should say that he had two views as to how ‘laws’ manifest themselves.
With his law of primitive socialist accumulation Preobrazhensky saw it essentially as being conditions which were imposed upon the Soviet economy; either the state sector will grow or it will succumb to the private sector, but the ‘law’ itself is only manifested by a series of conditions which were conscious acts upon the part of the Soviet state, since it involved plans and planning.
All of which contrasts with his definition of the law of value, which was seen as a spontaneous phenomenon or mechanism, which acts ‘behind the backs of the participants’, where there are market controls, rather than being controlled.
We can see, therefore, that Preobrazhensky was propounding two essentially different concepts of social law.
the law of primitive socialist accumulation arises from conscious decisions and actions .
The decision to create a socialist economy and the consequences that flow from that cannot be placed upon the same level as the results of unconscious decisions and actions (at the  macro level) which result in equilibrium for a commodity-capitalist economy, since the later is post hoc , whilst the former is the result of the initial decision to build a socialist economy.
Clearly, we are dealing with two quite different social phenomena.
Capitalist economy was not built as the result of an overall, collective, decision; no one nor one group sat down and said ‘we shall now proceed to build capitalism.’
Therefore its ‘laws’ of regulation and equilibrium only emerge as the result of a myriad of private actions, the results of which cannot be foreseen.
Thus these ‘laws’ appear to be spontaneous and even ‘natural laws’.
On the other hand, Preobrazhensky's law of primitive socialist accumulation is merely the next logical step, or steps, based upon the premise of the conscious decision to build a socialist economy.
In the circumstances, therefore, it was misleading and confusing to emphasise primitive socialist accumulation as a law .
The question of the validity of the conception of primitive socialist accumulation is obviously related to the above, but is a separate issue.
There were, of course, numerous forms and methods in which this ‘law’ expressed itself, but the most characteristic aspect was that of the transfer of resources to the socialist sector from the private commodity sector, and this is the process that — according to Preobrazhensky —imposes itself upon the socialist sector.
State policies were seen as merely modifying the particular application of the law.
In outlining his ‘law’ Preobrazhensky took as his starting point Marx's theory of primitive capitalist accumulation, and in particular the section of Vol.
I of Capital dealing with this topic.
Bukharin rejected Preobrazhensky's whole conception of primitive socialist accumulation, and with good cause as we shall see.
Bukharin asked: ‘What is the historical-economic essence of so-called ‘primitive accumulation’ according to Marx?’
And answered with the following quotation from Capital :
The so-called primitive accumulation…is nothing else than the historical process of divorcing the producer from the means of production.
It appears as primitive, because it forms the prehistoric stage of capital and of the mode of production corresponding with it.
Bukharin saw the separation of the producers from the means of production, that is the breakdown of peasant economy and the driving from the land of the peasants, as the main historical form of this primitive accumulation and further quotes Marx to this  effect.
Bukharin argued, moreover, that primitive accumulation belongs to the prehistory of capitalism and therefore does not belong to a consideration of its history proper nor of its modern functioning.
As can be seen from the quotation from Marx, above, this was also the view of Marx himself.
Bukharin pointed out that many features that characterise Primitive accumulation carry on into the history of capitalism itself, yet they do not thereby mean that capitalism is forever stuck in that particular stage of development.
Is not the history of capitalism full of the destruction of the peasantry, colonial robberies, the constant expropriation of small-scale production parallel with the most brutal methods…
But these are all moments of ‘primitive accumulation’.
In our opinion these considerations are profoundly erroneous.
The main thing has been missed here, the fact that, according to Marx, ‘so-called primitive accumulation’ is ‘not the result, but the starting point’of capitalist development.
It would be silly therefore to place, for example, contemporary imperialism, so long as it is directed against ‘third persons’ and is a tool for ‘devouring’and ‘expropriating’them, under the heading of ‘primitive accumulation’.
Either one of two things: either the period of primitive accumulation is taken just as ‘pre-history’; in which case it has a strict time-limit …or we see it as a process of ousting ‘third persons’ in general— in which case the concept itself has to be abolished, since in that case it does not express anything special, specific, etc.
Bukharin was making clear the distinction between the period when means of production were gathered into the hands of certain groups, who then used them as capital and thereby began the process of the accumulation of capital, and reproduction o f capitalist relations of production.
This was compared with the situation where capitalist methods of production were used to further undermine pre-capitalist methods of production.
The first phase must almost certainly involve the use of coercion and brutal methods; the second phase need not rely upon such methods, but can use the methods of the market by introducing cheap goods with which to destroy petty-commodity or peasant production.
Marx himself used the example of the destruction of Indian cotton manufacturing in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries by British capital using the ‘battering rams of cheap prices’.
Marx did not thereby characterise this as being primitive  accumulation on the part of British capital, but rather as period of development of capital on the basis of the capitalist mode of production, even though this entailed the destruction of pre-capitalist forms.
This was an extremely important distinction that Bukharin was making in his debate with Preobrazhensky, since it entailed the question of how the Soviet state should act in its relations with the peasant population.
To telescope primitive accumulation and the destruction, or replacement, of petty-commodity production into one continuous process was for Bukharin not only unjustified theoretically, but also could, and did, lead to unacceptable policies being pursued in practice.
We shall return to this point later.
Bukharin pointed out that:
Comrade Preobrazhensky has…defined socialist accumulation as something where not a single ‘Copek’ is obtained from the non-socialist sphere!
And primitive socialist accumulation he defines as something where at least only ‘one Copek’ comes from the non-socialist sphere…
If one took analogies seriously and from such a definition…of ‘so-called primitive capitalist accumulation’, then literally the whole of capitalism , right up to its death would end up in the ‘pre-history’ of capitalism: for capitalism obtains surplus profits from ‘third persons’throughout its entire existence; there is and will be no such stage in the life of capitalism when profits were not to come its way on the basis of exploitation of third persons.
Having rejected the blurring of quite distinct phases in socio-economic history Bukharin then said:
What then could — very conditionally — be called the ‘period of primitive socialist accumulation’?
Only the act of ‘expropriating the expropriators’ with its concomitant measures could be called thus.
if capitalist primitive accumulation was characterised as the separation of the producers from the means of production, then here we have their unification; the use of force, the characteristic of the process, as ‘revolution’, the ‘suddenness and forcible nature’ of the process, finally, the characteristic of the process as an historical pre-requisite and the ‘starting point’for development not its ‘result’— all these are elements of similarity.
But, nevertheless, the term ‘primitive socialist accumulation’ is a ‘childish game ’.
Why?
Well, because this ‘childish game’ conceals the peculiarities of our development, the facts are far fetched, many things stand in a completely false perspective .
We have expropriation — it is the economic revolution against the only-just ex-ruling classes; during the period of primitive capitalist accumulation there is neither revolution nor fight against the old master, but the destruction of peasants; in that case there is the creation of a necessary class pole; in our case nothing similar.
There, subsequent measures take the same course of further expropriation of ‘third persons’; we have a problem of expropriation directed against the bourgeoisie and landowners , but the main further problem, which comrade Preobrazhensky discusses, is the problem of the small-scale producers , i.e. of another class; there, further development takes place from the point of view of destruction, exclusion or, if you like, ‘devouring’— here, from the point of view of ‘getting along together’, ‘re-educating’‘assimilating’ and so on.
Given such a state of affairs, the parallels and analogies which comrade Preobrazhensky has constructed could not be anything other than a childish game of terminology.
In the above passage Bukharin exposed the confusion within Preobrazhensky's conception of ‘primitive socialist accumulation’.
Preobrazhensky had a blanket term to cover two quite different situations:(a) the expropriation of the bourgeoisie and feudalists and the gathering of large-scale industrial production into the hands of the proletariat; and (b) the transformation of small-scale petty-commodity peasant production into socialist agricultural production.
Bukharin's point was that the same methods cannot be used to carry through these two quite distinct tasks.
On the question of the transfer of surplus produce/value from peasant petty-commodity production to the state, Bukharin said: ‘no one will try to deny that industry does and will receive into the fund for its accumulation surplus-value from the small producers.’
This then was not the substance of the disagreement between the two protagonists.
Bukharin realised, just as well as Preobrazhensky, that there would have to be a transfer of resources to industry if industrialisation was to proceed.
It was a fundamental difference as to the methods to be used to acquire the surplus, and the time-scale of the transformation of agriculture into large-scale units, that divided them.
Moreover, Bukharin pointed out, whilst Preobrazhensky claimed to be dealing with abstract theory, he was in reality dealing with current economic policies.
Comrade Preobrazhensky complains that I did not ‘warn the reader with single word’: his article, he says is a ‘theoretical analysis of the fundamental regularities of our economy’ and not at all an analysis of ‘the economic policy of the state’.
I confess I did not ‘warn’.
And I did not ‘warn’ for the simple reason that I radically differed and differ from comrade Preobrazhensky in my estimation of his article: he does lay claim to the above mentioned analysis, but in my opinion there is absolutely n o analysis itself.
Even now I am looking through the chapter on the ‘law’ again: the question of colonial robbery (p. 62), ‘the alienation…of the surplus product from all pre-socialist forms’(p. 62), ‘the taxation of private capitalist profit’(p. 64), the question of state loans (pp. 64–65), currency emission (p. 65), railway tariffs (p. 70), the monopoly of the banking system and the credit policy (pp. 70–73), home and foreign trade (pp. 73–84), the ‘prices policy’(sic pp. 84–89), and so on and so forth, with further argument on the theme that socialism is fighting against capitalism and in order to win it must accumulate at the expense of the private economy — and the more the better — this is the entire content of the work.
Comrade Preobrazhensky preaches abstraction from politics but in point of fact, apart from politics,there is absolutely nothing in the work.
Only his politics are bad , about which in due course I did ‘warn’.
Theoretical analysis ought to show what objective laws determine our policy, how the correlation between production and need changes, whether the dynamics of the proportion between branches of production advances, how the law of value is transformed into the law of labour expenditure, what new mechanisms of the law of labour expenditure will emerge in the transition period, where the limits of our policy are, etc.
But the reader will not find this in comrade Preobrazhensky's work.
A theoretical analysis of the economy, the question of objective regularities turning into norms — over our heads — is precisely absent from him.
Whilst preaching abstraction from politics to the glory of theory, comrade Preobrazhensky has in reality ‘abstracted himself’ from theory to the glory of politics.
This was the gravamen of Bukharin's complaint, that Preobrazhensky, whilst claiming to discuss abstract theory, was in fact discussing matters that could only relate to concrete current policies.
None of the questions highlighted above by Bukharin can be abstracted from state policies in a Soviet type economy, even that of the mid-1920s, therefore once one had made a few  generalisations about the need to transfer surplus from the private sector to the state sector of the economy, all else came down to precise policies which are not self-regulating but consciously decided upon.
Bukharin was suggesting that one cannot construct a theory of transition a priori but must pragmatically steer towards a given objective, only then will the theory of transition emerge upon the basis of practical and concrete experience.
This, incidentally, was something of a retreat by Bukharin from his stance of 1920, but by the time the present text was written he was being far more cautious; the exuberance of ‘war communism’ had run its course.
Bukharin mocked Preobrazhensky for his attempt to define a ‘pure law’ for the working of the state economy in such a transition period, by abstracting from its relations with the private sector, i.e. by examining the state sector in isolation.
He made the point that:
If we were to dismiss ‘third persons’, then we would arrive at ‘pure socialism’, but at the same time all the categories and problems of the transition period would disappear.
Try to dismiss the entire petty-bourgeois environment, then the problem of value disappears altogether , such forms as that of wages etc., will disappear.
Nothing ‘transitional’ will remain even in this sphere of the ‘state economy’.
Moreover:
to disengage oneself from ‘third persons’ in an analysis of the transition period is inadmissible, this is to dismiss all the specific theoretical problems: The theoretical misunderstanding of this entails an incorrect line in the sphere of economic policy.
Presenting the laws of development in the manner of two sticks in the hands of the two classes, bitterly beating each other, comrade Preobrazhensky loses sight of the unity of the system: although this unity is contradictory, it is a unity, with the mutual conditionality of the parts.
So, by attempting to abstract state industry from its relations with the private sector, and particularly the peasant sector, Preobrazhensky abstracted from the particular and peculiar nature of the transitional economy .
But where he did recognise the private sector he merely saw conflict and not the contradictory unity.
Here we see Bukharin's concept of equilibrium coming into play.
Bukharin recognised that NEP was not merely a compromise  of ‘principles’ but also an acceptance of the balance of class forces in the Soviet economy and society generally.
Having arrived at some form of equilibrium, Bukharin was concerned that this should not be equilibrium with ‘negative indications’, but one that would have mobile growth without cataclysmic consequences.
Preobrazhensky attempted to define some optimum rate of primitive socialist accumulation for the state sector in an abstract manner.
He suggested that there should be drawn up such an ideal optimum, and only then should the private sector be taken into account to see how the ‘ideal’ and the possible would diverge, but always attempting to push towards the ideal.
But as we have seen, Bukharin argued that such a method was quite wrong, since it presupposed that the two sectors were wholly antagonistic, whereas they formed a contradictory unity, a living totality.
Bukharin pointed out that: ‘The law of correlation presupposes both members of this correlation.
Taking one out (peasant economy), you thereby destroy the whole.’
Two Methods — Two Perspectives
Let us attempt to summarise what the differences between Bukharin and Preobrazhensky were:
1.
Methodological, with particular reference to the level of abstraction used.
Preobrazhensky said that it was necessary provisionally to abstract the Soviet economy from particular state policies.
That is, he wanted to disregard the particularities and establish general laws for ‘socialist state economy’, without taking into account the interaction between state and private economy.
Bukharin rejected this since he argued that to do so would be to disregard the historical character of the dictatorship of the proletariat.
And to do so would produce an unhistorical abstraction that had no concrete usefulness.
2.
Regularity of the laws of transition.
Preobrazhensky said that in the transition period there are two laws:(a) the law of socialist (sometimes primitive) accumulation; and (b) the law of value.
These are expressed through planning and the market respectively.
Bukharin again disagreed, arguing that there is basically only one law, that of proportional labour expenditure.
The effects of the law of value will disappear when planning has been fully established.
In the transition period planning will modify the law of value, but on the basis of the law of labour expenditure.
These two differing approaches related to how the peasants were assessed as a class:(a) as a petty-bourgeois formation and a breeding ground for capitalism; or (b) pre-capitalist petty-commodity producers who can either grow into capitalist producers or move towards socialist forms of production via co-operation.
Preobrazhensky took view (a), hence his constant theme of struggle between the state sector of the economy and peasants.
Bukharin took view (b); here his theory of equilibrium becomes important in understanding his stance.
Since he viewed Soviet society as a totality with a mobile equilibrium, he considered it necessary to steer the peasants towards co-operation and eventually to socialist forms via exchanges between the two sectors on the market.
But this was to be a market that was not wholly free or spontaneous.
Preobrazhensky also wanted to use the market mechanism to extract surplus from the peasants so that state industry could accumulate and grow.
Therefore a part of the dispute between the two theorists revolved around how the market mechanisms were to be used, and what pricing policies should be pursued for industrial and agricultural production.
In practical terms what was at stake was the need to close the price scissors, as Trotsky termed it, that is, the disparity between the high prices for industrially produced consumer goods and means of production, compared to the prevailing world market prices, and the prices being paid for agricultural produce.
This price ‘scissors’ reflected the unequal exchange between ‘town’and ‘country’.
The high prices of industrial consumer goods deterred the peasants from buying, and the low prices offered by the state for agricultural produce deterred them from selling or even sowing.
The prices problem was of course a reflection of the low volume of industrial production and the low level of productivity in Soviet industry.
Soviet agriculture was relatively backward, even though the volume of production had, overall, overtaken its pre-1914 figures by the mid-1920s.
In the case of industrially produced consumer goods it was a question of increasing supply by a proportionally greater extent than that of agricultural production, and for this it was necessary to invest.
But to accumulate meant that it was necessary to obtain agricultural products at prices that would transfer the necessary surplus to the state sector.
Bukharin's basic approach was what could be termed increasing the surplus by accelerating the turnover of capital; which included a policy of lowering prices for industrially produced consumer  goods.
This would provide the incentive for the peasants to produce the necessary agricultural produce, particularly the grain with which to feed the towns and for export.
Such a policy would be seen to benefit both town and country and hence lessen the tensions and contradictions within the system as a whole.
Preobrazhensky's approach implied an increase in the surplus labour within industry, i.e., increased productivity, but a price policy that would not fully reflect this increase, i.e., a monopolistic surplus-profit policy.
This meant further discontent on the part of the workers and peasants, which would have meant a greater use of coercion by the state.
In terms of equilibrium theory, Bukharin was concerned that the existing, and fragile, equilibrium should not be destroyed by untoward leaps which would threaten the Soviet regime.
After the traumas of war, revolution and civil war he thought that it was necessary to have a prolonged period of social and political peace which would provide the correct climate for the economic growth that all desired.
Within the limits of the one party dictatorship prevailing in the Soviet Union Bukharin could be considered to be a consensus politician, seeking growth through co-operation not conflict.
This model would obviously allow for contradiction and divergence but would be one of mobile equilibrium with positive indications.
Preobrazhensky, on the other hand, seemed implicitly to work with a model predominantly of conflict.
To use the language of the dialectic, Preobrazhensky saw thesis and antithesis, but one would prevail by annihilating the other.
Bukharin's equilibrium theory specifically allowed for a synthesis arising from this contradictory unity.
His proposed mechanisms we shall explore in the next chapter.
The Notes of An Economist: Optimum versus Maximum Investment
The First Five year Plan
The Fifteenth Congress of the Bolshevik Party in December 1927 was notable for a number of reasons.
Firstly, it had been postponed to allow the United Opposition of Trotsky, Zinoviev and Kamenev to be expelled from the Party before the Congress actually convened.
Secondly, the Congress adopted a resolution initiating the First Five Year Plan (FFYP) of industrialisation and collectivisation of agriculture, both of which had long been advocated by the opposition.
Thirdly, as Lewin noted, despite the seemingly united Congress there were undercurrents of differences in interpretation as to the precise meaning of the resolutions adopted.
These differences of interpretation were to become the basis for new divisions within the ruling Party majority.
The formal decision on industrialisation had already been made at the Fourteenth Party Congress in 1925; therefore the Fifteenth Congress could be claimed to be merely a continuation of previous policies.
However, all serious historians have noted that the 1925 decisions had been merely a formality, more honoured in the breach than in their application.
The 1927 Congress decisions reflected the changed situation, since by that date industry had reached its 1913 levels of output and there loomed ahead the need to expand industrial capacity plus the renewal of much worn-out industrial plant.
The problem of replacement had been made particularly acute because of the lack of repair and replacement in earlier years, especially during the war and civil war.
None the less, by 1927 there was a general recognition of the need to accelerate the rate of investment, particularly in industry and, above all, in the machine-producing sector.
However, the ambiguity — already noted — hidden in the resolutions of the Fifteenth Congress began to take more definite shape in the attempt to formulate the FFYP.
It became manifest that within the ruling Party majority there was a fraction crystallising which was in favour of very high rates of industrial  investment; this was associated with Stalin.
Bukharin, on the other hand, based himself upon the formal wording of the resolutions of the Fifteenth Congress, which had actually formulated a more cautious and balanced growth rhythm.
The emerging strains in the Centre-Right Bloc in the party were already beginning to show in July 1928 when Bukharin wrote his now celebrated ‘Notes of An Economist’.
These ‘Notes’, whilst ostensibly aimed at the Trotskyist Opposition (which had officially been routed in 1927) were in reality directed against the ‘super-industrialisers’ amongst the ruling majority.
This form of political ‘discourse’ has become painfully familiar in the years since then, but it was sufficiently new at the time to mislead many as to the true target of the strictures.
One of those misled was Trotsky himself, who completely misread the real import of what Bukharin had written, as we shall see in the next chapter.
The ‘Notes’ appeared in Pravda on 1, 3 and 7 July 1928.
The timing of another action by Bukharin should be noted: on 11 July he held a secret meeting with Kamenev to propose an alliance between the Left and Right groups against Stalin.
In other words, the cautious phrases of the articles in Pravda hid a sharp political turn on Bukharin's part, but not a sharp turn in his views regarding economic policies.
Implicit in this turn was an acknowledgement that the differences between the Left and the Right groups on practical policies were much narrower than the fractional struggle had previously admitted; a common phenomenon in left-wing politics.
The political turn was signalled publicly in an address given by Bukharin at a memorial meeting on the fifth anniversary of the death of Lenin on 21 January 1929.
This speech was published in Pravda on 24 January under the title of ‘Lenin's Political Testament’, which must have rung some warning bells for many within the Party since Lenin's actual political testament had not been published at that time.
That Bukharin was preparing for a struggle with Stalin at this point cannot be doubted and he was attempting to drum up international support among other parties of the Comintern.
Rosa Levine-Meyer recounted to me how Bukharin met and discussed his plans with members of the German Communist Party in the late summer and autumn of 1928.
Bukharin and his associates used Rosa and Ernst Meyer's hotel room in Moscow for meetings to discuss the mounting struggle inside the Bolshevik Party, meetings at which they ridiculed the ever higher figures being propounded for the drafts of the First Five Year Plan.
In his address of 21 January Bukharin painted a broad picture of  how he interpreted Lenin's vision of NEP and the transition to socialism.
He reiterated the major points made in his ‘Notes of An Economist’— of which more later — but also sketched out the political implications of his earlier essay.
Again we are faced with having to read between the lines, but the allusions must have been clear to most of Bukharin's contemporaries.
The main themes that Bukharin pursued were:(1) the need to cut down on the excessive unproductive consumption of the state bureaucracy; and (2) the need to draw the widest possible strata of the people into the planning process and into controlling the state.
In other words, Bukharin was cautiously calling for curbs on Stalin's power, even if he was not referred to by name.
How else do we explain Bukharin's reference to Lenin's urgent call for a reorganisation of the Commissariat of Workers and Peasants inspection?
Everyone knew that this body had been a key element in Stalin's rise to power and that any criticism of it was, by inference, a critique of Stalin.
Once more Bukharin dwelt upon what he considered to be the unique character of the Russian revolution: that it was a combination of workers revolution and peasant war, which implied the need for a long-term alliance between the two classes.
Such an alliance, for Bukharin, implied that co-operation was the keystone of success, not confrontation, as implied by the drive towards forced collectivisation.
On the question of co-operation with the peasantry Bukharin stated:
This does not mean that Lenin is here denying the class war, for the ‘peaceful’, ‘cultural’ work of ‘organisation’is also a special form of class struggle.
It means that the proletariat is leading the entire working nation behind it, that it is responsible for the development of the whole of society , that it is becoming a great collective organiser of the entire national economy , that the direction of development is not towards a widening of the gulf between the fundamental class (the working class and peasantry) and that things are not moving towards a ‘third revolution’, etc.
Who was intent upon launching such a third revolution?
Stalin.
Of course during the previous factional struggles it had been Trotsky who had been accused of advocating policies which would have led to a split between the working class and peasantry, but now it was Stalin who was in Bukharin's sights.
And as if to point up this change Bukharin declared, ‘Our Red Army, which is to an enormous extent composed of peasants, is the greatest cultural machine for the re-education of the peasantry, which leaves it with a new  mentality.’
Taken in isolation such a remark would not be significant, but in a speech which had mentioned the two institutions with which Stalin and Trotsky had been most closely associated, this reference to the Red Army must be seen as nudge and wink towards Trotsky.
By his lauding the progressive role of the Red Army Bukharin's audience would have grasped what he had in mind.
Clearly Bukharin was signalling the need for a new political alignment, especially as he had repeated Lenin's warning against a split in the Party.
Rather than seeing the exploitation of the peasantry as the means to industrialisation Bukharin insisted that ‘a qualitative increase in the productivity of national labour, and a determined fight against non-productive expenditure…are the main sources of accumulation.’
And ‘for co-operation to lead to socialism,civilised co-operation is needed, for which it is necessary to trade not in an Asiatic , but in a European way.’
And who represented the ‘Asiatic’ in this context?
Again, Stalin.
Thus Bukharin had come to recognise that the bureaucratic stratum which had coalesced around Stalin now posed an incomparably greater threat to his vision of the transition to socialism than the opposition of Trotsky ever did.
However, it was in the ‘Notes’ that Bukharin gave a precise résumé of the differences on economic questions between himself and Stalin.
The necessity for Balanced Growth
The first point of importance in what Bukharin said in the ‘Notes’ is that, despite the accelerated rate of industrial investment and growth presaged by the FFYP, he argued that there would be no fundamental change in the basic strategy of the New Economic Policy.
Naturally, the transition to the reconstruction period does not entail a fundamental change in economic policy as was the case in 1921.
It is however, of immense importance, so to speak, from another angle.
For there is a tremendous difference between, let us say,repairing a bridge and building one.
The latter process demands a knowledge of higher mathematics, the strength of materials and thousands of bits of wisdom.
The same applies to the whole economy.
The reconstruction period raises a number of complicated technical problems…a number of extremely difficult tasks in the overall management of the economy.
Bukharin was warning that there should not be such a fundamental  revision of policies as would mean a return to the arbitrary and commandist methods of ‘war communism’, This meant that, for Bukharin, industrialisation should proceed within the established framework.
Accordingly, this meant that market relations, especially those between ‘town and country’ must be continued, even though in a modified form.
Moreover, the reference to the technical abilities needed to build a bridge was directed as a warning against grandiose schemes which lacked a firm technical basis; and for the need for patient, long-term methods of work, rather than substituting the ‘shock-troop’ methods of ‘war communism’for more prosaic means.
It was no accident, therefore, that Bukharin went on to point out the real advances already made by the Soviet economy, particularly in industry, during the preceding period.
He mentioned oil, chemicals, engineering and electrical engineering, all of which had made solid progress.
To emphasise the point, he said in relation to overall investment:
The systematic growth of totally new industrial construction is a further point of great interest.
The share of means accorded to this construction work, calculated in percentages of the total allocation to industry, has increased steadily.
In 1925–6 this share was 12 per cent, in 1926–7 21 per cent , in 1927–8 23 per cent .
The specific weight of heavy industry is increasing rapidly…as also the specific weight of the production of the means of production in our industrial sector.
Then he made the point that ‘all this shows how rapidly the industrialisation of the country is proceeding and how clear the simultaneous process of the socialisation of the whole economy is.’
Obviously, since the whole economy was engaged in this process there could not be, according To Bukharin, a wholly unbalanced growth, even though there would be certain imbalances as a result of growth taking place in different sectors at somewhat different rates.
He did admit, however, that the growth itself had induced ‘peculiar crises’, but not of the same character as those observed in the capitalist economies.
He highlighted the differences by a series of juxtapositions: ‘over-production’ versus ‘goods famine’; ‘overproduction of grain' versus ‘under-production of grain', i.e., disproportion between production and consumption, but in the capitalist countries this took the form of over-production, in the Soviet Union of under-production, ‘disproportion between various  branches of production’etc.
In other words, Bukharin was positing disequilibrium with positive indications for the Soviet economy, and negative indications for the capitalist economies.
In a word, the past year, especially, has confronted us with the problem of ‘our crises ’, which are the result of the initial stages of a transition economy in a country with a backward, petty-bourgeois population and surrounded by hostile forces.
Thus while capitalism's crisis was seen as one of decline, he viewed the Soviet crisis as the result of growth.
Given Bukharin's reference to disproportionality it was not surprising that he should refer to Marx's schemata of reproduction.
In his book Imperialism and the Accumulation of Capital Bukharin had already dealt with such questions at some length.
However, in his ‘Notes’ he came out solidly for disproportionality as being the fundamental cause of crisis in the capitalist economies.
Marx, as you know, gave us a theory of capitalist crisis .
These crises he showed to be caused by a general lack of planning (anarchy) of the capitalist methods of production, by the impossibility of attaining correct proportions between elements of the process of reproduction under capitalism, especially between production and consumption…he showed the cause to be the incapability of capitalism to maintain an equilibrium among the various elements of production.
We have already met this formulation when we examined Bukharin's theory of capitalist crisis.
The reason why he introduced these ideas at this point in his discourse was to bring out the similarities and differences between Soviet problems and those pertaining to capitalism, since he went on to say:
If our ‘crises’ apparently possess the character of capitalist crises ‘turned inside out’, and if effective demand of our masses has overtaken our production, then is not the ‘goods famine’perhaps a general law of our development?
Are we not perhaps condemned to periodical or non-periodical ‘crises’ on an inverted basis, on a different correlation between production and consumption?
Are these critical differences not an iron law of our development?
In posing the idea of such an ‘iron law’ Bukharin unwittingly  predicted the actual course of events in the Soviet Union that has persisted up to the present time, that is, the continual shortfall of consumer goods production as compared to the growing population and the growth in monetary incomes.
In posing such a possibility Bukharin was of course seeking to avoid it.
He went on to reject the premise for such an ‘iron law’, since he argued that production would catch up with demand as industry developed, and any disproportions arising would derive from faulty planning.
And the reason for this would be:
The relative lack of planning , or the relatively planned character of the economy in the transition period originates in the existence of small undertakings, of market connections, that is, of anarchist elements of considerable strength.
Therefore, the plan itself has a character of its own; it is not by any means a more or less ‘complete’ plan of a developed socialist state of society.
The plan contains many elements of the prognosis of the anarchical factor (e.g. the estimate made of crops, of the amount of grain available as a commodity, the amount of commodities represented by peasant production generally, and consequently, the estimate of prices), and this prognosis becomes the starting point for this or that directive.
Precisely for this reason it is impossible for us to have an ideal plan.
This passage forcibly expressed Bukharin's concern that, given the conditions then prevailing, the ‘plan’ should not be regarded as being actually able to control all the elements that had to be taken into account.
He also suggested that planning as then envisaged could not really be more than a series of approximations.
To recognise that reality meant that such plans had to be rigorously controlled to take account of actual conditions.
He continued:
Precisely for this reason [the anarchic factor]there may be errors up to a certain point.
But the fact that an error can be explained, even an unavoidable error, does not mean that it thereby ceases to be an error.
That is the first point.
In other words, the best laid plans will contain errors, and not to recognise them as such would only further compound them.
‘The second [point]is that the grossest violation of fundamental proportions…and the resultant erroneous calculations, are by no means unavoidable .’
Again we see Bukharin arguing that a violation of fundamental  equilibrium is avoidable, so long as proportionality is used as a guide around which the plan would oscillate.
But any conscious attempt to disregard this proportionality would inflict unnecessary losses and suffering.
Moreover, any disregard for the fundamental proportionalities of the economy leads to ‘upsetting the political balance of the country’.
It would seem, therefore, that Bukharin was attempting to set the drive for industrialisation within the wider socio-political framework of the worker-peasant alliance upon which NEP was founded, rather than within merely narrow ‘economic’ guidelines.
Increased turnover Leads to Increased Accumulation
During the course of his argument Bukharin sketched out what he considered to be the three variants of the development of agriculture under capitalism, these were:
Within the confines of capitalism three fundamental models of these relations can be distinguished: the first is that of the most backward semi-feudal agricultural economy with its pauper peasants, rack-rents, ruthless exploitation of the peasantry and the weak capacity of the home market.
(Example: pre-revolutionary Russia.)
The second type: considerably fewer relics of serfdom, the landowner has to a considerable extent already become a capitalist, the peasants are better off and the peasant market has a greater capacity, etc.
The third model is the ‘American ’ one, the almost complete absence of feudal relations, ‘free’land, in the initial stages of development, no absolute ground rent, well-to-do farmers and a large home market for industry.
And what do we see?
It is not difficult to see that the…power and extent of the growth of the productive forces, have reached their highest point in precisely the United States .
This passage is interesting for several reasons.
First, there is clear approval of the ‘American’ way as a means of development in agriculture and industry, that is, the provision of mutual markets for the respective products.
As to whether this was an historically accurate account of American development is beside the point, since he was using it as a debating point.
Secondly, the consumption of the producers forms a part of Bukharin's growth equation.
Total consumption is not the relevant part of this  equation; rather the consumption of producers is the key variable.
Moreover, since in this context the producer-consumer is mainly the agricultural one, we can see that Bukharin followed his previous thoughts on the necessity for growth and equilibrium to be seen as an interlocking set of social, political and economic factors.
Lastly, there is his first ‘model’ of agriculture, with its paupers, ruthless exploitation etc., of which he says pre-revolutionary Russia was an example.
But this was not an exercise in historical analogy for Bukharin; it was a veiled reference to a possible future.
In February 1929 he actually accused the majority of the Central Committee of creating a ‘military-feudal exploitation of the peasantry’.
In other words the pauperisation and misery of the peasantry, which undoubted occurred, was attributed by Bukharin to the policies, particularly forced collectivisation, of the Soviet state.
The whole of Bukharin's arguments in this period, 1928–9, can be summed up as being directed towards the development of an optimum rate of investment and growth as opposed to maximum investment rates.
He argued that attempts to impose a maximum investment rate would in fact lead to a lower overall rate of growth than would an optimum one.
The difference between maximum and optimum investment, and hence of growth rates, hinges upon the relationship between growth and consumption, and more particularly the relationship between the productivity of labour and the consumption of the producers.
And, it could be argued, the lower the initial level of consumption by producers the greater will be the link between productivity and consumption.
This presupposes that given a low level of development of the productive forces, and a correspondingly low level of consumption by producers, a significant rate of growth not only depends upon the rate of investment but also upon an increase in the consumption of the direct producers.
We can formalise some of the above propositions along the following lines: Let F = fixed capital, cc = circulating constant capital (raw materials, fuels, etc.), v = variable capital, s' = rate of surplus-value, T = expected life-span of F, and F/T = d = depreciation, d + cc = c (constant capital in normal Marxist usage), and finally w = product.
Given the above assumptions we find that:
Bukharin pointed to such problems and themes when he said:
Clearly the question of reserves is closely bound up with both the question of productive consumption (including capital construction) and the question of personal consumption (the personal consumption of the masses).
It is a generally known fact that here our bow is at a very high tension.
To increase this tension further and aggravate the goods famine even more is impossible.
And:
Those who believe that the growth of planned economy brings with it the possibility (on the narrow basis of the dying out of the law of value) of acting just as one pleases, do not understand the ABC of economic science.
To emphasis the point further he said:
When a plan drawn up during a period of supply crisis fails to analyse thoroughly the question of the balance of supply and demand this of course is no ‘external’ defect, no ‘formal’omission, but a profoundly internal fault.
The acuteness of the goods famine must certainly be alleviated and not in some remote future but during the next few years.
Bukharin specifically warned against tying up too many resources in long-term capital projects, and argued for a balanced approach which would actually yield a greater product:
With respect to the correlation between the development of heavy and light industry we must again proceed from the optimum combination of both factors.
Whilst regarding as correct the shift of the centre of gravity to the production of the means of production, we must at the same time remember the danger involved in tying up too much state capital in major construction work, which cannot be realised on the market for many years.
On the other hand it must be remembered that a more rapid turnover of light industry (production of essential articles) permits its capital also to be used to build up heavy industry, whilst developing light industry at the same time.
Here we see Bukharin repeating his argument for a speeding up of the circulation of commodities, which he said would provide a greater surplus out of which investment of all types could be increased.
He perceived very well the dangers involved in an attempt to concentrate too many resources upon major capital projects.
The over-straining in capital expenditure:(1) will not be accompanied by actual construction to a corresponding extent;(2) will lead in time to the curtailment of work already under way;(3) will react unfavourably on other branches of production;(4) will exacerbate the goods famine in every direction; and (5) will finally retard the speed of development.
The whole of the ‘Notes’ was thus devoted to arguing that optimum investment would produce a greater product than would maximum investment; and that, maximum investment would actually retard  the rate of overall growth.
But what was the actual result of the FFYP?
Plan and Reality
First there is the question of the fulfilment of the plan; we find that in percentage terms very few of the eventual increased target figures were met, i.e., coal 72.3, crude oil 107.1, electricity 49.1 pig iron 43.3, steel 24.4, rolled steel 19.3, cement 36.3, cotton goods -3.0, woollen goods 3.3, shoes 26.1, paper 32.2, matches 1.6, soap 36.9.
Of course the low percentage achievement does in part reflect the very high targets that were set as the plan was revised upwards during the course of the period, and it was carried out under the slogan of ‘the five year plan in four years’.
In fact there were several drafts of the plan, each more ambitious in terms of targets set than the previous one.
As Medvedev noted, the ‘plan’ became almost like a ‘think of a number game’:
Stalin and Molotov suddenly at a meeting of the Council of Commissars…proposed that the control figures of the plan be increased twofold…in June 1930, Stalin suddenly announced sharp increases in the goals — for pig iron, from 10 million to 17 million tons by the last year of the plan; for tractors, from 55,000 to 170,000; for other agricultural machinery and trucks, an increase of more than 100 per cent.
And for the workers there was an actual decline in real wages during the FFYP, and only in 1940 did they recover their 1928 level.
Jasny maintained that ‘Instead of actually rising by 55 per cent in the five years from 1927/28 to 1932/33, as provided in the approved version of the Five Year Plan, total farm output declined by 14 per cent between 1928 and 1933.’
And Conquest said that ‘Grain exports during the early thirties were higher than at any time since the revolution, running around 5 million tons a year in 1930–31 and 1¾ million tons during the famine period of 1932–33.
In 1929–30 it had been less than 200,000 tons.’
Alongside this must be set Conquest's estimate of 5 to 6 million deaths during the famine.
And he maintained:
Collectivisation destroyed about 25 per cent of the production capacity of Soviet agriculture.
The Five Year Plan postulated a grain output…of over 100 million tons.
It did not reach 70  million, and the original target was not achieved before the outbreak of war.
Jasny produced the following table for industrial production:
No doubt there would be disagreement as to precise figures, both in absolute and percentage terms for Soviet economic growth during this period; and the above small selection is only meant to be indicative.
The fulfilment or non-fulfilment of inflated ‘plans’ does not, of course, detract from the very real increases in industrial production that took place during the FFYP.
But there can be little or no dispute about the appalling state of agriculture as a result of forced collectivisation and the fact that millions of farm animals were slaughtered by the peasants rather than allow them to be collectivised, nor can the starvation and deaths be disputed.
However, since we are supposed to be dealing with planned growth, there surely must be some connection between targets and fulfilment.
Let us admit that since the FFYP was the very first exercise of its kind in history, it would not be surprising if there were discrepancies, failures of some kind.
It is not our purpose here, however, to re-examine the details of the success or otherwise of the FFYP as a whole.
What is being done is to argue that the failures were of the order to suggest that Bukharin had been correct in his prediction before the event, not after it.
What emerges from an examination of the FFYP is that it set a pattern for the Soviet economy that persists up to the present day.
The reason for the actual results is not hard to determine; as Mandel pointed out:
The mistake committed by the Stalinist planners during the First Five Year Plan…is a confusion between maximum and optimum rate of accumulation.
Or rather: these planners started from a wrong assumption that the maximum rate of accumulation is also the optimum rate.
[And]the mistake has its roots in the absurd assumption that the productivity of labour is independent of the consumption of the producer.
The result, according to Mandel, was that:
There were in 1928 3.1 million workers and employees (technicians and engineers with university degrees not included) in Soviet industry.
In order to achieve the First Five-Year Plan, figures worked out at that moment estimated that the manpower necessary for attaining the production goals at 4.1 million workers and employees (i.e. an increase of 1 million or 33%).
In fact, in 1932–33,without all the goals of the FFYP having been achieved, 6.7 million workers and employees were working in Soviet factories, an increase of more than 110% over that of 1928, and of 65% over the planned number of workers!
What should have been produced by 4 million workers needed 6.7 million to be manufactured, i.e. per capita productivity was more than 50% below the planned level .
The maximum rate of accumulation was…far from maximising the social product.
And, as Lewin pointed out, there was a deterioration in the quality of goods produced plus considerable waste of materials.
And along with this there was a considerable increase in unproductive costs.
This pattern still subsists: one of priorities for heavy industrial investment; discrepancies between targets and fulfilment; a continual lagging behind of the production of consumer goods as compared with the production of the means of production; low productivity rates, low investment priorities for agriculture.
One might almost be driven to conclude that there are in fact two ‘plans’, the public one which always seems to go awry and a secret one that the economy actually works to.
In retrospect Bukharin's ‘Notes of An Economist’ stand out as a clearsighted warning against the headlong rush to industrialisation — without due regard to proportionality — that was embarked upon with the FFYP.
Moreover, the strictures against maximum investment rates were vindicated, as we have seen above.
Nor were his warnings a fluke; his ability to provide such foresight was based upon his theory of equilibrium.
Bukharin understood better than most that Stalin's mania — as it was shown to be — for breakneck industrialisation was to bring many years of misery and suffering to all the Soviet peoples.
And most of this catastrophe was avoidable; there was no inevitability, only wilful arrogance and a disregard of humanity.
The most bizarre manifestation of this disregard was to be the purges that swept across Soviet society in the middle 1930s.