

John Overall
The Education of Building Surveyors
The structure of surveying education has progressed through a number of fundamental changes since the granting of a Royal Charter to the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors over a hundred years ago.
Commencing with only three Divisions with their own examination structure, the number of Divisions in the RICS increased to seven and periodically the wheel is re-examined to establish whether it should turn full circle to produce a smaller number of specialist groups once again.
The smaller Divisions could argue that at the heart of their success lies an individual education process and a separate designation — the Chartered Building Surveyor is a prime example.
Three further educational trends have appeared in the Institution's history.
First, only a quarter of its corporate members enter by way of the profession's own examination system, the remainder qualifying through external degree or diploma courses.
Secondly, Continuing Professional Development has become mandatory for all members qualifying since January 1981 and, thirdly, the Institution has now embarked on the process of shedding its own Part I examinations — a logical conclusion to the trends.
Building surveying is by definition a very technical skill.
It will be interesting to judge whether universities and colleges will be successful in producing well-rounded graduates, capable of strategic thought processes and adaptability.
More importantly, will the employer adequately fulfil his obligation to complete the educational process by producing sound technicians and businessmen?
What role should education fulfil for a profession, and how should it serve it best?
Should it produce the rounded man, versed in life's rich mysteries, yet having an awareness of his responsibilities to his craft, or should it procreate the technical expert whose knowledge of all things professional is without equal?
These exaggerations are offered to define the limits rather than to present accurate profiles, but they do highlight an educational dilemma.
The educational history of the surveying profession began around 1881; after the granting of the Charter in 1868, an initial examination structure was developed in 1880 which proved to be remarkably durable and apposite, surviving almost intact until  1932.
The Institution's structure was then expanded from three to four Divisions, and building surveying was singled out for the first time, and referred to as IIIB (Division III, Building).
This structure survived a further three decades, until 1961, when it was subsumed by the General Practice Division; and although the Building Surveyors Panel of the General Practice Committee gave evidence of their dissatisfaction with the syllabus structure to the Eve Committee in 1967, it was not until 1973 that a Building Surveying Division re-emerged as an identifiable entity.
Preparation for the profession has occupied the thoughts of many; perhaps the most definitive and comprehensive statement is F. M. L. Thompson's in Chartered Surveyors: the Growth of a Profession .
At the RICS, special committees have constantly reviewed educational policy in the light of contemporary social and professional circumstances, often producing far-reaching and profound recommendations.
In all cases the necessity of balancing professional and academic requirements has been recognised, with the inexorable move toward a ‘graduate’ profession being accepted responsibly, though more slowly than for similar professions: ‘It is a matter for concern that, compared with other professions surveying has not made a greater impact upon university life and thought in general’(Wells Report, 1960).
The first modern systematic inquiry into the Institution's general educational policy was undertaken by the Healing Committee in 1939, and while it proved to be the forerunner of the Watson (1950), Wells (1960), Eve (1967) and Brett-Jones (1978) reports, it reflected the attitude of the period by confining its recommendations to relatively detailed matters of the examination system and syllabuses.
Fortunately, the later committees approached the matter differently, seeing educational policy as an instrument to reflect change in the social structure and to influence the future development and improvement of the profession through scholarship and the assessment of academic and vocational attitudes.
Innovatory Steps Post–1959
In 1959, the Crowther Report forecast that with the raising of the minimum school leaving age to sixteen, more affluent parents would persuade their more intelligent offspring to stay on for A levels at eighteen.
The choice the Institution had therefore to face was either to accept poorer intellectual material at sixteen or to recruit a higher proportion of sixth formers.
Against this background, the Wells Committee, the following year, recommended that, as from 1962, the minimum academic entry requirement for the Institution's examinations should be raised to five O levels at  one sitting the previous standard of five O levels with at least three at one sitting having been established in 1951.
There was also extensive reference in the new regulations to A levels, but records showed that few students offered A level attainment, preferring to commence their vocational training at 16-plus rather than 18-plus; in other words, it was still an O level profession.
Arguably, though, the achievement of five O levels at a sitting was more demanding than a piecemeal collection of A levels.
The Wells Report went further, in its consciousness of the need to raise and maintain academic standards, stating that: ‘No person shall be eligible to become a chartered surveyor unless he possesses the necessary academic qualifications and has acquired a practical knowledge of surveying….
These two limbs are essential to a candidate's training and he ought not to become a corporate member until he satisfies both requirements.’
A perceptive statement in 1960, considering that the Test of Professional Competence (TPC) was not introduced until 1973.
It may be noted that although throughout the preceding period the vast proportion of the nation's building costs was being spent on war damage repairs and reinstatement, an activity in which building and quantity surveyors provided invaluable service, the building surveyor made no impact within the Institution at this time.
In spite of his good work, the Wells Committee recommended that he should, along with housing and urban management, town and country planning and valuation — previously amalgamated by Council into a single General Practice Committee — follow an examination curriculum dedicated to General Practice with a ‘typical subject’ only at final level.
Seven years later, the Eve Committee was strongly influenced by the DES White Paper of 1966 on polytechnics and the implications of the greater availability of higher education.
To ignore the general implied upsurge in academic attainment was, the Committee recognised, by inference to label the surveying profession a second league one.
It set out therefore to ensure, in consultation with the DES, that surveying came within the polytechnics' orbit and that ‘centres of excellence’ for surveying education were established.
In line with this policy, the Eve Report also recommended, shatteringly at the time, that there should be a two-A-level entry standard, and acknowledged that, ‘in time the normal method of training for the professional examinations or for exempting qualifications will be by way of full time, or sandwich, study.’
It went on to accept ‘the principle that professional experience should  be based on theoretical completeness, and that training in often petty procedures during the earlier years in professional offices has little bearing on the exercise of professional judgement.’
The creation of a new public sector of higher education charged with teaching and researching subjects of a more vocational nature was timely.
Hitherto, for the most part, the provision of professional education had responded to market forces; if a demand was perceived a course was devised and offered, and when the demand disappeared, so did the course.
The obvious outcome of such a fragmented service was that no academic area of work was established or recognised, and outside the university sector, surveying, in any of its specialisations, lacked credibility, backing and dedicated resources.
Now, the means whereby the standards of the higher courses, devised by the new polytechnics, could be validated and monitored were also at hand, with the Council for National Academic Awards (CNAA), granted its Royal Charter in 1964, and charged with ensuring that the courses approved by it were of a standard at least equivalent to similar courses in the universities.
The stage was set for the establishment of thirteen ‘centres of excellence’ for the development of full-time surveying — thanks, principally to the foresight and energy of HMI Howard Wainwright — and for the first time a sense of security and confidence was available to the selected centres, as they were encouraged to improve their resources base and to develop exempting RICS diplomas, and subsequently degrees, to be validated by the CNAA.
Initially, it seemed that control of surveyors' education would pass out of the hands of the membership of the Institution and into those of the academics.
This has proved an unfounded anxiety since the design and management of all full-time courses in the polytechnic sector were and remain the responsibility of persons who qualified via the Institution's external examination system and entered teaching as qualified surveyors after years of service in the public or private sector.
They are, needless to say, supported by lawyers, economists, mathematicians and other specialists for the relevant parts of courses.
The Brett-Jones Report, eleven years later, reiterated and reinforced the principal points of the Wells and Eve Reports, and recognised the enormous changes that had occurred in the intervening years.
For example, where in 1967 there were eight fully exempting awards for the profession as a whole, with one in building surveying, by 1978 there were sixty-one, five of which were in building surveying; where in 1967, 8639 candidates sat the  Institution's examinations in all divisions, in 1978 there were only 4991.
It went on to make two historic recommendations: that the Institution should give more overt support to the Society of Surveying Technicians, formed in 1970 by the General Council of the RICS, pointing out that the notion that the profession needed persons with technical qualification to ‘come in at the bottom’ and stay there was insensitive to human aspirations and naïve in its recognition of the Society's worth; and that practitioners should henceforth be required to undertake structured Continuing Professional Development (CPD)— a courageous and necessary proposal (see below).
Thus, it was through the work and recommendations of its special committees that the Institution took cognisance of what was happening in the world around it, and was able to lead its membership toward a more enlightened view of educational thought and progress and away from the traditional one of on-the-job training supported by evening or postal tuition surmounted by the Institution's examination.
THE BUILDING SURVEYOR IS BORN
How did the building surveyor fit into or emerge from this new form of education?
In spite of representations to the Eve Committee in 1967, the pressure for a separate Building Surveying Division had not been sufficient.
Indeed in the Future of the Profession Report of 1970, the text preceding a recommendation that the Institution have a structure of three chapters, stated,inter alia , that ‘there is an historical nexus between land agency, general practice and building surveying which still validates the view that they are different applications of the same basic skills.’
While such statements could be interpreted as being passive rather than negative in terms of the advancement of building surveying, the Report went on to state that building surveyors ‘have been less ebullient [than quantity surveyors]in recent years — partly because they are less numerous and their work less homogeneous or well defined; but, to a large extent because they have made a less prolonged and concerted effort to develop their skills and explore the horizons of opportunity, although there has of late been a welcome resurgence in this respect’.
Not a very supportive viewpoint; but worse was to come, for having defined maintenance, and little else, as the province of the building surveyor, the Committee went on to observe that their ‘apparent failure’ caused the Committee ‘lingering concern for their lack of identity…’and that ‘until they can establish what their discipline is (as opposed to the rather  disparate activities with which they are associated) they may find it difficult to develop their full potential.’
Finding reasons, or excuses, for this unflattering view of the building surveyor's contribution to his profession during a period of unprecedented post-war reconstruction and technological innovation is not a productive exercise, but what is obvious is that the most damning indictment is the lack of identifiable discipline.
No one could point to an area of study, academic interest or professional expertise that was clearly his; little or no research had been conducted in his name, and no role other than that of the building technician for general practitioners could be found for him.
The education process which the 1970s building surveyor had undergone in the fifties and early sixties had not equipped him for a meaningful and identifiable role in the profession of the seventies.
The educational system had failed him — an education system that had relied largely upon on-the-job training and part-time or distance study was inadequate and had ineptly squandered the intellect of its candidates.
By contrast the SITE Report (‘Surveying in the Eighties’ 1980) of ten years later makes very different reading: ‘The role of the building surveyor has become more clearly defined in the past decade….
His main growth areas…are likely to include the improvement and extension of existing houses, the modernising and planned maintenance of commercial, industrial and other buildings, and the need to improve the thermal insulation of almost all buildings….’
While not all reference to building surveyors is quite so supportive, clearly this Committee has a new perspective.
Several factors had intervened to bring the building surveyor to the fore.
On the broad front, the oil crisis of 1973 produced a climate far less favourable to wholesale redevelopment.
Simultaneously, it was being discovered that the ill-chosen or ill-formed materials and techniques used in the new build of the sixties was beginning to break down after only ten years: autopsies on building failures indicated that earlier cavalier attitudes to the intricacies of new technological phenomena such as interstitial condensation and concrete additives, called for newer skills and deeper understanding found only in the education and training of the building surveyor.
Clients now became appreciative of specialisms and saw the basic good sense of employing the building specialist, not only to put right a defect, but also to refurbish entire buildings.
The waiting in the wings was paying off.
Developments in Education
Statistics on building surveyors prior to the formation of the Division are unobtainable, since they were merely defined as general practitioners.
However, when the Division was formed in 1973 there were 1886 members, in 1980 there were 4024, a 113% increase, and by 1983, 5210 — 10% above forecast.
Assuming a lead-time of approximately six years, i.e. the time taken between starting to train and ultimately being elected a full member of the Division, this figure shows that over half of those building surveyors now practising started their education during the period 1967–75.
This coincides with the opening of the polytechnics and the ‘centres of excellence’ around 1968, and indicates that the new Division was well-timed to absorb the resulting growth.
The position when the Division was formed in 1973 was as follows:
successive education reports had supported the concept of a graduate profession
the Eve Committee had in 1967 raised the academic entry requirement to the university standard, a minimum of two A levels
the polytechnics and the ‘centres of excellence’ had been designated c. 1968
from there being one exempting building surveying course in 1967 there were now four, three CNAA degrees and a building surveying option available to the Estate Management degree at Reading University
the Test of Professional Competence became operational.
Obviously the progress made in educational thinking just prior to 1973, and in its interpretation, had been quite dramatic and the way was clear for the first time to develop long-term objectives for education.
In 1973, approximately 14% of the persons training for building surveying were doing so through full-time study; still a minority, but trends were obvious and it was predicted that seven years later, by 1980, that percentage would have increased to around 30%; in the event the figure was 46%.
Alongside the development of full-time courses there had to be provision for the part-time student and in consequence suitable curricula and syllabuses had to be devised.
Care was taken to make building surveying curricula more apposite to the work of the candidate, the technological aspects being increased at the expense of law and economics.
The teaching methods in the full-time courses were centred upon projects which sought to provide a  simulated work situation, to integrate what might otherwise appear to be disparate subject areas and to engender in the student independence and originality of thought.
This mode of study was too time-consuming to be suited to the part-time student and it had to be assumed that these benefits would be provided by the employer and the real-life work situation.
Similarly, peripheral studies such as logic, decision making, design studies, available to the full-time student, were not included in the Institution's examinations.
There were thus two examination systems set on diverging courses for membership of the same Division.
Subsequent curriculum development has simultaneously reflected and led the professional work of the Division: in both full- and part-time courses, emphasis has been placed upon such areas as cost-in-use and design and management studies, by way of work activities, and computer applications and energy analysis as forward indicators.
Course adjustments may be put into effect immediately in the case of full-time courses, while, in order to protect the interests of part-time students locked into the Institution's examination programme, adequate forward notice and even a transitional period with parallel diets, have had to be offered.
Of necessity it has meant that the development of the Institution's syllabuses tends to reflect what is, rather than what will be.
To fulfil a positive role for a profession, its education and training programme should equip candidates for what will be demanded of them in their future careers.
Accepting that the average study period for a student is six to seven years long, an educational programme on which he starts is required to offer that body of knowledge and those skills that he will be required to demonstrate ten to fifteen years on.
At the end of that period, in mid-career, most surveyors will nowadays be involved in some form of re-training, and the trauma of that experience will be alleviated where the original education input was right.
The problem this poses for the educationalist is formidable because, as well as designing curricula that will help the surveyor cope with future changes, he has also to provide the basis of a training experience to enable him to cope with contemporary practice.
In the current climate of change and innovation, education must anticipate and supply professional skills even before their need is perceived by the profession.
The most obvious example of such foresight being required is in the use and application of the ‘new technology’.
In 1972–3 full-time courses in the polytechnics began to offer computing studies as part of the normal curriculum and attempts were also made as early as 1969 to include a European language; while the latter proved to be an irrelevance, the former  has certainly not.
Attempting to predict the changes likely to take place in practices and in the world at large and their consequences for Institutional education policy, has been a function of the educational committees of the Institution and the centres of full-time education, all of whom have been addressing the question since early 1985.
Alternative Entry
In addition to the students coming in through the normal channels, two non-uniform routes have emerged during the eighties.
The graduate entry scheme, which attracts entrants with both cognate and non-cognate degrees, has swelled the numbers entering the profession generally, and the Building Surveyors Division in particular.
The cognate degree holders, i.e. those with degrees in building or civil engineering, present no notable challenge, offering as they do subject attainment closely allied to that normally required.
But the non-cognate degree holder, with for example a degree in languages, mathematics or geography, offers other prospects and his presence has noticeably increased.
Prior to 1980, only thirty-one non-cognate candidates in total put themselves forward for examination, but in the period 1980–4, eighty have gained membership, following the special examination route devised for them.
It would appear that the employer has a predilection for this type of trainee, and this trend may well increase in future years.
The other, probably more significant innovation, is that of the mixed mode degree, at present only offered by Thames Polytechnic.
Recognising that the employment market, and the preferences of students and of their parents fluctuate, and that full-time learning facilities should also be available to the part-time student, a course of study has been structured so that the student can opt for full-time, sandwich or part-time attendance, as employment or personal circumstances dictate.
This enables a student to optimise the opportunities presented to him without prejudice to his progression through the examination system.
Pulling the threads together, educational opportunity for the building surveyor is available by full-time study at seven centres — five polytechnics and two universities — and at forty-one part-time centres, two of which provide part-time degree courses.
Unfortunately the number of part-time centres fluctuates from year to year, usually downwards.
In the 1984 academic year, approximately 800 students were studying full-time exempting qualifications, mostly honours degrees, and approximately 647 took the  Institution's external examinations; there were 200 students on the two part-time degree courses.
Each full-time centre, while approved by the Institution as offering a course of study apposite to the building surveyor, has developed slightly different academic philosophies to reflect its own perceived strengths, and its individual resource bases.
Thus, while each has the same ultimate goal, each chooses a different methodology to achieve it.
The subtle differences have brought a strength and depth of study to the discipline of building surveying and created the sense of identity so palpably missing in the 1960s.
THE TEST OF PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE
The Test of Professional Competence, for building surveyors, first introduced in 1973, has remained unchanged over a period during which many other changes both technological and sociological have taken place within the Division.
The quality of the work submitted by candidates for the Test has improved, but more in presentation than in intellectual calibre.
However, it may be unfair to accuse the candidates of failing to attain the unattainable.
The areas of experience necessary for the full satisfaction of the Test requirements have proven very difficult to acquire over the two-year period, since what is available to the candidate is conditional upon the type of practice he is in and the volume and the quality or variety of commissions received.
The candidate finds himself on trial, therefore, for what may be the unavoidable shortcomings of his employment.
Knowing this, the interpretation given by the assessors to phrases like ‘reasonable experience’ or ‘satisfactory cover’has to be sympathetic; but if a rule cannot be enforced, it may not be a good rule.
The 5000-word critical analysis, which may or may not be supported by graphical evidence, has also been criticised as being a test more of the candidate's authorship than of his professional ability, and an exercise more easily tackled by the ex-full-time student than by the part-time candidate.
Certainly the importance of the TPC cannot be overemphasised as, with more and more candidates entering the profession with little or no previous work experience, and all professions coming under more frequent pressure from a litigation-conscious public, the need for proven professionalism is greater than ever.
Furthermore, the Institution through its new policy on part-time education proposes to withdraw from the formal examination process and will in future delegate this responsibility to approved polytechnics and colleges.
Assuming that students will still regard Associate Membership of the Institution as the final accolade of professional ability, the members, through the Test, will remain  the final arbiters on entry to their profession.
While the academics should be responsible for the academic inputs to the total education and training process, the members must accept responsibility for providing suitable training for, and devising, administering and adjudicating on a proper and sufficient Test of Professional Competence.
CONTINUING PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT (CPD)
The principal arguments for a policy of CPD were advanced in the Brett-Jones Report of 1978 and although none could be refuted in a responsible way, it was not until 1 January 1981 that Regulations were made by the General Council of the RICS to make compulsory, and to regulate, members' Continuing Professional Development.
Nevertheless, while regarded by the vast majority of members as good, proper and for the immediate and ultimate improvement of professional standards, the concept was challenged on a number of points, though these challenges were directed against the logistics of the proposal rather than the philosophy.
CPD was made compulsory only for those members qualifying after 1 January 1981, older members being given the choice to opt in.
The basic success of the policy however has tended to draw into its influence many who initially chose not to participate, since it would obviously be professionally unsound to be seen to be consciously not taking part.
Anyway, avoidance is unnecessary as for the most part it's enjoyable.
After wide debate, the majority of the Branches were in favour of extending the mandatory requirement of CPD to all members, but such a proposal is unlikely to get the support of the membership if put to a referendum.
It is worth noting however that the Building Surveyors Division, with a younger age profile than other divisions and with the technical nature of their interests well suited to post-graduate updating events, has exhibited no marked conflict between ‘CPDers’ and ‘non-CPDers’.
In any event the tide of time will wash away any real or imagined anomaly.
At the same time, while conscientious attendance at events is satisfying in itself, a strong argument exists among the membership as a whole for monitoring and accrediting participation.
Difficulties arise however in deciding how this should be carried out and which events are CPD worthy.
Given that private study is still appropriate in view of the nature of the work, and that geographical isolation puts some members at a disadvantage, monitored attendance may not be the fairest form of assessment.
Nonetheless, a member's record of achievement in respect of CPD  is likely to become one of the criteria applied to the approval of an application for a fellowship.
In its current review of the effectiveness of CPD, the Institute is paying particular attention to these issues.
The final and perhaps most important aspect of a programme of CPD, is who should be responsible for its initiation and implementation.
In the early days of its operation, it fell in terms of administration between the stools of Members' Affairs and Education, and the respective roles of the Institution, the Branches, commercial operators and the public sector educational institutions were never made clear.
Fortunately, what might have been an area of conflict has been modified by compromise.
No one seriously believed that the Institution, having spawned the policy, would make itself responsible for its implementation, but all hoped that a watching brief would be maintained; this has been the case, but with a complication: no financial provision.
The three agencies, the Branches, the commercial agencies and the educational institutions have developed a policy of mutual support whereby the Branches include some academic input in their meetings, the commercial sector provides a more sophisticated programme, and the polytechnics draw upon the strengths and goodwill of their own staff and practitioners to provide seminars at post-graduate level.
But the lack of finance in all but the commercial sector is inhibiting.
The latter has the organisation, the marketing skill and the backing to offer viable meetings, but these centre on the affluent conurbations and are not therefore always accessible to members.
The Branches have to depend upon the voluntary support of the membership to fulfil what many see as their prime role, and where once the polytechnics were able heavily to subsidise a service of CPD seminars or even help run an ‘in-house’ programme, they can no longer operate in this way and have to charge for the events on a full cost basis.
The profession has managed to offer CPD on a shoestring up until the mid-1980s but henceforth some funding will have to be found if it is to fulfil the role given it by the membership.
The nature and content of CPD events have frequently been cross-disciplinary, a necessary factor if they are to attract optimum attendances.
In consequence no particular facet of the policy is seen to be peculiar to any one Division; what is so for the profession generally is also true for the building surveyor; we are all in the same boat.
THE FUTURE
But what of the future?
A professional environment must be created so that the members have confidence in the educational system to produce persons of the right calibre with the ability to bring identity and credit to the profession.
Previous reference has been made to the slowly increasing proportion of graduates entering the Division, and it is interesting to note that in 1984 of all members achieving corporate membership of the RICS, 65.6% did so by exempting degree or diploma courses, but of building surveyors only 51.1% joined the Division by this method, the lowest proportion of the three main Divisions.
Nor is this untypical; statistics prepared for the past four years present the same picture.
However, what the 1984 statistics for the Division also show is that, of the 51.1% exempting degree or diploma holders, 22.4% qualified by the graduate entry or Direct Membership schemes, and only 26.5% entered by way of the Institution's examinations.
Now that the Institution's policy for the provision of part-time education has been made clear for, say, the next ten years, it is most likely that all new entrants to the profession will be studying for surveying degrees or diplomas and the profession will have finally become a graduate one.
In these circumstances, the RICS will have completely to relinquish control over curricula content to approved universities, polytechnics and colleges — a process which, as we have seen, is already under way.
The task these educational establishments face is to equip the surveying student with the basic skills of the profession and an ability to adapt to new circumstances.
The substance of building surveying has not changed appreciably over the years and while certain aspects of the more academic subjects of economics and law have been latterly introduced, they were there to prop up the whole discipline rather than to provide invaluable information.
With a resurgence of technology, it will be unnecessary in future years to seek artificial academic support for the discipline; instead the study of construction technology, construction method, design and materials and construction management should be allowed to form the core with the relevant contribution of legal and financial (rather than economic) subjects directed towards it.
It should also be borne in mind that, in the current success of building surveying practice in the areas of project management — be the project new or refurbishment — and analysis of building performance, the medium through which these special skills are consolidated is client contact.
The relationship that the building  surveyor is able to develop directly with the client is unusual in its closeness, and has a special significance in that it enables him to be identified as the expert in the area of work under inquiry.
That is to say, he stands between the client and the outcome of his instruction and is therefore identified as the one most responsible for a project's success or failure.
Within future curricula, this aspect of the building surveyor's career may need greater emphasis, to ensure he holds the ground he has already gained.
The mode of student attendance is more difficult to forecast, because while a full-time place for study will feature topmost in a candidate's range of choices, the prospect of getting a job early may provide a stimulus for part-time study.
The critical factor in such an equation is the role of the employer, for all part-time study must be employer-led; but the availability of study opportunity in the shape of viable courses will also be a crucial factor.
The number of eighteen-year-olds seeking further and higher education is currently on the decline, at the same time as more of the graduates emerging from university are non-cognate; thus a balance is being held but at the expense of ‘RICS students'.
(This too is demonstrated by the statistics, for as RICS entrants have declined from 41.2% in 1981 to 26.5% in 1984, so the graduate intake has increased from 6% to 13.8% over the same period.)
This poses two questions.
Will employers prefer the new graduates to the A level employees, and, where will the graduates with their already developed learning skills obtain their building surveyor education?
Furthermore, if the demand for full-time places increases, will there remain a sufficient number of part-time students to sustain the continuance of the courses?
With the proven success of the Open University methods of distance learning, it is likely that a combination of sophisticated distance learning packages, linked to short residential periods on university or polytechnic campus during the vacations, will provide an efficient and cost-effective method of study.
There remains a further consequence of the Institution's policy of withdrawing from the examination process.
While CNAA remains the accrediting authority for degree status, the Business and Technician Education Council has the responsibility for, and is an increasingly influential body in, the establishment of pre-degree certificates and diplomas.
Thus, there exists a state structure which includes the surveying specialisms and which provides accredited courses and awards to levels other than those of university or CNAA degrees.
With a realisation that many of the profession's tasks, in both the private and the public sector, now being undertaken by graduates and full members of the Institution  could equally well be done by qualified technicians, the role, influence and recognition of technician courses is bound to increase.
Salary structures and the unpredictability of recruitment patterns are also likely to bring the technician more to the notice of discerning employers.
This will not so much create a two-tier structure within the Division, as enable a wider spectrum of students to participate in the profession, allowing them to stop off, by way of academic attainment, economic circumstances or job notice, at different levels, secure in the knowledge that they have professional status, capable of being upgraded if they so wish.
CONCLUSION
While the evolution of the Building Surveyors Division, and consequently the education and structure that had to serve it, was a little painful, disconcertingly humble and certainly slow, the present circumstances give cause for dignified confidence.
The prognosis is for more full-time and part-time degree courses, providing study based upon technology, but incorporating management skills, together with enhanced distance learning facilities to provide bridging courses for non-cognate graduates.
However, none of this makes up a complete education and training programme for a building surveyor: it is only the first part, the second being the professional training component culminating in the Test of Professional Competence.
An academic model for building surveying education has been established by the ‘centres of excellence’, and where the shortfall in employment prospects has chilled the ebullience of some job markets, the building surveyor is currently displaying skills and attributes that stimulate a demand and maintain a 100% employment record for the graduates.
The prospects are bright and assured: ‘Never fear the want of business — a man who qualifies himself well for his calling never fails of employment’(Thomas Jefferson).
Michael Finn
Practice Management and Job Control
As any professional practice or department becomes more successful, its expansion is unlikely to be achieved without growing pains.
This is no less true in the surveying profession, and those who were once concerned only with the responsibility of quality control and personal time apportionment will have found that a position of seniority in an expanding work sector now requires a far broader range of management skills.
Job costing, fee assessment, cash-flow forecasting and staff motivation are only a few of the requirements of a successful practice manager.
Although accountants may be on hand, the surveyor at partner level in a growing practice, or one of a substantial size, may find himself in the anomalous situation of spending the major part of his time on management for which he received no training rather than on technical matters, in which he is expert.
There is no doubt that competition from both within and outside the profession will continue to grow, and efficient practice management in all its forms has become as important as technical skill in maintaining and improving profitability.
An increasingly perceptive and litigation-conscious clientele, combined with the abolition of fee scales and the introduction of fee tendering, will ensure that only those practices with an awareness of management skills will survive.
Strong management is required at two levels — management of the practice and management of each project.
Surveyors must decide whether to meet this challenge themselves or employ others to do so.
There really is no alternative.
Many of the traditions and principles of professional practice are today being challenged by social, economic and to some extent legal changes in society.
The process of training and qualification does not automatically guarantee the surveyor job security and the buyer of professional services is no longer interested either in tradition for its own sake or in the mystique in which many professions have corseted themselves.
The breeze of competitive change dictates that the professional who wishes to survive must be a very different animal in the next fifty years from previously, and that no surveyor can approach the problems of the future with attitudes and practices which are rooted in the past.
Whilst the maintenance of professional standards must remain  paramount, competition is increasing as a result both of clients demanding evidence of value for money and of the number of professional practices anxious to increase the size of their slice of the cake.
This pressure must bring about greater awareness of the need for good management techniques both in the organisation of a practice or department and in the execution of clients' work.
The resources necessary to discharge the functions of a surveying practice may not be scarce, but these functions grow increasingly costly and therefore efficiency in the application of those resources is essential in running a successful practice.
Ability in the techniques of good management should be a prime objective of all surveyors.
This chapter crystallises the main issues relevant in the management of a surveying practice and the internal organisation necessary to manage a project successfully.
PRACTICE MANAGEMENT
Clear objectives are essential as, without well-defined goals, it is likely that efforts will be misdirected and achievement consequently disappointing.
In commercial organisations, the prime aim is usually to maximise the return on capital invested to benefit the owners of the business or to secure further capital necessary for growth.
This is not usually the case in a surveying practice, where the preoccupation is more with technical and professional aspects while matters such as profitability are often only discussed in hushed tones or privately between the partners.
In any organisation where the personnel can relate themselves and their role to clearly defined objectives, they will be motivated by team effort.
In contrast where there is no stated goal, their contribution will be obscure and their sense of dedication and responsibility will ebb: when purpose is unclear, performance is low.
The personal effort and good fortune of the partners may have resulted in advancement in the past, but continued success in a growing practice will be helped by the clarity of its aims.
Each practice will have differing ones but the following represent common ground: development of the practice, requirements of the partners, development of the staff.
Development of the Practice
No surveyor would contemplate the construction of a new building without first drawing up detailed plans.
Likewise a business plan should be developed in order to chart the proposed progress.
Business plans can be as simple or as complicated as the designer wishes, but their prime function is to set well-defined  goals and to identify the resources in terms of time, finance, accommodation, equipment, personnel and training that will be required to meet the objectives.
For example, one aim of a business plan may be to acquire the local authority housing department as a new client.
To achieve this the following must be identified and stated in the business plan:
Time-scale for achieving objective broken down into component parts
Finance necessary for producing practice information, photographs, employing extra staff, renting more accommodation, purchasing additional equipment, etc
Personnel, and accommodation required for any extra staff needed to handle the work once obtained.
Programme for training new (and existing) staff in the procedures of the new client and generally becoming familiar with his requirements.
Having set the objective, the steps necessary to achieve it must be identified.
These could be:
Produce practice information and other necessary promotional material
Make contact with officers at the appropriate levels within the organisation
Arrange meetings with those officers and visits to schemes you have previously completed
Prepare a proposal which can be sent to the potential new client at the appropriate time, outlining your approach to their work, proposed fee structure, etc.
A time-scale should be set for the achievement of each of the steps identified, accompanied by a system of monitoring which is independent of those concerned with accomplishing the aim.
As budgeting is an integral part of any business plan, it is usually preferable both to express the plan and to review it on an annual basis that coincides with the firm's accounting year.
Practice development is a lengthy process requiring continued application and review.
It is therefore desirable to have both a long-term (say five years) and a short-term (one year) plan.
The two should be interrelated and constantly evolving so that a five-year rolling plan is always in view.
No plan should be inflexible, the services offered and the demands of clients should be monitored constantly to ensure that both are compatible.
A weather eye must  also be kept on external changes, such as government policy, which can affect the surveyor's business.
For instance, small practices which rely heavily on local demand could experience a period of decline if, owing to regional factors, reduced investment occurred in the locality.
Internal changes can also affect the development of the practice, for example, the resignation or retirement of partners and the appointment of new partners can have a major bearing on the vitality of the firm.
The reallocation of management functions within the practice and redefinition of objectives can materially change the image of the practice and the working environment of the partners and staff.
Requirements of the Partners
The sole principal is saved many of the difficulties and tensions of partnership; on the other hand, he must face other problems such as a finite client list, constant pressure to be aware of the situation on each job and the need to know the individual requirements of each client.
Within a partnership the interests of the partners can be diverse and the success of the practice hinge on the way in which the partners' ambitions are moulded together into a harmonious plan.
Ambitious young partners may seek expansion which requires capital.
Their ability to provide such capital may however be limited, and therefore high profits will be sought.
By contrast older established partners may be less keen on expansion in view of the added pressures it will produce.
Once again, clear objectives are necessary; partners must manage their corporate affairs in a way similar to business affairs, with plans and objectives well defined and progress clearly monitored.
Organisation
As a professional practice grows, so the work of the equity partners can change from direct involvement in a project to the organisation of a structure in which others can efficiently carry out the work.
Some surveyors may find such a loss of direct involvement personally unacceptable, particularly if not trained for the new role, but the growth rate of a firm is probably dictated more by the partners' ability to manage the organisation than by their own capacity for surveying work.
Constantly changing technology and the demands of clients for speed and reasonable cost, point to a need to specialise in some areas of work.
If specialisations or departments are to be created they must have clear identities and objectives.
The chain of  command must be defined and lines of reporting well established so that specialisation optimises time, man-power and professional skills and results in a better quality job produced more quickly and showing increased value for money.
In order to preserve certain client relationships it may be necessary for a partner (not responsible for the particular specialisation required) to maintain personal control whilst delegating the execution of the task to the group or department concerned.
As a practice grows its structure will need formalising to facilitate proper control.
Specific areas of responsibility will need to be established covering such aspects as administration, finance, personnel and marketing.
Each of these areas must be controlled and assessed separately.
Delegation
Central to sound organisation is the creation of a structure in which people can work and delegation is practicable.
The art of delegation is possibly the manager's most valuable skill.
The delegation of a task does not however transfer accountability; delegation must be linked to the necessary authority.
The partner concerned will need to develop control systems to enable him to monitor progress and to satisfy himself about quality control and supervision.
Delegation, accompanied by effective control, is possibly the best method of developing the contribution made by staff.
The wide range of work common to surveyors within most practices makes the delegation of selected tasks possible in the context of personal ability.
The manager must strive systematically to increase responsibility within his team and thus develop experience and confidence in his staff.
Controls should centre on quality, results and performance.
The measurement of success as a factor of control must be clearly established and related to either predetermined criteria or a performance measure which is well known.
For example, the quality of presentation of a drawing can be established by reference to previous similar work.
Controls must be sufficiently near to the event to enable adjustment or avoiding action to be taken.
Personnel
In most surveying firms the largest single outgoing is budgeted under the heading of Personnel.
No matter how good the firm's organisation it cannot compensate for low-grade staff; the selection and training of personnel is therefore an essential part of the surveyor's management function.
Policies should be developed to deal with matters such as organisation  and staffing, recruitment, training, employment conditions, sickness, discipline and retirements.
In an expanding practice recruitment may be the prime personnel requirement.
The cost of recruitment should not be underestimated nor the time it takes from the decision to recruit to the new staff member joining.
It is important to prepare a description of the vacancy and a description of the qualities of the person required to fill it.
The job description should cover inter alia title, grade, qualifications and experience required, position within the firm's structure, responsibilities and special arrangements.
The job specification should set out the qualities and skills of the person required for the post and these should ideally match the job description.
Many surveying practices face irregular demand for their services and therefore the correct balance between work volume and staff levels can be difficult to maintain.
The use of temporary staff for some functions such as secretarial duties and drafting can facilitate the balance between peaks and troughs and, in some cases, subcontracting of the instruction (or part of it) may be possible, although this latter approach needs careful consideration and responsibility control.
Client protection is also a matter which has to be addressed.
Regulation of the work flow by turning away instructions (when this is possible without offending or losing good clients) is a necessary part of job and personnel management.
The setting of fee levels is another device which can assist in balancing work load to staff resources, using the simple factors of supply and demand to regulate work flow.
It must be remembered however that outgoing costs and a minimum level of profit should be recovered on each assignment and the practice of ‘buying work’ should be discouraged at all times.
Training for partners and staff is necessary and costly although important in an increasingly competitive market.
Systematic programmes of training should be instigated in both technical subjects and matters allied to the surveyor's job but not essential to it, e.g. the operation of financial markets, the art of negotiation, personal time management.
The value of on-the-job training for junior staff should be maximised and where necessary different types of work (or staff) moved around the office to ensure an even distribution of basic knowledge.
Advantage should be taken of external courses where these can be shown to be relevant and cost effective.
Clients expect high-level advice and in a constantly evolving technical profession, training is a prerequisite for competence.
With the profession having accepted the need for a formalised system of Continued  Professional Development (see Chapter 5) it will be necessary to devise specifically designed training programmes and to manage these at a senior level to ensure that they are effectively maintained.
For each professional within the practice a training programme should be devised.
This might consist of: special in-house courses, attendance at outside professional courses, plus evening college lectures and private study.
Regular assessment of an individual's progress and training requirements is important, and should be linked with job analysis and promotion prospects.
Effective personnel management requires considerable time and effort, and annual interviews (appraisals) are necessary to ensure a progressive environment in which partners and staff can develop and the business of the firm be discharged with increasing quality and efficiency.
Communication
The heart of effective management is communication, whether between partners and employees or between line managers and subordinates.
Professional duties are themselves a series of communications; firstly, the surveyor receives from his client a ‘brief’ which will usually represent a fundamental item of communication between client and surveyor; the partner or manager responsible will then communicate his understanding of that brief to the surveyor who will then progress the instruction.
Throughout implementation of the job, communication will take place at a variety of levels and the skill with which it is handled will often dictate the ultimate success of the job.
However knowledgeable a surveyor may be, his skills will be limited unless he can communicate.
Managers in a surveying practice must therefore master the art of communication and use its every facet in organising, controlling and reviewing the activities of others.
A clear understanding of the task by the partner and/or manager is a prerequisite for good communication.
Instructions must be clarified and the instructor should probe when appropriate to ensure that his requirements are properly understood.
There can be a world of difference between what is said (or written), what is meant and what is understood.
Without effective communication, delegation is impossible.
The good manager will be keenly aware of the needs of others and able to identify information which must be passed on.
He must also be able to interpret or amplify when necessary.
There are three basic methods of communication within an organisation, and managers must decide which is most appropriate  in each circumstance: oral (meetings, telephone, lectures, interviews); written (letters, reports, telex); or mass (notice-board, news-sheet, magazines, tapes, slides, films).
As a way of ensuring effective job control, it is sound practice to develop within the office, standard systems for communicating important information such as contract instructions, valuation details, site reports, meeting minutes.
Likewise communications to staff can be standardised without becoming impersonal.
A firm's newsletter (or briefing), for example, can communicate information regarding new instructions, pressures within the organisation, personnel details and the aims of the partners.
Team briefing sessions are effective in developing the art of communication.
In a small practice this could involve the whole office: in larger firms individual line managers should regularly brief their own subordinates on all matters relevant to the work of the group including information generated by the partnership for general consumption.
Finance and Administration
This is covered by David Robinson in Chapter 7 and it is only necessary here to emphasise the need for some of the partners (and to a lesser extent senior managers) to allocate time to financial control and administration.
No matter how small the practice may be, it must be financially managed if it is to succeed.
As a firm expands, the need for sophisticated financial control, possibly in the hands of one individual, will become necessary.
Unless steps are taken to develop the financial structure of the practice ahead of its business expansion, there will be a risk of over-trading, under-capitalisation and the payment of high interest rates.
Administration, like finance, is a ‘down line’ function of good management; it should not dominate the practice; the entrepreneurial spirit of many professionals should not be quelled by an overemphasis on financial or administrative management.
Marketing
The final branch of a sound management structure is marketing.
Unfortunately many surveyors in private practice do not consider marketing an essential part of practice management.
Invariably in well-established firms the work continues to flow from long tapped sources, but in the aggressive business climate facing the profession today it can no longer be assumed that this will continue.
The threat from outside the surveying profession by those who would compete on the same ground can be countered by active marketing of the surveyor's services.
The necessity of allocating time and  resources to this aspect of practice management cannot be too heavily stressed.
Finally, it is important to remain flexible: the future is a mental picture and the process of planning for it and managing a business to enable it to survive requires experience and imagination.
The buyers of services are becoming more selective, unconcerned about cosy established relationships and anxious to be convinced that they are receiving value for money: competitiveness and excellence are the watchwords for the future.
Flexibility of approach is important to survival and the practice which has adopted a ‘managed’ structure will be best placed to appreciate the changing environment, adapt to it as necessary and implement the changes within the practice.
JOB MANAGEMENT AND CONTROL
The principles of good management discussed above are equally relevant to job management.
We now analyse those aspects of management and control that relate to particular jobs rather than to the practice as a whole.
Resources
A recognised formal staff structure acts as a basis both for the processing of instructions and for job control and expansion.
Individuals need to know where they fit in the organisation, what their responsibilities are in terms of organisation and job control and who is above and below them.
That structure need not be rigid or too formalised but it must be clear and known to those in the firm.
Without it chains of command and responsibility patterns cannot be established.
If staff are the most valuable resource in a surveying practice, then accommodation and equipment will rank second.
They are, of course, interrelated; use of computers in calculation, word processing and computer-aided design, for example , can put strains on office space, and as accommodation is one of the least flexible resources, there must be careful consideration and if necessary appropriate investment made ahead of time.
When considering investment in equipment, particularly major items such as computers, it will be necessary to weigh up carefully the cost and value of the equipment and also its anticipated rate of obsolescence.
The need to train staff in the use of new equipment must not be overlooked and the pay-back period may be very long.
Having decided to invest in new and expensive equipment it may then be appropriate to market actively for more work in a  particular field in order to maximise the use of the equipment and enable more staff to become proficient in its use.
If staff are the most valuable resource then time is the most scarce.
Invariably the surveyor's work is associated with a property or business transaction and because investment and interest rates are an inevitable part of the project, delay or slow progress may prove unacceptable to a client.
The fine balance between proper execution of the task and its achievement in minimum time can only be set with experience and even then never exactly.
A detailed analysis of time likely for elements of each job before commencement should be undertaken to indicate ways in which, for example, some stages can be done back-to-back and total time saved.
Two-stage tendering, for instance, means negotiation with a contractor can progress at the same time as the production of detailed design information, thereby shortening the total period necessary in which to complete the pre-contract work.
Incentives
Payment by results is a dangerous area in a professional practice.
Any attempt to reward performance job by job should be viewed with caution as, with the exception of commercial developments, where time and money are interrelated, it is usually impossible to complete a job successfully by spending the shortest possible time on it.
A system of incentive fees may be advantageous when measurement includes other elements, such as quality.
Incentive payments to staff in the form of a bonus relating to the whole firm or department are possible and where used should be made in respect of a known period of time or on completion of certain jobs.
Monitoring of fees earned against time spent is usually a sufficient measure of performance and will provide an incentive to staff, but not all projects run smoothly and allowance must therefore be made for these.
As with all businesses, the work done should be cost effective.
This can be best calculated by reference to accurate time-cost information.
All surveying practices should employ a sophisticated time-recording system which relates to daily time-sheets and measures time-cost incurred against anticipated fees.
It is only with such a system that uneconomic jobs or work types can be identified and stopped for either the fee basis to be renegotiated or the amount of work done reassessed.
The level of staff deployed on a project influences cost effectiveness.
Although careful control is required, the ideal system seeks to have all staff working at the peak of their knowledge and ability.
Such an assumption however overlooks the mundane unproductive work which is common in any office (e.g. filling in time-sheets!).
Fees
The basis and level of fees need to be established.
With the abolition of professional fee scales, it is possible for firms to publish their own house scales.
The present political climate is encouraging fee tendering and competition between firms.
Whilst this is not unacceptable, price without value is meaningless and firms must set out clearly the service they will provide and, where appropriate, show examples of the standard they expect to achieve.
Given an acceptable fee basis for a job, an accurate time-cost recording system should be adopted which permits analysis of fees.
This can greatly assist in tendering or in compiling house scales.
Work habitually done on an ad valorem basis may be quite uneconomical and should perhaps be time charged.
As important as level of fees is cash flow — the life blood of any business.
On long run jobs regular interim payments should be obtained which are either time or work related.
Clients will often appreciate a realistic approach to fee billing, and a break from the architects' system of 75% at tender stage can assist cash flow.
On large jobs where the fee is related to the value of the building contract, for example, it is possible to negotiate with the client a basis of drawing monthly fees which relate to the gross value of the building work executed during that period.
In this way a regular income flow can be secured.
On time-cost work, regular (monthly or quarterly) billing is possible and should be established as part of the fees agreement when instructions are confirmed.
Planning the Work Method
Time spent in planning a job is time saved in doing it.
Unless a particular task is repeated regularly, it is essential for the good management of the job to prepare properly by considering the objectives of the work.
This aspect is further considered in the following section on job control.
The job should be analysed not only from the surveyor's point of view, but also from the client's.
For example, the surveyor may consider cost the overriding criterion, whereas the client's objective may be to complete the project in the shortest possible time.
Time allocation is the next consideration.
Again, discussion and agreement of the time scale with the client should take place immediately, together with a detailed examination by the partners of available resources and current work load.
There is clearly no sense in setting an impossibly short timetable  in order to impress the client.
On the other hand, the allowance of too much time will lead to stagnation, lack of enthusiasm and the job's being put on the ‘back burner’ when more important assignments arrive.
The timetable must be formal and actual, i.e. dealing with dates not periods of time.
The way in which the time-frame is applied to each assignment is covered in the following section on Job control.
Within the agreed timetable the task must be broken down into elements or stages which are themselves ‘milestones’.
The target date should be set against these events and progress monitored at each stage.
When drawing up the job timetable, forward planning should allow for all known eventualities to be taken into account e.g. other work and holidays.
The work plan timetable will highlight specific requirements which must be either budgeted for or planned as appropriate.
For example, a long period of site activity may require pre-booking of hotel accommodation and measured survey stages could demand additional temporary help.
Time spent in planning is useful particularly where the plan is fully utilised as a formal project network for the organisation of the total job.
Delegation
Not all surveyors have the same ambition and aptitude, and unless training is the reason for putting appropriate surveyors on to certain jobs, it is advisable to select those individuals who have experience relevant to, and interest in, the particular project in hand.
In the latter case, delegation becomes possible.
The complexity of the job will to some extent dictate the level of personnel required, and detailed consideration should be given to the optimum staff structure.
If owing to pressure of other work in the office the ideal team is not available, senior management will need to pay greater attention to the job since either the line of delegation will be sparse at the top end, or well qualified and experienced surveyors will be forced to do mundane duties which could both lower morale and prove financially inefficient.
Delegation without enabling authority is of little value, the person delegating will never be free from the task and the subordinate never fired with the enthusiasm and dedication which comes with having authority.
The position and authority of subordinates must be clear, both internally and externally.
Senior personnel should only usurp their assistants in public when this is unavoidable, otherwise they will stunt initiative and reduce team cohesion.
Clear ground rules should be established so that those to whom authority is delegated appreciate the extent of their power and the  situations and stages at which they should report back.
Delegation is not abrogation and the person who delegates retains accountability and therefore must be in ultimate control at all stages of the job.
An integral part of delegation is the setting of targets for those given responsibility for tasks.
Just as the work plan and timetable are essential tools in progressing instructions, so they can prove useful aids in target setting.
The target should be identifiable as part of the total work plan.
The person to whom the task is delegated must be able to see the role of his task within that plan and adequate resources must be made available to him.
With targets set, the person delegating must give every encouragement along the way and not simply ignore the task until the next target date arrives.
Reference to the work plan and timetable during the course of the project will also be necessary in order to assess progress and consider resource allocation.
Discussion between the team leader and his surveyor must take place as the monitoring process should not be done by one person in isolation.
Continued interest will reassure the surveyors involved that responsibility is still felt at higher level and this will inevitably produce better quality work.
At convenient points in the job an appraisal should be conducted.
This is a more objective discussion than progress monitoring and should concentrate on the problems the surveyor is encountering in his own contribution rather than the inherent problems of a particular job.
Current work will feature as a background in an appraisal, but the aim should also be to discover the success of delegating the responsibility from the viewpoint of both parties.
It should be a frank two-way discussion from which useful lessons can be learnt for the future.
Monitoring Job Progress
Without a system of progress evaluation the manager will not know until the end, whether he has succeeded.
Systems are required to facilitate progress monitoring.
They should be simple and comprehensible to both manager and surveyor.
Examples are given in the section dealing with job control.
No work plan is infallible and changes may be necessary.
Monitoring progress against the timetable allows variations to be identified and replanning undertaken.
The frequency of review may be critical and therefore the work plan should highlight dates when appraisal or review will be carried out.
At the review any lag which has developed should be identified and where necessary additional effort or resource applied to get back on programme.
Although there is usually a link between time and resources, this  is not always the case and adding more staff can be counterproductive at certain stages of a job.
Monitoring is only beneficial if steps are taken to act on the feedback received.
Although no two surveying projects are the same, there are sufficient similarities for common problems to emerge.
The effective manager will apply lessons from one job to another both to alter current situations and to assist the future planning process.
Evaluation
Information from each project or job should be collated in an easily understandable form to assist in subsequent evaluation.
Various types of evaluation are possible, according to the information required and the purpose for which it is intended.
Not only are time-cost recording systems useful in measuring ultimate job profitability, they can also be an aid to mid job evaluation (see fig. p. 95).
For example, analysis of the total fee receivable against the resource plan for the job will indicate the appropriate level of time necessary for each stage.
Records from the time-cost system can therefore be compared with the predicted work plan and if large divergencies occur or an underlying pattern of divergence emerges, appropriate action can be taken.
Evaluation in the longer term requires an analysis of completed tasks against financial information and of the spread of work across the firm or department.
This allows the practice to compare total income per job against total time-cost and to identify job types which consistently show imbalance.
Comparative analysis is useful not only between different jobs but between different surveyors carrying out similar tasks.
Although individual job analysis may not prove conclusive, it allows trends to be established and where appropriate, unprofitable job types singled out for special scrutiny.
Jobs undertaken on a particular fee basis can be analysed together for profitability.
Staff groupings can be subjected to productivity tests to enable budgeting decisions to be made regarding staff levels in the future.
Productivity tests involve consideration of fee received against time-cost invested and can be applied to the analysis of work types and clients as well as staff.
The results, while a useful management tool, should be viewed cautiously as no two jobs are identical and the statistics may make no allowance for special circumstances.
This said, the information disclosed must be seriously considered and action taken as appropriate.
Motivation
Enthusiasm is the outward sign of motivation; without motivation, efficiency wanes, productivity falls and inaccuracies develop.
Either the manager must be able to create an environment that stimulates self-motivation, or his leadership qualities must be such that enthusiasm is automatically generated within the practice or department.
Although it is not always possible to match jobs perfectly with aptitude, use should be made of the strength and expertise of senior staff in the jobs to which they are best suited; their enthusiasm will spread to assistants and a higher level of general motivation will result.
Whether problems increase as enthusiasm wanes is not easy to measure, but every office will inevitably have its share of problem jobs and loss leaders.
The quality of an individual's performance will certainly be reduced when job progress is frustrated either owing to poor internal organisation and resources or to external factors beyond the surveyor's control.
Job satisfaction is a key element in the motivation of the professional.
So also are promotional prospects, and future managers within the practice should be identified and given suitable training in order to equip them for greater responsibility.
Efforts should always be rewarded and whilst good salary levels are essential to retain the right calibre of staff, bonus payments for exceptional effort or particular success will be rewarded by increased motivation.
Job Control
It would be unthinkable to build a machine without controls to regulate its speed and direction.
Likewise any project or assignment needs a system of control to ensure that it proceeds in the manner designed.
Controls, however, are in themselves useless unless they trigger an appropriate response to permit changes to be made.
This demands an organisation and control system that channels information to the right people at the right time.
The designer of any control system should bear in mind that controls influence the way people think, talk, act and react.
Because they measure performance, they touch upon people's sensitivities and self-interest.
While there are some ‘off the shelf’ packages which can be employed to assist in time and cost controls, there are no comprehensive programmes which can simply be applied to every surveying job, basically because no two are entirely alike.
The  following sections therefore set out to identify key issues which should be borne in mind when designing job control systems to suit the organisation and individual assignment.
Formulation of Detailed Work Programme
Before any job can be controlled it must first be analysed into its component parts.
Each task should be identified and its position in the overall project established.
A bar chart can often be a useful format for listing tasks in a clear visual manner and showing them against the time-frame of the overall project.
Interrelated tasks should be linked in order to reflect areas where performance and time-scale may be critical.
The key to identification of tasks is the correct breaking-down of the job in sufficient detail to enable crucial steps to be listed, but not in such detail that minute functions — of little significance — are overemphasised.
Once the component parts have been established, their order in terms of time-scale can be decided.
This process will identify critical areas where lack of performance could prevent progression to the next stage.
Not dissimilar from the system known as critical path analysis, the approach envisaged should show a time-scale allocation against each task.
In order to identify the ‘critical’ elements, the time-scale must indicate the earliest and latest finish dates and any functions which will trigger the next step (see fig. p. 96).
Often at this point it is possible to pick out tasks which, although time-consuming and important to the project, do not influence the progress of the overall programme.
These non-critical elements can be either spread throughout the time-scale or tackled when spare capacity is available.
The danger of the latter approach is that they can be shelved and then become critical at a time when resources are being deployed elsewhere.
A further advantage of detailed job analysis is the ability it gives to allocate resources.
In any surveying practice, labour is the key issue and since it is an expensive commodity it must be used to the highest level of productivity.
With many surveying projects the input of resources is not consistent throughout the job.
Very often one individual with only a small time commitment can carry out the initial investigation and appraisal aspects of a project, but once the scheme is under way the resource level may have to be increased in order to cater for the client's time-scale.
In the latter stages of the project the resource level may decline again.
By analysing a job with the benefit of experience, the peaks and troughs of activity can be identified and proper provision made for staff allocation.
Site Organisation and Control
The detailed work programme is not only a tool for analysing time-scale and resources, it is also a valuable document in controlling the project once it leaves the office and work commences on site.
The area of site control is complicated by the fact that the partner or manager of the job has not only to control his own staff and their performance, but also has to ensure — on behalf of his client — that the work being done under his direction by third parties is also properly progressed.
This double area of control can easily lead to the blurring of the job surveyor's responsibilities.
For example, delay on the project may be owing to either lack of information from the surveyor or the failure of the contractor to progress the works at the required pace.
For this reason regular and careful monitoring of the work programme is essential to enable early identification by the surveyor of any slippage.
No work programmes can.be ‘cast in tablets of stone’.
As mentioned above, a comprehensive programme should be prepared for the whole job, but when the contractor is appointed he will prepare his own contract programme and there will inevitably be a need to adjust the surveyor's programme in order to harmonise with the activities of the contractor.
Job control can be ineffective if the command structure is not properly laid down.
For example, a job surveyor must know the areas where he is free to issue instructions and give guidance to the contractor.
If he is consistently having to refer back for support this will not only weaken his standing with the contractor, but it will cause uncertainty and delay to the contract.
If the job surveyor is given autonomy in certain areas then the manager must ensure that he has a system of job control which enables him to keep abreast of the progress of the job and be able to compare surveyor and contractor performance in one operation.
(This may well require the harnessing of the separate programmes into one management schedule.)
Autonomy however should not imply total independence for although the manager may divest his authority to the surveyor to run the job on site, he is still ultimately responsible and must show support at all stages.
It is important however that the manager should set down the areas where responsibility for decisions is vested in the surveyor in order that any uncertainty regarding delegated authority is kept to an absolute minimum.
The supervision of work on site is a key factor for ensuring a good quality end product as well as for monitoring progress.
The  frequency of site visits will vary with the nature of the work in progress, but unless the surveyor has agreed a basis of instruction which excludes detailed supervision, then this aspect of job control will usually be extremely time-consuming.
Brief site visits are not sufficient to supervise work effectively and the surveyor must ensure that adequate time is set aside when on site to look closely at the work executed since the last inspection.
Too often time on site is absorbed in dealing with contractor's queries rather than in looking at the work.
Site supervision should be both systematic and comprehensive.
A method for inspection will avoid duplication or omission.
For example, the keeping of notes of each visit on site inspection sheets or in a specific notebook will greatly assist in reducing the tendency to reinspect work previously passed.
The notes should record the stage reached with regard to each element of construction and any defects or omissions set down.
A typical record sheet could be as indicated below:
When making an inspection of work in progress the surveyor should not hesitate to obtain the services of the contractor to satisfy himself that the work is done correctly, e.g. to check fixings by applying leverage or loading or to ascertain that screeds or pavings are correctly laid with a site level.
The criteria for analysing work done must primarily be the job specification.
If the specification is unclear as to the standard to be achieved, then the surveyor will be in difficulty.
References in the specification to Codes of Practice, or British Standards are helpful in setting a datum for measurement.
‘In accordance with good building practice’ is a phrase often used in specifications, but it is indefinable and therefore open to interpretation.
If British Standards or Codes of Practice are referred to, the surveyor must be aware of their content and limitations.
For example, tolerances can be within acceptable limits, but at each extreme.
This can lead to very wide discrepancies in the dimensions of adjacent components.
Notification of defects to the contractor should be done in writing.
The site inspection sheet, shown above, has provision to insert a reminder as to how and when the contractor was notified.
All instructions must be confirmed in writing; not only if they  have a financial effect.
Again standard forms can be used and copies should be sent to all interested parties.
Lengthy instructions are best handled by way of an addendum sheet in order to keep the standard form as succinct as possible, bearing in mind its subsequent use as a contractual and financial document.
Forward Planning
The detailed work programme is a critical document throughout the life of any project.
It needs constant update so that it is always a ‘living’ document.
If the detailed work programme is initially prepared with due thought and consideration, it will be possible to anticipate certain key points within the programme.
These key points can then be carefully monitored for time accuracy and if delays seem likely the programme can be reconsidered or at least its effect shown in a new programme and the client advised.
Where progress of the job is solely within the control of the surveying practice, i.e. with jobs such as schedules of dilapidations, condition surveys, site surveys and design work, the detailed work programme should be regularly monitored for progress.
Such monitoring should not only be backward, it must be forward looking and where it can be seen that a task has taken longer than anticipated, the effect of such delay should be immediately considered in relation to the overall programme.
If necessary rescheduling should be carried out either to give a new completion date or to increase resources (or reduce time allocated) in order to get back on schedule.
The satisfied client is the client who never gets surprises.
Where the surveyor is properly forward planning, there will be adequate notice of delay and the client can be notified accordingly.
A proposal to increase resources may incur extra costs, and therefore the client will need to be involved in the decision process.
In all other cases, early notification to the client of any changes is necessary both to ensure a good continuing relationship and also to enable the client to adjust his scheduling of matters which have a bearing upon the task being performed by the surveyor.
As with all advice to clients, written notification must follow the spoken word.
However insignificant the change may appear to the surveyor its effect may be far-reaching and subsequent embarrassment can be prevented by timely confirmation.
Progress Monitoring and Analysis
In any situation where heavy demands are placed on personnel owing to excessive work load, there is a tendency to deal with those jobs where most external pressure is being applied and to  neglect the ones showing least demand.
Such an approach ignores any pre-planning or the detailed work programme and will lead to total confusion and an absolute lack of control.
The surveyor responsible will then find himself under increasing pressure as the build-up of back-log work overrides current planned work.
Underestimating the speed of events or overestimating the efficiency of personnel are factors which lead to slippage in any work programme and their early detection is essential to effective progress monitoring.
But it is difficult to predict the stages at which progress on a job should be formally monitored.
The size and complexity of the task coupled with the overall time-scale will to a large extent dictate frequency of formal reviews.
Whilst individual job appraisals of each team member may be useful review of the whole job or project should be done with all concerned present.
Such a format will help to diminish the feeling of isolation which some individuals or departments may feel and will provide a forum for the exchange of views and ideas.
It is often amazing how the most insignificant contributor to a project can foresee the subtlest problem and devise a solution.
Although not designed as ‘brain storming’ sessions, progress review meetings may have to serve this function if a job is behind programme and rescheduling is required to get back on target.
Once the analysis of past performance and current progress is completed, the information derived must be fed back into the programme, either by way of historical updating or as hard facts upon which re-programming can be based.
There are always dangers in re-programming with the benefit of hindsight as the underlying assumption is that historical circumstances will be the same in the future.
It is better to re-analyse the following work programme in the light of past performance and make predictions against this background.
Seeing that cash flow is the life blood of any business, it follows that if fees are related to job progress there must be a direct relationship between performance and cash flow.
Where fees are based on time charges the effect of programme delay may not influence cash flow, unless the stages at which accounts can be rendered are linked to progress points.
However, in such cases the client should be warned of any likely increase in the budgeted fee due to overrun of the project.
Ad  valorum  fees will almost certainly be payable in relation to progress of the job and cash-flow predictions will be seriously affected should delay occur.
Not only therefore is monitoring for job progress necessary, but review of cash flow predictions must follow.
More serious to the surveying practice is the job which has a  fixed fee and runs over budgeted time.
Assuming the job was cost effective on the basis of the original programme, any delay or commitment to extra work in the surveyor's office could lead to the erosion of the job profit unless a significant increase in the fee datum occurs, i.e. the final account exceeds the contract sum.
When monitoring job progress the manager should be analysing fee predictions at the same time.
This information will be helpful in subsequent job appraisal and as a background to future fee quotations.
No form of monitoring is effective unless there is implicit within the manager's power an ability to control and introduce change.
Simply to observe that a job is running late and the profit margin is being squeezed will achieve nothing.
The manager must be able to act decisively by, for example, bringing in more lower paid staff to assist in mundane areas thus increasing productivity when compared with the same work being done at more senior level.
External factors such as slowness by the contractor may be causing programme delay and the manager must have the ability to involve himself at senior level within the organisations causing delay, in order to try to influence change in the progress of the work.
Effective control is active not reactive.
The manager is reviewing progress and analysing achievements to date in order to influence future performance.
Control reduces stress, increases objectivity and helps to sharpen focus on activities which really matter in the context of the whole project.
Any manager who fails to devise adequate systems for job control is at best not in control and at worst out of control.
David Robinson
Costing, Finance and Accounting in Practice
It is a sad but true reflection of all professional life that efficient business management has become as important a factor in ensuring success as technical competence.
It is recognised that for many, the call of the profession was in anticipation of spending each day involved in surveying work.
Instead, most principals, whether in large or small practices or departments, spend an ever-increasing proportion of their time in managing the business.
Financial control, aided by accountants, partnership secretaries and computers, is of paramount importance.
It is difficult to imagine how a business could survive without knowing and forecasting its cash flow, fee invoicing, costs and receipts.
Similarly, the use of time-sheets, hourly cost rates and profitability forecasts for each work type should be considered a vital part of every surveyor's armoury.
For some inexplicable reason, professional firms have previously considered that the.financial management procedures relevant to corporate entities bore little relevance to a professional services partnership.
Bitter experience or willing enlightenment have thankfully induced new attitudes.
‘THE BOTTOM LINE’
This inelegant but graphic import from American business vocabulary sums up the relevance of finance to the building surveying practice.
Gone are the days when professionals left the business of fees, commissions, variation charges, reimbursables and the rest to underlings whilst they got on with the interesting work.
The language of ‘break even analysis’, ‘down side risks’ and ‘cash flow’distinguishes the professional from his less competent contemporary.
None are exempt from this need to understand the principles of finance if they are to succeed.
The purpose of this chapter is to describe a framework within which an up-to-date surveying practice might operate.
It does not attempt to offer a detailed guide to the issues, or to cover such problems as fund raising, tax planning or profit sharing.
These are subjects which readers are encouraged to refer to a qualified professional adviser.
However, it describes an overall approach which experience has shown produces positive results in practice.
WHAT BUSINESS ARE WE IN?
Every firm or department carrying out building surveying work will, to a certain extent, be different from those in its peer group.
These differences may be minor, matters of portfolio composition or geographical area.
They may however be major as, for example, between a department within a large corporate entity and a small ‘hot shop’ practice specialising in one type of large building contract.
Much of what follows, and in particular the need for a systematic and planned approach to financial control, is not dependent on any particular assumption about the nature of the business.
Some topics, such as profit accountability and taxation would, however, need to be addressed differently for activities which vary greatly from the type assumed here.
The ‘model’ for this chapter is a practice specialising in building surveying, organised as a partnership with several professional fee-earning departments supported by specialist administrators.
Smaller or larger partnerships in all aspects of surveying will hopefully find all that follows relevant; sole practitioners and departments within companies will have different needs.
It is worth spending a moment highlighting these.
The sole practitioner faces some special problems in financial management.
Some are associated with the sheer lack of resources to apply to the routines of bookkeeping, billing and chasing debts, assessing and settling VAT and tax liabilities and keeping track of liquidity.
Others relate to policies of pricing and work management to avoid ‘feast’ and ‘famine’and to smooth out troughs in income.
The sole practitioner is especially vulnerable to the effects of sickness or other absence and the financial management regime must provide sufficient cover for such factors.
On a more positive note, the sole practitioner generally needs to care little about the financial decisions of his colleagues and how they might affect his income.
His colleagues are usually subordinates with little, if any, spending authority, thus, many of the financial management needs of more complex organisations are eliminated at a stroke.
Equally, costing and pricing decisions can often be made without recourse to complicated records.
Simple income and expenditure (and cash flow) formulae are generally all that are needed.
Doubtless the freedom from ‘bureaucracy’ such as an accounts department is one of the reasons why individuals decide to practise on their own.
By comparison, the problems of a department within a large corporation are more daunting.
While it can be assumed that routine bookkeeping and other financial support services are  readily available, questions of profit-making and pricing are likely to cause the surveyor difficulties.
Take the question of profit making.
A service department within a large company often operates simply as a ‘cost’ centre since it works wholly within the company itself.
Thus costs are accumulated (perhaps including overheads) but no revenue is earned by the department.
The difficulty with this is that unless there are well-established efficiency measures for the services of the department neither it nor its users will know whether they are getting value for money.
In these circumstances the department will be potentially vulnerable to subjective (and possibly erroneous) views on its performance.
The solution lies in internal cross-charging (or feeing) mechanisms which are negotiable and subject to external comparison.
This results in an ‘internal’ income stream against which efficiency can be measured.
Such a system raises special problems of ‘pricing’.
Is the department a marginal service for which the overhead commitment is already made or is it to recover all its costs, including capital?
The former might result in a totally false comparison with outside sources.
The latter could force elimination of, or reduction in, a vital in-house facility.
The principles and concepts outlined in this chapter will serve as an introduction to these issues.
But it is vital to start the financial management debate with knowledge of the business you are in and not to presume that there are universal systems which suit every circumstance.
Indeed, organisations are as varied as the people who work in them — both in their financial management needs and in their attitude to financial control.
FINANCIAL CONTROL — MASTER OR SLAVE?
One fundamental characteristic of professional people (including those who are the most successful) is to put technical excellence in their own field first, everything else coming a poor second.
In this secondary category falls financial control — seen by many as boring, bureaucratic and uncreative.
Whatever the merits of this criticism of financial methods, an initially cavalier attitude towards the subject can result in problems occurring which could, and should, have been anticipated.
Good financial management routines should be the well-established but unobtrusive skeleton of a practice.
A last-minute approach to paying bills or collecting debts is not good enough.
Sensible, practical disciplines which are acceptable to partners and staff at all levels are the foundations on which good financial control is built.
The problem for many organisations is that little time, or thought, is given to this aspect of the firm's infrastructure.
The result is a disjointed, inaccurate (and hence misleading) and inefficient system frustrating to both owners and staff.
There are two basic elements in the financial management system:
financial accounts which record the flow of transactions through the business
management accounts which provide data for the efficient and profitable operation of the business.
Good financial accounts are vital to the success of any enterprise.
Good management accounts separate the well-organised from the rest but are not vital in the same way.
These differences will be explained more fully later.
DIFFERENT STRUCTURES — DIFFERENT NEEDS?
There is a further aspect of financial management to consider at this stage: the impact of different legal structures on the way in which firms manage their financial affairs.
There are three main alternatives: sole practitioner; partnership; or unlimited or limited liability company.
The distinction between the first two is blurred by the fact that more than one principal working together with another will de facto be in partnership even though they may have no formal agreement between them.
The sole practitioner is usually working on one or two assignments at a time and consequently can keep track of costs and profitability relatively simply.
As soon as several partners are involved the need for good financial control systems is emphasised by the need to maintain equity between partners and perhaps relate profit shares to job profitability.
The company structure introduces the statutory requirement for an audit and the concept of directors' liability even though they may not be shareholders.
In general the more complex the legal structure chosen the more important will be the need to ensure that the design and operation of the financial management systems are sound.
This applies to obligations both to those trading with the firm (creditors, bankers and so on) and to those within it (partners and staff).
There are also important taxation implications which are worth outlining here.
Partnerships are assessed for tax on the ‘preceding’ year principle under which the profits of the accounting year ending during the last tax year form the basis of this year's assessment.
Many firms choose accounting years ending shortly after 6 April for this reason.
There is especially favourable treatment for partnerships in their  first few years of trading and, similarly, special rules apply when a ‘cessation’ occurs.
These rules are complex but many see tax planning advantages in the partnership arrangement.
Needless to say, the taxation liability is ultimately a personal one for the partner — assessed on him according to the profit-sharing formula.
Companies, on the other hand, account for corporation tax according to their accounting years.
Salaries and other remuneration are paid out of gross profits and the recipients account for tax under normal PAYE arrangements.
Although corporation tax rates on profits retained are generally lower than average personal tax rates (particularly for small companies) there is much less flexibility for tax planning than for partnerships under current legislation.
For both partnerships and companies all properly incurred expenses of the trade can be offset against revenue when computing taxable profit.
There are some minor, disallowable categories which apply to both structures.
Capital allowances at appropriate rates are also deductible.
FINANCIAL ACCOUNTS — THE FOUNDATIONS
The basic records that every practice should have include:
cashbook
wages and salaries record
fees/bills daybook and ledger
purchase daybook and ledger
nominal (or ‘impersonal’) ledger
These are necessary for any business to provide for the proper management of its finances.
Many practices buy such bookkeeping packages with their microcomputer.
There are, however, pitfalls involved.
If the information recorded in these systems is not carefully indexed by a well-designed coding scheme a great deal of re-analysis will be needed before meaningful management information can be produced.
For example, overheads should be analysed under such headings as selling, staff-related, accommodation and finance costs.
This is a vital part of retaining control over the finances of the business.
The salary records should provide the opportunity to analyse wages between productive and non-productive headings; the fees ledger should give the facility to ‘age’ debtors if necessary by client type or geographical area.
It is useful to decide before the accounts system is installed on exactly what analysis is going to be needed and then design the books (or buy the packages) needed to meet these ends.
The books  should be capable of giving simple management information without extra effort, irrespective of the size of the practice.
Shop around for the system which will best suit the practice concerned rather than accept the most readily available (such as the packages which the computer salesman will be keen to sell with the machine).
To be of any use as a tool of business control, financial records must be up-to-date.
Nowadays this is made easier by the disciplines needed to keep a computer-based system operating tidily.
Typical by-products of well-run financial records include:
debtor analysis by responsible partner (or director), by length of time outstanding and by department/activity
overhead analysis
information for VAT and tax computations
work in progress totals.
Whilst these useful items of information should be derived with little extra effort from the basic books of the business, more resources are needed to provide management accounts which are a real aid to decision taking.
At the heart of these systems lie two essential, and complementary elements — job costing and budgeting.
THE ROLE OF COSTING
A job-costing system performs several vital functions in a building surveying practice.
It is a means of measuring operating efficiency; a basis for making decisions on pricing, margins and overhead recovery; an aid to feeing, negotiation of variations and defence in disputes; and an element in the measurement of true profitability and net worth of the practice.
Lengthy works of great technical excellence have been written on the subject of costing, but the acid test of a well-organised system is that it provides useful information to management under each of the above headings.
There are some golden rules for organising a costing system.
These are:
defining a sensible unit of measurement as the ‘job’; many systems give a totally inadequate level of control through jobs being defined too widely;
properly defining and recording ‘direct’ costs.
Time is, of course, the major direct cost in a building surveying practice and a disciplined time recording system, backed by well-calculated hourly rates based on the relationship between productive and non-productive  time expected from the grade of partner or staff member concerned in a normal working year, is essential
recognising reimbursable expenses attributable to jobs, categorising them correctly and maintaining their separation from the operating costs of the business;
overheads being recovered on a logical and consistent basis to enable work in progress and profit levels to be assessed accurately on a job-by-job basis.
It is surprising to find that some practices, perhaps believing that the world will always grant them a living, manage their affairs without the elementary assistance of time recording.
The feeling that this discipline is somehow undignified is difficult to dislodge in some minds.
The installation of a computer system is an excellent opportunity to sweep away prejudice and introduce a more professional approach: good time recording systems, on micro-computer, for example, are often part of a suite of packages linking output to the input needs of the job-costing system.
Some firms find the problem of setting out hourly rates some-what daunting.
A simple formula for calculating a rate,excluding overhead recovery, is: where: r = rate per hour in £s e = employment costs in £s, including salary, national insurance, firm's pension contributions, value of company car n = estimated number of non-productive hours per annum including holiday, sickness, non-productive projects, administration (1820 is the number of hours in a year based on a 35-hour working week)
It is sensible to charge a notional salary for equity partners' time in such systems.
Adjustment may well be necessary, however, to exclude the element of partners' salaries from work in progress totals at the end of the financial year.
Setting overhead recovery rates at the right level is crucial.
The object is fully to recover estimated overheads at a normal level of activity measured by the total productive capacity of the firm.
This in turn is usually measured in a building surveying practice in terms of billable value of the hours for all fee earners.
The relationship between overheads and this basic productive capacity is  usually expressed as a percentage uplift on the hourly rate (r) referred to earlier.
This total cost rate does not, of course, include any profit element at this stage.
To the extent that job cost records are intended to assist in the calculation of real profit margins these rates, excluding profits, are normally used.
However, it is important to calculate fee rates inclusive of margins for use in time-based quotations.
Commonly, overheads double the underlying employment costs and when a margin of, say, 25% of revenue is added, the total uplift on the basic hourly rate is between 150% and 200%.
When a practice enters new markets, or takes on new clients or unfamiliar types of work, accurate costing becomes even more important than in more conventional activities.
The reason is simple: firms often ‘invest’ in the early jobs in a new work sector.
The investment is measured in terms of the irrecoverable time and expenses involved in the learning process.
If this extra time is not carefully recorded, under appropriate section headings, vital information will be lost forever to the practice, and expensive mistakes repeated.
In common with all financial systems, well-disciplined methods for collecting data from time-sheets, expense claims, and suppliers' invoices are very important.
Equally, it is vital that job cost records are posted on a daily basis and job cost reports are provided at least once a month to responsible professional staff and partners.
Ideally, these reports show costs recorded to date under analytical headings, progress compared with estimates of percentage completion to date, and details of billings, expense recoveries, credit notes, disputes and other relevant commentaries.
When fees are dependent on work measurement, the ‘cut off’ timing between the surveyors' estimates and the costing systems must be managed with great care if seriously misleading management information is to be avoided.
Overall the practice should have a monthly report of the periodic and cumulative value of job completions with budget comparisons to assist general control of the business.
Job costs should obviously provide a stimulus for and the basis of billing.
The history of completed job costs should help with estimating for new work.
This carefully won information is often overlooked; and, again, computer systems offer tremendous scope for retrieving essential data on earlier jobs to assist in quoting for new ones.
There is one area in which costing systems can do no more than provide the raw data, and that is in the treatment of overruns, variations and claims, which can often only be quantified by a  detailed interpretation of the data recorded in the system.
In practice, this exercise provides an excellent opportunity for active collaboration between the firm's accountant and responsible fee-earning staff.
BUDGETS — FACT OR FICTION?
The purpose of a system of budgeting is to provide a reasoned framework for the financial decisions of a future period.
These decisions include:
the level and cost of productive resources
the level and method of recovery of overheads
pricing services, particularly in competitive bidding situations
action to be taken if profits fall short of (or exceed) planned levels.
Creating a budget for the firm provides an exceptional opportunity for partners to review, in depth, all aspects of its operations.
The well-organised firm does not just look at last year and add ten per cent.
Having reliable data for the current year is, of course, a prerequisite of good budgets.
However, the review should be conducted from revenue expectation through to costs and not vice versa.
Where projects extend between years it is important to have a view of expected completion dates and the level of bidding needed to replace the activity lost.
Failure to anticipate changes in income levels and bidding requirements is a far more common cause of financial difficulty in practices than serious overspending.
In the budgeting process the firm should decide on what should be treated as profit centres and what as cost centres .
Profit centres should be logical groupings of work by type or by geographical distribution with significant directly attributable costs in relation to the whole business.
Cost centres, on the other hand, normally represent collections of similar support costs, ideally corresponding with the direct responsibilities of one person.
Thus the cost centre for premises might include rent, rates, insurance, security, heat and lighting costs and maintenance, all under the control of the partnership secretary.
In creating an overall budget the contribution of each profit centre (its budgeted income less all wholly attributable costs) is the first significant managerial measurement.
Costs deriving from the cost centre analysis are usually then allocated on a fair basis between the profit centres to give a departmental or activity net profit.
There are many ways of allocating overheads — numbers employed, payroll, space occupied, gross fees — and it is good  practice to choose the basis most suited to each type of cost involved.
However, many firms take a fairly robust approach to allocation, using one overall basis (such as space times fee income) and as long as it is a fair allocation and does not distort fee rates, it provides a perfectly acceptable alternative to the more detailed method.
Budgets should be prepared at least two months before the start of the relevant period and normally (but not invariably) cover twelve months of operations.
Techniques of zero-based and flexible budgeting need organisational sophistication in setting objectives and interpreting results, which may be felt inappropriate to relatively small surveying practices.
Most firms find a well-documented budget with a regular comparison between actual results and budgets (variance analysis) wholly adequate.
Two further points are of importance in going about the budgeting process.
The first is that the arithmetical accuracy of a profit and loss budget must be confirmed by the preparation of a budgeted balance sheet as at the period end.
This will immediately highlight any inadequacies in the assumptions underlying the profit and loss budget.
Secondly, it will show the potential liquidity of the practice at the period end and link in with the cash flow forecast for the same period.
Estimating cash flow forecasts from budgets is not the daunting task that it may seem.
If a pro forma cash book is prepared and a theoretical monthly record projected of cash receipts from fees and cash expenses (including capital items) incurred, the net difference is the movement in the cash position.
WHAT MANAGEMENT NEEDS TO KNOW
Time spent on costing, budgeting and re-costing is wasted unless up-to-date reports are made on a regular basis to responsible management in the practice.
Accuracy and immediacy are often incompatible objectives for the accountant and the organisation should always insist that approximations that can be acted on are infinitely preferable to historical exactitudes.
A possible list of management information, showing frequency and circulation, is given overleaf.
Each firm will want to modify or amplify this list to meet particular organisational and business needs.
However, it is vital that the importance of a disciplined approach to management information and the necessary action which follows, is instilled and regularly reinforced from the top.
Sloppy attitudes towards this topic quickly result in a careless approach which is vulnerable to loss of margins and, ultimately, overall financial control.
Even the apparently boring activities of checking costs, analysing variances, worrying about debt collection ratios, can be enjoyable if they result in higher profits to the firm and better salaries for staff.
THE COMPUTER — THE WHITE KNIGHT?
The computer power that even the smallest practice can now afford means that there is no excuse for the well-organised firm not to be making use of this opportunity not only for operating efficiency but also as a tool of competition.
The availability of excellent packages for routine bookkeeping has already been mentioned.
Many of these integrate with costing and management reporting systems using common data drawn from the basic data recording process.
Budgeting and forecasting are significantly simpler thanks to the availability of packages based on the electronic spreadsheet principle.
These systems are ‘user friendly’(much used on home and hobby computers); and a forecasting model, once built and tested, will produce consistently accurate results: a claim that few accountants could make!
The real advantage of such modelling systems is, of course, that  many iterations using different data can be made extremely quickly and accurately.
Properly constructed, a model can respond to ‘what if?’ inquiries and provide sensitivity analyses over a range of possible conditions, for example, fee levels or bank interest rates.
Many believe that the future of finance management lies in the concept of totally integrated information systems linking forecasts, actual results and sensitivity-tested re-forecasts into a ‘real time’ decision support system for managers.
It would be a brave man who would claim that these ideas were unrealistic given the availability of cheap computer power.
The Automated Office
Most of the technology (apart, perhaps, from extensive voice recognition capability) needed for a fully automated office has arrived.
Networks of microcomputers, word processors, fax (facsimile), telex, photocopiers, electronic mail, filing systems and digital switchboards are constantly developing.
The needs of surveyors are unlikely to justify the sophistication of operations (or substantial costs) inherent in these comprehensive schemes.
For them, the more likely route for development lies in the expansion of the use of microcomputers (for both data and word processing) linked into substantial databases tailor-made for the individual practice.
The database concept is ideally suited to professional activities since it relies on an assumption that an ‘architecture’ of information storage and retrieval will follow predetermined (albeit flexible) routes.
Much of the skill of the surveyor who specialises in building lies in his ability to recall and apply data relating to a large variety of cases, perhaps both internal and external to the organisation for which he works.
The evolution of huge but cheap storage capacities in computers, accessible instantaneously, could and probably will revolutionise both the professional work and financial management methods of surveying firms in the years to come.
SUMMARY OF ISSUES
The following are some of the financial management issues which individual practices need to consider:
Financial Accounts
what basic records are needed?
how should they be analysed?
should a computer be used — if so should packages be purchased or bespoke systems be commissioned?
how should the system be controlled to ensure it is working properly?
is an annual audit needed?
Costing
what are the departments/activities involved?
what is the basis of charging?
how should raw costing data be collected?
how should overheads be recovered?
how frequently should results be reported?
Budgets
is budgetary control needed?
how should the business be analysed between profit and cost centres?
how should budgets be prepared?
how (and how often) should actual performance be compared with budgets?
Management information
who needs what information?
how often should they receive it?
how can management check what follow-up action has been taken?
The relationship between the functions discussed in this chapter is indicated diagrammatically on the flow chart shown.
If this all seems like another blow for bureaucracy it is not intended to be so.
Ultimately, when the professional surveyors have taken their fees and returned to their offices, the success (or failure) of the practice will depend on these factors.
Malcolm Ross
Professional Practice and Legal Forms of Organisation
The combination of professional codes of conduct and historic precedent has, until recently, created a natural assumption that a partnership structure is the most appropriate vehicle for the operation of a surveying practice.
In the last few years, however, relaxations in Institution rules and instances of surveying practices becoming public companies have coincided with a number of applications being made to the RICS for permission to practise by way of a corporate structure with limited liability.
Perhaps misguidedly, this increasing interest in the corporate structure is linked also to the problems of a more litigation-conscious public and dramatic increases in professional indemnity insurance premiums.
This trend culminated in the overwhelming vote of members of the RICS at an Extraordinary General Meeting in July 1986 in favour of the removal of nearly all the restrictions on practising with limited liability, whether as a public company with outside investment or as a private company still owned by chartered surveyor shareholders.
All business tends to suffer from periods of under-capitalisation which stifle investment and expansion plans.
The possibility of attracting outside investment only really exists for a corporate entity and this is likely to be a further reason for surveyors' considering various comparisons between the partnership and corporate structure for the running of their businesses.
Even if the decision is that the partnership structure continues to be more appropriate, the management processes and incentives exercised by large companies are well worth examining.
INTRODUCTION TO THE LEGAL FORMS OF BUSINESS
In general terms, any group of people wishing to carry on business under English law has to make a choice between three distinct legal forms of organisation, the company, the partnership and a hybrid known as the limited partnership.
Incorporation may itself take several forms: public or private, limited or unlimited, and with or without a share capital.
For many professions, including surveyors, there has been a tradition of forbidding the carrying on of business under the protection of limited liability.
However, the constitutional changes voted for by members of  the RICS, subject to Privy Council approval, herald a relaxation of those restrictions.
Certainly, the notion that limited liability is of itself a denial of the very skills and integrity being held out by a professional to the rest of the world may be outdated in the light of the size and type of projects now being undertaken as part of surveying practice.
There appear to be four main driving forces behind the consideration of widening the business options open to surveyors: better use of skills, increased competition in the offering of advisory and financial services, improvement in public image and financial expansion.
For example, it might seem curious that a member of the RICS could be a director of a commercial company offering a range of services to the public, yet not be permitted to occupy the same position in a company offering the very skill for which he has been trained.
The threat of greater competition brought about by the trend towards government curtailment of professional monopolies and relaxation of advertising rules means that refusing to contemplate the idea of incorporation could entail a heavy loss of business.
As far as public image is concerned, the prevailing consumer-oriented climate is one in which professional practices are increasingly scrutinised.
By opening up surveyors and others to greater public accountability, there may be some protection against further, more intrusive, regulation.
Finally, as will be seen below, a restrictive view towards the use of companies may be a disincentive to expansion in so far as the corporate form permits greater flexibility in the raising of outside finance.
This chapter looks at the three major categories of organisation in the light of those considerations likely to prove most significant for surveyors: management authority of the participants, the raising and use of finance, the administrative burdens which will be created, the conduct of relations with outsiders and the settlement of disputes.
Taxation and pension rights, which are undeniably important aspects of the choice between legal forms, are not considered in the following discussion.
Partnership
Definition
According to the Partnership Act 1890 a partnership is an association of persons carrying on a business in common with a view to profit.
It is not necessary, however, that all partners take part in the management of the business, or that they all have equal shares in profits.
The heart of the legal notion of partnership  consists in the mutual trust and confidence of the participants.
Unlike a company, a partnership possesses no legal personality separate from the partners that comprise it.
One of the main advantages of partnership is the ease with which it may be formed.
No registration is required, and even a mere oral agreement would suffice at law.
However, this would clearly not be a wise move in practice, and the better course is to set out a formal partnership deed in writing after professional advice.
The intention of the partners will be clearer, and some of the difficulties that can otherwise arise may thus be avoided.
For example, knowing whether or not a particular individual is a partner may prove crucial, especially with regard to the fact (discussed below) that partners may bind the other members of the firm to contracts and other acts.
Even after the RICS rules on the methods of carrying on business are further relaxed, partnership may continue to be the normal form.
Surveyors are one of the professions exempt from the usual size limit of twenty partners.
The Partnerships (Unrestricted Size) No 1 Regulations 1968 apply to firms involved in surveying, auctioneering, valuing, estate agency, land agency and estate management.
Similar provisions also exist for consulting engineers and building designers.
For the latter, at least three-quarters of the partners must be either registered under the Architects (Registration) Act 1931 or recognised as chartered engineers or chartered surveyors.
Management
The idea behind the Partnership Act is that the internal affairs of the partnership are for the partners to decide.
However, in the event of there being no clear evidence of what the partners intend, certain presumptions will apply.
So, for example, s 24 assumes that all partners may take part in the management of the business, that no person can be introduced as a partner without the consent of all the existing ones, that all the partners are entitled to share equally in the capital and profits of the business and must contribute equally towards the losses sustained by the firm.
It is also assumed by the Act that any difference of opinion over the running of the partnership's ordinary business will be decided by a simple majority of the partners, although any change in the nature of the firm's business requires unanimity.
However, and this could easily be the case in the larger surveying organisation, it may not be in the interests of either effective management or particular individuals to maintain this full-scale participation of all members.
It is permissible to ‘contract out’ of  s 24 by creating a division between active and ‘sleeping’partners.
Similarly, partnership deeds commonly state whether partners engaged full time on the firm's business are to receive salaries in addition to their share of profits, such salaries to be paid before the figure for net profits can be determined.
Whatever their status, all partners owe each other duties of the utmost good faith.
This means that any secret profits made by them in dealing with the firm should be disclosed and accounted for.
Similarly, partners are prevented from participating in a competing business.
It would also normally be advisable to have a term in the partnership deed which allows for disputes to be referred to arbitration, thereby avoiding the risks and costs of litigation.
Such a clause may provide for the president of the professional body to appoint such a person.
Authority to Bind the Firm
The principles of agency apply to the acts of partners.
Consequently, any act by a partner done in the ordinary course of the firm's business will bind all the other partners.
Besides those things which a partner is actually authorised to do by the terms of the partnership, any other of his acts which would be part of the usual conduct of a business of the type carried on by his firm will also be binding.
This can, of course, be potentially dangerous for the partnership as a whole, since even acts in which the partner is prohibited from indulging under the deed of agreement may still fall within this category of ‘ostensible authority’ so long as the outsider concerned is not aware of the relevant restriction.
The effect of these agency principles is that a ‘sleeping’ partner may find himself liable to meet the financial obligations incurred to a third party by an active member of the partnership.
The only real limits on the extent to which the partners as a whole will be bound by one of their number are set out in s 5 of the 1890 Act.
The other partners are only safe if the individual who acted had no authority in fact and the party with whom he dealt either knew about the absence of authority or else did not know or believe the individual to be a partner.
Subject to these limitations, any partner will have implied authority to sell the goods of the firm, receive payments of the firm's debts and give receipts for them and to engage employees for the firm's business.
Financial Participation and Liability
Here can be seen some of the most significant differences between partnerships and companies.
All partners are unlimited in their personal liability for the debts and obligations of the firm incurred whilst a partner.
This means that creditors, for example, may pursue the personal wealth of a partner in order to satisfy a partnership debt.
Liability for contractual obligations is joint.
But the enactment of the Civil Liability (Contribution) Act 1978, now means that a judgment given against one partner when the other partners are living does not prevent the creditor (assuming the first partner does not have the necessary financial means) from bringing an action against the other partners who are jointly liable.
In other words, the practical position with regard to liability in contract is tantamount to the joint and several liability which has always been the case in tort.
Where a civil wrong has been committed by a partner under the authorisation of the other partners or as part of the normal business of the firm, then the plaintiff may pursue the partners collectively or separately until judgment is satisfied.
Liability problems may arise when new partners are taken into a firm or others leave.
The principle known as novation is the key here, being an agreement with the creditor to substitute one debtor for another.
However, it is important to distinguish the presumptions applied to outgoing partners from those relevant to incoming ones.
A partner who retires remains liable for debts and obligations incurred whilst he was a partner, unless an agreement exists (either expressly or to be implied from a course of dealing) to release him.
An incoming partner is not liable for debts incurred before he joined unless there is a novation.
The property of a partnership belongs to all the partners in common, since the partnership itself has no legal personality.
This point is of great significance in so far as any increase in the value of partnership property belongs to the firm.
On the other hand if particular property is shown to belong to one partner, then only he is entitled to take the benefit of increased worth.
By virtue of ss 20–1 of the 1890 Act, partnership property consists of property brought originally into partnership stock, or acquired (by purchase or otherwise) on account of the firm or for the purposes and in the course of the partnership business.
Unless the contrary intention appears, property bought with money belonging to the firm is deemed to have been bought on account of the firm.
Where land is involved, it is usually conveyed to a maximum of four partners on trust for sale, the proceeds of sale and any rents and profits being held as partnership property.
Limited Partnerships
This hybrid form of organisation was created by the Limited Partnership Act 1907.
It remains an unpopular choice, with only just over a thousand in existence.
This figure is less than the average number of new company registrations every month.
Most of the normal rules outlined above concerning partnerships are relevant to the limited partnership, but with some crucial differences.
First, the whole rationale behind the concept of the limited partnership is that membership can be divided between limited and ‘general’ partners.
The general partners remain liable for all debts and obligations of the firm.
A limited partner, however, contributes capital or property to the partnership on entry, the valuation of which represents the limit of his liability for the firm's debts and obligations.
According to the Limited Partnerships (Unrestricted Size) No 1 Regulations 1971, which provide for limited partnerships in surveying and allied professions beyond the usual maximum of twenty members, not more than one quarter of the total number of partners can be limited partners.
The protection which is conferred by a limited partnership leads to extra rules of law.
Such a body must be registered with the Registrar of Companies; default leading to limited partners being treated as unlimited ones.
Subsequent changes in the required particulars must also be notified to the Registrar.
These include the nature of the business, identity of the partners, the sums contributed by a limited partner, or any switch from general to limited or vice versa by a partner.
Perhaps the most important consequence of a limited partner's role is that in return for his limited liability he must give up his normal right to participate in the management of the partnership.
Nor will a limited partner be able to bind the firm.
However, by s 6 of the 1907 Act, a limited partner may by himself or his agent at any time inspect the books of the firm and look into the state and prospects of the partnership business, and may advise with the partners thereon.
The crucial dividing line therefore is between this general advice and participation in management.
For if a limited partner does become involved in ordinary management business, he becomes liable for those debts and obligations incurred by the firm whilst so acting as if he were a general partner.
Limited partners have very restricted freedom of financial action.
During the life of the partnership they must not, either directly or indirectly, draw out or receive back any part of their contribution.
If such drawing out occurs, then a limited partner becomes liable  for the debts and obligations of the firm to the extent of that withdrawal.
As will be seen below, any advantages which the limited partnership might confer are equally available by use of the private limited company.
Assuming a free choice becomes possible, it is difficult to foresee any great increase in the numbers of limited partnerships.
Companies
The Different Types
Companies exist in several forms.
The most popular in general business is the public or private company limited by shares.
Hitherto, any attempt at utilising these in surveying practice has been restricted by the effects of the RICS Royal Charter Byelaw 24(4) (a) and (b) and Conduct Regulations 10, 11 and 12.
Companies have other attractions besides the limitation of members' liability, most of which flow from the separate legal personality with which corporations are endowed under English law.
However, the price for these advantages is that there are greater formalities in getting a company off the ground, and considerably more public scrutiny and accountability as a going concern than in the case of partnerships.
The current law governing companies is to be found in the Companies Act 1985,.
the Companies Securities (Insider Dealing) Act 1985 and the Companies Consolidation (Consequential Provisions) Act 1985.
Aspects of liquidation and insolvency are subject to the Insolvency Act 1986 and the Company Directors Disqualification Act 1986.
The differences between private and public companies are significant, and go beyond just the size and name requirements stipulated by the legislation.
Public companies, for example, may seek permission to have their shares quoted on the Stock Exchange.
This kind of flotation to raise large capital sums has already been seen in cases such as Bairstow Eves and Connells.
However, ‘going public’ may still be an option of limited attraction.
Not only does it normally require an exceptionally large financial injection, but the rules of company law are considerably more demanding for public companies than for private ones or partnerships.
For example, the restrictions on loans or credit facilities granted by companies to their directors are much more stringent.
The Royal Institution also perceives another difficulty with becoming a public company and obtaining a Stock Exchange quotation.
This stems from the latter's requirement that the shares must be freely marketable.
The problem is how the professional  bodies themselves can maintain ethical discipline over members, with regard to the prospect of shareholders seeking high profitability and paying rather less concern to the interests of the company's clients.
The solution being put forward is that a member of the RICS may only carry on practice as a surveyor through the medium of a company (limited by shares or unlimited) provided that he complies with the new conditionally approved regulations.
Where a surveyor is a director of the company concerned, there must be special provisions inserted into that company's constitution relating to its objects and the duties of its directors.
On the one hand, the memorandum of association must qualify the company's ability to provide surveying services, to the effect that such business must be carried on at all times in accordance with the Rules of Conduct for the time being of the RICS.
On the other hand, the articles of association of the company concerned must contain a clause equivalent to a requirement that the directors shall be under a duty to ensure that the company conducts any surveying business in accordance with the Rules of Conduct.
Formation and Status
Before a company can exist or do business it must obtain a certificate of incorporation from the Registrar of Companies (in Cardiff).
The formalities are not unduly onerous in the sense that there are several commercial agencies who specialise in providing ‘off the shelf’ companies.
The registration requirements include a constitution, made up of a memorandum and articles of association, specifying what the company is formed to do, and how its internal affairs are to be regulated.
For any company there must be at least two subscribers, who will become members.
There must also be at least one director if the company is private, or two if it is to be public.
Once the formalities are completed and a certificate issued, the company (public or private) possesses a legal personality of its own, distinct from its membership.
This principle was recognised and sanctioned by the House of Lords at the turn of the century in the leading case of Salomon v Salomon & Co Ltd [1897]AC 22.
The crucial repercussions of the company existing in its own right are that it can hold property, raise money on the security of its property, sue and be sued in its own name, and continue to exist and do business despite changes in membership or its directors.
Financial Liability of Members
On paper, this is one of the most attractive features of converting a business into a company limited by shares or by guarantee.
In the former type, the liability of an individual shareholder is limited to the amount, if any, unpaid on the nominal value of his shares in the company.
Thus, to take a very simple illustration, X Ltd might be formed with a nominal capital of £10,000, divided into 10,000 £1 ordinary shares.
This figure of £1 has nothing to do with the market value of the share, but is the legal benchmark for the determination of individual liability.
Thus, if S subscribes for 200 of these shares and pays the company for them at their face (par) value, S's future personal liability for any debts incurred by the company is nil.
If the shares were only partly paid, for example if S had only contributed £150 for his 200 shares, then his liability would be £50.
It should, however, be pointed out that in practice the extent of limited liability is itself restricted.
Creditors with sufficient bargaining power may well be able to extract personal guarantees from the company's directors as an additional security, despite the presence of the so-called corporate veil.
In this sense, a small private company may confer no great advantage over the personal liability of a partner.
If the company is limited by guarantee then slightly different considerations apply.
First, instead of a figure based on shares, the members' liability would be limited to a fixed sum expressed in the memorandum of association on registration of the company.
Secondly, that liability to pay can only arise if the company goes into liquidation.
Personal liability on shares could occur whilst the company is still a going concern.
The choice between going for a company limited by shares or one limited by guarantee is thus largely dependent on whether the surveyors involved are having to put up most of the funds themselves.
Shares are essentially a method of raising funds for the company, so that if money is available by other means (loans from various sources, endowments, etc) there may be no need to form a share company.
A guarantee company can avoid the usual requirement of limited companies to have ‘Limited’ as the last word of the corporate name.
A further alternative is the unlimited company.
Here, as the name suggests, the members remain personally liable to meet the obligations of the company.
The reasons for choosing this form fall into two main groups.
On the one hand, it may be preferable to a partnership because the benefits associated with separate legal personality are still available.
Thus, it has hitherto been appropriate  for the professional partnership where limited liability is forbidden.
On the other hand, unlimited companies are not subject to the strict publicity and accounting requirements which govern limited companies.
However, the Companies Act 1981 (now consolidated into the 1985 Act) permitted greater relief from publication of accounts for small private limited companies.
As a result this particular attraction of the unlimited company may be diminished.
Raising Finance
It has already been noted that limited and unlimited companies may have a share capital.
However, no new company limited by guarantee is permitted to have shares.
By issuing shares, a company obviously receives a financial benefit, for which the shareholder obtains in return an interest and a marketable asset.
The interest will depend on the class of share which he holds.
Companies may describe classes of shares by any terminology they like, although ordinary and preference shares are the commonest labels.
A preference share, as the name suggests, will normally confer some priority in the distribution of dividends or assets.
The dividend may be expressed as a fixed percentage of the nominal or paid up value of the shares, or may even extend to participation in any dividends declared over and above that fixed amount.
Receipt of dividends will depend in any event upon a declaration in accordance with whatever procedures may be specified in the company's articles.
Ordinary shareholders cannot normally expect the same kind of safe, steady return on their investment as a preference holder might.
Ordinary shares stand last in the queue for payment of dividends and return of capital.
However, as some compensation for this, there is not usually any fixed limit on what they can receive.
In addition, ordinary shares usually carry votes at any general meeting of the company's shareholders, whereas preference shares do not.
The standard alternative to raising money by shares is to do it by borrowing.
Here again there is a vital difference between the powers of companies and partnerships.
A device peculiar to companies is the ‘floating charge’.
This allows the company to use its own assets as the security for credit but retain the ability to deal with those assets itself as it wishes until such time as the creditor takes steps to enforce his security.
In other words the creditor's charge ‘floats’ over the class of corporate assets comprising the charge until an event occurs which will crystallise it.
By contrast, the provisions of the Bills of Sale Acts 1878 and 1882 make it impracticable for partners to create an effective floating charge.
Incorporation thus brings with it a useful device to facilitate borrowing, from both the company and the lender's viewpoint.
To be effective against other creditors of the company or a liquidator, a floating charge must be properly registered under s 395 of the Companies Act 1985.
Charging its property in this way will be the usual method of securing the debentures that a company may offer to attract lenders.
Often issued as a series with the various holders' interests administered by a trustee, the rights and obligations of such arrangements will largely be governed by the rules of contract.
The normal form of debenture is payable to registered holders, although bearer debentures (which are negotiable instruments) and debentures which are convertible into shares are also possible.
Management and Responsibility
The fundamental assumption made by company law is that the functions and powers of the company, as an artificial legal entity, are exercised by two organs: the board of directors and the general meeting of shareholders.
Historically, this distinction between ownership (by the shareholders) and management (by the board) was aimed at facilitating non-participatory investment on the one hand and specialised decision-making responsibility on the other.
Although this picture no longer accurately reflects the reality of many modern corporate structures, legal rules still rest upon the old idea.
In the professional context, reservations have been felt in the past about the extent to which surveyors should be allowed to practise in organisations where large stakes of capital are held by outsiders for investment purposes only.
The risk of diluting the nature of the surveyor's duty to his client was one reason for the restrictive rules about investment holdings.
However, it now seems to have been accepted by the RICS that the overseas experience of limited liability, together with that of UK land surveyors, livestock auctioneers and other companies, indicates that in practice the ethical problem may be overstated.
The effect of this so-called organic basis to corporate structure at law may create problems in the event of a transition from a surveying partnership to a limited liability company.
In particular, as outlined below, one area of potential dissension and difficulty in the modern small private company is the very fact that some of the relevant legal rules and remedies are based on being able to distinguish the capacity in which a particular individual may be acting at a given time.
In a company of five surveyors, all of whom hold shares and are also directors, the question of  whether or not an individual may allege ‘prejudicial’ conduct by the others will depend on whether the plaintiff has suffered harm as a member .
A further consequence of the split between management and ownership is reflected in the different duties and responsibilities placed upon the board and general meeting.
Directors are usually agents of the company, and owe it duties both of a fiduciary nature and of care and skill.
The accountability of directors to shareholders is very different from that of partners to each other.
At one level, the shareholders have the inalienable right to dismiss directors by a simple majority vote under s 303 Companies Act 1985.
There are also certain transactions, such as the alteration of the company's articles of association, which may only be carried out by resolution of the shareholders.
The problem that could therefore arise for surveyors choosing incorporation is how to safeguard themselves against changes in ownership and control.
For, as already noted, any company holding a Stock Exchange quotation must have readily marketable shares.
A private company, on the other hand, will normally (but not necessarily) confer a discretion upon its directors over proposed transfers of shareholdings.
A veto over membership is therefore effectively created.
The procedural consequence of the doctrine of corporate legal personality is that the proper plaintiff in any action against the directors for breach of their duties is the company, not individual shareholders.
This raises very complicated questions, as yet not fully resolved by the courts, as to the extent to which a director who holds shares may take off his director's hat and attempt to ratify as a shareholder his own alleged misconduct.
The old case authorities suggest that the nature of a share as property does not prevent such a course, but the more modern cases seem to incline towards some restrictions upon the use of votes where there is a conflict of interest involved.
As far as the authority of the board is concerned, it must carry out its functions according to the powers conferred upon it by the company's articles.
It will be common practice to permit delegation of powers by the board to, say, a managing director.
It is not obligatory for directors to devote continuous attention to the affairs of the company.
Most companies have a balance between full-time executive directors and part-time members of the board.
However, the fact that one is a non-executive director does not diminish one's legal duties or responsibilities.
With regard to negligence liability, for example, all directors must exercise the care of a reasonably prudent person.
The skill demanded of a director is  that which can reasonably be expected from a person of his knowledge and experience.
Incorporation certainly does not provide a shield against actions brought against surveyors for professional negligence.
It is well established that individuals may be pursued in tort even though the allegedly negligent act or piece of advice itself was in name performed by a company.
If the individual is in fact acting on behalf of the company as an employee then the principle of vicarious liability would mean that the company (as potentially the wealthier party) might make a more attractive defendant from the plaintiff's point of view.
However, this does not relieve the individual from responsibility.
The settlement of disputes between participants in a company may also prove awkward.
Where the shareholders also happen to be the directors, and a close personal trust and confidence is involved, the courts have been willing to look at the settlement of arguments on the basis of equity rather than strict legal principle.
This approach, based on the House of Lords decision in Ebrahimi v Westbourne Galleries [1973]AC 360, attempts to give weight to the intentions and expectations of the parties.
The plaintiff, who was both a director and a forty per cent shareholder, had the company wound up after being removed from his directorship by the majority shareholders.
This act left him with an interest in the company that was for most practical purposes worthless since the previous practice among the three member-directors had been to take the money out of the firm in the form of directors' fees rather than shareholders' dividends.
The Ebrahimi type of doctrine is most likely to occur when a partnership is converted into a company but the same people are involved as before and carry on the business with much the same attitude.
Since Ebrahimi was decided, s 459 of the Companies Act 1985 has added to the minority shareholder's armoury a claim of ‘unfair prejudice’, but only in so far as the conduct (actual or threatened) that he complains of is prejudicial to him in his capacity as a member.
Parent/Subsidiary Relationships
Perhaps the most important commercial change since the invention of incorporation itself has been the rise of groups of companies with interlinking control and ownership.
Given the economic significance of such groups, it may be surprising that neither Parliament nor the courts have yet got to grips with the problems they present.
Apart from a few statutory exceptions based on tax, fraud and other predictable areas, the Salomon principle of separate legal personality is still applied to subsidiary companies.
The courts  have developed some complex tests based on control whereby the subsidiary may be deemed to be an agent of the parent company.
These involve looking at whether personnel or premises were shared, the nature of the businesses, the way that the subsidiary's profits are treated and the amount of decision-making autonomy held by the subsidiary's directors.
However, creditors or other claimants whose attempts to sue a subsidiary go unsatisfied remain unlikely to be able to probe behind the separate legal personality of the companies to challenge the parent.
Of special interest to surveyors is the impact of chains of companies upon the retention and exercise of control.
The most obvious example of this in recent years, of course, has been the relationship between Lloyds Bank plc, Black Horse Agencies plc and the various unlimited companies acquired by the latter.
From the point of view of professional conduct rules, the problem posed by chains is how far individual members of the RICS may be involved in different links at the same time.
Seen commercially, the advantages of operating through a subsidiary include the ability to diversify activities whilst not exposing the other parts of the business to financial risk.
At the same time, the autonomy of any subsidiary can be restricted by contractual or financial means.
SUMMARY OF MAJOR ISSUES ARISING FROM CHOICE OF FORM
Financial
Two separate questions are at stake here: the financial risk of the individual participants, and the ease and extent to which the organisation itself may obtain suitable funds for its tasks.
On the question of risk, the attraction of the various legal forms is in part predicated upon the attitude of the RICS to relief from the restrictions on practising with limited liability.
If that hurdle disappears, along the lines of the July 1986 revisions, then the company limited by shares may prove an attractive form.
As far as access to one's financial input is concerned, the Companies Act 1981 (now consolidated into the 1985 Act) lifted many of the restrictions which previously existed on companies purchasing their members' shares.
This now puts members of companies on a closer footing to partners in their ability to withdraw their capital from the organisation.
As to the financial interests of the organisation as a collective unit, the choice of legal structure really depends on the extent of the need for external financing.
This in turn obviously reflects the scale and level of risk of the venture contemplated.
If the only  working capital that is required can be provided by the personal capital of the participants, then partnership may well fit the bill.
Once there is a perceived need for expansion, involving the provision of security to a lender, the facility of the company to charge its own property may dictate the choice.
Management and Accountability
These issues may again be viewed from several perspectives.
At its most basic, the actual design of a project or implementation of a task may not vary as between a partnership and a company.
Large professional partnerships commonly adopt corporate strategies with regard to the determination of objectives and allocation of functions to departments and individuals.
Conversely, the flexibility of partnership management in so far as it is free from the formalities of meetings and public notification of decisions may be more attractive than the requirements of the Companies Acts on these issues.
In reality, small incorporated businesses where the members and directors are the same individuals are not run on quite such formal lines anyway.
The design, costing, supervision and execution of a project may be undertaken by different individuals within the organisation but by informal agreement, not legally based demarcation.
However, the restriction of management powers within a partnership requires careful and express rebuttal of the presumptions established by the 1890 Act.
The message which emerges is clearly one of forward planning to avoid any undesirable over-involvement in management decisions.
The practical difficulty, of course, is to ensure that a partner agrees to a dormant status.
As shown above, ‘sleeping’ partners may still be liable in full for the firm's obligations.
It may be hard to convince a partner to waive his rights of management when such risks remain.
Turnover in personnel may also pose problems.
Formally, at least, the death or withdrawal of a partner (or general partner in a limited partnership) terminates the partnership.
Again, prior planning under the partnership deed may provide for purchase of a deceased or retired partner's share by valuation.
In the event of one partner serving notice to dissolve the firm, the others may choose to re-form.
Nevertheless, even though the procedural obstacles in partnership dissolution may be merely inconvenient, the company is probably the easier form to maintain without death or retirement disrupting the organisation.
The extent to which the choice between partnership, limited partnership, limited or unlimited company is likely materially to affect the quality of work must be a matter of speculation.
It  requires evaluation of how far the risk of personal financial liability is an incentive to performance.
On the other hand, the use of subsidiary operating companies to specialise in different services under the supervision of a more global policy pursued by a parent company may be an attractive and concentrated use of resources for the organisation seeking to undertake diverse, highly expensive projects.
The command hierarchy in such an enterprise may be more clearly structured, and responsibilities better delimited, than in a smaller and more informal partnership.
As a final note on the range of legal options, it should be pointed out that there have been several suggestions that a new form of incorporation should be introduced to combine some of the features of company and partnership but without the problems associated with limited partnerships.
A Green Paper (Cmnd 7944, February 1981) advocated the notion of the ‘incorporated limited firm’ designed to combine the benefits which derive from separate legal personality but without adopting the fullest protection of limited liability currently available by incorporation.
However, the Green Paper has come in for a variety of criticisms and there is little evidence that its recommendations will be acted upon in the short- or medium-term.
In any event, the scope for freedom of choice among surveyors is dependent upon the attitude taken by the RICS to acceptable protection.
However, the recommendations of its members have indicated that the way will be opened up for the abandonment of most restrictions.
The need to combat competition seems to ensure that this will be the path that is followed.
John Trustram Eve
The Planning Context
The insidious growth of statutory planning restrictions, since the.first real control was introduced forty years ago, has increased with such rapidity that it has often been difficult to keep abreast of new legislation without concentrating exclusively on this aspect of the development process.
Nevertheless, it is unrealistic to expect clients always to seek advice on these matters from sources other than the building designer, and a basic knowledge of planning law, compensation and the individual vagaries in attitudes of planning authorities is often the basis of releasing latent development value which is of tangible benefit and for which the client is prepared to pay high rewards.
The expertise of specialist planning consultants can never be replaced by the generalist, particularly where complex projects such as town centre schemes and developments which may proceed to a major planning inquiry are involved.
Nevertheless, the design professional can no longer rely on avoiding all responsibility for planning interpretation and advice, and indeed he would be commercially naive in being content to do so.
PLANNING — WHAT IS IT?
Planning Control as now known in the United Kingdom is often thought to have started with the Town and Country Planning Act 1947 and its Scottish and Northern Ireland equivalents.
In fact, on any view it started many years before that, though in a haphazard manner.
Planning control as set up by the 1947 Act was not therefore revolutionary but evolutionary, building on aspects of the Town and Country Planning Acts of 1932 and 1944 which extended the requirement for planning permission to the whole of the country, albeit ineffectively.
It is true, however, that taken as a whole, the 1947 Act created for the first time a comprehensive framework for planning and thereby laid the groundwork for a permanent and highly significant change in the public attitude to private property and its use and development.
The planning system has two basic aims: improving the allocation and the use of land and building resources, and good neighbourliness.
Because planning is by definition interfering in the unfettered use of land and buildings, to be justified and accepted by the general public it must produce a ‘better’ answer than a free  market would.
An early concept of planning was the Green Belt, that is, a belt of countryside round a town to inhibit urban development.
Residential building could always outbid any farmer for the land round London and this concept was therefore seen as a means of redressing the balance.
Although planning has its positive aspects and much is written and debated about improving this side of the system, it has to work with and adapt to economic demand; when it strays too far from that reality it fails.
Yet, the public perceives the system in much simpler terms.
It believes, with some assistance from professionals, that planning can lead to an environment wholly to its own taste.
The consequent paradoxes are: convenient airports but no aircraft noise, an attractive unchanged countryside and an efficient agricultural industry, urban areas convenient and easy to move around, but with no noisy and intrusive traffic — in short, an ideal world.
It also believes that planning can ensure that new buildings are designed in a way which it likes, and has an ability to prevent anything, however small, happening near its own house which reduces its value or interferes with the way in which it has been in the habit of using it.
This may be an exaggerated view of the public's overall reaction, but it is certainly not of a vocal minority: It is this pursuit of utopia which is at the heart of the reason why anyone concerned with buildings should understand and take into account the impact of planning control.
This should be as much for what it cannot and does not achieve, as for what it does.
Planning proposals are subject during their life to many checks or forms of appeal.
Consequently, many proposals which are approved have, because of these checks, been highlighted as apparently contrary to approved local policies and local views.
While a planning authority may have a rational policy of its own, because of the appeals system, it is possible to get an appeal decision which is not fully in accordance with the local authority's own idea of its own policy.
Indeed, this is bound to be so by definition.
The position is exacerbated by the differences in the competence of different authorities.
For example, it may be a local planning authority's policy to restrict growth in a village, a highly popular policy with the local villagers.
The policy may be based on an assumption that not many houses are required in the whole district.
On appeal, this assumption could be shown to be false and the village ends up with a significant new development site; it is this type of appeal decision which leaves the layman surprised and frustrated at the way in which the system operates.
This ease of changing decisions on appeal is in contrast with the extreme difficulty that there is in  getting changes or approvals under leasehold restrictions or other forms of restrictive covenants.
There, if the person with the benefit says ‘no’, the alternative can be relatively time-consuming expensive and uncertain.
Authorities Who Matter
There are four distinct forms of authority in control of planning.
Most important is the district council; for nearly all purposes they are the planning authority and it is that council which issues planning consent.
County councils, where they exist, have important strategic functions but except for highways, minerals and waste their role is only advisory and they have no power over whether the district authority grants or refuses consent.
In spite of this lack of actual power, their influence can be significant but it varies greatly both between authorities and with the type of development concerned.
The third influence on planning policy and decision is the Secretary of State for the Environment.
Not only is he generally responsible for the system but he also receives all appeals from refusals of permission, and has the power to call in any application for decision by himself rather than leave it with the district council.
This power of call-in is a threat which counties use to ensure ‘sensible’ decisions by districts.
However, the Secretary of State is not very keen to call in applications and there has to be some substantial justification, e.g. a public outcry.
The fourth ‘controlling authority’ in planning are the inspectors of the Department of the Environment who hear appeals and handle objections.
Since, as we shall see later, a large number of appeals are actually delegated to them for decision, they are an important part of the process.
Development Plans
In order to give a framework within which decisions on individual applications can be judged, there exists a series of policy documents and maps collectively called development plans.
They are of two main varieties: structure and local.
Structure plans are the responsibility of the counties and contain the general strategic guidance for either the county as a whole or a substantial part of it.
All other plans (outside London and the old metropolitan county areas where ‘unitary’ plans now operate) are local plans and the great majority are the responsibility of the districts who prepare district plans for their whole area or local plans for smaller parts of it.
A few counties have also produced local plans either to cover minerals and/or waste — their own responsibility — or particular topics such as green  belt or coastal policy which are likely to cover more than one district area.
All local plans are intended to develop in detail the broad structure plan policies and indicate how they are to be applied on the ground.
Most local plans therefore show their detail on ordnance based plans, unlike structure plans, which are not site specific, and only illustrate proposals diagrammatically.
Structure plans have to be approved by the Secretary of State and except for small amendments, he generally accepts them after he has received a report by a panel who hold ‘an Examination in Public’.
This is not like a planning appeal because only those who are invited can actually participate, although in practice anyone with anything substantial to say, for or against any aspect of the plan, is likely to be invited.
Local plans on the other hand can be objected to.
All objections have to be considered by an inspector from the Department's panel of planning inspectors, appointed by the promoting authority, who makes the final decision in the light of the inspector's report.
The authority is not bound to accept his recommendations but it is rare for many, or any of substance, to be overruled.
Tools of the Trade
To understand the system, it is essential to have some idea of its jargon and processes.
In principle, this means starting with the definition of development itself.
If what is proposed is not ‘development’, the ‘developer’ does not have to worry, but not every planning officer or outside adviser always checks this first.
‘Development’ is ‘the carrying out of building, engineering or other works or making a material change of use’, as defined in the 1971 Town and Country Planning Act.
While any works of a substantial nature are clearly caught, small works need not be.
For example, a small aerial on a building may very well not be development, any more than moving round light partitions in an office or work such as decoration which does not necessitate building.
On the other hand, the act of changing rather than continuing the use can of itself constitute ‘development’; this can be a very important consideration.
The basic definition of ‘development’ being so wide, a substantial number of activities or changes have been arranged so they do not in fact need specific consent.
Alterations to a building not materially affecting the external appearance of the building, agricultural operations and the resumption of a former lawful planning use at the end of a temporary planning consent are excluded from the definition of the 1971 Act.
Conversely, while the Act provides that dividing up residential units to create more does specifically  require consent, nothing is said about reducing the number of residential units or, for that matter, splitting or amalgamating any other type of unit of use.
Conventional wisdom is that within broad limits, these types of change of use do not need consent, but it is as yet untested: the issue may ultimately be judged by the external effect of the split or amalgamation (e. g. increase in traffic).
A number of acts of development are granted consent by two Statutory Instruments issued under the 1971 Act.
They are called the Use Classes Order and the General Development Order.
The Use Classes Order (currently under review) grants consent for certain changes of use within some defined classes, so that a shop can change from selling shoes to selling paint, because they both fall within the same use class.
On the other hand, a travel agent, which is also defined as a shop for this purpose, cannot change to an estate agent or building society's premises because the two latter are both included in the definition of offices.
Many of the classes in the Order are concerned with various types of industry, not only ‘light’, which can generally be carried out in a residential area without detriment to its amenities, and general industry, which can change to light but not vice versa, but also with a number of special categories, such as those subject to the Alkali Inspectorate.
There are other uses which do not fall within any of the defined classes and these need specific consent to change to any other, provided of course the change is ‘material’.
While property which is vacant can resume its last lawful planning use, it is possible for there to be no use, in which case any new activity will require consent.
The General Development Order contains three broad categories of consent.
Residential and industrial premises can be extended by up to ten per cent(in volume terms), provided in the latter case that it does not materially affect the external appearance of the premises.
It also permits installation and alteration of plant, roads and railways on industrial premises.
Certain temporary development is allowed as part of the process of development itself, thus contractor's huts may be erected on the development site for the duration of the works.
There is a category of exempted minor works such as the erection of fences or walls on or around property, provided they do not exceed two metres generally or one metre adjoining a highway.
Finally the Order gives permission to a number of statutory and other undertakings to carry out various types of development related to their own function.
All the permissions granted by the GDO are subject to conditions and some are hedged about by preconditions which can be very important.
It is possible for permissions granted by the GDO to be removed by a direction under Article 4 of the Order.
Such a direction is made by the planning authority but has to be confirmed by the Secretary of State.
Permissions granted by either the Use Classes Order or the GDO can also be removed by a specific condition in a planning permission which will override the provisions of the relevant Order.
Hence consent to use a shop as an estate agency may well preclude its being changed to any other office use.
Planning Permission
Where development is proposed and no planning permission is available under one of the general consents granted by the Use Classes Order or the GDO, then a specific planning permission is required.
It is not illegal to carry out development without permission but the planning authority (and only they) can, if they so wish, take action to put the position back physically to what it was before the development took place.
There are penalties for non-compliance with that requirement.
The planning permission granted is obviously fundamental and its precise terms are therefore very important and require careful reading.
In principle, a planning authority can only grant what is actually applied for or a part of it.
They also have the power to impose conditions; but that power, whilst not fettered by the words in the 1971 Act, is constrained by legal decision.
For example, permission to carry out development cannot be completely frustrated by the terms of the condition.
Furthermore, the conditions cannot impose a positive obligation, a financial payment or relate to land outside the application or the control of the applicant.
In spite of this, there is plenty of scope for what is sought to be greatly reduced; it is also possible for the permission to be limited in time, in other words for the development, building and/or use to be permitted only until some date in the future.
Planning permission can either be complete in itself, normally referred to as ‘full’ permission or can require further details to be referred to the authority for approval.
These latter consents are known as ‘outline’ permissions and the details requiring approval as ‘reserved’matters.
The 1971 Act provides that all permissions must have conditions relating to the time within which the development must be started and approval of reserve matters sought.
If the planning permission does not specify a time, the Act provides for the period to be five years, or two years after the approval of all reserve matters for the start of development and three years for the application for approval of all reserve matters.
These time limits are extremely important, because if the planning permission  lapses there is no certainty that it will be re-granted, and going to appeal may well not help if the Secretary of State believes that the original consent should not have been granted.
The question of whether an authority is exceeding its power in imposing a particular condition on a planning permission —ultra vires , as the law puts it — and what happens when ultra vires , is easily stated but difficult to determine in practice.
The courts have developed criteria against which to judge a condition, the main elements being: does the condition fairly relate to the development in question?
Is it capable of being implemented?
Does it so restrict as effectively to frustrate the actual development permitted?
If a condition is ultra vires , the second question is, what happens to the consent?
Broadly, if the courts believe the authority would still have granted the consent if they had known that they could not have imposed the condition in question, the permission stands without the offending condition, but if the answer is that they probably would not, then the permission itself falls.
It is perhaps because of the unpredictable nature of the outcome that few cases come to court on ultra vires conditions.
When making a planning application, notice has to be served by the applicant on various other people with interest in the premises to which the application relates.
These include anyone else with a freehold or leasehold interest with more than seven years remaining and any agricultural tenant.
The interest in question has to relate to the land or building covered by the application so that, for example , an application for a change of use for a third floor does not require notice to be served on anyone with an interest in any of the other floors.
On the other hand, any interest in any part of the land, however small, does require a notice and this can include (to some people's surprise) land interests as small as those shown for a new visibility splay for an access road.
There are certain so-called unneighbourly developments which have to be advertised before a valid application can be made.
These include public lavatories, dance halls, casinos and, most important of all, development over twenty metres in height.
The procedure is laid down in the 1971 Planning Act — Section 26 — and is a prerequisite for a valid application.
If, therefore, after permission has been granted, it is found that Section 26 has not been complied with, the permission is of no effect.
Notices and advertisements all invite the recipient or reader to make representations to the planning authority within a stated period, normally three weeks.
The authority may not determine the application before the period is complete but they are not bound to follow any representations received although they must  consider them.
In practice, local authorities almost always consider anything sent to them until the point where the report is prepared for the relevant committee or even later.
Appeals
Any applicant who is aggrieved either by a refusal or a condition on a permission can appeal to the Secretary of State who, in effect, considers the whole application afresh.
Where the appeal is in respect of a condition, in particular, he can refuse the whole application.
Nowadays, a large percentage of appeals are delegated by the Secretary of State for decision by his planning inspectorate.
These are known as ‘transferred cases’ and account for the vast majority of appeals.
Appeals can be by way of a hearing or by written representation.
The latter requires the agreement of both the appellant and the authority and even where this is so, the Secretary of State can decide that a hearing is desirable — for example, if there is much local feeling on the issue.
With written representations, the argument is conducted by way of written submission and counter-submission and it is both quicker and cheaper, but not always the most effective method of exposing a fallacious argument or superficial view.
Where there is a hearing, anyone who has been entitled to notice of the application is also entitled to appear and make representations.
Anyone else may appear, but only at the inspector's discretion.
In practice, anyone with something genuine to say — and many without — is allowed to make their point.
Although advocates of the main parties are allowed to cross-examine other parties' witnesses and the advocates are frequently barristers or solicitors, hearings are not as formal as a court of law and great effort is generally made to bring out the real substance of the layman's arguments.
From the point of view of procedure, there is no difference between transferred cases and those appeals decided by the Secretary of State.
In both cases the inspector issues a reasoned report, but only in transferred cases will he give the decision; in non-transferred cases, he gives a recommendation which the Secretary is free to accept or turn down.
It is possible to challenge an appeal decision in the High Court but only on grounds of an error of law, of a defect in the procedure or of the decision being one which no reasonable Secretary of State could have made.
Although the procedure is quite slow and expensive, many more appeals are being taken to the courts on a variety of ingenious arguments, probably because the amount of  money at stake can be very large, and because applicants do achieve a measure of success.
Third parties cannot appeal against the grant of a planning permission, but they too are looking more to the courts for redress, usually by way of a declaration or judicial review.
So far, probably because of the expense and uncertainty of the courts' view, the number of cases is very limited.
Powers and Procedures
Planning authorities have formidable powers over unlawful development once it has taken place.
They can issue an Enforcement Notice to cease an unauthorised use or remove an offending development and in the latter case, once the Enforcement Notice has been issued they can also make a Stop Notice which requires all work to cease in a short period, often seven days, until the Enforcement Notice is confirmed or quashed.
However, since an Enforcement Notice has to be confirmed by the Secretary of State who is required to have a hearing, and since compensation is payable for any loss arising out of a Stop Notice, if the notice is quashed because the development is authorised or does not require planning permission, unauthorised development can, and does, go on unpenalised for a very long time.
As with all regulations, there are a few on the fringe who are willing to exploit the weaknesses of planning authorities or, in this case, the inherent difficulty they have in using their powers quickly and effectively.
There is a series of procedures and powers available to potential applicants and planning authorities for sorting out some of the problems that can arise.
For example, at present , a use started unlawfully can never be lawful however long it continues.
This however has only been the position since 1968.
Before that, once development had taken place more than four years earlier, it was immune from enforcement action.
In 1968, changes of use but not physical development started after 1963 were excluded from this four-year period.
For uses started before that date and continued without permission ever since, it is possible to obtain an Established Use Certificate, i.e. a certificate of immunity from enforcement action.
However, the increasing difficulty of finding evidence, let alone proof, of what actually has been the use since 1963, the prerequisite for such a certificate, makes the procedure increasingly difficult to use.
A potential developer can find out whether the ‘development’ that he intends to carry out requires consent by an application under Section 53 of the 1971 Act.
As with Established Use Certificates, a right of appeal to the Secretary of State exists.
Because the  procedure cannot apply to development already started and it is generally as quick to apply for actual permission if the planning authority's officer advises that it is necessary, this does not get as much use as might be expected.
Planning authorities have powers to stop existing lawful uses by issuing a Discontinuance Order and to revoke any planning permission not yet implemented in full with a Revocation Order.
However, these Orders have to be confirmed by the Secretary of State before coming into effect and anyone affected is entitled to claim compensation for his losses.
For this reason they are rarely used.
Existing Use and Permitted Extension
When development rights were nationalised by the 1947 Act, a new concept, ‘existing use rights’, was created; these were left with the landowner.
These rights included not only an ability to continue using the property as before but also the right to rebuild or extend it, provided the original building was not exceeded by more than ten per cent.
The existence of these rights did not override the necessity to obtain planning permission but on compulsory purchase, permission for existing use rights was assumed to exist.
This concept has persisted as an integral part of the law.
The rights are set out in the Eighth Schedule to the 1971 Act and are divided into two parts: Part I allows for the full rebuilding of any building and Part II for its extension.
If planning permission is refused by the Secretary of State on appeal for a Part II application, the owner is entitled to compensation for the difference between his interest with and without the consent.
If permission is refused to a Part I application, no direct compensation is paid, but it may well be possible to compel the local authority to purchase the property compulsorily if it can be shown that the property has no reasonable beneficial use.
In this case, the position is equivalent to that of compulsory purchase, and the permissions in the Eighth Schedule are assumed to be available when assessing the compensation.
The ten per cent addition assumed by the Eighth Schedule was, as in the 1947 Act, measured by the external cube, but it has since been modified to the smaller of cube or internal floor space, and only relates now to buildings in existence on 1 July 1948.
A large claim for compensation for refusal to allow more flats on top of an existing block in Hampstead led to some well-publicised litigation (Peaktop Properties Ltd v Camden Borough Council (1982) 262 EG 239).
The case caused a dramatic rise in the number of developers  seeking to add the additional ten per cent to their blocks of flats, much to the concern of the tenants affected.
The resulting public pressure led the government in 1985 to remove the right to compensation, as it applies to blocks of flats where the proposal is for an increase in the number of dwelling units (not for an increase in height).
Positive Conditions
As we have seen, there are distinct limitations on what can be achieved by way of conditions on a planning permission; this can often be as awkward for the developer as it is for the planning authority.
The developer may, for example, be very happy to improve a road junction as an essential prerequisite to his proposed development, but often this cannot be assured by a condition.
The Planning Acts, the Local Government Acts, and one or two Private Acts give powers to local authorities to enter into agreements containing much wider matters concerning the use of land; these include the payment of money and the enforcement of positive covenants.
Such arrangements are usually called ‘Section 52 agreements’, in reference to the 1971 Act.
However, such agreements have been much abused and sometimes used to give spurious respectability to untenable views.
For example, a district council in Sussex sought, when granting detailed planning permission on half a site at fourteen dwellings per acre, to maintain the average overall density at ten per acre.
The developers, constrained by financial difficulty, entered into a Section 52 agreement with the council to that effect, making the density in the other half under six houses per acre.
Government policy was, and is, to maintain urban densities to conserve farming land, and when the developers won an appeal on the second half at a density of twelve houses per acre, the developer asked the district council whether, in view of the Secretary of State's decision, they would agree to waive the restriction (which they could still enforce if they wished under the Section 52 agreement); this the district council agreed to do.
In addition to the General Development Order, it is possible for Parliament itself to grant specific planning permission.
This can be done under the Planning Acts by way of a Special Development Order (SDO), or it can be provided for in a Private Act concerned specifically with a project.
SDOs are a means by which the government can grant consent for extensive activities, for example, for Mercury's cable-laying for their alternative communications system, under the Town and Country Planning (Telecommunication Networks)(Railway Operational Land) SDO 1982.
Private Acts of Parliament are often needed for major development  projects, and it is convenient for them to contain all the provisions relating to the project including consent under the appropriate Planning Act.
The most common nowadays are for reservoirs, but major bridges and tunnels also usually need Private Acts.
Policy Documents
When considering what might or might not be permitted by the planning authority or by the Secretary of State on appeal there are large numbers of policies with which the development may have to comply.
There will be an approved structure plan and there may also be an adopted local plan.
The policies in these have to be the starting point but may well not give the final answer.
Many structure plans are being ‘rolled forward’ to end in 1996 and there could well be draft policies and proposals in the roll-forward documents.
Whether they can be relied upon (they can always be cried in aid) depends partly on how out of date the approved version is and partly on how near to approval the roll-forward version is.
Both county councils and the Secretary of State are somewhat equivocal on this point, the answer really depending on whether they ‘like’ the proposed development.
Similarly, with local plans: if no adopted plan exists, the current draft is likely to carry much weight with the district council.
If the council is amending an adopted plan it will, as with structure plans, depend on the relevance of either plan to the current facts in the locality.
On the whole, drafts carry more weight in practice than they should in theory, simply because they represent the most up-to-date thought.
The Secretary of State is also prone to make pronouncements which can be highly relevant, especially on appeal.
These come in various formats — White Papers, departmental policy documents and ministerial statements, and speeches.
White Papers and policy documents are generally to be taken seriously and are therefore quoted extensively on appeal.
It is not unfair to say that some turn out not to mean quite what everyone thought but nevertheless because they represent government policy — seldom of a direct party kind — they are useful.
Drafts of these documents are often political kites and should be treated with considerable reserve, quoted but not relied upon.
Ministerial statements are much more interesting but are often somewhat ephemeral.
Frequently they are relevant and will be followed on appeal — but during the six months to a year it takes for an appeal to come to a hearing the minister could have changed, while the current appeals will have been lodged long before the words have been spoken.
Furthermore, if  the views are going to last, they will probably end up in a White Paper.
Planning Designations
Considerably more pertinent to those trying to cope with day-to-day developments, are the various areas of special control which have found their way into the planning framework and jargon.
National Parks
Established under the National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act, these are of course neither national, in the sense of belonging to the nation, nor parks in any very tangible form.
They are rather areas where a special planning regime exists and which have their own special planning committee.
Basically, however, the difference between these and other areas lies in the attitude to new development, either whether it should be permitted at all(it often is not) or, if it is, of what it should be constructed — the materials used generally have to be traditional, for example , stone in the Lake District.
Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB)
A creature of the planning system even though they are designated by the Countryside Commission.
Covering countryside such as the Chilterns and the South Downs, they are intended to be areas of special planning control with strong accent on the visual and environmental effects of any development.
Conservation Areas
Rather like small urban AONBs except that they are designated by the local planning authority as part of their planning function.
While the same special regime exists for both National Parks and AONBs, in that some of the GDO permissions are not available, Conservation Areas are under even tighter control.
In considering any application, the local planning authority is under a duty to seek the enhancement of the Conservation Area, and consent is required for the demolition of any building.
From a practical point of view, Conservation Areas are very important and surprisingly extensive.
For example, the whole of Mayfair and much of the City of London have been designated as Conservation Areas.
Enterprise Zone (EZ)
Effectively the opposite of a Conservation Area, and intended to encourage development, it carries a number of financial benefits of which the most tangible is freedom from local rates for ten  years.
It is relevant however that planning permission is granted for a whole range of development by the order designating the EZ.
Precise details vary from area to area but, generally, all permit industrial development.
Listed Buildings
Finally, by far the most important of the planning tools for any concerned with repair, maintenance and alterations of buildings are Listed Buildings.
These are buildings held on a list now compiled by the Heritage Sponsorship Division of the Department of the Environment for the Secretary of State as being of ‘special, historic or architectural interest’.
The necessity to obtain planning permission or not is untouched, but any works which will affect the character of the listed building require listed building consent in addition to any planning permission.
Listing can include both the interior and the curtilage and can therefore cover, for example, outhouses.
The list itself contains a description, and it is generally possible to tell from that which features are protected.
As the penalty for making a mistake could be quite high, it is prudent to assume that more forms part of the character than does not.
Previously, where planning permission was required for work to a listed building, the application was treated as being simultaneously an application for listed building consent, unless the works involved demolition of part or the whole, in which case a separate application was needed.
Now, all proposals require the submission of two separate applications, both made to and determined by the local planning authority, though they have to consult the Secretary of State on major works to buildings listed Grade II* or where demolition is involved.
Quite often (but not always) such cases are called in by the Secretary of State even where the planning authority is minded to grant consent, in order to allow interested groups a chance to air their views; so it can all take a long time.
Listed buildings have, however, a few advantages, not least of which is freedom from VAT in respect of major works of repair or renovation.
In London, the GLC Historic Buildings Section used to have delegated powers from the Secretary of State.
However following the abolition of the GLC that section now forms part of the Historic Building Council.
Using the System
It should be apparent from this overview of some of the major elements of the planning system that it intrudes in many places and is a factor which has to be taken into account at every stage  of considering what, if anything, should be done with land or buildings.
It is not merely a matter of whether planning permission is required and, if so, whether it is likely to be granted, but also of how long it will take.
For this reason, it is also important to consider at what point in the programme of the development an application should be made.
Although many authorities can deal with routine applications within the eight weeks allowed to them, applications raising major issues and those dealing with large construction programmes, are extremely unlikely to be dealt with in anything like that period (statistics on the length of time taken by local authorities in dealing with applications are produced regularly by the Department of the Environment).
Early discussion with the authority's officers to see exactly what information they require with the application, as well as to ensure that the proposed development is basically acceptable to the authority obviously helps to reduce the time needed.
Much is written about the slowness, uncertainty and perverseness of the planning system and there is no shortage of examples.
A case where a local authority was anxious not to permit some single-storey buildings, erected by the government during the war and subsequently in the Green Belt, to be used for anything once the government use ceased, is a perfect illustration.
When the local authority lost the resulting planning appeal, they decided to answer prospective tenants' solicitors' inquiries in such a slow and equivocal fashion that the development of the property was substantially prejudiced, until suitable action was taken.
But such a situation, whilst not unique, is rare.
More frequently, the cause of problems can be traced to an excessive desire to stick to policies or to a lack of understanding by the planning officers of the realities of life for developers and occupiers of property.
There can be, however, just as much obdurateness and ignorance on the part of property owners and users who fail to understand how their proposals may cause actual difficulty to others.
In most cases it is possible to achieve a quick and acceptable answer provided there is adequate appreciation of the impact of the proposals and enough flexibility on both sides to look at modifications, and time allowed for doing so.
Complicated as the system may appear from this superficial view, it is one which has to be used and therefore needs to be understood.
For example, it is becoming increasingly necessary for much proposed new development to ensure that it is mentioned in the local plan.
This means making representations at the initial draft stage, when public comment is sought, and going through what is effectively a planning appeal if the first comments are  ignored and a formal objection has to be lodged.
A further consideration worth taking account of early on is neighbouring activities.
Some forms of development could have significant effects on existing interests: the operator of a superstore, for example, is unlikely to welcome another one in the vicinity.
The planning authority may similarly welcome some assistance, overt or otherwise, in appreciating such before major commitments are made.
The art of surviving is to understand how the system works not to be frightened by it, and to know when to seek more expert help.
The planning system invites intelligent use and foresight: it is surprising how many cases have got to within three or four weeks of a public inquiry with no serious thought having been given to what evidence should be presented in favour of the proposals.
Often this is because the original advisers are not familiar enough with what is involved in proving a case, and may even have the naive belief that the inherent ‘sense’ of their development proposal will somehow be apparent to all.
Another misconception is that a planning appeal is a means of settling a ‘dispute’ between applicant and authority and that therefore the issues to be considered are only those raised by the planning authority.
This approach is often given further credence by ministerial advice and speeches.
In fact, the inspector or Secretary of State is usually making real decisions, that is, decisions that will make a difference to the built environment; when presented with that responsibility, they want to be sure the result is acceptable.
Furthermore, third parties to an appeal may raise a point even if the local authority does not.
More than one appeal concerned solely with the scale rather than the principle of whether there should be any development, has been dismissed on the grounds that the site was unsuitable for any development at all.
The comprehensive and pervasive nature of planning makes it easy to forget that it has very little to do with private rights and restrictions.
Lessees are sometimes astonished to be told that in spite of obtaining planning permission with their landlord's knowledge, they still require his consent and if he is not inclined to give it, the means of getting him to agree can be difficult, slow and expensive.
While the position of lessees may be obvious, there are other interests which may be less so.
For example, easements over land are generally precisely identified in the document that set them up and it is not possible simply to remove one without the agreement of the person with the benefit.
On the other hand, an easement for the benefit of the property in question may be limited as to its  use: it could be expensive to discover after subdividing a house into flats that the private drive is restricted to the use of a single dwelling.
There are also other consents which are required, for example, before introducing hazardous substances.
WHAT OF THE FUTURE?
There appear to be two distinct and conflicting pressures on the system.
As the government and many local authorities are striving to make the operation of the system quick, simple for the lay user and an encouragement to development when it is employment-related, so the public is not only taking a greater interest in its immediate environment, historic buildings and countryside and conservation generally, but is increasingly using the planning system to try to achieve its aims.
This is demonstrated, on the one hand, by Enterprise Zones, the enlargement of exemptions in the GDO and talk of further relaxations of control, and on the other, by inquiries, like those for the Third London Airport and Sizewell, breaking the records for length of time taken.
The changing nature of the planning context, through case law, government policy and statute, demands continuing attention.
This applies equally to the grander measures, such as Simplified Planning Zones and proposed alterations to structure plans, and to apparently minor amendments to listed building consents.
‘Simplification’ of the planning system for the developer can mean complication for the property professional, simply because change means a new body of law or policy.
Thus, it is clear that the system is not going to get easier for advisers, and it is going to be increasingly important for them to have more than a passing understanding and experience of it.
Clients are likely to be less forgiving of mistakes due to ignorance and incompetence, particularly as those mistakes may turn out to be more expensive than they have been hitherto.
Tony Ensom
Contracts in Building
Employers have consistently complained that most forms of standard building contract published by the Joint Contracts Tribunal have inadequately catered for their requirements, and have been devised mainly to suit the traditional procedures adopted by the building designer, quantity surveyor and contractor.
These criticisms continued to be levelled at the many standard forms produced in 1963, but it was not until 1980 that a number of new forms appeared, the lengthy gestation period reflecting the difficulties in satisfying the disparate interests of the constituent members of the Joint Contracts Tribunal.
Since 1980 the JCT has provided the industry with a number of new model forms, giving the employer a much wider range of choice to suit his particular contractual needs.
Meanwhile the British Property Federation has also produced its own form which, not surprisingly, seeks to promote new thought processes by giving the employer maximum flexibility, with more risk and responsibility being passed to the design and build team.
Inevitably more new forms of contract will be produced by different organisations representing their own response to the difficulties of continuing the traditional relationships in the construction process.
Gone are the days when the, existence of a signed building contract merely reflected a formality required by prudent businessmen.
The modern surveyor involved in administering building contracts needs more than just a working knowledge of its terms — he needs a detailed legal appreciation.
Twenty-five years ago, a building contract was regarded by surveyors, clients and contractors alike as something to be signed, put away in a filing cabinet and brought out only in the unlikely event of a dispute.
Today, cynics would say that a building contract never has the chance of being put away as disputes start from the moment it comes into operation.
Certainly everyone involved in the building process finds that contracts play an increasing part in their daily lives and that they therefore have to take more interest in them.
What has brought about this change?
Diverse factors have combined to force contracts to the forefront of the surveyor's mind when dealing with building projects.
Until post-war reconstruction began in the 1950s and early 1960s, most building projects were carried out in the traditional manner, with  an architect designing the building and managing the contract, a quantity surveyor preparing bills of quantities, valuations and a final account, and a general contractor who actually constructed the building.
The RIBA had produced a standard form of building contract which was widely used and regarded as reflecting the various roles involved.
The client, who generally accepted the traditional process, also accepted the form of contract for what it was: a formal document encapsulating the procedures which seemed to work well and produced few disputes.
He rarely had recourse to it.
By the early sixties, however, building projects were becoming larger and more complex and new technology was having a dramatic effect on construction methods.
Traditional procedures were no longer necessarily applicable and new systems of building procurement, the process of securing the design and construction of a building from its inception to completion, were devised.
Building contractors and employers soon became aware that the contracts into which they had entered no longer made provision for those situations which were beginning to arise: but new standard forms were slow to emerge, and it is only in recent years that these have proliferated.
Nowadays there is a bewildering selection from which to choose.
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
Both employers and contractors have had to become more aware of the detailed provisions of contracts, and the liabilities or benefits they confer.
This heightened awareness is partly the result of changes in the economic climate of the last ten to fifteen years.
When building work was booming, contractors were able to allow, in their tenders, for the many problems which always arose and added to their costs.
Employers were in no position to refuse this and there were certain advantages to them in not having disputes with their contractors over minor issues.
With the slump in building work, the market forces reversed and contractors found themselves in a fiercely competitive market with tenders very keenly priced.
No longer were they able to allow for unforeseen problems so they looked at their traditional contracts for any opportunity for reimbursement of additional costs.
They found ample scope and many became experts at so doing.
Employers and their advisers reacted, many for the first time, by taking a good look at contracts, and they in turn became experts.
As a consequence, employers and their advisers today are playing an increasing role in the formulation of building contracts.
The British Property Federation (BPF) has gone as far as not only  producing its own system for dealing with projects but, in liaison with the ACA (Association of Consultant Architects), producing its own standard building contract to suit its system.
Clients are also playing a larger part in the settlement of disputes under building contracts.
A growing number of disputes over building contracts has inevitably led to more cases coming before the courts or arbitrators.
Most building disputes which go to litigation are dealt with by the Official Referee.
Ten years ago, applications for cases to be heard were dealt with relatively swiftly, but a dramatic increase in their work load has produced a situation where despite the appointment of more judges to the Official Referee's court, applicants are having to wait up to two or three years to have their cases heard.
Subcontractors
Greater litigation has brought an evolution in the law, and some uncertainties have been clarified.
This has meant that some detailed provisions in standard forms of contract have required amendment.
An area where many changes have taken place concerns the employment of ‘nominated’ subcontractors.
‘Nomination’ is the process whereby the client chooses a subcontractor to carry out specialist works under a building contract and where the contractor is obliged to employ that subcontractor.
The complexity of buildings constructed today, and the large proportion of the work involving services, have led to the need for specialist subcontractors who play a large and important role in the building process.
Frequently, clients and their advisers want to influence the choice of these specialists; where they are relying on specialists for design input, this is a necessity.
The greater use of nominated subcontractors has been reflected in their influence on building contracts.
The report Action on Banwell recommended that conditions on which subcontractors estimate, and the subsequent conditions of subcontracts, should be standardised.
In consequence, the Joint Contract Tribunal (JCT) extended their terms of reference to assume responsibility for the production of standard forms of subcontract and at the same time enlarged their membership by inviting the two main subcontractors' organisations to become constituent bodies.
Their influence on the JCT can be seen clearly in the 1980 edition of the JCT standard form of building contract.
This includes full and detailed provisions for the employment of nominated subcontractors.
The JCT was set up to prepare and publish standard forms of building contract, its constituent members including organisations representing clients in both the public and private sectors, the  professions, main contractors in the building industry and specialist subcontractors.
Its constitution allows it to publish contracts and practice notes only where these have been approved unanimously by the constituent bodies.
This obviously adds great weight to its publications, in that they clearly have wide acceptance amongst those involved in the building process.
However, the effect of requiring unanimity means in practice that any one constituent body has a right of veto.
The various bodies represented on the JCT will obviously not necessarily share views on all aspects of building contracts and this leads to compromises being reached, not always totally satisfactorily.
Critics of the JCT point to these compromises and suggest that as a result either the client or the contractor is at a disadvantage.
These criticisms often relate to the inevitable problems of producing standard forms of contract which have to suit all situations, and which are therefore never the perfect answer to any particular project.
Some organisations, including so, me within the JCT, have produced their own standard forms.
Both central and local government have their own contracts, including some individually tailored to suit particular authorities' needs or views.
Amongst professional organisations the ACA has recently produced contracts and the FAS (Faculty of Architects and Surveyors) has revised and extended its own range.
Many contractors, particularly those involved in the non-traditional management systems, have also put forward their own standard forms.
This has had an effect on the JCT, which has not only revised its own forms, but is working hard to extend its range.
A feature of these forms has been the increase in those aspects which relate to procedure rather than to strict contract conditions.
An example of this is the rather complicated procedure laid down in the JCT 1980 form for extensions of time.
All these changes have resulted in a situation where the surveyor is faced with a wide range of methods of procurement of building projects and an equally wide, though not necessarily matching, range of contracts with which to deal.
TYPES OF PROCUREMENT
The selection of a building contract for a particular project is unfortunately often left too late to allow proper consideration of matching the contract to the job.
The right contract for a project will depend largely on the system of building procurement being used, and it is useful to review here the systems commonly in use.
The traditional system involves separation of the design and construction processes.
The design, which would be completed before any contractor involvement, would normally be incorporated  in drawings, specifications and/or bills of quantities.
Contractors would then be invited to tender for the work, or a price could be negotiated with a single contractor.
In either case, a lump sum contract would be agreed.
The contractor would then carry out the building work with the supervising officer (frequently the designer) managing the contract.
Frequently, specialist subcontractors would be nominated by the client to carry out a large proportion of the work.
The advantages put forward for the traditional system are that the project is fully designed before the tender and, therefore, the cost should in theory be known at the commencement of the contract.
Also, the system makes clear that the designer is acting strictly for the client.
It also allows the designer and the builder to be involved in the project only at those stages where they have a particular expertise.
In other words, the designer designs and the builder builds.
During the last ten years, a system known as management contracting has become popular.
This system may vary in detail between specific contracts but in principle it runs along the following lines.
A designer will prepare outline information describing the client's needs.
A contractor will then be invited, possibly in competition, to undertake to provide the management of the works for a set fee.
He will not himself carry out the work but will invite works contractors to tender for packages of work within the project.
The management contractor, by being brought in at an early stage, will become involved in the design process in co-operation with the client's designer.
The management contractor, designer and client will agree a total budget for the project incorporating the management contractor's fee.
An advantage of this system is that work can commence much earlier than in the traditional system because much of the design work will take place at the same time as the actual construction.
Another system which has recently found favour is the package deal.
This is especially suitable where the client requires a simple building and his needs can be met by a relatively standard design.
Its main feature is that the chosen contractor offers a comprehensive package comprising the site and a completed building.
The client will probably negotiate with the contractor before a contract is signed to ensure his needs will be met, and once the contract is signed he will have little involvement until the building is complete.
A modification of this, which allows the client to incorporate his own requirements in more detail, is the design and build method.
This again provides single-point responsibility and the client knows his total financial commitment early in the project's life.
However, because he can have his own detailed requirements incorporated in the project, the system is suitable for construction of most types of building.
Since in some building projects it is impossible to define the extent of the work in advance, a number of forms of agreement are available where the contractor is reimbursed his costs for carrying out the work.
This is instructed as the project proceeds and a fee paid, usually related in some way to his costs.
Each of these systems involves quite different risks and responsibilities for the employer, contractor and surveyor who may be involved in the design and/or management of the project.
Each therefore needs a different type of contract.
TYPES OF CONTRACT
Any standard form of building contract incorporates two elements: the basic agreement between the parties that the contractor will carry out and complete the work and that the employer will pay the contractor for doing so; and detailed conditions which define how this will happen and procedures which are to be followed.
Certain situations arise on almost any building project, such as the need for the employer to vary the works or for the contractor to require interim payments.
These matters could be left to the two parties to agree as they arise, but the standard forms assume that prior agreement will lead to a smoother running project.
Many of the detailed terms of the standard forms define the apportionment of risks between employer and contractor.
For example, what happens if the contractor fails to complete the works by an agreed date: who accepts the risk of delays to the work?
For a project to have any chance of being completed without the potential for constant disputes, these and many other questions must be answered within the contract.
The key is to understand the system of procurement being used, the responsibilities of those involved and the agreed apportionment of risks, and then to find a standard form which matches those requirements.
The surveyor will therefore require a knowledge of the contracts available in order to advise his client.
So far as JCT contracts are concerned, a useful publication is their Practice Note No 20 which gives guidance on the appropriate forms to use in particular circumstances.
A detailed review of all the standard forms of building contract available is not possible here, but a brief description of the most common forms may serve as a guide.
Emphasis will be given to the JCT forms as these are undoubtedly the most widely used.
JCT Forms
The latest edition of the JCT Agreement for Minor Building Works was issued in January 1980 and reprinted with changes in October 1981.
The JCT designed this form for use where minor building works are to be carried out for an agreed lump sum based on drawings and/or specifications and/or schedules but without detailed measurements, and where an architect or supervising officer has been appointed on behalf of the employer.
It assumes that bills of quantities are unnecessary, that fluctuations in prices need not be allowed for, and that the nomination of subcontractors is not required.
The JCT also suggests that the form is generally suitable for contracts up to the value of £50,000 at 1981 prices, in other words, for projects which are relatively uncomplicated and small.
It is therefore short and simple, and its use, as has happened, for larger and more complex projects, should be viewed with concern.
In an effort to produce a short form the JCT has not included specific provisions for many common situations, such as the need to open up work for inspection, or loss and expense suffered by the contractors due to default by the employer and supervising officer.
The conditions themselves are also in shortened form, usually without any requirement for a particular procedure to be followed.
For example, in the provisions for extension of time, an extension may be given if the works are delayed for any reason beyond the control of the contractor (a clause of much wider scope, incidentally, than in other JCT contracts), and the contractor is not required to provide information to assist the supervising officer in making an extension.
The conditions do however include provisions for damages for non-completion, extension of the contract period, defects liability period, architect's instructions, variations, payment provisions, insurance and determination.
For rather larger projects, the JCT in 1984 produced their Intermediate Form of Building Contract .
Here again they state that the form is for use where works are carried out for an agreed lump sum and where an architect or supervising officer has been appointed on behalf of the employer.
The contract documents, however, may include not only drawings and specifications or a schedule of work but also bills of quantities.
Limited provisions for fluctuations are included and some choice is given to the employer in the subcontractors to be employed for specialist work.
The JCT suggest that the form is suitable where the proposed works are of a simple content involving the normally recognised basic trades and skills of the industry and are without any building service  installations or other complex specialist work.
They further suggest that the form is suitable where the contract period is not more than twelve months and the value of the work is not more than £250,000 at 1984 prices.
As would be expected in a larger contract where the risks are greater, this form is more detailed than the minor works agreement.
The conditions include the matters covered in the minor works agreement, add procedures, and often go into rather more detail.
In addition, allowance is made for deferment of possession, postponement of the work, the appointment of a clerk of works, opening up for inspection, and tests, and there is a much wider determination clause.
Probably the most novel feature of this contract is the provision for subcontractors for specialist work to be chosen by the employer.
This is not intended to be nomination in the traditional sense and once the subcontractor has been named (subject to reasonable objection by the contractor if the naming is during the course of the contract), that subcontractor becomes almost entirely the responsibility of the contractor.
Those critics of the traditional nomination procedure may find this a welcome feature.
Perhaps the most widely criticised standard form produced by the JCT is their Standard Form of Building Contract , 1980 edition.
Although incorporating some features of the previous 1963 edition, this was basically a new form of contract and by implication was intended by the JCT to be used on contracts exceeding £250,000 in value.
There are a number of variants, but the basic form is meant to be used with bills of quantities and is published in two editions, one for use by private clients (Private with Approximate Quantities ) and the other by local authorities (Local Authorities with Approximate Quantities ).
The form is again for lump sum contracts where the work has been fully designed and an architect or supervising officer appointed.
It includes provisions for full nomination of subcontractors, for fluctuations which can be calculated in a variety of ways, and for partial possession by the employer.
Many of the provisions go into a great deal of detail and lengthy procedures are often included.
Standard forms of tender, nomination and contracts for nominated subcontractors together with detailed provisions for dealing with fluctuations under both the main and subcontracts are published separately.
There are further versions for private and local authority use but without quantities.
These are not entirely satisfactory as they are simply crude adaptations of the basic forms in which a specification  is substituted for references to bills of quantities.
A more successful variant is one for use with approximate quantities.
The JCT Standard Form of Building Contract with Contractor's Design , 1981 edition, is intended for situations where the client having stated his requirements, seeks proposals from the contractor for the design and construction of the project.
Where only part of the works are to be designed by the contractor, the standard form is used with modifications set out in the Contractor's Designed Portion Supplement to the JCT Standard Form of Building Contract with Quantities , 1980 edition.
The last of the standard forms produced by the JCT is the Fixed Fee Form of Prime Cost Contract for Building Works , 1967 edition.
This is designed for situations where for one reason or another the work cannot be fully described in advance and therefore a price cannot be agreed.
The contractor is paid for the actual costs he incurs plus a previously agreed lump sum for his overheads and profit.
The form is again detailed in its provisions and broadly follows the lines of the JCT 1963 standard form.
The JCT is also producing a new fixed fee form and a management contract.
Most management contracts in current use are produced by the contractors themselves.
Forms other than JCT
Other forms which are available, if not as widely used as those of the JCT, are published by the ACA and by the FAS.
The ACA Form of Building Agreement was published in 1982 and, unlike most JCT contracts, requires the contractor to take all risks which are outside the control of the client or the architect.
It contains a number of alternative provisions which make the document quite flexible.
It can be used with or without quantities, and either the architect or the contractor produces detailed drawings.
There are no provisions for nomination but subcontractors may be named in which case they become entirely the contractor's responsibility.
A useful provision is the ability of either party to require an adjudicator to make a quick decision on any dispute during the course of the work.
There is also a BPF Edition.
The FAS has a range of three contracts, the Minor Works Contract the Small Works Contract , and the Building Contract .
Each is simply worded and although this may seem attractive, it is also their weakness as some of the drafting is poor.
The minor works contract contains no provisions for nomination and neither this contract nor the small works contract can be used in conjunction with quantities.
Running the Contract
Having matched the contract to the project, the surveyor is then faced with its administration.
This was relatively easy for a surveyor in the days when the RIBA standard form was the only one in common use.
Experience in using the contract and familiarity with its provisions allowed surveyors and contractors alike to devise operating procedures which worked well.
The same approach prevailed following publication of the JCT 1963 form, which is probably one reason why so many surveyors still cling to its use long after publication has ceased.
However, if surveyors are to keep up with the inevitable changes taking place, they must become familiar with the new contracts.
There are problems.
Even the JCT family of contracts contains widely different conditions and procedures to be followed.
Furthermore, there are often subtle differences in what at first glance appear to be similar provisions in different contracts, for example, the provision for liquidated damages.
In the standard form the contractor must pay to or allow the employer the liquidated damages.
In the minor works agreement, by contrast, the wording is simply that the contractor shall pay to the employer the liquidated damages.
The omission of the word ‘allow’ means that the employer may not deduct damages from monies otherwise due to the contractor.
Where the surveyor is in the position of administering, say, three projects in each of which a different contract is used, it can be difficult to ensure that the correct procedure is being followed.
Yet the slightest deviation from procedures laid down could prove disastrous.
The large number of contracts which end up in litigation or arbitration suggests that many surveyors do not strictly follow contract procedures.
In their defence, however, it has to be admitted that the drafting of contracts has not always been perfect, particularly in the simpler forms, where clarity has sometimes been sacrificed to brevity.
In whatever capacity the surveyor is appointed, he should understand first his role as defined by his conditions of engagement agreed with his client and, secondly, his specific role as laid down within the building contract being used.
The surveyor should be clear as to his authority and responsibilities, particularly where there is potential conflict.
An example of this is that under most standard forms the supervising officer has wide-ranging powers to issue instructions.
However, his terms of appointment may impose some limitation on these powers.
Under standard RICS Conditions of Engagement, the surveyor has his client's authority to make  material changes in design which increase the cost, or delay the execution of the works, only if he has his client's specific approval.
The surveyor who is appointed as supervising officer may not need a detailed knowledge of the law surrounding building contracts but should certainly have a full working knowledge of the procedures laid down in the contract.
A surveyor who fully understands his own role and appreciates the roles of both client and contractor as defined in the contract can have a great influence in ensuring that a project runs smoothly.
He has also to appreciate that as supervising officer his position within the building contract is unique in that he often has responsibilities to both his client and the contractor.
For example, under the terms of many standard forms, client and contractor agree that the valuation of variations and the issue of certificates shall be dealt with by the supervising officer.
In carrying out these functions, the supervising officer has a duty to both parties and not just to his client to deal with these matters strictly in accordance with the contract conditions and with good professional practice.
SOURCES OF DISPUTE
One area which is often contentious is the employment of nominated subcontractors.
The conflicting interests of client, contractor and subcontractor have provided the basis for numerous court cases.
As a result of the decisions in these cases and the growing influence of subcontractors within the JCT, the 1980 standard form contains a procedure for nomination second to none in its complexity.
Almost every eventuality has been foreseen, but this has necessitated a complicated set of forms which, although simple in principle, are so detailed as to be regarded by many as impractical.
They do however perhaps highlight the problems associated with nomination, and direct the surveyor's mind to consider whether nomination is really necessary.
Is a nominated subcontractor really likely to perform better than the subcontractor's own subcontractor?
Who takes the risk, for example, when a nominated subcontractor fails to perform diligently and delays completion of the main contract?
The answer is the employer.
Both the JCT standard form 1980 and the JCT intermediate form introduced novel procedures to overcome these problems whilst leaving the employer with some influence in the appointment of specialists.
The standard form 1980 provides a procedure where the client puts forward three specialists whom he would be happy to see used.
The contractor chooses one of the three who immediately becomes his responsibility and is in the same position as a domestic subcontractor.
The intermediate form  introduces a totally new concept, the named subcontractor .
Here the employer chooses, by whatever method he likes, a specialist either in the specification prior to tender or in a variation order during the course of the contract.
The ‘named person’ then becomes a subcontractor with the main contractor taking most of the responsibility, but with the client bearing some responsibility, for example, if the subcontractor defaults.
Standard forms of tender and subcontract are issued by the JCT for use in conjunction with this method, which is far less complicated than full nomination and which, because the main contractor takes greater responsibility, must be considered a useful alternative by surveyors.
Probably the most difficult problem in administering a contract is a contractor's claim.
Once a dispute arises relationships tend to sour, and there is often a noticeable effect on the works if they are not complete.
There are a number of ways in which a surveyor can attempt to offset the problems usually associated with claims.
The first is to anticipate the claim and then to keep a detailed record of events and information which will be useful when reaching a decision.
The surveyor should also ensure his client is informed, not only of the claim itself but also of progress in dealing with it.
Finally, if the surveyor can show the contractor that he is processing the claim and will.make his decision within a reasonable time, it should be possible to maintain a good relationship with him.
ARBITRATION V LITIGATION
The relative merits of arbitration and litigation are much contested.
Those putting the case for the former, point to its relative speed, although where large and complicated matters are involved this advantage may be lost.
Certainly, small disputes are often settled much more quickly, particularly where the parties can agree to written submissions only, thus avoiding a full arbitration hearing.
Litigation, on the other hand, can take a very long time.
One disadvantage of this to all parties is that over a long period memories fade and evidence becomes more difficult to establish.
Another point put forward in favour of arbitration is its lower cost; in litigation the costs can be considerable.
However, costs in either event depend very much on the use which is made of lawyers.
They, as might be expected, often favour litigation because this is the field with which they are usually most familiar.
Clients' attitudes may also have a bearing on which alternative is chosen.
Many local authorities prefer litigation, possibly owing to the choice and influence of their own legal departments.
Whichever course is chosen, the surveyor should be aware of the different  procedures which are followed.
Indeed, with so many claims ending in litigation or arbitration, there is increasing scope for surveyors to be involved either as expert witness or as arbitrator.
This is a growing market and many surveyors are specialising in this field.
It is an area full of opportunities for surveyors to demonstrate their skills and knowledge.