

Introduction
Censorship is a recurring problem in libraries, and there is no issue in librarianship which is more likely to bring libraries on to the pages of the Press, frequently in a damaging and trivial representation of the library profession.
Given the preoccupation of most of the British Press with the sensational and the titillating such coverage will inevitably continue, but more can be done and should be done to avoid the negative image of the profession that emerges with each story.
Such Press coverage not only trivializes the profession but also trivializes the problem of censorship.
Every day in many countries, it is routine practice that books, pamphlets, newspapers, etc. are censored on a massive scale, and those whose ideas are the object of censorship risk death and imprisonment as a matter of course.
Mercifully the issue of censorship in the UK is not at present the matter of life and death that it can be in other countries, yet various instances of censorship in recent years (even in the library field) have illustrated how inflammatory the question of censorship can be.
Fortunately the considerable degree of freedom of speech and expression that we enjoy allows us to discuss and challenge censorship at all levels and at all times.
It is a privilege enjoyed by everyone in this country but because the library profession has a responsibility for some considerable part of the provision of and access to literature and information, there is a heightened obligation for the library profession in the UK to resist censorship with a much greater collective and individual will than it has tended to show in the past.
Much of the Press coverage of library censorship tends to be concerned with attempts to censor so-called obscene and indecent literature.
More recently the focus has been on literature which might be thought of as racially damaging.
In the censorship scale obscene literature might be rated as less serious than racist literature but both would have to defer to seditious literature which normally does not find its way on to library shelves.
It might be argued therefore that library censorship is relatively  unimportant.
However, each of these types of censorable literature is subversive in its own way: obscene literature is morally subversive, racist literature is socially subversive, and seditious literature is politically subversive.
Nor can one now easily separate moral, social, and political issues.
That inevitably makes censorship, of whatever sort of material and in whatever environment, a matter of major concern.
Whatever censorship takes place in libraries, even of seemingly innocuous indecent material, can reverberate elsewhere.
For this reason, if no other, the question of censorship in libraries has to be treated more seriously than hitherto.
But there is a further problem of censorship in libraries, particularly in public libraries, which probably was not evident in the past.
Censorship is now, in a real sense, polarized along political lines.
Thus, for example, left-wing authorities go out of their way to ban what seems to be racist matter, and right-wing authorities tend to be careful to exclude what may be regarded as homosexual literature.
These are generalizations, but the probability is that political control does determine what may or may not be censored or, conversely, stocked in a public library.
This in itself is alarming, but a further probable consequence of this is even more alarming: whereas in the past local authorities would censor in isolation and in response to local pressure, the tendency now may be to follow ‘the party line’.
State censorship is abhorrent and unthinkable in a democratic country, but censorship carried out along party lines is equally abhorrent and is a significant move towards state censorship.
The News International ban was arguably effected along party lines, but it owes its place as a landmark in censorship, and censorship in libraries in particular, to the fact that legislation and hence the State was used to lift censorship rather than to implement it.
Yet state censorship has arguably come much nearer and become more sinister with the Spycatcher affair and the more recent Section 28.
The former created few problems for libraries, but the latter will almost certainly present considerable difficulties for libraries in the foreseeable future.
Each of these three events involved the legal process or changes in the law, and as such inevitably make the censorship issue in libraries less localized than it used to be even after the Obscene Publications Act of 1959.
The local nature of much public library censorship was often an argument for saying that these were just local storms caused by local byelaws and local pressure and could be allowed to pass over without much fuss or comment.
New legislation which contains elements of censorship, forces us to take a wider and more considered view.
Similarly, while in the past libraries have often simply faced  local pressure and protest, they are increasingly confronted by the professionalism and organization of protest through national pressure groups.
Together these trends towards pressure, protest and censorship at a national level, demand in turn from librarians a national and global response, or in other words a consistent and professional approach to and reaction against censorship.
The fight against censorship is based on the defence of intellectual freedom, which has always been the essence of the profession of librarianship.
In a way this new fight against censorship is an opportunity not simply to defend and ensure intellectual freedom but to affirm that a profession does exist which essentially safeguards this freedom.
The defence of the first is an assertion of the second.
There is therefore much to gain and much to lose for the profession.
1 The perspective of the profession as a whole and the impact of the News International ban
It is necessary at the outset to examine more fully the standpoint of the profession on the issue of censorship.
Whatever action can be taken against censorship at an institutional or individual level depends on the firmness and strength of the profession's stated position, and that requires an examination of views, role and actions of the professional association, namely the Library Association, in response to censorship.
The Library Association and its views on censorship
The position of the Library Association with regard to censorship was made quite clear in a statement promulgated in 1963:
The function of a library service is to provide so far as resources allow, all books, periodicals, etc., other than the trivial, in which its readers claim legitimate interest.
In determining what is a legitimate interest the librarian can safely rely upon one guide only — the law of the land.
If the publication of such matter has not incurred penalties under the law it should not be excluded from libraries on any moral, political, religious or racial ground alone, to satisfy any sectional interest.
The public are entitled to rely upon libraries for access to information and enlightenment upon every field of human experience and activity.
Those who provide library services should not restrict this access except by standards which are endorsed by law.
The Library Association's position is therefore based entirely on the rule of law: whatever is published and has not been banned by law is permissible within a library.
Moreover it recognizes its duty to make such publications accessible to the public at large, and not to restrict access on any grounds other than legal.
In 1978 a further statement was made by the Library Association relating to censorship:
…
Librarians recognize the need for an appropriate balance to be maintained within the materials which they make available to reflect differing extremes or shades of opinion on matters which might be thought to be contentious.
In providing reasonable access to a representative range of published material, a librarian is required to take note of the needs and interests of the public as a whole; from time to time pressures, which this Association would feel to be undue, have been brought to bear on a librarian to discontinue the acquisition and display of material, which is thought to be unacceptable and which thus might prohibit the service to certain minorities whose interests the libraries are equally supposed to serve.
The Association would regard the professional responsibilities of the librarian to include full discretion over the acquisitions made by the library service within the terms of the general guidelines laid down by an employer: in the case of public libraries these guidelines should not be expected to allow local censorship.
The Association would call upon all local authorities which have instructed their librarians to restrict or prevent access to materials, either on grounds of personal prejudice or a desire to ‘protect’ public morality, to reconsider the principle on which the public service is provided, and to recognize the necessary discretion that their professional staff should be allowed in providing a comprehensive service for users.
This statement affirms that the service is there to meet the needs of the public as a whole and therefore minority interests have to be catered for as well.
Only by meeting these interests will a balanced collection emerge, reflecting a wide range of opinions.
But the statement also points to the pressure that is brought to bear to exclude that material from the library which it is felt would harm minority interests.
It identifies in particular local authorities as applying such pressure, and asks them to permit librarians to exercise their professional discretion in the selection of stock.
The above 1963 and 1978 statements by the Library Association are unequivocal and admirable statements of what is, and should be, the professional position with regard to censorship in libraries and the nature of the librarians' responsibilities in the selection of publications.
In fact an amalgam of these statements formed a policy statement published by the Library  Association in 1978 and slightly, but significantly, revised in 1989.
It is aimed at both local authorities and librarians to remind them of the professional responsibilities of librarians.
The Library Association has thus taken a consistent position on censorship over a period of at least 25 years.
But while the  views expressed in the current policy statement are still valid, such declarations, which have never been sufficient to deter censorship in libraries, are now patently inadequate, in spite of being updated to reflect perhaps the differing rationale for censorship.
The 1978 statement highlighted the increasing interference by local authorities in book selection, and pointed to the possible consequent danger to minority interests.
At that time local authorities could be seen as acting in the interests of the majority — the phrase from the last paragraph of the 1978 extract from the Library Association record above (omitted from the 1989 policy statement)‘either on grounds of…a desire to ‘protect’ public morality' suggests so.
But with the increasing radicalness of local authorities, many vigorously proclaiming sectional interests, such interference by local authorities could also endanger majority interests.
This, it could be argued, was the case in the ban by libraries of News International publications in 1986.
The ban, and the judgement on the ban, was a major turning point in library censorship in the UK.
The News International publications ban
In the early part of 1986 a number of local authorities throughout the UK instructed the libraries under their jurisdiction (mainly public libraries, but also a number of college libraries) to suspend their subscriptions to newspapers and periodicals published by News International.
This meant the banning of The Times, The Sunday Times , the Times Educational Supplement , the Times Higher Education Supplement , the Times Literary Supplement , the Sun and the News of the World .
The reasons for the ban on News International publications were essentially as follows:
The decision was a gesture of sympathy and solidarity with the views and activities of employees, their unions, the union leaders and representatives in an industrial dispute which had arisen after the transfer of newspaper production to Wapping, a consequential strike and many subsequent dismissals.
The political nature of the News International ban rendered the reiteration of the Library Association's 1963 and 1978 statements on censorship inadequate although not irrelevant, and a further statement appeared in 1986 in direct response to the News International publications ban.
It appeared in a letter to local authority associations:
In our view it is manifestly not right that councillors should allow their personal opinions on a political or industrial matter to stand in the way of the right of access of the public to all publications which can reasonably be provided.
No public library is able, of course, to make all publications available to the public.
What is wrong in this case is not only the denial of very commonly used and important newspapers but the reasons for doing so.
It is also relevant that the Public Libraries and Museums Act 1964, under which public library services are provided in England and Wales, requires local authorities to provide a ‘comprehensive and efficient library service for all persons desiring to make use thereof’.
(Section 7).
The Library Association is deeply concerned that the imposition of these bans constitutes a major breach of the traditional principle that public libraries should be a neutral and non-partisan service, a principle which goes back to the beginning of the public libraries in the middle of the nineteenth century.
Censorship of literature on political grounds was by no means new as Thompson's history shows, and both Thompson and Noyce have demonstrated that the censorship of newspapers in particular(especially those from the hard and radical left) is common and endemic, so why this new and specific response by the Library Association?
In fact there were some special features associated with the News International ban, which if not individually unique were unusual, and in combination made the ban virtually unprecedented.
The circumstances certainly merited a vigorous response by the Library Association.
First of all, the banning was not localized but was widespread throughout the UK.
It affected a large number of libraries, and it included college libraries as well as public libraries.
Secondly, there were indications that the decisions by the various local authorities (in the London area at least) to ban the publications were not taken in isolation.
In all probability therefore the action was carefully co-ordinated.
In the face of such concerted action it was clear that the Library Association had to take strong action on behalf of its members who, individually, could have little chance of opposing the ban.
Thirdly, the censorship was arguably politically motivated.
More crucially it ran along political lines, i.e. in general it was applied by Labour-controlled local authorities only.
Fourthly, the grounds for the ban were not the content of the newspapers but the actions of the proprietors of News International on another issue.
In this respect it was similar to the ban on P. G. Wodehouse's novels during the Second World War when his broadcasts in Germany were believed to have given the Nazis propaganda support.
Finally, the process of the ban was made clear by the Authorities, and the various stages were well documented.
In both 1978 and 1986 the Library Association's statements were  made in response to censorship in a number of public libraries, largely instigated by local authorities; and the appeal was directed to the local authorities.
However, the situation in 1986 differed as a whole from earlier examples of censorship (as indicated above), to the extent that mere statements of protest were clearly going to be inadequate.
Much stronger pressures and probably more decisive action was necessary in these circumstances.
Ultimately it was inevitable that there had to be recourse to legal action to remove the ban.
The grounds for the action were specified in the Library Association's statement to the local authorities in 1986, and such legal action was obviously contemplated by the Library Association.
Legal action was also promised by the Government but only belatedly did the Minister for the Arts pursue the matter under the Public Libraries and Museums Act 1964.
Eventually it was left to the proprietors of the banned publications — Times Newspapers Ltd, News International plc, etc. — and ratepayers in some of the local authorities affected to go to court.
They won, and on the basis of the 1964 Act.
One might reasonably ask why the Library Association, the body responsible for all professional matters concerned with the operation of libraries, including attempts to impose acts of censorship in libraries, did not itself initiate legal action against the News International ban.
In fact under the terms of the Public Libraries and Museums Act 1964, it was the duty of the Minister for the Arts to act:
From the commencement of this Act it shall be the duty of the Secretary of State to superintend, and promote the improvement of, the public library service provided by local authorities in England and Wales, and to secure the proper discharge by local authorities of the functions in relation to libraries conferred on them as library authorities by or under this Act.
And the Library Association, amongst others, continually pressed the Minister to act, but to no avail.
In the light of Government inaction, one might reasonably ask again why the Library Association did not then initiate legal action against the News International ban.
The Library Association took legal advice on whether they could take action, but were apparently advised that they did not have the ‘locus’ to intervene in this way.
Thus an opportunity had to be missed by the Library Association to assert its outright rejection of library censorship, using one of the few pieces of legislation that ensure that libraries exist and in a manner free from censorship.
It shall be the duty of every library authority to provide a comprehensive and efficient library service for all persons desiring to make use thereof…(2) In fulfilling its duty…a library authority shall in particular have regard to the desirability (a) of securing, by keeping of adequate stocks, by arrangements with other library authorities, and by any other appropriate means, that facilities are available for the borrowing of, or reference to, books and other printed matter, and pictures, gramophone records, films and other materials, sufficient in number, range and quality to meet the general requirements and any special requirements both of adults and children…
Instead it was left to Times Newspapers Ltd and others, to bring the case to court and win on the grounds that the library authorities had abused their powers under Section 7 of the Public Libraries and Museums Act 1964.
The News International ban had some unusual characteristics as we have seen, but the ban and the judgment on it was a significant event in several further respects.
First of all, the case made it clear that in some circumstances statements of protest alone, however well argued and legitimate, were not sufficient to stop library censorship, particularly if it was widespread and co-ordinated.
Much stronger action was necessary, to the extent of going to court.
Secondly, and more importantly, the judgment on the ban illustrated that there was a specific piece of legislation, and legislation directly concerned with libraries, which could, in legal terms at lest, halt censorship in libraries.
Thirdly, there was now a legal precedent upon which to mount attacks on politically inspired censorship.
Although such censorship is not the most common type of censorship in libraries, it is the one in recent years that has threatened to be the most damaging.
The polarization of censorship in public libraries along political lines may continue, but the News International case gives legal grounds for putting an end to the banning of newspapers and magazines of whatever political persuasion.
The irony of the News International judgment is that it should put an end also to the widespread exclusion of left-wing newspapers and magazines.
It will be necessary to return later to the question of the rule of law and library censorship with regard to both access to information in libraries and censorship in libraries, but at this stage it is appropriate to examine in part a document which contains the essence of professional librarianship in the UK — the Library Association's Code of Professional Conduct.
It was first approved by the Association in 1983, but in October 1985 the Library Association Council approved some guidance notes on the Code, and these were published in March 1986.
Coincidentally  this was at the height of the News International affair, which undoubtedly provided a severe test for the Code and its guidelines.
The Library Association and its Code of Professional Conduct
The Library Association's Guidance notes on the Code of Professional Conduct contain much that is pertinent to the question of censorship and access of information, as one might expect.
One section of the Code of Professional Conduct above all has a considerable bearing on censorship:
In places to which the public has right of access, save where the flow of information must be restricted by reason of confidentiality, members have an obligation to  facilitate the flow of information and ideas and to protect and promote the rights of every individual to have free and equal access to sources of information without discrimination and within the limits of the law.
There is nothing exceptional in this: it merely reinforces earlier Library Association statements on the responsibilities of the professional librarian with regard to censorship.
In the case of the News International ban it offered clear guidance on how the professional should react.
But, coincidentally, Section 2f, which follows immediately the above statement on censorship, was particularly significant in the News International case.
It highlights the difficult position that the professional frequently faces in cases of library censorship because even if the employer does not initiate the censorship, the censorship is generally ratified by the employer.
Section 2f reads:
Members must fulfil to the best of their ability the contractual obligations owed to their employer.
However circumstances may arise when the public interest or the reputation of the profession itself may be at variance with the narrower interests of an employer.
If it is found to be impossible to reconcile such differences then the public interest and the maintenance of professional standards must be the primary considerations.
The second statement sums up the News International ban precisely, and the following sentence reflects the dilemma that was faced by many librarians in the dispute; though not by all, because for many librarians who supported the ban there was no dilemma.
For the many professional librarians who were employed by the banning authorities and who disagreed with the ban, the direction contained in Section 2f was virtually impossible to follow.
It seems likely that in every case, perhaps after much agonizing, they succumbed to the decision to ban News International publications: to do otherwise would have risked contractual misconduct, strong moral and political pressure from both colleagues and employers, and ultimately, probably, dismissal.
Such situations as were faced by these librarians in the early part of 1986 were not new and no doubt will recur, and librarians may well feel forced to take the same course of action in future.
What may not recur is the opportunity open to the Library Association at that time to act decisively not only against the ban but to act firmly in support of professional integrity.
The coincidental publication of the Guidance notes on the Code of Professional Conduct during a major test of professional practice can be viewed as a piece of misfortune or as a superb opportunity to affirm the stature of the profession by using the Code to support the Library Association's case.
As events unfolded and the Library Association failed to act it is to be viewed as a piece of misfortune for the Code, and hence the Association and for the profession.
It is one thing for the Association to demand certain professional standards of its members (as formulated in the Code of Professional Conduct), and to expect them to have loyalty to these rather than to the employer in any dispute, but the professional association itself has to be seen to take a strong stand in support of its membership, or indeed against its membership, if such situations of conflict arise.
Thus, not to act or not to be able to act decisively against the ban in the first place seriously questioned the professional association's ability to take a firm position on the vital matter of unhindered access to legitimate publications.
Moreover, not to act or not to be able to act decisively, seriously weakened the resolve of members in making a choice between professional standards and employers' decisions.
In this case the fact that all the bans were put into effect and no reports of significant clashes between librarians and local authorities emerged, probably indicates that in the last resort employer's directives preceded loyalty to professional obligations; and in the light of the current employment situation it would have been surprising if such personal considerations did not prevail.
This, of course, does not mean that the Library Association's Code of Professional Conduct was in disarray or no longer credible.
Arguably only if the Library Association failed to take disciplinary action against its members for not putting professional loyalty and practice above employers' decisions would the Code be discredited — as a paper tiger.
In a letter to the Library Association Record in April 1966 Philip Plumb commented:
The letter from Mr. Roper in the March issue of the Record claims that in many authorities it has been staff themselves who have initiated the blacking of News International newspapers.
If they are members they would find it difficult to refute charges of a breach of the Code of Conduct.
It might have been difficult to prove that librarians themselves took the initiative for the censorship, although many would have been pleased to make that claim.
What is not in doubt is that many members failed to follow the professional path of Section 2f in the dispute, and were thus in breach of the Code of Professional Conduct.
No charges of breaching the Code of Professional Conduct were ever brought.
It may appear harsh to criticize the Library Association for not pursuing possible cases of professional misconduct and it may seem even harsher to pillory members of the Association for putting personal interests first and professional interests second, but censorship, and being party to censorship.
is undoubtedly professional misconduct under the terms of the Code.
The essential principle which lies behind the Code is that the professional librarian's prime duty is to facilitate access to materials and information in order to  meet the requirement of the client, irrespective of the librarian's personal interests and views on the content of the material and the client's requirement.
It may even appear unfair to elevate such a document as the Guidance notes on the Code of Professional Conduct when it declares
The Code of Conduct is primarily intended as an indication of the standards of behaviour expected of a member of the Association.
In all professions, voluntary adherence to standards is the norm.
But the Code is quite explicit at the beginning:
The purpose of this Code of Conduct is to set out the standards of professional conduct expected of members of the Association and to indicate what matters may be regarded by the Disciplinary Committee as being contrary to the aims, objects and interests of the Association or contrary to the profession of librarianship.
The guidelines on professional conduct are embodied in the Code of Professional Conduct, and if the Code has any significance and weight it must be applied.
The News International ban was just the type of dispute that must have been envisaged when the Code was drawn up.
The Code specified the action required if members did not adhere to the Code on an issue  of censorship and no action was taken.
The Code was tested, but there was no resolve to back it up.
But such a Code also has to be effective if applied.
If the question of professional misconduct had been pursued the issue would not merely have been the efficacy of the Code but the power of the employer against the strength and stature of the profession, and thence the credibility of the profession.
There is little wrong with the tenor and even toughness of the Code but its weakness is that it is unrealistic when crucial choices have to be made by its members.
Action by the Library Association on censorship
The views of the Library Association on censorship are, on paper, sound, but what the News International ban demonstrated was that a simple reliance on policy statements and codes of professional conduct was not enough and never will be enough to confront library censorship.
Some sort of specific and effective action is necessary.
There are a number of different options, and each of these can probably be brought into play together, but broadly speaking they fall under two headings.
The first involves action against the institutions practising censorship, and the second involves action on behalf of or against the membership of the profession.
The first alternative (and at one time in the News International dispute it was considered a possibility), is to fight censorship at an institutional level; that is, for the professional association as an organization to join battle with the local authority or similar organization, by recourse to legal means whenever censorship arises.
The judgment on the News International ban made it clear that political censorship, at least, could be fought effectively, and the basis for the defence against censorship was the Public Libraries and Museums Act 1964.
There are two problems here: the first that is it is not always easy to determine that censorship has taken place in libraries.
To begin with, censorship is a particularly difficult concept in law.
And even when the censorship is proven, it is possible to defend the practice by simply saying it was unavoidable.
For example, long after the News International judgement some authorities had still not reinstated the The Times newspaper, and the defence was, perhaps correctly, that they could no longer afford the subscription.
The second problem is that legal action and the threat of legal action would put the Library  Associational in almost constant conflict with one or other authority.
It is not simply that cases of public library censorship appear to be on the increase (although there is no substantial evidence to confirm this), but that the  question of determining what is and is not censorship can be so time-consuming.
Yet the News International case has provided some legal precedent to tackle swiftly further similar cases of censorship should they arise.
Both of these problems depend on some clarification of what can be legitimately called censorship, and the question of what is censorship will be examined later.
But they do not invalidate the point that if a professional organization believes firmly in the principle of ‘no censorship’, then it must be prepared to defend the principle resolutely on every occasion.
The second alternative is to deal with library censorship on the individual and professional level.
Here the problems are even greater.
In the first place it could be argued that the power of the professional association to act is severely limited, because much of the censorship that takes place in libraries is ultimately applied by Library Committees and local authorities whose members are beyond the control of the librarians' professional body.
Professional librarians normally make only policy recommendations to the Library Committee, and this is the limit of their responsibility.
The decisions are finally in the hands of non-professional personnel outside the library.
In the second place to put the onus of preventing censorship in libraries on individual librarians is unreasonable and unrealistic.
Against concerted action by local authorities the individual librarian would be fighting a very hard and probably losing battle.
Even if the individual librarian is supported or protected or even threatened by the professional association, this seems to be an inadequate defence against censorship.
Yet the onus of preventing censorship already rests on the individual professional when policy statements and a code of professional conduct alone are the only weapons being applied against censorship.
Both of these problems question the status of the professional librarian in the workplace, and ultimately the status of the profession and its professional body.
Against such a challenge the first step must be for the professional body, i.e. the Library Association, to exercise its authority on its professional membership.
It has made unequivocal statements and set clear guidelines on the issue of censorship.
Censorship is an unprofessional act, and anyone who deliberately calls for and takes part in censorship has no place in the profession.
It is now necessary to examine the extremely difficult and invidious position of the individual professional librarian.
2 The professional librarian and censorship
The pressures on the professional librarian in issues of censorship are enormous.
There is pressure from the society being served — to respond this way and that; there is pressure from employers; and there is the pressure from within — to be an individual and to express individual tastes and views.
But these pressures are faced by all professionals in other fields.
Ultimately the requirement is to act professionally and that, at the very least, should ensure a consistent approach to the issue of censorship.
But because there is some uncertainty about what it is to be a professional librarian and how to respond professionally to many situations, there can be rather tao many difficult decisions to be made; and the dilemma is not helped by the weakness of the profession, both inherent and externally perceived, on the issue of censorship.
It is appropriate therefore to examine more fully the pressures or tensions that the professional librarian is faced with in questions of censorship, and to look for their resolution in terms of the Code of Professional Conduct.
The pressures might be conveniently categorized as follows: duties, obligations, loyalties and convictions, and arguably that is the order of priority in which they should be followed.
The duty of the professional librarian
Members' primary duty when acting in the capacity of librarian is to their clients, i.e. the persons or groups of persons for whose requirements and use are intended the resources and services which the members are engaged to provide.
In all professional considerations the interests of clients within their prescribed or legitimate requirements take precedence over all other interests.
So much mere lip-service is paid to the concept of the primacy of users' needs, and so often are the users' needs merely perceived rather than ascertained, that library services fall short  of users' real needs or requirements too often.
It then becomes easy in service provision to slip almost unwittingly from providing what we think the clientele requires to providing what we think they ought to have.
For that reason the word ‘interests’ in the Code of Professional Conduct is perhaps an unfortunate guide in the context of censorship.
It encourages us to believe we can take a protective attitude, by acting in the clients' 'best interests', in making decisions about what stock to provide.
The path of ‘best interests’ is ironically the swiftest way to library censorship.
The word ‘interests’ could then blur the message of the Code.
The operative word in the duty of the professional librarian has to be the ‘requirements’ of the user.
The obligations of the professional librarian
Members must fulfil to the best of their ability the contractual obligations owed to their employer.
However circumstances may arise when the public interest or the reputation of the profession itself may be at variance with the narrower interests of an employer.
If it is found to be impossible to reconcile such differences then the public interest and the maintenance of professional standards must be the primary consideration.
Here it is envisaged that in most instances the conflict will be a simple one between the librarian's obligations to his profession and public interest on the one hand, and the librarian's obligations to his employer on the other hand.
Yet realistically this dilemma is likely to be brief as long as employers hold the key to one's livelihood rather than the professional association.
The threat of disciplinary action or even dismissal from the Library Association is empty when one can practise as a librarian without membership of the professional association.
This is the essential weakness of the profession in censorship as well as in other professional issues.
The key factor then in a conflict of obligations between profession and employer is the librarian's obligations to family and career.
The latter will always heavily tilt the balance towards finally meeting one's obligations to the employer.
Yet since so much censorship is initiated by Council members (in the case of public libraries), individual readers, pressure groups, and not by librarians and decisions are finally taken by library committees, there is room for substantial protest which falls short of outright rejection of the censorship; and that is probably as far as one can ever go in preventing the censorship taking place.
The professional librarian's divided loyalties
Differentiating between obligations and loyalties is difficult, and  many would argue that membership of a trade union implies obligations rather than just loyalties.
Certainly trade union responsibility was the key factor in the equation of obligations in the News International ban, although it was more a case of loyalty to trade unionism, and loyalty to fellow trade unionists.
When it comes to loyalties the list of allegiances extends much further than we have considered hitherto.
One has loyalties to working colleagues and to professional colleagues elsewhere; our loyalties to these alone make both work and a professional career immensely rewarding.
But in the last resort what really moves us is our personal convictions.
The professional librarian's personal convictions
Personal convictions provide the strongest pressure in making professional judgments, and two of the most powerful and most relevant in the question of censorship are moral principles and political beliefs.
These principles and these beliefs are such an integral part of each person's characteristics that few days will pass in the professional life of the librarian when these loyalties do not impinge upon our professional judgment.
Indeed the most important conflict we face in censorship is the battle between individual convictions and–professional practice.
The Code makes no mention of this conflict, and rightly so, because our own beliefs have no part to play in making professional judgments.
To be a professional is to exercise (and most importantly to have the ability to exercise) one's professional skills and to make professional decisions, without deference to moral, religious or political beliefs and points of view.
This is not a denial of individuality, but an affirmation that we are professionals.
One could claim that one's beliefs and principles are soundly based, and are both socially inspired and socially acceptable, and hence justification for the modification of professional standards.
Thus in the name of the common good and social responsibility are decisions to censor made.
Social responsibility is a concept that in almost all cases enables one to reconcile one's own views with the needs of society, but it is a complex idea and particularly so for the professional librarian.
3 Social responsibility and the social context
The kaleidoscope of censorship
To look back through a history of censorship in libraries is an instructive and fascinating experience (and there is no better way than through Thompson's Censorship in public libraries in the United Kingdom during the Twentieth Century ).
As the various censored titles appear (and often re-appear) over the years one reacts with thoughts like ‘How ridiculous, how silly, how could they!’, and ‘Unbelievable, unacceptable, how could they justify that?’.
Such instantaneous judgments come quickly with the benefit of distance and hindsight — it is easy to be smug and superior at (what we think are) the follies of earlier times.
But if you were old enough to be around at the time, reactions like ‘Well, of course, the political circumstances were such that…’, and ‘Yes, I have to admit I took offence to that’ are more likely, and cause one to take a more considered and less dogmatic view.
We may defensively claim that it was the right thing to do at the time.
Such retrospects can be an unnerving experience.
It is like seeing an old, flickering film of one's emotional and cultural development.
Our attitudes change and, we hope, mature as time passes.
Society too, of course, changes (and helps to change us), but whether it develops and matures is a matter for another debate.
But change it does, and there is no better barometer of that change than what is censored, by libraries as well as by other institutions.
Censorship reflects the social concerns and even fears of society and government at the time.
In times of war and similar threats we are acutely sensitive of anything that is faintly seditious.
In times of social upheaval we guard against anything that might make society fragment too precipitately and dangerously, and we try to take care that racist or intolerant literature is suppressed.
At all other times, but particularly in the change from less to greater liberality and vice versa, then obscenity becomes the target.
Our perception of what should be censored, therefore, changes with the times and over time.
The 1940s and war made seditious  literature a vital concern; the 1950s and anti-communism made left-wing literature seem so threatening; the 1960s and permissiveness eventually caused us to think we could go too far with ‘indecent’ and ‘obscene’books; and the 1970s and 1980s and the move towards a more multicultural society and the assertiveness of nationality made us conscious of the damage of racist and religiously intolerant literature.
Some of these issues set off fewer alarm bells today and perhaps for most of us they are of less social concern.
Yet we would be ill-advised to dismiss any of them.
From time to time a publication appears which arouses and sustains passions which are difficult to contain.
Salman Rushdie's The Satanic Verses illustrated that while our now largely secular society regards blasphemy as rather less heinous than it did a hundred years ago some parts of our society are offended to such an extent that the call for retribution goes beyond censorship.
The Rushdie affair illustrated on the one hand that the general social climate changes with the passage of time, and views on what is censorable change with it.
The Rushdie affair also emphasized that the composition of society is not homogeneous and some sections may have very different perceptions of what is acceptable at any time.
However, these minority interests should not be protected by censorship, but, as Coleman insists, by ensuring that positive images of that minority's beliefs are positively and adequately represented — in libraries particularly.
There are certain features associated with censorship that do not seem to change through the years.
Firstly of course, many sincere viewpoints are held and vigorously presented, perhaps reflecting a morality that is now unfashionable or less prevalent; these viewpoints are always with us and it is proper that they should be so, and that they are seriously and sympathetically heard.
What we also find as we turn the pages of the history of censorship are the moral and social and political opportunists, loud and strident, quick to make their mark and catch the mood of the day.
The horror felt for or against the censorship is less than the feeling for the opportunity it provides to make capital out of the situation.
In other words the incident is exploited for personal, political, etc. gain.
In the history of censorship in public libraries such opportunists are often local politicians and the local and national press, who feed and sustain one another with a rich diet in prurience, bigotry and alarmist politics, all in the name of the protection of a way of life and cherished values.
Sadly the voices of reason are overwhelmed or ignored, even though in the long-term they are safer guardians of our values.
The voices are few not only because  it takes courage to speak out against the tide of opinion, but because few can see the issue in a wider context and take the longer perspective.
The professional and social responsibilities of the librarian
Librarians are no more gifted in taking the longer perspective than any other individuals, and will in the main react instinctively like most of the rest.
Yet training and practice should make librarians different in one particular respect, otherwise we have no claim to be professionals.
Whatever our personal views on politics, morals and society are, we have responsibilities not simply to the here and now but to society over a much longer term.
The librarian as custodian of culture is a cliche but it is the essence of our professional activity.
‘Social responsibility for the librarian, then, means responsibility not simply to society as it is, but to the society of the future and the past.
And the way to do this is to ensure that libraries stock material of the widest possible range to reflect all opinions.
Only in this way can any future generations gain a balanced view of society in our time.
In the society of the present, or at any time for that matter, the librarian, in his or her professional capacity, has no competence and no right to make moral judgments of the propriety of this or that piece of literature.
Even his or her literary appreciation and sensitivity are normally based more on acquired interest than on academic training, although such is literary fashion and taste the latter may be no firm base for judgment either.
By all means let us have personal and private views on this or that book, but we are not employed as professionals to impose such views on society, however well meaning we may be.
It is not for us to decide whether or not a book is racist or obscene or seditious; society has laid down laws to make such judgments and has conferred upon statutory bodies the power to advise and assess on such matters — however imperfect or fickle such institutions may appear in their assessments.
And where such statutory means are slow to act or uncertain of their action it is not for us to make pre-emptive strikes in the name of propriety.
We have a place in the chain of communication from author to reader as facilitators of access to the printed word, not preventers of such access.
In specific terms it is our professional duty to stand back and, acknowledging that the resources to acquire everything are not available, to provide a service that is balanced and unbiased and tries to meet the demands of a clientele that itself must judge what is good and proper.
4 Censorship and the law
The legislation of censorship — some general observations
If the question of social responsibility and censorship is complex and forever shifting, the relationship between the law and censorship is even more so.
The questions are similar in that both are a reflection of the values and morals of society at the time.
But while social responsibility generally moves broadly in step with societal changes, the law does not always keep pace with society and its new standards, and consequently may be considerably out of phase with present society.
That does not mean that the law should change with every passing fancy — crimes such as theft, fraud, murder, etc. will never become fashionable — but ‘social’ crimes such as publishing indecent or obscene material are dependent on society's perception of what is or is not indecent or obscene at the time, and the legislation of one period may be inappropriate in another period of time, to the extent that resorting to the courts to deal with the matter may be quite inappropriate and ineffective.
Perhaps for this reason the law in several areas of censorship has for many years remained quietly in the background, yet with an extensive array of legislation to be respected and always at its disposal.
This is particularly so in the area of obscene or indecent publications, where, interestingly, some of the older legislation (e.g. part of the Customs Consolidation Act 1876, now incorporated in the Customs & Excise Act 1952) is invoked instead of the new legislation (e.g. the Obscene Publications Act 1964), partly because some of this more recent legislation has become less effective in securing convictions.
But even some of the older legislation requires sharpening up to meet modern situations or to respond appropriately to new ‘indiscretions’.
Thus we have the reform of Section 2 of the Official Secrets Act 1911.
Such legislative changes are seen as necessary (by government in particular) to curb abuses of privilege (by improper disclosure of information) and confidentiality, and more is likely to get onto the statute books as appreciation and  concern grows of the power and damage that information can wield.
This new legislation adds substantially to the armoury of pre-publication censorship, and together with our more traditional legislation of post-publication censorship, forms a disarming net around freedom of expression.
Such a double-fisted attack has so far posed no extraordinary problems for librarians, but a series of events over the last few years illustrates that the issue of the law and censorship could become a major problem in the management of libraries.
Legislation has been used to thwart library censorship (as in the News International dispute), and legislation has been implemented which as a consequence may encourage and even legitimize library censorship (as with Section 28 of the Local Government Act 1988).
What is noteworthy is that this legislation is not part of the set of legislation that is explicitly and exclusively concerned with censorship.
The result is that the librarian has to look over both shoulders and consider more carefully the legal implications of every decision on stocking this or rejecting that.
In some sense there is nothing new in this, as the question of obscene and indecent literature in libraries shows, but whereas obscene and indecent literature is a source of conflict between users and librarians, some of the new, vaguer areas of literary censorship will force librarians to be more cognizant of legal prosecution.
Nonetheless it is perhaps surprising that the librarian has not crossed swords with the law over obscene and indecent literature before now.
Obscenity, the law and the librarian
No area of the law can ever be said to be easy but the legislation dealing with obscene and indecent publications seems to be unduly complicated.
The overriding problem is that unlike most criminal acts where one knows clearly that one has committed a crime, one can often only know one has published obscene or indecent material at the very end of a prosecution.
It is possible to make some observations of the law relating to obscenity and indecency which indicate that, while accepting that one ought to be guided by the rule of law in censorship matters, one would be better advised to come to decisions without reference to this or that piece of obscenity or indecency legislation.
Firstly, there is a large amount of legislation concerned with the area of obscene and indecent material.
The various pieces of legislation run into several dozens, and the overall impression is of a piecemeal approach to dealing with the problem.
Secondly, and almost as a consequence of the plethora of legislation, the legislation is often, not surprisingly, fragmentary, sometimes overlapping and occasionally contradictory.
Indeed  given the opportunity it might be better for someone publishing obscene or indecent literature to be charged under one piece of legislation rather than another, since one might permit more or better defences.
One does not normally have the choice however, yet this anomaly should not exist.
All this suggests the urgent need for rationalization and a consistent approach.
Thirdly, some of the legislation has been on the statute books for a considerable time, perhaps long after the original and primary intention of the law had been forgotten, e.g. the Vagrancy Acts of 1824 and 1838.
Social perceptions of what is or is not obscene or indecent may change but the legislation may remain to trap the unwary in a much more liberal climate; and just because the legislation has not been used in many years that does not mean it will not be applied again.
As we have seen, most of the Library Association's statements on censorship rightly point out that members should be guided by the law.
This is correct, but bearing in mind the observations made above, all one can reasonably do is to assume that everything published and available is legally permissible until the law says it is not.
Unfortunately, although the law may be the final arbiter and may rule on what is or may be obscene and indecent, in general terms it does not judge on every item published or made available for sale, since there is normally no censorship of obscene or indecent matter prior to publication in the UK.
The result is that there are books on many library shelves which have at one time been declared obscene or indecent and may be so categorized again.
There are books on many library shelves which become the subject of litigation, though not banned.
How often, especially in cases of indecent literature, does one hear of the defence that ‘the material is already to be found on public library shelves’.
To some extent therefore, the law dealing with obscene and indecent literature is a somewhat elusive reference point for the librarian.
Decisions on the propriety of stocking a particular publication must depend very much on his or her own judgment and good sense, rather than on waiting for legal counsel.
The criterion here is that if the publication is published and on sale it should be considered for purchase.
This is the practice that has been followed for many years and by and large it has worked.
However, recent legislation suggests that such a simplistic approach by the librarian is no longer tenable or advisable even when the publication is neither obscene nor indecent.
As a consequence there are books on many library shelves which may eventually have to be withdrawn, with or without litigation, not because of their content but because of their intent.
The legislation  in question is Section 28 of the Local Government Act 1988.
Section 28 of the Local Government Act 1988
Section 28 of the Local Government Act 1988 requires that local authorities ‘shall not (a) intentionally promote homosexuality or publish material with the intention of promoting homosexuality’.
This clause provoked considerable anger amongst the gay community and some concern amongst local authorities.
Public librarians were also alarmed as to their position vis-à-vis the stocking of publications of a homosexual nature in their libraries.
The Library Association sought to clarify the matter and thereby safeguard the librarians' position, and sponsored an amendment which was put forward by Lord Peston in the House of Lords.
This amendment was defeated early in 1988.
However, the government's spokesman on the Bill in its passage through the House of Lords, Lord Caithness, tried to give assurances that there was virtually no possibility that a local authority nor its librarians were in danger of falling foul of the Act by simply stocking homosexual material as part of the library service to the public.
…it is no part of the government's intention to inhibit local libraries in their decisions on which books to stock.
We recognise that local authorities are under a duty to provide a comprehensive and efficient library service and that they may wish to stock a range of material about homosexuality, dealing with homosexual themes or written by homosexual authors.
In our view, Clause 28 does not stop them doing so unless they are setting out intentionally to promote homosexuality….
Our amendments make it absolutely clear that it is only the deliberate promotion of homosexuality by local authorities that would be affected.
Such a statement seems assuring enough, but another by Richard Luce, Minister for the Arts in the House of Commons, could be construed as less so:
I am advised that local authorities seeking simply to provide the public with access to a comprehensive range of artistic and literary materials will not be put at risk by this provision.
Intentionally or not he seems to suggest, as Lord Caithness also did at the Committee stage in the House of Commons, that the homosexual literature should pass the test of artistic and literary merit — characteristics which are necessary as a defence against  a charge of obscenity under the Obscene Publications Act 1959.
So in spite of the fact that guilt under Section 28 revolves around the intention of the authority and hence the librarian, it is possible that the homosexual nature of the content may at some stage be the focus of attention if it is believed to have no artistic or literary merit.
Luce, in a letter to the Chairman of the Library and Information Services Council, went on to try to give further assurances to librarians:
I went on to say that local authority support for public libraries which simply put books with a homosexual theme on to their shelves would not constitute promotion of homosexuality.
The effect of the amendment which the House of Lords accepted on Monday, by making clear that promotion cannot be unintentional, is to put the point beyond doubt.
I recognise that this may not go as far as librarians would wish.
But it does secure what is surely the central and most important point, by removing the possibility of unintended consequences for the libraries.
The views of members of parliament have no weight in law, and in spite of the Minister's assurances and the weight of legal opinion declaring that there should be no problem for librarians, some local authorities might still be cautious:
There is, however, a danger that local authority lawyers, elected councillors and members of the public may use the Section in order to urge librarians to censor their stocks.
That undoubtedly will happen in some authorities.
The prevailing public view of homosexuality as obscenity is bound to encourage anti-homosexual groups and individuals to test Section 28, and few local authorities would be keen to challenge the difference between ‘intentional’ and ‘unintentional’.
Section 28 has brought further uncertainty to the field of censorship and the law, and as a result further weakens the direction that in censorship librarians should be guided by the law.
This legal uncertainty may not be long-lasting.
Section 28 calls to mind the Obscene Publications Act of 1857 and the subsequent Hicklin case of 1868, which together still underpin modern legislation on obscenity.
Lord Campbell, in clarifying the scope of the Act, stated that it applied
…exclusively to works written for the single purpose of corrupting the morals of youth and of a nature calculated to shock the common feelings of decency in a well-regulated mind.
Clearly it was a winning gambit to aver simply that the work had not been written with that ‘single purpose’, and this was the substance of the defence of Henry Scott who had published or who at least intended to sell copies of an anti-papist pamphlet containing more than a little obscene detail.
The Quarter Sessions recorder found that the volume was obscene because its indiscriminate circulation would injure public morals, but he considered that the defendant's actions were redeemed by his innocent motive.
This ruling was reviewed, as a point of law, by the Queen's Bench of the High Court, which decided that a man who publishes a book in circumstances where he must reasonably know that it is obscene commits an offence, even if his motive is pure.
It may seem improper to juxtapose the Obscene Publications Act of 1857 with Section 28 of the Local Government Act 1988, but the perception of homosexuality as obscenity is so widespread and homosexual literature continues to be seized and prosecuted under the various indecency laws, that it is not inappropriate to recall the Hicklin case in the present context.
The fate of Henry Scott may yet prove to be a salutary lesson to those local authorities intending to expand their programmes of publishing homosexual-related literature, nor should librarians ignore this piece of history if they display homosexual literature amongst their new acquisitions or publish a booklist of homosexual literature.
One of the features of the history of censorship legislation is the way amendments have been subsequently introduced in order to try and plug the loopholes left by some earlier legislation.
The implications of Section 28 are many and alarming.
The assurances of Lord Caithness, Richard Luce, et al.should not make librarians complacent or satisfied.
There is cause for concern on at least three counts.
Firstly, who is to say that other subjects — like witchcraft, feminism, radical politics, etc. — may not in time be induced in Section 28.
They are legitimate fields of study and interest, each with a substantial literature, but their ‘promotion’ causes dismay in many quarters already.
Secondly, Section 28 signals a movement towards censorship not merely on the grounds of content but to censorship on the grounds of intent.
A book may have to be examined for the author's motives in writing it and for the librarian's motives in buying it; and though one copy purchased may be regarded as a reflection of user interest in the title the purchase of five may be regarded as instructional support.
Thirdly, Section 28 brings increased uncertainty into the  librarian's position with respect to censorship and the law — just after the News International case had clarified at least one aspect of it.
While the News International ban and the consequent judicial review effectively closed the door to some forms of library censorship, Section 28 seems likely to push librarians towards censorship in several areas of service, including book displays, exhibitions, and reading lists.
But above all Section 28 will affect the operation which is seen as the heart of library censorship: book selection.
5 Censorship and book selection
Censorship, selection and rejection
Few librarians would agree that censorship has anything to do with book selection, and indeed as we shall see they are or should be diametrically opposite operations with entirely different functions.
Nevertheless the political and social motivation of some librarians and the antics of the media in frequently misrepresenting the situation when books are or are not selected have brought the two practices so uncomfortably close that we are being forced to justify what is undoubtedly a professional task of the very highest order and demanding considerable skill.
Probably the clearest statements on book selection are by Lester Asheim in a defence of book selection against the charge of censorship.
His paper provides clear distinctions between book selection and censorship.
Basically he contends that censorship is a negative process and selection is a positive one.
In the former we look for the objectionable and unacceptable features in the book and use these as the basis of rejection, and in the latter we look for the meritorious and desirable features in the book and use these as the basis of selection.
Yet this ‘black and white’ approach is not enough and he goes further: each text, Asheim argues, should be assessed as a whole — to do otherwise would be fair neither to the book nor to the author.
It is interesting to note that Asheim's exhortation to judge the book as a whole in book selection pre-dates the text of the Obscene Publications Act 1959 which demanded that:
…an article shall be deemed to be obscene if its effect…is, if taken as a whole, such as to tend to deprave and corrupt…
In fact to judge the book as a whole in determining if it was obscene had generally been the practice in law for the hundred years since the Hicklin case.
The point to make here is that if it is good enough for the courts to judge a publication as a whole then it would be perverse of  a librarian to do otherwise in book selection.
Asheim made several further valid points about book selection which not only suggest responsible action by the librarian, but recognize and assume that the library user is an intelligent and responsible person.
The censor on the other hand claims a moral and élitist superiority in his or her actions, and whether intentionally or not credits the user with virtually no powers of discrimination.
Of course the above differentiation between book selection and censorship is a simplification.
In practice the distinction is far from clearcut, but the object here was to emphasize that philosophically book selection and censorship are miles apart.
Let us see how book selection and censorship can become almost inextricably interwoven — in the increasingly common, political context.
Censorship, selection policy and the role of politics
A librarian recently wrote that
The equation of selection with censorship is dangerous.
Censorship is the banning of material on political grounds, selection is matching our proposed client with their projected information and leisure needs.
…selection should not be left to individual librarians to be based on ‘the mood of the speaker’, and this is not happening in authorities that are recognising the need for properly thought-out selection policies based on the political policies of the local authority, together with an analysis of the local community, in the context of wider statutory provision across the authority.
These are illuminating statements, encapsulating several important aspects of the problem of censorship and book selection.
First of all there is the question of what part censorship plays in book selection.
Atkins seemed not to notice that ‘selection policies based on the political policies of the local authority’ combined with his earlier statement that ‘censorship is the banning of material on political grounds’inevitably means that, for this librarian at least, censorship is an admitted and major constituent of the selection process.
Of course there are occasions when censorship is deemed legitimate in the selection process.
In its study of Trends in public library selection policies , Capital Planning Information quoted from two selection policy documents as follows:
Censorship is only to be exercised in accordance with the law of the land
No work shall be automatically excluded except where the law of the land expressly forbids its circulation.
This seems acceptable but doubts about its legitimacy can arise when, for example, the issue seems less a legal one than a political one, as it was during the Spycatcher affair.
Secondly, there is the problem of political bias in book and periodical selection in libraries.
There is nothing new in this.
For many years (and it continues), many right-wing, and even avowedly apolitical librarians, have excluded left-wing periodical literature from libraries as a matter of course.
It has been done quietly and almost subconsciously, while recent left-wing selections and de-selections have been done more openly and more deliberately.
Such left-wing gaucherie has made them easy meat for a largely right-wing press anxious to show that extreme political dogma is a left-wing monopoly and determined to deny the left the social concern and humanity that lies behind some of the left-wing philosophy.
The quotations above illustrate this left-wing frankness, and show how far political allegiances in some cases determine selection policy.
It indicates that the stock in the libraries in that authority, for as long as that local party rules, will reflect the politics of the majority of the voting electorate, in spite of the disclaimer that the policy will be carried out ‘in the context of wider statutory provision across the authority’.
Such a selection policy is clearly professionally and publicly unacceptable, from any political grouping, and if pursued over a period of time, will surely replace education with propaganda as one of the purposes of the public library service.
Moreover this policy positively invites tit-for-tat measures if or when another political party takes over, and this eventually and inevitably leads to an escalation of censorship.
The pendulum swings from right to left, and from left to right, each side overcompensating for the perceived aberrations of the other.
The tragedy of the situation is that their aims, their social aims, are often similar.
Political posturing has encouraged a degeneration into the politicization of social issues.
Atkins' article is quickly identified as left-wing (I found the label disturbingly easy to apply) and socialist, while Spiller's article, to which Atkins' was a reply, could be seen as right-wing, reactionary and oblivious to social concerns.
Casting aside the political labelling, which view is correct: sitting back and following a policy of status quo which allows social change to evolve or embarking on a course of social engineering by positive discrimination?
However, in spite of such increasingly overt politicization and  polarization of libraries and librarians, the level of political intrusion in library selection policy is frequently limited by the need to be practical and realistic.
In 1985 a London borough considered the possibility of discontinuing the purchase of all publications from 45 major UK publishers because of their trading links with South Africa.
Recognizing the impracticality of such an action it opted for a series of initiatives which were consistent with its fight against apartheid in South Africa and its fight for the presentation of a positive image for black people in the UK.
The blanket ban on the publishers not only would have led to virtually nothing being bought for the borough's libraries, but it would have denied the borough those titles which do serve the fight against racism.
The persuasive approach of the alternative initiatives may take longer (and time is a luxury one cannot always afford in politics) but it should be more influential.
The confrontational approach by censorship can achieve the quick gain of publicity for the cause but it does not halt the flow of published material.
Public statements of selection policy
Atkins alludes to the danger of equating selection with censorship.
Although librarians might not make the mistake of viewing selection as censorship, amongst the general public * might be difficult to make the distinction given the sensational and mischievous coverage given to some alleged library censorship in the media.
On these occasions there is a real danger to the credibility and purpose of the profession and the public's respect for the quality of library services.
A significant proportion of the public must have the impression that their library services are regularly prey to the ad hoc, impulsive indulgence of liberal/authoritarian, prurient/puritanical, left-wing/right-wing librarians, rather than guided by a set of selection policies trying to achieve a balance of users' and nonusers' educational and leisure needs and preferences, circumscribed by statutory requirements, within the limits of financial reality.
It is not enough for librarians to claim that censorship does not and will not take place in libraries.
Until the public is made aware that a selection policy directs and determines acquisitions, the misconception will continue.
Therefore the wider circulation of such policy statements needs to be a priority in order to correct that misconception.
This public impression thrives in a climate of secrecy, or, to put it more fairly, in a climate where there is a lack of information on the selection process, the selection criteria, the selection policy and the selection decisions.
Selection policy guidelines are common but in general such documents are only available to those  working in the library.
One can appreciate why there may be a deliberate decision to restrict their circulation: these are sensitive matters and whatever policy applies, one group or another will be dissatisfied, perhaps to the extent of taking action against the library; moreover any decision-making that is laid bare almost always invites debate and dispute.
Critics of this or that policy, but particularly some elements of the Press and local politicians, could all have a field day, but they do so on half-truths anyway.
Informed and reasoned debate takes place when there is full disclosure of the facts.
Of course it goes without saying that such openness should reveal sound policy decisions, and that is what we should have if a professional approach has been taken.
Here, then, is the positive benefit of the librarian's openness to public inspection.
It is an opportunity, a rare opportunity, to illustrate good professional practice in the context of specific cases — as the lawyer does in court, as the surgeon does on the operating table, and so on.
Some libraries have no selection policy statement and this is surely half the cause of library censorship and the trouble it causes.
Quite simply, having no formulated statement is like walking through your own minefield without the benefit of a map of where the mines were laid.
All the nimble footwork in the world is to no avail in that situation.
A policy statement not only clarifies the library's position on censorship, but recognizes that controversial material exists, that it may be selected or rejected, and that the library may have to defend its decision.
Anticipating the problem does not make it any less likely to occur, but planning and preparing for it helps one to cope with it, and will emphasize that professional and consistent judgment has been exercised.
Frances Jones, in her valuable text entitled Defusing censorship: the librarian ‘s guide to handling censorship conflict indicates more fully the procedures that may be used in dealing with censorship in libraries, particularly in respect of planning and policy statements.
Capital Planning Information in its study Trends in public library selection policies summed up its brief notes on censorship with the suggestion that
This issue, while causing considerable problems to librarians in individual cases, is not one which affects selection trends to any extent.
With the increasing politicization of librarians and libraries in the UK and an increasing politicization of social issues generally, this view seems alarmingly complacent.
Perhaps the very reason  that the issue is ‘causing considerable problems to librarians in individual cases’(individual cases meaning either individual librarians or individual libraries) is the lack of serious attention to the censorship problem in selection procedures in the UK.
6 A strategy for professional action on censorship
As long as information is such a potent influence on minds and events, censorship will always be with us.
It is a weapon in the armoury of everyone who aspires to power, and more importantly of everyone who seeks to cling to power.
In totalitarian states absolute control of information and the armed forces is the key to the survival of the despot.
In democratic states, and even in those which see themselves as having a so-called information society (even we define it as a society which offers increased access to information), some forms of censorship will be as much a part of the fabric of society as in a despotic state.
It would be pretentious to suggest that librarians can overturn the practice of censorship in non-democratic states, yet that is no reason for inaction.
In association with everyone else who has the chance to speak out in a democratic society there are opportunities to support the efforts of organizations like Article 19 which fights strongly and to good effect against censorship worldwide.
Censorship represents a denial of human rights and it cannot go unchecked.
Within democratic societies like our own there is much more that librarians can do and should do against censorship.
The basic professional stand against censorship is sound but it is weakened by inaction when opportunities arise to be decisive and it is further weakened by elements of the profession which seek to censor, while often interpreting this as positive discrimination.
Unless firmer action is taken to remove these weaknesses then there can be no authority to act against censorship on a larger stage.
There is a further justification for the removal of censorship in libraries and the reason is the cancerous nature of the practice.
We cannot contain it and still expect that the wider health of freedom of expression may be unaffected.
Naturally no professionals and professional bodies have full freedom to act in what they believe is a professional manner on all occasions.
Local government seems to have the upper hand on matters of censorship in libraries at the moment, and national  Government often intervenes decisively on major professional issues in professional medicine.
That does not make a body like, for example, the British Medical Association powerless to act; in fact the British Medical Association is regarded as one of the most powerful and influential pressure groups in the UK.
Nor should it prevent the Library Association exercisng some influence on local government and other organizations disposed to interfere with the right of access to legally permissible literature; nor should it prevent the Library Association exerting some influence on national government which is disposed to censor.
In the same way that one would expect the British Medical Association to be called upon to comment on any issue of human rights, we should come to expect the Library Association, along with other organizations such as Article 19 to be called to comment on any issue of censorship, and not just in the literary context.
Significant moves to achieve this have already been taken by the Library Association, including, as we have seen, its efforts to amend Section 28 of the Local Government Act 1988.
To those who read with scepticism in the Guidance notes on the Code of Professional Conduct that there may be occasions when the Association would act where the law might be in conflict with professional ethics this is encouraging.
The Library Association is increasing efforts in parliamentary lobbying but the question of how far it wants to go in challenging the use of legislation for censorship is unclear.
The rule of law is the benchmark by which the Library Association directs the profession on matters of censorship, but that need not prevent its challenging the concept of legalized censorship.
Until such time as the long overdue rationalization of obscenity and indecency legislation takes place the Association's resolve cannot be measured, but some sustained lobbying on the idiosyncrasies of censorship law would not be amiss.
For the profession at large the most important thing is to be guided by the professional association and to act professionally and challenge attempts at censorship from whatever direction.
It is important also not to pretend that library censorship is such a small problem that it can be safely ignored.
Above all we cannot ignore it: whereas at one time we might have been able to smile at the perversity of the local watch committee in another town, the collective action of several dozen politically motivated local authorities to ban News International publications effectively took censorship in libraries well beyond the silly season in the Press; and whereas we could once afford to hang back with our copies of Fanny Hill secure in the knowledge that we would be nowhere near the top of the prosecution list, Section 28 is in place and ready to pick us off should we try to share our enthusiasm for homosexual literature with more than a few of our consenting adult users.