

The Smoke
‘Rascals,’ Fat Watt had said.
In summer from the Ridgery you looked out over the tops of the trees.
As far as you could see there was a great undulating cushion of varied greenery, mile upon mile of leaves.
Nearby, the trees were distinguishable as oaks, ashes, chestnuts, yews, but gradually they resolved themselves into a universal greenness.
The yews were the last to lose their identity, they were little notes of blackness.
Only on the very clearest days, when the air was like the purest well-water, shadowy blots appeared to the west and north to show where the forest came to an end at hills, mountains…but they were a world away, two, three, four days' journeying…if one dared.
As summer drew on, the ocean of green became darker and darker until the first fires of autumn caught the leaves and turned them into a patchwork of burnished copper and gold leaving the black of the yews standing out once more.
In winter when all the leaves had fallen the forest became rough and creviced like the trunk of a tree.
On winter days the thin spirals of blue smoke were particularly visible, although, in fact, you could see them on most days save when heavy rain, snow, or mist came down like a curtain over everything except the immediate slope of the hill and its scattered beeches.
‘Rascals,’ Fat Watt said when he noticed the far-off plumes of smoke, and stumbled off as though everything had been said that could be said.
But the smoke plumes fascinated her.
She looked for them whenever she was on the Down.
They appeared often at different spots, places far apart, sometimes — usually — far off, many miles into the forest, sometimes quite near, not more than a few miles in.
It was then that Fat Watt regarded them most sullenly as though their nearness was a threat.
Once she had asked him: ‘What rascals?’
He had stared at her suspiciously and sniffed.
‘What rascals?
Vagabonds, that's what.
Murderers, thieves, outlaws.’
But there was one place in particular where the smoke column could often be seen.
If she looked a bit to the right, northward, rather more than half-way into the forest, it was often there.
‘How far?’ she asked Allen.
He shrugged his thin shoulders.
‘Let's go and see,’ he said with a chuckle.
‘Three days' journey, four?’
As written words meant nothing to Marian the name of the man who called himself her foster-father presented no difficulties, but Allen, the boy from the dales of Yorkshire, who could read no more than she could, liked tossing words about and playing with them like pebbles, so he called Fat Watt when he was out of earshot ‘What Fat’.
Allen had no home but slept in the church porch and earned his keep in any way he could and scavenged and begged when that was the only way to stay alive.
When he first came the villagers wanted to get rid of him but he wouldn't go, and as he made himself useful they came to endure him.
He was small and hard and wild and in some ways more like an animal than a boy.
The Ridgery was clay on chalk; heavy land difficult to work where it sloped gently towards the east: in the winter it lay sodden and cold, in summer it dried as hard as brick and there were cracks in it.
On the steep western slope where the beeches grew there was scarcely any soil, only chalk and flints.
Ridgery Butts was a slovenly, poor village, clay and thatch hovels clustered about its church and windmill.
The village swine fed on the beech mast on Steep Ridgery.
It was Marian's work to drive the swine out onto the slope and keep an eye on them.
In the evening she drove them back to the village.
The few tracks that led down Steep Ridgery were worn deep into the chalk and clay.
They led into the forest; after that she did not know what became of them.
There was little to do all day but climb in the old beeches and look out over the forest to see where the smoke plumes were.
‘What is the smoke for?’ she asked.
‘Why does it come from different places?’
‘Rascals,’ said Fat Watt, ‘roasting the King's deer.’
Also to fill in the time she used Allen's bow.
It was a small bow but it was tough for her thin arms to bend.
‘You'll get used to it,’ he said, ‘when you learn to use your weight.’
Allen attached himself to her, nobody else did.
She was moody and quiet.
He made her a bow, lighter and smaller than his, until she could shoot with it almost as well as Allen himself, though not so far because the light bow wouldn't carry.
Then he made her another, as powerful as his own.
It took her some time to get used to that but she got the knack of it in the end, and they spent hours together shooting at marks, or at rabbits on the Down or pigeons in the high trees at the forest edge.
They did not go into the forest or, at the most, only a hundred yards or so.
Then the trees closed in and it became very silent.
It was two summers since Allen had come to the village and taught her to shoot.
He was fair, snub-nosed and freckled; she was dark, her hair lank and straight and despite being exposed to all weathers her skin was pale.
He had grown little in those two summers and she was now as tall as he but although her scrambling life on the Down had made her tough and wiry she was not as strong or as agile.
When they wrestled together he was the stronger; he sent his arrows further and more accurately; but when they ran races barefooted across the rabbit-bitten turf it was she with her long skinny legs and flying hair who left him far behind.
People came out of the forest and went into the forest as they had done for centuries, making the deep tracks down Steep Ridgery.
Great carts pulled by as many as six horses at a time came up the roads from the east and waited at Ridgery Butts until a party of people who wanted to cross the forest formed up so that they could travel together.
For safety.
There was an Inn at the village where travellers stayed until there were enough of them to go forward in confidence.
Often they waited until armed men were in the group, a party of King's men, or of the Lord Warden's Forest Rangers.
When these convoys were gathering she and Allen used to hang about the Inn staring at the strangers.
There were regular travellers whom they came to recognise, people who crossed the forest three or four times a year, foremen in charge of the great waggons of building-stones, or carters with consignments of  wheat from the eastern cornlands, or drovers with herds of cattle or flocks of sheep…these last never ventured without a large escort.
They talked very little about what went on down there among the trees.
It was as though it was a subject to be avoided.
They would talk about the weather, about what went on by the sea-coast, about Easterling pirates, about news from Lincoln, or Peterborough, or York, or Chester, but not about the forest.
The forest seemed a cause of silence.
Sometimes, before their numbers were made up, one or two of them would come to the edge of Steep Ridgery and look gloomily out over the sea of greenery as though wondering whether they dared set out without waiting longer.
Apart from the swine, and a few small fields where corn was grown, and half a dozen apple trees, and the pigeons and the rabbits, the money the travellers spent at the Inn was all the wealth of Ridgery Butts.
Besides those who waited to journey together there were others who came up out of the forest alone and who seemed to belong there, men licensed by the Lord Warden to carry on their trade in certain parts of the forest, woodmen, trappers, charcoal burners, for the most part a silent surly sort of men who emerged from the forest, went briefly about their business, had little to say for themselves, and then disappeared into the solitude again.
Sometimes an old woman clambered mysteriously alone out of the dark silence on to the airy lightness of the Ridgery; sometimes a friar came out of the trees, mounted to the village and required alms in a confident whining way.
Occasionally, very occasionally, a lone knight in armour rode into Ridgery Butts from the east and plunged straight down one of the forest paths without pausing to do more than pass the time of day at the Inn and drink ale.
What was their business, these people?
In the autumn there had been a great commotion when a large party of the King's and Warden's men, some fifty of them, mounted and heavily armed, gathered on Steep Ridgery and carefully marked where the plumes of smoke were rising — often there were more than one — and made off purposefully towards them.
They plunged down into the forest with a great clattering of hooves and jingling of harness, and the acrid smell of horse-dung lingered about the village for days afterwards.
Either they did not come back or they returned by another route.
Fat Watt watched them go with a satisfied air.
‘That ought to settle them,’ he said.
Marian knew he meant the rascals, and for a day or two she wondered if he were right, for the smoke trails disappeared.
She felt oddly lonely without them, the forest and sky seemed empty.
Then they sprang up joyfully and strangely, well away to the south in a part of the forest where they rarely were, so far as to be almost out of sight from the crown of an old dying beech where she and Allen were often perched like birds.
After that for six days little smoke columns seemed to be sprouting up all over the forest, now here, now there, but only for an hour or two.
‘They're confusing them,’ said Allen.
‘The King's men don't know where to go.
They start off after one smoke and when they're half-way the smoke's gone from there and is in another place.
They are clever.
Sometimes, you see, there are three or four of them at once.’
But after a week or so things settled down again and the sky and the forest resumed their usual pattern.
One day in early spring from her perch in the beech Marian saw something white moving in a gash in the forest where a tree had fallen in the winter gales.
The leaf-cover was thin and the distances were more brown than green.
What was it?
She saw it once and not again although she watched the spot off and on all day.
‘Someone on a white horse,’ said Allen.
On the second day after she first saw the white gleam she saw it again in the same place.
On the next day Allen watched with her.
She felt sure that Allen had been wrong about the white horse.
It had been a mere moment of whiteness seen out of the corner of her eye but it had not moved purposefully like a horse does with a rider.
‘A riderless horse, then,’ said Allen.
‘There are wild ponies in the forest.’
The third time she saw it Allen was with her but he must have been looking in the wrong place, for he didn't see it although she didn't understand how that could be.
‘I think,’ she said, ‘it might be a unicorn.’
The idea excited him.
‘So it might,’ he said, ‘we ought to go and hunt it.
That might be why I didn't see it.
Only women see unicorns.’
‘Oh!’ the girl said, and thought about it.
It was the shock of being included, of being swept up in the word women that came first.
Then followed the more practical thought ‘If Allen couldn't see it, how was he to hunt it?’
‘I will help you to hunt it and you will shoot it,’ said Allen.
‘Then I too will shoot where you tell me.’
She thought about this too.
‘I do not know’ she said ‘whether women ought to shoot unicorns.
I think perhaps not if they are part of our mystery.’
She was proud now to consider herself a woman.
The unicorn was part of ‘our’ mystery.
Then a man-at-arms whom they recognised as being one of the leaders of the expedition reappeared in the village and stayed for several days.
He had a round face, a hard set expression, and a way of speaking with his mouth scarcely open so that his words fell out as though under the weight of their meaning.
He was short and sturdy and when he was on a horse he seemed a part of it.
The foreman of the Lord Warden's Forest Rangers was with him and they came out twice a day to the lip of Steep Ridgery, early in the morning and again towards sunset, to look out at the smoke.
Once Fat Watt came with them, and once the priest came and all four stood there together.
Fat Watt waved the children out of earshot.
The next time they came Allen was already hidden up in a beech-tree above where they stood and Marian was far off wandering among her swine looking for flowers.
When the men had gone back to the Inn Allen dropped out of the tree and ran down the slope to her.
‘They talked about the first of May,’ he said.
‘It's to be another expedition that will start then.
What Fat is to go with them.’
‘In one week,’ she said, reckoning up the time.
They both turned and looked out across the fresh greenery sparkling in the April sunlight towards the solitary plume of blue smoke.
It was in the usual place.
‘When shall we go?’
Allen asked.
The Departure
They went the next morning.
‘If we are to get there in time we must go at once,’ Marian said.‘We don't know the way, and they will travel faster than we, for they will be on horseback.’
‘Faster or slower,’ said Allen, ‘because of the trees.’
‘Yes,’ she agreed, ‘faster or slower.’
She was the leader because she knew what she wanted to do, but he knew many things she did not, although she was not prepared to admit that to him.
They slipped away just before sun-up.
There was a grey light and the grass was wet with dew.
The air was chill and sweet.
Allen had stolen a cheese and some bread.
He had his great knife, a flint for striking fire, his bow, and a clutch of arrows.
Marian was already waiting for him when he reached the head of the track.
They spoke very quietly, a little awed by the secrecy of the day and what they were doing.
He showed her his wallet and what was in it.
She nodded approval.
The cheese had been her idea.
The rest of their food was in the forest, their plan was to feed on the forest as they went.
Her own bow was about her shoulders, her arrows were slung at her belt, and she carried a skin for water.
It was darker in the deep groove of the track that led down the Ridgery.
Long whips of hawthorn arched over and helped to shut out the barely lightening sky.
The first birds were beginning to tune up.
A solitary blackbird tried his voice.
Another answered from far away, a cock crowed in the village behind them, two pigeons began rubbing their gentle sound down in the forest.
Then, as they came out onto an open stretch of bitten turf at the foot of the hill where the rabbits were running, as though a signal had been given a universal clamour broke out, a clatter, a din of singing, from the unseen roof-tops of the village behind them, from the beeches on the  Down, from the ash trees that stood like singing poles in the hedgerows along the hollow track, from every tree it seemed of the whole vast forest birds were singing and singing and demanding to be heard.
Up on the flank of the Down the rabbits' shadows were lying long across the thymy ground and the beeches on Ridgery Edge high above had caught the flat sun on their lettuce-green leaves.
To Marian it seemed that she and Allen were being overwhelmed and carried along by the rush of sound and the race of the sun up the sky, as though they were part of the birds' song and the general triumphant awakening of the dawn.
At first, although the trees stood only lightly around them and every minute the sky shone more clearly through the thin scatter of early leafage, she was uneasy.
They were further into the forest than she had ever been before.
Familiar landmarks had already disappeared.
She could no longer see the Steep yet the feeling of the dark airless room she had left behind, the sound of her foster-parents breathing heavily in the close darkness, still seemed to hang about her and draw her back.
She was like a child half-born and there was discomfort in it.
‘What a row they are making!’ called Allen, raising his voice to be heard.
He, like the birds, was bubbling with the spring of the morning, but to Marian with a sense of secrecy still about her, his voice sounded strangely, dangerously, loud.
‘I wonder when they will start to look for us?’ she said, forcing herself to speak above a whisper.
‘I suppose they may,’ Allen said.
‘No one will mind if I'm gone, but they'll miss the cheese.’
The idea made him throw his arms about and chuckle.
He wanted to take nothing seriously.
There was a lightness, a frolicsomeness in the air.
But Marian continued to feel for some time that uneasiness in the legs which she knew meant that she wanted to run, to get away fast.
The further they went into the forest the more it seemed as though the village behind, with Fat Watt and Diggory the King's man and the priest, represented the enemy, and the miles and miles of trees she had formerly and still a little feared had become a sort of sanctuary, a hiding place.
The track was broad and rutted with old cart-tracks.
Water lay in the ruts and in some places marshy muddy patches had  developed where water-grasses grew and the track had spread to pass them now on this side, now on that.
Here and there piles of branches had been cut and laid in the mud to help carts through.
There were hoof-marks of horses, and once or twice the slots of deer, and out on the very edge where the track was worst a narrow winding verge where travellers on foot had been forced to push their way through the undergrowth.
‘They will follow fast enough if they guess what we're doing,’ Marian said; then she added ‘…when they guess.’
For even as she said it she knew that they would.
‘How will they know which way we've gone?’
Allen asked, and as though to point his question they came to a place where another track came in from the right.
Marian pretended to be in no doubt.
‘Straight on,’ she said.
‘The other must come down from the Ridgery.’
The thought that they might already be pursued made them hasten their pace.
The dawn chorus was beginning to die down and the glimpses of the sky through the branches were now blue and golden.
‘Do you think Old Fat will guess we're making for the smoke?’
Allen asked after a while.
He was beginning to take the idea of pursuit seriously.
They would certainly have been missed by now.
But would anyone be troubled by it?
Perhaps not.
And if so why should it be supposed they had adventured into the forest rather than eastward towards the corn lands and the nearer towns, and the coast?
‘Because,’ said Marian firmly.
‘Because of Old Fat, you mean?’
Allen said, and began whistling as though he hadn't a care in the world.
‘He knows I look at the forest,’ she said.
‘He will tell the others and they will guess.’
‘They will never find us in the forest,’ Allen said.
‘Besides, the smoke moves.’
But it had been fixed for days in its usual place and she was sure they would make for that.
‘If it comes to that,’ Allen said, ‘if they can't find it how shall we?
We can climb trees to get our direction.
It will  hardly be on a track, I suppose.
But if the smoke is put out?
Or moves?’
But he didn't really care.
‘Because they will want us to find them,’ Marian said with certainty.
This time she spoke of a different ‘they’.
‘They won't hide from us.’
It was this certainty that made her the leader.
To Allen it was just an adventure.
He had been in other worlds beside Ridgery Butts, the Yorkshire Dales and the long miles between, and thieving and creeping and running and looking after himself; but Marian knew only the Ridgery and remembered very faintly some other sort of life, a memory of glints and patches of a different sort of sunlight.
As the morning wore on there were other sounds.
The birds had fallen silent, but every now and then there were rustling noises in the undergrowth as creatures, disturbed by their passing, scrambled to cover.
At one point the track divided into three and narrowed, and Allen climbed a tree to see where they were.
‘The smoke's over there,’ he called, pointing the direction to Marian on the ground.
‘It's moved.’
‘Can you see the Ridgery?’ she asked.
Allen looked about and then scampered on to another branch.
He seemed puzzled.
‘That's moved too,’ he called out in astonishment.
‘It's over there.
I can see the church-tower and the windmill.’
Marian thought for a moment.
‘Then the smoke's in the usual place,’ she said firmly.
‘Can you see anyone on the Steep?’
He half slithered, half dropped, to the ground.
‘Some people on the Steep,’ he said.
‘We don't seem to have come far; the track must have twisted.
There was a man holding a horse, and another beside him.’
Marian looked anxious.
‘That means they haven't started yet but will soon.
Come on.’
Within a mile or less they came to a stream.
It was about fifteen feet wide and ran strongly.
It looked deep, With a mud, not a gravel, bottom.
The track plunged down into it and emerged on the other side.
It was not too deep or strong for horses but a tree had been felled across it for foot-passengers.
The winter floods had tumbled it and it lay half in, half out, of the water.
‘This is where a fox would lose them,’ Allen said.
She looked at him.
‘Be a fox,’ she said.
‘A fox would cross here and then steal back to this side and make a line of his own through the forest.’
‘We shall do that,’ she agreed.
Allen walked deftly along the rotten trunk and leapt the last eight feet to the further bank, making a scuffle in the mud where he landed.
Then he walked heavily on for a pace or two until his tracks merged with the cart-way, then he turned back along the ruts to the stream and did the same thing again, more lightly this time.
‘Where did you learn that?’ asked Marian
‘In the Dales,’ Allen said lightly.
‘That and all sorts of things.
We're quick up there.’
Under Allen's guidance she climbed on to an oak that grew by the ford, clambered along a branch, and swung easily into a chestnut.
By this means they covered about thirty paces before they were forced to drop to the ground well away from the track.
From there on the going was more difficult, for now there was no track, but it was too early in the year for the undergrowth to be thick and the chief obstacle was the accumulated debris of former summers.
They kept as close as they could to the east bank of the stream and held generally towards the north.
Here and there a regular path of some animal helped them but it rarely ran in one direction for long and they were unwilling to lose contact with the water which they would eventually have to cross.
‘I have been thinking,’ said Marian, ‘there are not enough of them.
Just the two men wouldn't dare go further into the forest than the ford.
I think that we should have been safe on the track until they got others to come with them.
We should have been able to move more quickly.’
‘This is more fun,’ Allen said.
They came to the bank of the stream which had for some time been running unseen beside them.
It still had a blackish colour but was narrower and less deep.
They felt hungry and sat down to eat the bread and cheese from Allen's wallet.
Marian grudgingly watched it disappear, it seemed to be their last link with the village, from now on the forest must feed  them.
Afterwards they stretched themselves out where a patch of sunlight lay warm on the bank and slept.
When Marian woke after an hour Allen was plucking a heron.
He had seen it plane in behind the trees beyond a bend in the stream and had stalked and shot it while she slept.
‘They say they're tough and taste of fish,’ Marian said; ‘we shall have to roast it a long time.’
Allen had eaten them and hedgehogs often.
He said: ‘Hedgehogs are easy and good.’
While he was talking he went on disembowelling the bird in a practised way with his knife.
Then he cut off its long neck and feet, washed the carcass in the stream and stuffed it into his wallet.
‘We could catch fish here,’ he said.
‘There's not time.’
‘Do we go back to the track?’
Allen asked.
She knew it didn't matter what she decided so long as there was no doubt about it.
The forest was all about them and was all unknown; why should one way be better than another?
How could they tell?
Only to go on making towards the smoke, that was all they needed to do.
Going back was wrong.
It meant acknowledging they had wasted time and time mattered.
In another hour they lost contact with the stream.
They had kept direction roughly by watching the sun.
By keeping it more or less behind them and to their left they could be sure of travelling north-west which was the direction they believed right but the inequalities of the ground often forced them out of their way and although they always returned to their line they had to guess what corrections to make to allow for obstacles.
If they were to find dry kindling to light a fire to cook their heron Marian knew they would have to stop soon, but not until they had found the stream again and crossed it.
The stream had become a symbol.
On this side of it there were the dangers of pursuit, the sense, the smell of Ridgery Butts hanging over them; on the other side there were quite other dangers, unknown and therefore more terrifying by far and yet, somehow, alive and real and necessary, cleaner and happier.
Allen climbed a tall ash tree to look for the stream.
At once he signed down to her to be silent.
He spent some time climbing about and peering in all directions.
After a while he slipped quickly to the ground.
‘There is a man,’ he said, ‘about a furlong away.
The stream bends across to the right and there is a track and a log across the water.
He is on the other side sitting on the end of the log.’
‘A woodman?’ she asked.
‘I don't think so.’
‘A forest warden?’
‘No, he is not in their uniform.
I don't think he is anything.’
‘What sort of track is it?’
Marian asked.
It was not a cart-track but one used by men on foot only, perhaps by single horsemen, and it ran along the bank of the stream before turning and crossing by the log, then it seemed to wander off, more or less straight into the forest.
The smoke was steady in the usual place.
The Ridgery was still in view but they were now much further from it and Ridgery Butts was well behind them almost out of sight; Allen had just been able to see the church tower.
If the stream was symbolic so was the man who sat there on the end of the log.
He was on the deep forest side of the water.
His clothes were nothing but rags, indescribably dirty.
There was a crutch lying on the ground beside him and another at an angle under his right arm.
When they stepped out on to the track some twenty paces from him he only turned his head slowly to glance at them and made no other movement.
It was almost as though he had grown there like a vile fungus on the dead timber.
They approached him at a steady pace as though unconcerned by his presence, but they went in single file, Allen with his hand lying lightly on the knife at his belt and Marian carrying her bow, strung, and with an arrow ready notched, lightly and inconspicuously in her left hand.
He made no further sign of life as they drew near than to continue to watch them.
When they reached the log they stopped side by side and looked across the narrow water towards him.
His eyes were small and bright and malicious.
He made no effort to move out of their way and they made none to speak.
At last he spoke and his voice was part croak, part whimper.
‘What do you want?’
‘To cross this stream,’ said Allen.
‘Why?’
‘Because,’ Marian said, ‘we are going into the heart of the forest.’
‘The heart of the forest,’ the cripple said, repeating the words as though it was a joke.
‘This path doesn't lead there.’
‘Where does it lead, then?’
Allen demanded.
‘Nowhere,’ he barked.
‘That is a lie,’ Allen said calmly.
The eyes sparkled with renewed malignancy, but the cripple said nothing.
‘Where does the path come from, then?’
Marian asked.
The cripple ignored her.
‘I saw you in the tree,’ he said to Allen.
‘They're looking for you.’
‘Who are?’
‘They are.’
‘Who are ‘’ they'’?'
‘You will find out,’ he nodded violently.
‘Which way did they go?’
‘This way and that way.’
He hooked his thumb over his shoulder in the direction of the deep forest and then pointed the way they had come.
Allen looked at the ground on which they were standing and then back along the path.
‘That is a lie, too,’ he said.
‘No-one has been on this path for two days.’
‘Yes, it is,’ the cripple crowed.
‘That is all you'll get.
Lies.
Go on, get out of it.
They'll catch you if you stay there.’
While he spoke Allen set foot on the log and began to cross.
‘Have you seen anything of the unicorn?’
Marian asked suddenly.
In an instant the cripple lurched up and with a powerful twist of his crutch sent the end of the log into the water.
Allen half-fell, half-dived into the stream.
The cripple turned to make off into the undergrowth and as he did so there was a twang from Marian's bow and one of his crutches spun from under him and he was down one-sidedly.
With an oath he struggled up, plucked the arrow from the crutch and stumbled off among the trees.
The First Fight
They stopped that evening later than they intended.
The adventure of the cripple had made them uneasy and they were not prepared to camp until they were well clear of the spot at which they had encountered him.
‘What did he mean by ‘’ they'’?'
Marian asked.
‘Nobody,’ Allen reassured her, ‘lies, just lies.
It was all lies.
It is all he does.’
‘Yes, but what doeshe do?
Where does he live?
Why was he there?
It was as though he was guarding the bridge.’
That the cripple lived near the stream there was no doubt because his crutch prints were heavily marked on the path for a hundred paces or so as though he often came there, but beyond that point there were none.
Nor had there been any to the east of the water.
As they went they noticed several places to right and left of the path where he had broken off into the wilderness.
Thereabouts were many yews and crumbling tree-wrecks draped with ivy so that the place was more dark and forbidding than any they had yet seen.
They had no wish to follow to see where he had gone.
There were many more beasts on the west of the stream.
Several times they came across signs of deer, and wild pig, and once, some way off in a thicket, they heard a stag grunt.
There began, too, to be a criss-cross of tracks and it wasn't always easy to tell if they were the paths of animals or men.
In a clearing there was the scattered skeleton of a horse, the skull some way from the rib-cage and the leg-bones further off.
This they knew was the work of wolves.
Celandines and violets grew there bright and innocent against the glare of the bones.
There were also a great many red squirrels in the forest, delicate little creatures with tufted ears who looked at them fearlessly from the high branches.
Birds were always with them; robins watched with bright eyes and sang as they passed; wrens flew suddenly and low from branch to bush; great tits rang out their bell-notes unseen from the tree-tops; tree-creepers trickled headlong and caterwise down the creviced trunks of the oaks; woodpeckers kept up a constant drum-rattle on the hollow branches, the sound coming now from the right, now from the left, now in front, now behind; wood-pigeons wooed one another in secret leafy recesses, comforting, encouraging, cajoling; rooks sprang upwards cawing into the blue sky as they passed beneath their nests; and higher still, up towards the sun, they caught occasional glimpses of great birds circling, buzzards, kites, eagles.
Eventually they found a spot, away from the track but on the edge of one of the many glades in the forest.
At their back was a giant oak, hollowed out like a cave, and before them an apron of lawn.
Here they gathered some dry leaves and twigs, and Allen shredded a tinder-old branch with his knife and stuck it upright among the leaves.
Then, with flint and steel, he struck a spark and at the fifth attempt carried it to a withered leaf, which delicately he breathed into flame.
Soon he had a strong fire going and the blue smoke pillared up through the young oak leaves.
It was impossible to be afraid; but impossible not to be alert, alive, crisp in every sensation, glad in the headlong abundance of reviving life that washed about them on every side.
Allen drove a long stick through the heron and they sat on either side of the fire, turning the spit as they talked.
The smoke got in their eyes and in their hair, they were impregnated with wood-smoke, while the carcase crackled and browned, and now and then spat into flame.
The sun was going down and the sky had declined into green-gold before the bird was tolerably roasted.
Before the light faded altogether Allen climbed in the oak but could see neither the Ridgery nor the column of smoke for which they were making.
With the sun below the horizon it was only by a perceptible lightening of the sky in that direction that it was possible to place themselves in the great ocean of trees.
The bird was tough and stringy but they tugged at its smokyburnt flesh with a ravenous appetite.
The fire had formed a bed of glowing ash, a core on which from time to time they threw a branch.
As the dusk came down the bats  came out and the song of birds ceased one by one until only a lone blackbird spoke occasionally from the shadows.
The world closed quickly in on them and was limited to the gleam and crackle of the dying fire before them, to the firelight on each other 's faces, and the pale darkness of the sky above them scattered with stars.
They were tired but unwilling to abandon themselves to sleep, so much had happened, they had come so far, left so much, found so little, were so far from what they had been.
They are looking for you.
Why were they?
And what had the cripple known who, so malevolently, had seemed to recognize them?
Was he, perhaps, one of the rascals?
Was he the type of the world into which they had so unthinkingly plunged?
An owl crossed the clearing on soundless wings and a little later its hooting, haunting, call came from the depths of the wood.
Or were ‘they’ from that other world, the world of Fat Watt and the Forester and the priest and the King's man?
Near midnight they were woken by a vixen screaming near them.
It was a sound they knew, one often heard at night from within the dark walls of the cottages in the village, but out here it was around them and with them and part of them and it had an eerie quality as though inside the vixen some diabolic spirit was entrapped, a demon screeching its despair.
Then, not long after, they heard a great sound like the trampling of hooves.
‘What was that?’
Marian whispered as the sound passed.
But Allen had not heard the like before.
It was cold and despite their weariness they slept very little.
They were awake before dawn and for the second time they heard the chorus begin as a trickle and grow swiftly to a torrent as the birds welcomed the great Trumpeter.
When they began to move the flow of blood came back to their stiffened limbs and they felt better.
Marian insisted on climbing the tree herself and was up there some time.
The direction is there, she said when she came down, and she pointed due west.
The truth was that they were lost, there was no smoke in sight whichever way she looked, nothing but the undulating feathery greenness of the forest and the sun rising above the trees in the east, but she wanted to conceal her uncertainty from Allen and even from herself.
The smoke had  been west and north when they had looked from the Ridgery.
They had come, so far as she could tell, west and north, perhaps far enough north to turn west, that was all.
At least if they kept going towards the sunset they were going away from the Ridgery and would arrive somewhere.
To do that would be an achievement because at present the unchartable wilderness of trees seemed as unstable a nowhere as a cloudless sky or as fields under a carpet of snow, a world in which they might go round and round, and from which they might never emerge, a world in which there was no point in going anywhere for the reason that there simply was…nowhere.
Allen in any case was unconcerned.
The direction was for her to decide, not for him.
He handled immediate matters he could see and touch like lighting the fire, hunting game, or finding the easiest way through a thicket or over swampy ground.
Marian talked over with him some of the things that troubled her.
She wanted to know why these paths existed; there were several of them, not much used, but used often enough to be distinguishable.
How long since anyone had been along them?
Some, Allen guessed, had been several weeks unused; others, not since the winter rains; of one of them he said with more certainty that it had been used recently, perhaps yesterday.
A man with a staff had been there and must be somewhere ahead of them.
‘And the noise of hooves?’ asked Marian.
No mark of those, but the slots of deer and wild pig in plenty.
And why was there no smoke?
perhaps, Allen told her doubtfully, the outlaws had heard the expedition was starting and had put out their fires as before?
But Marian shook her head.
The expedition was not to start until the beginning of May, five days away, and she knew with absolute certainty that the word of it was to come to themfrom her.
Allen looked at her with a puzzled air; this was not the girl he had taught to shoot with his bow, and who had watched swine on the Ridgery.
There was something new and strange about her.
The forest at this point was more broken than before.
They came upon several hollows filled with water, silent dark meres, some little more than puddles or ponds, others several acres in  extent.
Often, too, the paths rose and fell over undulating ground and writhed among the trees with little reason as though they followed the casual waywardness of game tracks.
It was no longer a question of looking for a path to follow but of choosing which, for they rarely went a mile without being faced with the need to choose.
Once or twice they followed a track that simply petered out, as though it had never been; but always, when they returned they found the path she should have chosen was the path the man with the staff had been down before them.
‘Is he going where we are going?
‘It looks like it,’ Allen replied.
‘Then we need only follow the mark of his staff and not trouble ourselves further,’ Marian said.
But what was he, that he should be alone in the forest in which honest men went, not alone, not in pairs, but in dozens and well armed?
‘Not an honest man evidently,’ said Allen with entire contentment.
Somehow ‘honest man’ was now a phrase blurred in meaning, as though its edges had been lost among all the trees.
The cripple, for example, who had flung Allen into the stream, was he an honest man or a rascal?
On which side did he fight, or on neither?
At every opening in the trees, across every glade, and beside every hidden pool, Marian looked to see that glint of white she had seen from the Ridgery; it was never far from her mind.
They came up with the man with the staff at last.
They heard him before they saw him.
They heard an irregular bang and clatter of metal on wood and a constantly repeated shout of ‘Ho!
Ho!
Ho!’ accompanied by the shuffle of feet and a background of muttered curses.
He was standing with his back to a tree as all lone men stand if they can who are attacked by many.
Marian and Allen hurried towards the sound and came upon the fight from the side.
They were conscious of a tall man in the habit of a friar keeping a crew of ragged rascals at bay with his staff.
He seemed very cheerful about it and chanted his ridiculous Ho!
Ho!
Ho! as though it were a personal battle-cry.
He was defending himself with great skill, every now and  then sliding his hands down the staff and striking at a distance with its full length, and then suddenly changing direction and bringing the shortened end up in a jab at the face or stomach of one of the attackers he had tempted to come too close.
And at every blow there was a moan or a curse as it went home.
As Marian and Allen were taking in this scene one of the attackers slipped to one side and sidled around the tree towards the Friar's unprotected flank.
Although the man moved quickly the moment was so vivid to Marian that it seemed to her as though time had frozen and become an icicle of stillness.
The man's face was eager, greedy, vindictive; his arm was raised with a great jagged knife clasped in it.
The twang, hum, and strike were one sound as Allen's arrow nailed the raised arm to the tree.
There was a hush before the man screamed.
The Friar frowned, checked his ho-hoings and allowed his eyes to flicker from the enemies in front.
Instantly they took advantage and leapt in under the hesitating staff but as they did so two other shafts struck in quick succession, Allen's second and Marian's first.
In a moment the attackers dissolved and were gone.
There was a brief impression of two men stumbling down the track as though they had been hit in the leg, while the man with the pinned arm, having broken the arrow that held him, hurtled off in to the undergrowth.
The tall Friar grounded his stiff and looked at his deliverers.
‘No doubt you meant well,’ he said, ‘but you have saved them some hard knocks.’
‘They could have stayed,’ said Allen, ‘if they had wanted to.’
The man considered this for a moment before replying.
‘Yes,’ he admitted, ‘and so, perhaps, would I have done if you had not come.
Who shot the fellow in the arm?’
‘Allen did.’
‘Intentionally?
An aimed shot?’
‘Why not?’ said Allen.
‘In the Dales we learned to hit what we aimed at.’
‘Even in a hurry?’
‘Never in a hurry,’ said Allen.
‘That is very important.
Are you not a bowman?’
‘No,’ agreed Marian, ‘Allen taught me to be quick but not to hurry.’
The man once again considered before replying.
‘Have you heard of a man,’ he asked ‘known as William Scarlett?
They had not.
‘I have heard him say something similar.
He would like to know you — both,’ he added, including Marian.
‘Who were they?’
Marian asked, ‘and why did they attack you?’
‘This is a good place to sit down and a good time to sit,’ said the Friar, ‘for judging from the condition of the sun, we should eat a little.
Fighting makes me hungry.’
As he moved away from the tree it became apparent to Marian that between him and the trunk lay a substantial sack, and that it was this he had been defending so stoutly.
‘They were hungry men,’ he said, ‘and they wanted what was in my sack.’
‘What is in your sack?’
Allen asked.
‘I had put it down at this spot and was about to discover,’ he said.
‘But the visitors were impatient and did not wait to be invited.
Now let us see.’
He peered into the sack and produced a cooked ham, three dark bottles about which some dust and cobwebs still clung, a loaf, and some cheese.
There were evidently other objects in the sack but these he did not disclose.
‘I am,’ he said, ‘a man of peace, not a bowman.
Sir William Scarlett is a master of that craft…among masters; but he acknowledges a better,’ And then abruptly: ‘How many set upon me?’
‘Five,’ said Allen.
‘Surely…seven,’ he said.
‘I think seven?’ he asked Marian, looking anxious.
Marian looked serious.
‘I don't know,’ she said, ‘probably others ran from you before we came.
There were very many.’
‘But…’
Allen began.
‘We shall eat,’ the Friar interrupted with increased cheerfulness.
They sat together eating and drinking.
‘We have followed your track all day,’ said Marian.
He looked up sharply.
‘Why?’
‘Because you seemed to be going in the direction we were going.’
‘What direction was that?’
‘West and north from Ridgery Butts.’
‘I have never been to Ridgery Butts,’ he said.
‘That is not my mission.
But I know of it,’ he added.
‘We came upon your tracks early this morning,’ Allen said, ‘on this side of the stream.’
The Friar cut himself a slice of crusty bread and a large segment of cheese.
‘The people about Stilton make good cheeses,’ he said.
‘The people of Wensleydale make better,’ said Allen.
‘Any cheese is good when you are hungry,’ Marian said.
‘Why, since you allow us to share what is in your sack, did you not allow those others?’
Allen asked.
At this the Friar looked thoughtful.
‘Before I answer that question,’ be said, ‘let me in turn ask you one.
What are you doing in the forest?’
Allen looked at Marian, unsure what she wished him to say.
Marian was cool and guarded.
It was not yet time to speak of the smoke and the expedition.
Who was this pleasant-spoken man of peace?
‘We are hunting the unicorn,’ she said lightly.
The effect of Marian's reply was astonishing.
The Friar sprang to his feet as though bitten by a snake.
‘You — what?’ he demanded.
Only now did they realise how enormous a man he was, for when fighting with his staff he had been crouched with head forward and shoulders bent.
‘You were hunting…’ he paused.
Marian was alarmed and Allen drew quietly to one side so that they should not both be within reach of this giant.
‘Looking for the unicorn,’ she repeated, saying ‘looking’now instead of‘hunting’because perhaps in some way he was the protector of the beast.
He looked down on her, his brow drawn into an angry frown.
‘Is the unicorn, then, in the forest?’ he demanded.
Marian explained what she had seen from the Ridgery.
‘But why,’ he insisted, ‘should you have supposed that what you saw concerned the unicorn?’
Marian explained the apparent inability of Allen to see it.
He became less agitated.
For some time he walked up and down in silence.
At least he came to a stop before them.
‘And what else did you see from the Ridgery?’ he asked more gently.
‘People coming out of the forest…going into the forest?
There is a great view all over the forest from the Ridgery, I've been told.’
Marian felt less inclined to distrust him but was still cautious.
‘Why are you so upset?’ she said.
‘If you may travel in the forest, why may not we?
What is your business here?
And what else is in your sack?’
The Friar looked warily at her.
‘As to what is in my sack,’ he said, ‘that is my affair.
And do you not know that friars come and go…everywhere!
‘But evidently safely,’ Marian said.
‘We have seen people go into the forest from the Ridgery but they do not often go alone like you.
Those who go alone are usually woodmen and strange people.’
‘Strange people?’ he queries.
‘Beggars and friars,’ put in Allen impertinently.
‘Why not beg?’ demanded the Friar.
‘What is there strange in that?
I do not think you…’ he nodded towards Marian, ‘…meant that.
What did you mean?’
‘Secret people,’ she said, ‘who do not seem to have any business that could take them into the forest.’
‘But there are ways through the forest.
Why should they not be travelling to cities and places beyond?
We ourselves are not far from the high road to Nottingham at this moment.’
‘Is that where you are going…with your sack?’ asked Allen.
The Friar resumed his seat between them.
‘You are a very confident young pair,’ he said.
‘You question me as though I were a pedlar but you do not tell me what you are doing in the forest.
What do people say in Ridgery Butts about those who come and go into the forest, those strange people you speak of?’
‘They do not question them.’
‘And what else do you see from the Ridgery besides unicorns?’ he asked.
‘Trees, kites, and eagles,’ said Allen.
‘And the smoke,’ said Marian, watching the Friar closely as she said it.
But he seemed very little concerned.
‘Indeed?
What smoke would that be?’
‘From the outlaws’ fires.’
‘And are they much discussed by the people up there?’
‘Fat Watt speaks of them when I ask him.’
‘And he is?’
‘My foster-father and the chief man of the village.
He says they are the fires of rascals roasting the King's deer.’
The Friar nodded his head.
‘No doubt,’ he said, ‘no doubt it may be so.
When men are hungry they require to eat; just as we have done.’
‘Why are they hungry?’
Marian asked.
‘For many reasons.
No doubt those whom we so recently persuaded to seek their bread elsewhere are hungry because they are idle, vicious, and ill-conditioned and think it easier to rob such innocent and harmless passers-by as I than to toil in the fields.’
‘And are those fires the work of such men?’
The tall Friar shook his head.
‘For the most part the smoke you see from the Ridgery is from fires lit by persons of a different sort.
Many are soldiers of the cross who returned from the Holy Land to find their places filled.
Others are those who did not adventure themselves on the Crusade, but stayed to maintain the rights of their absent lords in their proper manors and castles, but as the years passed and their lords did not return they have been turned out from their posts of trust.’
‘By whom?’
‘Why, by those who coveted the manors and castles.’
‘This,’ said Allen, ‘was the case of my mother, for, my father dying, we were turned out of our homestead in the Dale to make way for a nephew of a new steward.’
‘And then?’
‘As my mother no longer had means to live, she died; and I  took myself off to the south in search of more sunshine and a master who asked no questions.’
‘And came to rest at Ridgery Butts,’ commented the Friar thoughtfully.
‘Now I must ask whether you found a master to your liking there?’
Allen shook his head.
‘Not particularly,’ he said lightly, as though it mattered very little.
‘I was able to eat.’
‘But why Ridgery Butts?’
‘Because the maid was there,’ Allen answered.
‘When my mother died the only persons to whom I owed duty were my lord who had followed the cross, and Marian, my lord's daughter.
I looked for her where she was lodged with her foster-parents.’
‘I begin to understand,’ said the Friar.
He turned to the girl: ‘One more question: who sent you to Ridgery Butts?’
‘My uncle.’
‘And who is your uncle?,
‘I know only what I have been told, I do not remember that I ever saw him.
He has never been to see me.
He is the Lord of the Dale, Baron Fitzwalter.
Watt is his man.’
The Friar nodded and got to his feet, picked up his sack, put it down again, and finally tied the neck in a tight knot, looking a little shamefaced as he did it.
‘I have an acquaintance in these parts whom I must visit.
Will you wait here and guard my sack? perhaps it would be wise to remove it a little from the public view…’
Thoughtfully he thrust it into the base of a bush a few feet from the path and covered it with dried leaves.
‘If you are so careful of it,’ said Allen, ‘why not take it with you?’
A smile like that of a child who had been caught stealing sugar and has no choice but to confess lit the Friar's face.
‘I am anxious that you should stay here until I return and I cannot think of a better way of making sure you do than by putting you in charge of my property,’ he explained.
‘But when you do return we may be gone…and the sack as well.’
‘True,’ the Friar said, ‘that is certainly possible, but a wise man's life is to a large extent a commerce in probabilities, if he were to deal in possibilities he would do little trade.
As for certainties,’ he frowned, ‘I am a friar as you see, one who has taken vows of poverty but I am also a little of a philosopher and certainties I do not believe to exist.’
‘I do not know what you are talking about,’ said Allen, ‘but I like your cheese.’
Capture
When the Friar left the children beneath the tree he went hurriedly but surprisingly lightly for a man of his bulk through the bushes until he came out on a narrow path that twisted this way and that into a deep ravine both sides of which were dark with yews.
The track continued along the bottom of the ravine but was barely distinguishable among the tumbled ruins of winter.
Whoever used it did so rarely and left few traces.
It was a silent and melancholy spot because of the darkness of the evergreens and the steep sides of the declivity which together shut out the sky.
After a mile the path turned sharply south and the ravine opened into a shallow cup-like depression three or four acres in extent.
In the heart of it was one of those still meres that were frequent in this part of the forest but because the yews had given way to giant beeches there was nothing dark about this lake which reflected the blue sky above and was a mirror of brightness.
The great beeches towered up towards the sky, their grey smooth trunks like the columns of an abbey church, and about their roots short grasses grew, gay with harebells and scentless violets among which indolently flitted small butterflies more blue than the flowers.
Here and there where the ground was more open near the lake-edge there were signs of cultivation as though someone with crude implements had scratched and dug a little to encourage nature, already prodigal, to do better still.
The Friar made for the further side of the water, skirting it to the north.
When he was about half-way he paused and whistled loudly like a blackbird that was attempting a Gregorian chant.
After a brief interval a reply in a lower key by a similarly religious bird came from what appeared to be a hummock of ivy on a small promontory which jutted out at the further end of the mere.
The Friar slackened his pace.
From the back of the hummock a figure appeared and began moving unhurriedly up the hill on an irregular route, at times coming obliquely towards the Friar, and then abruptly changing direction and seeming to go away from him: thus tacking and weaving the man was as inconspicuous as a partridge on ploughland, so that if the Friar turned his eyes from him for a moment he was difficult to rediscover, so perfectly did he merge with the duns, browns, russets, and half-greens of the wood.
At another whistle the Friar stopped and sat down on the stump of a tree.
A small man dressed in the scourings of the forest eventually came to the Friar's side.
He wore a cap of rabbit-fur decorated with a handful of dried grasses stuck in the seam.
His tunic of undressed deer-skin was patched with mole and tied about with a thong that might long ago have been the tail of a beast.
His legs were covered in rabbit-fur bound about with strips of weasel and stoat.
His feet were protected with strips of hide.
His face was creviced like the bark of an old oak.
He seemed the very distillation of the forest.
‘Greetings, brother Tuck,’ the small man said.
His voice was husky and low.
‘Simon the Trapper,’ Friar Tuck said with exasperation, ‘do you never go directly from here to there, and there to here?
Are your eyes crooked and your legs crossed that you zig-zag like a snipe?
The Trapper only smiled like one who hoarded a secret joke.
‘I have been expecting you for a week,’ he said.
‘Follow me closely.’
Obediently the Friar followed as Simon retraced his inconsequent path.
A spatter of April rain disturbed the surface of the mere and rustled like a whisper on the young leaves of the trees but the Trapper continued to pick his way with quiet deliberation and the Friar adjusted his pace.
‘You nearly expected me in vain,’ the Friar said.
‘I was attacked by a dozen vagabonds two miles from here.
You heard nothing of it?’
The small man shook his head.
‘I could not have done, I have been at the high-road seeing to my traps; but I saw that the rooks were disturbed.’
‘What news on the road?’
‘Verderers camped last night at the Five-wents.
They rode off at dawn.
I watched them.’
‘How many?’
‘Five.’
‘Strange.
So few to dare…and at this time.’
‘They had no time to gather more.
A girl and a boy have taken to the forest; they are to get them back.
I sat almost amongst them at their fire and heard.
They were unhappy and in a hurry to get clear of the trees; they started if a mouse stirred, and when an owl hooted they seized their swords.’
His chuckle was like a rustling leaf.
‘I was the mouse and the owl.’
‘How did they know where to search?’
‘The cripple passed the word.’
The Friar snorted with indignation.
‘The ways are still watched, then!’
‘More closely than ever in these parts.
And with you?’
The Friar shook his head, ‘Much as before,’ he replied.
‘Then it is from this direction it will come?’
‘Perhaps,’ the Friar said, ‘perhaps from all sides.
They mean to succeed this time.
The girl and the boy are with me.
They came like an answer to prayer when I was attacked.’
Again there was the leaf-like chuckle.
‘You prayed then?’
‘I might have done had I had time…and had I remembered.
This is a good prayer,’ he added, waving his staff.
They drew down to the back of the hummock which remained an ivy-grown tump until they were within a few paces and could see rough-hewn timber planks behind it.
Even the heavy door was thick with ivy.
It swung slowly on its hinges like a great branch stirred by the wind.
Unseen by the Trapper the Friar furtively crossed himself.
It was dark inside the cottage and some moments before the Friar's eyes became accustomed to the gloom.
Two window-spaces draped irregularly with trailing ivy opened out across the lake which was pimpled with the passing shower.
In the light that came from these he could see a rough plank table and three chairs and in the darkest corner a bed of stretched hides on which was curled up something darker still, a bundle the size of an old woman.
‘At this time of the year she sleeps a great deal,’ said Simon.
‘She is asleep now.’
The Friar regarded the bundle uneasily.
‘The boy and girl are with you,’ the Trapper repeated like a man slow of thought, to whom the words had at last revealed their significance.
‘They have come close to finding them, then?’
‘Too close.’
The Friar paused to give weight to his next pronouncement.
‘The girl is Marian Fitzwalter.’
Simon nodded.
‘I guessed as much,’ he said, and reckoned on his fingers.
‘She would be little more than a child if she has lived,’ he said.
‘Twelve years or less?’
‘More perhaps.
She was a babe when her father left for Jerusalem.
She remembers neither him nor William, her uncle.
She shoots well with the bow.
The boy, Allen of the Dale, taught her archery.
Scarlett could not draw quicker.’
‘Is she certainly that child?’
The Friar nodded.
‘And she spoke of the unicorn being in the forest, but that, I think, was by accident.
Yet it seems an omen.’
He looked towards the bundle on the bed.
‘Should she not be consulted?,
Simon shook his head.
‘She has not spoken for a month.
How, an accident?’
‘She believes she has seen the unicorn.
From Ridgery Steep.
She saw it move in the forest like a gleam of something white.
What would that have been?’
‘I think I know,’ said Simon.
‘You do?’ the Friar asked; but Simon said no more.
They sat for a while in thoughtful silence while the shower passed from the surface of the lake and the light hiss of the rain ceased.
‘It is a problem,’ the Friar said.
‘Firstly, the child should not be in the forest at this time.
That is to the bad.
Secondly, the child should not be allowed to remain in their hands; so, since she is no longer at Ridgery Butts that is to the good.
The question is now, what to do with her?’
‘What does she, herself, intend?’
‘I think they are making their way towards the Camp.
They have seen the smoke and guessed where it is.’
‘The whole forest knows.’
‘She is a strange child,’ said the Friar.
‘She shoots and fights like a boy, but there is something different about her.
She knows, but does not know why she knows, or what she knows.
I do not believe she knows why she is going to the Camp or what she will find there.’
‘She is being drawn,’ said the Trapper.
‘Let her remain here,’ said a voice from the bed.
The Friar's great shape froze; but the Trapper only turned and with his customary soundless deliberation crossed to that corner of the hut.
‘My dear,’ he said with great tenderness, ‘it is springtime.’
There was a sound between a grunt and a groan.
‘I heard,’ the voice said angrily.
It was a very old sound, more like a tired gate creaking on its hinges than a human voice.
‘It is time I returned,’ the Friar murmured.
‘If the verderers are out the forest is not safe for her.’
‘The forest is never safe,’ Simon answered, ‘but she will be safer there than elsewhere.
I shall come with you.’
Outside the hut the leaves and the grasses sparkled with the brightness of the shower, the air was fresh and sweet with released scents and the song of birds, and then, distantly but distinctly, almost as they emerged, came from very far away, somewhere to west and south of them, the sound of a horn.
‘Robin hunting,’ said the Friar.
‘Where?’
‘Beyond the Old Dyke.’
The Old Dyke was a dry ditch, fifteen paces broad and about ten feet deep, backed to the west with a bank of earth, dry, decayed, tumbled, but running straight across the forest for mile after mile, monument of some forgotten war centuries old.
The two men once more threaded the invisible path among the pitfalls, snares, and hidden dangers with which the Trapper had fortified the approaches to his dwelling.
‘You need none of this if you have her ,’ said the Friar, awe still in his voice.
He spoke of the old woman.
‘She is harmless.’
‘No-one believes her so.’
It was considerably more than the hour Friar Tuck had reckoned on when he and the Trapper emerged on the track  where he had left Marian and Allen.
Neither they nor the sack were there.
Marian watched the tall figure in grey disappear through the trees.
Was he indeed a Friar?
It seemed to matter very little.
All her life things had happened which she had not arranged.
Once more things were happening she had not caused to happen but now there was a difference and she sat with her back to the tree trying to discover what the difference was.
The sun's gentle warmth was reflected from the bark, the moss on which she sat and rested her hands was soft and cool.
She was conscious of being pleased by such things.
They were good things to enjoy.
That, it occurred to her, was something she was doing of her own choice.
Allen, for instance was rummaging about in the bush where the Friar had hidden his sack; and yet he might have chosen to sit still and let the sack take care of itself.
And the Friar was somewhere in the forest visiting an acquaintance; he had decided to do that rather than sit here in the young sun and sleep.
What they were doing might concern her, probably did concern her, but the decision, whatever it was, was theirs not hers; whereas waiting here, feeling the coolness beneath her hands and the softness of the April sun about her face, and being content to feel these delightful sensations flowing through her and to want nothing more —that was something that depended on her and on no on else.
Yet — and she shook her left hand to dislodge a fly that tickled — she had really done not even that.
It was the Friar who had said ‘Wait here,’ all she was doing was to sit and let things happen.
She was mildly surprised by this.
There was some difference that she could not at first put her finger on, and then at last it came to her; it was she who had said ‘We shall go’ and their presence in the forest had flowed from that.
And it was she who had said ‘This is the way’ and their arrival at this spot at the moment the friar was being attacked had flowed from that.
And now she was being carried along by the impetus of those two decisions.
It was like running down a hill.
You  started to run because you wanted to but when you wanted to stop you couldn't.
You decided, and then the hill decided.
And it seemed to her that she was at least two people, for the person who had plunged them into the forest and brought them to this spot was not the same as the person who sat here waiting for Allen to say what he was doing, and for the Friar to return.
She could not imagine that she had ever been the first person.
She would have been asleep if the fly had not returned to her hand.
Allen felt the sack.
There was some hard object in the bottom of it.
He cleared it of leaves and dragged it out of the corner into which the Friar had stuffed it.
Although it was only half-full it was heavy.
He looked at the knotted neck and shook his head.
‘I think we have had the best out of it,’ he said to himself.
‘And if we journey on with him we shall in any case finish the bread, ham, and cheese together.
But I should like to know what he was anxious about.’
He put the sack back and strewed some dead leaves over it.
Then he went back and sat down beside Marian with his back to the trees.
The fly transferred itself from Marian's hand to Allen's forehead but it did not disturb him and he slept.
A tree-creeper spidered head-first down the tree-trunk and flitted, a brown shadow, to the next creviced pasture.
A wren scolded unreasonably from the bush where the sack was hidden.
The fly browsed on Allen's unconscious cheek.
The sun moved on.
Further up the path a blackbird sounded an alarm note.
Allen woke.
He thought: ‘But I should like to know what he was anxious about.
If there was something valuable there…perhaps after all…’
He got up and went over to the sack.
He moved quietly to avoid waking Marian.
Marian opened her eyes suddenly.
Something had disturbed her, there was some reason why she should be awake.
Allen was not beside her.
He was stooping over the sack.
A man was standing on the path looking at her.
She stayed quite still and their eyes met.
She knew that he had seen Allen and that Allen was several yards from his bow.
Her own bow was out of reach.
The man was watchful.
She could see he was fair-haired and blue-eyed.
It was not an unpleasant face.
perhaps he was friendly.
Then he took a pace forward and she saw he was dressed in the russet smock of a verderer.
At the same moment Allen saw him and made a dash for his bow.
The man leapt; Marian half-rose to her feet to reach for her bow, there was a whistle, a rush of feet, and something knocked her over.
The path suddenly seemed full of men.
‘It is all right,’ said one who seemed to be the leader of them.
‘We shall not hurt you.’
He turned to the others: ‘Who has the boy?’
‘He slipped me,’ said the fair one.
‘Look!’ he showed his arm bleeding from a knife wound.
‘A bear-cub,’ he said.
The Horses
Allen lay behind a tree and watched.
It was not easy for him to separate himself from Marian.
His instinct was to be beside her even in captivity.
Had there been any sign of their ill-treating her he would have gone straight at them, hopelessly, with his knife alone.
But she was standing between them, a small, slim, erect figure with an air of quiet attention, apparently unharmed and unalarmed.
So Allen lay tense and still, watching.
Perhaps this was better, to be free to see where they were going to take her, to follow them, to keep out of their hands and then perhaps an opportunity would come to do something.
What that something might turn out to be he had no idea.
He did not doubt that she was a prisoner, for these were the Warden's men who they had thought would not dare come so far into the forest.
The wood was dense and he was able to lie close.
He saw them bind the arm of the man he had wounded.
They kept peering about on all sides as though they knew that he was not far off but they seemed reluctant to leave the path.
They were nervous as though they suspected a trap.
Allen thought that if they were delayed long enough the Friar would return and then something might be done…unless it was the Friar who had betrayed them.
He saw the blond man he had wounded, Hugh they called him, walk over to the bush where the sack was.
He stopped, and Allen could see that he was undoing the neck of the sack to look into it.
Out came the remainder of the hambone, the cheese, the loaf, an unopened bottle of wine, then the blond man paused with his hand in the sack as though he were holding something.
There was a look of astonishment on his face.
He glanced back secretively over his shoulder at the other three who were talking and paying no attention to him.
Carefully he retied the neck of the sack and was about to leave it where it was, concealed in the bush, when the Leader called out to him: ‘What have you got there?’
‘It's their food sack; a little bread cheese and ham,’ he called.
‘Are you sure it's not venison?’
‘Of course I'm sure.’
‘Bring it here.’
‘It's not worth it,’ said Hugh.
‘There's little left.’
Then casually, as though thinking better of it: ‘We might as well have it.’
Then Allen heard Marian's voice.
‘Leave it there,’ she said.
‘It isn't yours.
And it isn't ours.’
‘Whose is it, then?’
‘It belongs to the Friar.’
‘Friar?’ said the Leader.
‘What friar?’
‘We met him here.
It is his food.
He shared it with us.’
The men drew closer together.
Hugh was carrying the sack now as inconspicuously as possible over his shoulder but the others no longer cared about it; the word ‘friar’ had claimed their attention.
‘What did he look like, this Friar?’ demanded a man they called Crane.
‘A tall, powerful fellow?’
‘He was big,’ Marian replied.
‘Just a moment,’ said the Leader, checking Crane as he was about to speak once more.
‘You say you met him here.
How did you arrange that?’
‘We didn't arrange it.
We were following this path and heard people fighting under this tree.’
‘Fighting?’
‘It was the Friar; he was being attacked.’
‘Attacked by whom?’
‘They looked like beggars; there were a lot of them.
They ran when we came, and the Friar shared his food with us rather than with them.’
The men looked puzzled and discussed it among themselves, ignoring Marian.
‘If it were he why should he be attacked in the forest?’
‘There cannot be two such friars.’
‘There should not be one,’ said a thin tall man with a little head who seemed the most ill at ease of the four.
The Leader turned to Marian.
‘Where is he now?’
‘I don't know where he is.
We slept and when we woke you were here and he had gone.’
‘And he had told you where he was going?’
‘No.’
Allen listened approvingly.
So far Marian had spoken no more than the truth but the sort of truth children speak and understand for what it is — the letter of truth but not the spirit.
‘Then he's not far off,’ said the thin man, keeping a sharp look-out on the surrounding trees and resting his hand on the pommel of his short sword.
The fourth man, Michael, saw the movement.
‘You'll not get near enough under his staff to use that,’ he sneered.
Michael was a short burly man with a round ruddy face, he said little but Allen thought he looked more dangerous than the others.
At that moment there was the sound of a horn far off in the forest.
They all heard it and froze, listening.
It sounded twice, thrice, four times.
‘That was Robin,’ said the Leader.
‘I don't like it,’ said the thin man; ‘that came from over there, from the way we've come.’
‘It's almost as though they were hunting us,’ said Hugh.
‘Why shouldn't they be?’ said Crane.
‘They'll know we're in the forest.’
‘How…know?’ asked the Leader.
‘They know everything.
There's always someone to tell.
The smokes speak.’
‘It was further west,’ said Michael.
‘They're not at the road.’
‘Not yet,’ put in the thin man, ‘but they will be by the time we're back there.
I think we should go back by the paths.
That way we'll keep him from getting between us and the Ridgery.’
‘And leave the horses?’
‘You'll never get the horses down that way,’ said the Leader pointing the way the children had come.
‘And do you fancy meeting the Friar and his friends on foot?
No.
It's the highway and as fast as we can go.’
But already Allen was moving silently through the trees, making a half-circle around them until he reached the path further up.
Then he started running.
Somewhere ahead they must have left their horses.
His plan was only half-formed.
If they had left someone in charge of the horses nothing could be done, but he counted on their having kept together.
Also he had little time.
He knew they would be hurrying behind him, might even have heard his running steps on the path or noted, practised woodsmen as they were, the scatter of wood-pigeons that went up in a flurry ahead of him.
Then, some yards away he heard a snort and the clink of metal.
In an instant he checked, left the path and advanced as silently as he could through the trees.
The horses were standing where the path opened out into a small glade.
There was no man in sight.
Five horses, saddled and bridled, were tied by the reins to branches of trees.
The flies were troubling them and they blew through distended nostrils, or shook their heads, or stamped an impatient hoof.
Allen went quietly up to them and one by one untied the knots.
The first horse stood still as though unaware that he was free to move.
The second whinnied and moved back a step to graze the spot it had been coveting for the past hour.
Allen kept half an eye on the path as he worked.
He unloosed the third and fourth and was struggling with the reins of the fifth when he heard voices on the path.
The knot gave but still the four horses seemed content to graze the clearing where they were.
He punched one of them in the hindquarters; it moved a pace and grazed on.
The voices drew nearer.
Allen pulled out his knife and jabbed at the animal's flank where the stirrup hung.
The hooves slammed out and with a snort of terror it hurtled off up the path followed by the others.
At the same instant there was a shout from the opposite direction and the sound of running feet, and Allen melted into the bushes.
Crane came first, running fast.
He crossed the glade without hesitation and plunged up the path after the horses.
The others stopped when they found the glade empty.
‘It's no good,’ said the Leader.
‘Let Crane follow them.’
‘But what has happened?’ the thin man asked in a bewildered way.
‘Who has taken them?’
‘A crown to a groat it was the boy,’ said Hugh.
He was nursing his arm, his task seemed to be to keep close to Marian and prevent her making a dash for it.
‘Or someone else,’ said Michael significantly.
At this the thin man seemed more anxious than ever.
‘If you're right we'll not be likely to see Crane again,’ he said.
‘They'll have got him.’
‘It could only have been one,’ said the Leader decisively, ‘probably Hugh is right, it was the boy.’
‘How can you be sure it was only one?’ the thin man asked doubtfully but clutching at a straw of hope.
‘Because you're alive,’ Michael snarled, ‘which you certainly wouldn't be if there had been more than one of them here.’
‘Perhaps it was the Friar,’ the thin man said, scarcely less alarmed by the thought of this than the thought of the unspecified ‘they’.
‘Then if so he's in the wood hereabouts and can hear every word you say,’ Michael sneered.
‘You'd better go off and make a search.’
They stayed close together at the edge of the clearing, Michael and the thin man with arrows ready notched, Hugh with his left hand on his sword hilt; the Friar's sack was now tried with a rope to his belt and slung over his shoulder.
‘What do we do, now?’
Hugh asked.
‘Wait here till Crane comes back,’ said the Leader.
‘If he does,’ said the thin man.
Michael cursed under his breath but no one else spoke.
They stood close together in silence, listening.
At last there was the sound of a heavy object moving further up the track.
‘He's got one,’ said the Leader, ‘but I think it's lamed.’
After a minute or two Crane appeared leading a horse by a broken rein.
It was dipping on its left fore-leg.
‘It tripped on the rein and lamed itself on a tree-root,’ said Crane.
‘What about the others?’
‘They're on the high road.
I could see them about half a mile away still running wild.’
‘Who is with them?
Are they being ridden?’
‘No-one.’
‘I told you so,’ said Michael, ‘it was the Friar.
He never rides.’
He was tormenting the thin man.
‘It was the boy,’ said Crane.
‘I saw him as I ran into the glade.
He made off over there.’
He pointed exactly in the direction where Allen was lying.
‘Well he's not there now,’ said the Leader.
But he was.
‘Want to go and see?’
Michael asked the thin man.
‘It's only a boy not the Friar.
He doesn't hurt much…ask Hugh.’
The thin man ignored the taunt.
‘What do we do?’ he asked the Leader.
‘Now we have lost the horses we may as well go back by the paths.’
‘We've still got one horse,’ said Crane glumly, ‘but we might as well eat it for it'll carry none of us.’
‘Which way were they going?’ the Leader asked.
‘North, towards York,’ Crane replied.
‘When do you think they'll stop?’
‘If there's nothing to scare them further they'll tire in a mile or two more.
But if he's tied something to their tails they'll run till they drop.’
‘Then we can go on up the highway until we catch them,’ Hugh suggested.
‘That'll be best,’ the Leader agreed.
‘I would rather see and be seen than be seen and not see.
At least we can use bows out there.’
‘What shall we do with this?’
Crane indicated the lamed horse.
‘It's yours,’ said Michael to the thin man.
‘Want to carry it home with you?’
‘We'll leave it here,’ said the Leader.
‘It can't go far, it's no use to us as it is and we may be able to pick it up some other time.’
The thin man stripped the horse of its saddle and bridle and hid them behind a bush.
The contents of the saddle-bags he crammed into his wallet but there was more food than he could find room for.
‘Put it in that sack,’ he said to Hugh.
Hugh hesitated and then did so, undoing the neck just enough to stuff in half a loaf and some smoked meat, giving no-one a chance to see what else he had in it — not that anyone cared.
Then they set off after the horses.
When they were out of sight Allen came out of hiding and ran back down the track to the tree where they had been surprised.
He had noticed that none of them had his bow or Marian's.
His  bow was lying just where he had laid it; Marian's was broken at the foot of the tree, someone had trodden on it.
He took as many arrows as he could carry and, holding his bow with an arrow ready notched, set off down the track after the verderers.
There was no need to run, for he knew they would be following the horses, and on the highway he could not easily lose them.
It was a few minutes after Allen recovered his bow that Friar Tuck and Simon the Trapper arrived at the tree.
The Friar was bewildered by his loss and could not bring himself to think clearly about the disaster.
While he stood in amazement and distress Simon moved quietly about like a hound searching for a line.
First he covered the area near the tree, then he extended his search, widening the circle.
Very soon he was back at the Friar's side.
‘They have gone that way,’ he said, pointing up the path, ‘but someone has lain here…’
He went over to the spot where Allen had hidden, ‘…and then moved from tree to tree until he reached the path about twenty paces ahead.
Also there is blood near the bush where you left the sack.’
Friar Tuck stirred himself and stared at the Trapper.
‘Blood?’ he said.
‘That must be from the men we wounded in the fight.’
The Trapper shook his head.
‘It is fresh, scarcely fifteen minutes old.
The other blood is there also…and there…and there.’
He pointed again.
‘They ran that way when you beat them off.
It is tacky now, nearly dry.’
‘They came back?’ the Friar said unbelievingly.
‘But they were badly hurt and frightened!’
‘Not they, someone else.
These men were not shod like beggars.’
But the Friar's wits had not yet returned to him and he seemed not to hear what the Trapper said.
Several times he went back to the spot where he had hidden the sack as though unable to believe it had gone.
At last he returned and stood before Simon like a great forlorn child.
‘But I must have the sack,’ he said.
‘I must get back the sack.’
Simon looked at him curiously, but asked nothing.
‘Then we must follow them,’ he said.
They set off, but the Friar did not understand at first whom they were following; it was as though he believed that the children had taken his sack.
It was not until they came out into the clearing where the lame horse was dismally hobbling amongst the forest grasses that he became aware of what had happened.
‘But this is a verderer's horse?’
The Trapper once again moved like a shadow over the ground.
‘The other horses were tied,’ he said, ‘but something happened and they ran off and were followed on foot.
Either the girl or the boy is with them.’
‘Not both?’
‘The other went this way,’ and once more he pointed to the spot where Allen had hidden.
Gradually the Friar's self-reproach was overcome by anger directed at those who had caused it.
He frowned as he strode along, thudding his staff on the ground at every stride, but still it was the loss of the sack rather than of the children that seemed to be the cause of his anger.
‘The sack,’ he growled, ‘the sack, the sack!
What have they done with the sack?'
The Dive for Cover
The verderers hurried along the forest path and took little notice of Marian.
They were afraid of the closeness of the trees and dismayed at the loss of their horses.
Marian did nothing to draw attention to herself.
She had protested at their taking the Friar's sack but now she allowed herself to be swept along by them without resistance.
She was surprised to find how easy it was to be passive.
By entering the forest she and Allen had launched themselves into a stream of events that carried them with it.
They had taken the first step but now it was the stream and not they which determined where they should go and what should happen to them.
The verderers planned to take her back to Ridgery Butts but Ridgery Butts was the other side of the stream in a different world and this was the forest where nothing usual and expected happened.
She was confident that the current would bring her, in however roundabout a way, to her destination.
Yet had she been asked what that destination was she would have been hard put to it to answer.
She was not afraid but she was curious.
Curious about everything; about the men who paid so little attention to her, wondering where they were taking her; about Allen, wondering what he was doing; about the Friar and what he would think when he found them gone; about herself that she should be so indifferent to her circumstances and so little fearful; and a little curious, but least curious of all, about the Friar's sack, curious as to why if it contained only the remnants of a meal he had been so concerned to hide it and so uneasy at leaving it in their care.
Nor was she afraid for Allen.
Allen could look after himself in the forest.
She did not consider what he might do to rescue her.
That was his affair.
When the time came she would do what she could to help.
It was probable, she thought, that the Friar would befriend them.
It was clear that the verderers  regarded the Friar as a dangerous enemy.
This puzzled her.
He was strong certainly and brave but armed only with a staff he could hardly be a match for five armed men.
With all this ‘they’ who made the Smoke were in some way concerned.
But who were ‘they’?
The friar knew of them and spoke of them as good men illegally dispossessed and driven from their homes; the verderers spoke of them with fear.
Fat Watt called them rascals.
She felt their presence pervading the forest and yet where were they?
She had seen nothing of them and heard nothing except their horn in the recesses of the forest, a joyous and at the same time a melancholy sound which filled her captors with unease.
Once out on the highway the apprehension of the verderers grew less.
The trick here was never less than eight feet wide and in some places where the ground was soft it spread to thirty or forty feet.
Apart from the track itself the forest had been partially felled for about twenty feet on either side so that except where the road wound sharply it was possible to see a long way ahead.
In summer when the leaves were thick travellers were still within easy bow-shot of cover but in winter and spring when leaves were sparse the danger of ambushes was much lessened.
Because their danger was now different the men no longer walked together in a protective knot.
The Leader, following in the track of the horses, went some paces ahead scanning the forest on either side; behind him followed Hugh, walking close by Marian's side; still further back, together but with the width of the track between them, were Michael and the thin man; and bringing up the rear was Crane, the young man who had run after the horses.
Marian already felt her captors were not strangers to her.
They had scarcely addressed a word to her but from behind her barrier of quiet she observed them closely.
She knew their names — except for the thin man with the small head whom the others never addressed by name — and something of their characters.
The least marked to her mind was the Leader.
He was rarely the first to suggest what should be done; when the others spoke he listened with half an ear, made up his mind  what course to follow and followed it without hesitation as though no other were possible.
The thin man complained and continued to argue but no-one took notice but Michael, who growled tersely at his cowardice.
Crane was a quick, decisive man, the youngest of them, eager to be doing something.
It was he who had run ahead in pursuit of the horses, and it was he whose eyes now most keenly searched the forest edge.
None of these men seemed fearsome to her, but it was Hugh, her personal guard, whom she was most inclined to trust.
He was the blond man she had first seen when she opened her eyes under the tree.
Whereas Michael's round red face was hard, tough and almost brutal, and the thin man's expression was mean and cringing, and Crane's eager and self-centred, and the Leader's careful and considered, there seemed to be warmth and kindliness in Hugh's simple features.
After a mile or so on the highway Hugh's pace slackened as though he were tiring, and Marian noticed that the colour had gone from his face.
He winced when his wounded arm was touched.
They fell further and further behind the Leader.
Michael and the thin man, still walking with the highway's distance between them, first drew level and then went ahead.
Crane, despite his activity, remained behind making occasional sorties off the road to look behind some tree or peer into a thicket.
Hugh did not turn his head when he spoke and kept his voice low so that only she could hear him.
‘Where were you taking this?’
‘Taking what?’
‘This!’
He gave a little jerk of the shoulder on which the sack hung.
She was puzzled.
‘It's the Friar's,’ she said, ‘not ours.’
‘Was there a Friar?’ he asked, disbelievingly.
‘Of course there was.’
They walked on for several paces in silence.
‘But you were with the Friar,’ he said at last.
‘I told you.’
‘Where was he going?’
‘I don't know.’
‘You were going with him?’
‘Perhaps we were,’ she said, ‘I don't know.
Is your arm hurting?
Let me carry the sack.’
He shied away from her like a startled horse.
‘No,’ he said, ‘it's all right.’
There was a long further silence while they walked on nearly half a mile without speaking.
‘Was he taking it to the person it belongs to?’ he asked at last, and it was as though all the time he had been trying to frame the question in a special way.
But what he meant was a mystery to Marian.
‘It belongs to the Friar,’ she said.
He pulled a face.
‘Is that what he told you?’
At this she became thoughtful.
‘No,’ she said, ‘he didn't.
But he had it and he gave us food and wine out of it so we understood it was his.
Why do you think it isn't?’
Hugh shot a sideways glance at her.
‘Have you looked inside?’
‘No.’
‘Did the boy look inside?’
‘I'm sure he didn't,’ she said, but she wasn't quite sure.
Allen had been interested in the sack; she had seen him stooping where the sack was hidden and he had been doing something with it.
perhaps he had undone the knot and looked inside or perhaps he had done no more than lift it and feel its weight.
‘Well,’ she said, ‘what is in it?’
But then he changed the direction of his questioning.
‘What are you and the boy doing in the forest?’ he asked.
‘You can see it isn't safe.’
‘No,’ she agreed, ‘it isn't.’
‘Then you'll be glad to get back to your home with us.'’
She shook her head.
‘No,’ she said, ‘I shall not be going back with you.
I shall stay in the forest.’
He half turned his head at that.
‘But that's what we've been sent for; to fetch you back.
We don't like to be here.
The forest is very dangerous just now.’
‘More dangerous than usual?’
‘Much more dangerous.’
‘Why have you been sent?
Did the Warden of the Forest order you?’
‘It seems so, and others, perhaps, ordered him.’
She thought for a moment.
‘But Fat Watt could not have ordered him.
Perhaps it was my uncle who sent you?’
‘Who is your uncle?,
‘Lord Fitzwalter.
I have never seen him,’ she added, ‘but I know he is my uncle.’
Hugh once again gave her a sidelong, doubting glance.
‘I believe that someone knew you had the sack with you and that you were taking it to the outlaws.’
That was the word the Friar had used.
‘Is it they who make the fires in the forest?’
Hugh nodded.
‘We never had the sack.
It couldn't have been because of that.’
Another April shower swept over them, a heavy one, so that they all gathered together and took shelter under an old yew.
‘This isn't the way back, we're getting too far in,’ the thin man complained.
‘And you've not had your throat cut yet,’ growled Michael.
‘What about the horses?’ asked Crane.
‘They wouldn't have come as far as this on their own, he must be driving them.’
‘We'll be two horses short,’ the thin man put in.
‘We ought to go straight back by the paths.
We've got what we came for.’
Hugh said: ‘She says she's not coming back with us.’
The Leader looked up sharply.
‘How not?’ he asked.
‘Not,’ Marian said.
He gave her a puzzled look.
‘Why have you run into the forest?
It is no place for you.’
Marian did not answer.
The rain was making a curtain all round them but not a drop came through the yew.
The ground they stood on was dry and cushiony with centuries of yew-needles, nothing grew there.
While they watched the rain a horse suddenly walked around the corner of the track ahead.
Its stirrups swung, the reins trailed on the grass.
It walked deliberately and then stopped to graze.
They spoke in undertones in order not to startle it.
‘What about the others?, the thin man asked.
‘They'll be round the bend of the track,’ said Crane, ‘I'll head them off.
All right?’
‘All right,, said the Leader.
‘We'll stop them if they run from you, but I don't think they'll run.
They've got over their scare.’
Crane cut back into the forest to make a circuit so that he could get beyond the horses.
He had no way of knowing how close the others were so he made a big detour.
The Leader posted Michael and the thin man across the track on the further side, he took the middle of the track himself, and left Hugh and Marian to block the other half.
‘Take it gently,’ he said, ‘or we shall lose them.
The roan may try to break off among the trees.,
They all knew to move slowly.
In many places the wood was too thick and Marian thought that horses would not get far in it.
‘They will want to be caught,’ she thought.
And then she thought how strange it was the Leader did not seem concerned in case she should try to escape.
Were they so sure they would be able to catch her?
Or did he believe she would be afraid to be alone in the forest?
That was something none of them would like.
Hugh was nearest to her, and if she arranged to be on the side of his wounded arm she thought it would be easy to get away.
It was raining harder than ever.
The rain rustled in the grass.
A second horse sauntered into view.
‘Wait for the others,’ the Leader said quietly.
They watched the corner intently.
Then, out of sight, a horse snorted and there was the sound of galloping hooves.
The two remaining horses appeared round the corner, one of them the roan.
Already the first two were on the move.
All four began galloping down the track.
The men shouted and spread out their arms.
Marian, too, spread her arms out.
The roan plunged into the trees on the far side.
Michael darted in to head it off.
Crane appeared in the middle of the track on the corner.
The Leader and the thin man advanced a little way, narrowing the space the other three horses had to run free in.
Somebody seized Marian by the arm.
It was Hugh.
‘Come along,’ he said in a low voice.
‘Now!
We'll run for it.’
The Unexpected Ally
No-one saw them go.
Michael was in the forest on the other side of the track trying to head off the roan horse that had run out.
Crane was up at the corner to stop the others breaking back to the north.
The Leader and the thin man were advancing cautiously on the remaining horses which were standing restless, uncertain and in need of quieting.
They had barely gone ten yards from the highway before Marian knew that Allen was at her side, running with them.
She said: ‘I thought you would be here.’
After several minutes when there was still no noise of pursuit Hugh slackened pace.
‘Quick and quiet now,’ he said.
Almost immediately they heard someone calling behind them.
‘Hugh!
Hugh!’
It was an urgent enquiring call as though they thought Hugh was still close at hand.
Soon it was repeated, louder and more urgently this time.
Hugh was nervous.
‘They'll be after us.,
Allen spoke for the first time since he had joined them.
‘We aren't on any path, they won't know which way we've gone.’
‘Michael's as good a tracker as any in the forest,’ Hugh said, ‘so is Crane.
They'll read the ground like a priest reads his book.’
‘They'll be slow,’ said Allen.
‘Anyway, where arewe going?
There's no track here.’
Hugh nodded his head towards Marian.
‘That's for her to say.
She knows.’
Allen looked at her.
‘Do you know?’
Marian in turn looked at Hugh.
‘Do I know?’ she asked.
‘I reckon you both know,’ said Hugh.
‘And I believe you very well know what's in here.’
They had been moving steadily through a very thick part of the forest in which it was impossible to maintain a constant  direction for more than a few paces.
Only the shouts, very faint now, of the other verderers showed where the highway was.
‘They may be good trackers,’ Allen said, ‘but they'll have to leave their horses again and they won't do that.’
Hugh agreed.
‘Perhaps, after all, they'll wait to see if I bring you back.
They'll think you've run and I'm after you.’
‘I don't understand what's happening,’ Allen said, and then suddenly stood still and burst out laughing.
‘I know,’ said Marian, smiling, ‘it was the horses…their faces when they found you'd cut loose the horses.’
‘You saw?’ he chuckled.
‘I saw you lying in front of that bush.
It was your eye, like a rabbit's eye it was too still.
And I knew just where you'd be and how you'd be lying.’
The verderer looked from one to the other.
‘We didn't think to look for you,’ he said.
‘We were all for the horses.’
Then he added: ‘In front of a bush?’
Marian nodded.
‘Allen taught me it is easier to hide in front of something than behind it.’
Allen stopped laughing.
‘I don't understand,’ he said to the verderer.
‘Which side are you on?
What's happening?’
‘On his side,’ Hugh said, ‘the man who owns this.’
He pointed to the sack.
‘I see,’ said Marian, ‘and we are going to him?’
‘I reckon so.’
‘And the Friar?’
‘You know best about that.’
‘Yes,’ said Marian.
‘We are all going to the Smoke.
And you have changed sides because of that?’
She nodded at the sack.
‘We had better get on, then.
Do you know the way.
You know the forest.’
Allen looked uncomprehending; if Marian understood he did not.
But Marian did not understand either.
She only pretended that she did.
If Hugh thought she knew everything perhaps it was better that he should think it.
‘No,’ Hugh said.
‘I've not been in this part of the forest.
I know the south-a bit.’
They heard no more from behind them and as the small amount of sky they could see between the tree-tops was clouded over there was nothing to give them direction.
Allen  climbed a tree but although he climbed to a high bough and hung there swaying like a squirrel they were in a low-lying bowl of forest and he could see neither the Smoke nor the last rays of the westering sun but only leaves.
Dusk came quickly and they decided to stay where they were and camp for the night.
Allen gathered sticks and lit a fire.
Hugh dragged food from his sack, the food the thin man had transferred from his saddle-bags and the remains of the Friar's provisions; whatever else lay in the bottom of the sack he carefully left there.
‘I wonder where the Friar is,’ Marian said.
‘We left him without food.’
‘He will be following,’ said Hugh.
The leaping flames lit their faces and threw the surrounding forest into a black hole.
There was a warmth of comradeship between them.
‘How is your arm?’
Allen asked.
‘I'm sorry I hurt you.’
‘What is he following?’
Marian asked.
‘Me?’
But Hugh didn't answer that directly.
‘Are we agreed that we go on together as friends?’
‘You didn't jump on us like a friend,’ Allen objected.
‘I didn't know whose messengers you were.
We were sent to bring you back.
They said nothing about anything else.’
‘And is the ‘’ anything'’what made the difference?’
‘It's my side,’ he said.
‘I'd be a fool if it weren't.
I was at Acre.
Everybody must have a side.’
But Acre meant nothing to Marian and Allen.
‘How did you find us?’
Allen asked.
‘There was a man by the roadside with an arrow in his thigh.
His friends had left him to die.
He told us you had attacked them.
He didn't speak of anything else.’
‘Not of the Friar?’
‘What happened to him?’
Allen asked.
‘Michael hanged him.’
‘I wonder why he didn't speak of the Friar?’
Marian said.
‘They attacked the Friar to get the sack.
He said they were hungry; but need anyone be hungry in the forest?’
‘Perhaps Michael didn't give him time,’ Allen said.
‘No,’ agreed Hugh.
‘Perhaps he didn't.’
‘Who were they?’
Marian asked.
She had known when she set eyes on them that they were nothing to do with the Smoke and nothing to do with the expedition that was preparing.
They were sturdy beggars, Hugh told them, a sort of people rarely found in the forest, vermin whom the verderers would have been well able to control without an expedition had it not been for the outlaws.
‘The outlaws are not like that?’
‘No,’ he said, ‘not like that.’
They were very tired and slid quickly into the silence of sleep.
The fire died down and the embers became grey ashes, the forest around them became full of noises as the creatures of the night resumed possession of it, but Marian, Allen and Hugh slept on until well after dawn.
Marian was the first to wake.
Once again the clear air sparkled with the song of birds and the young leaves trembled with their movement.
The sounds and scents of the morning were keen and exciting yet at the centre of those sensations she was filled with a curious sort of quiet.
Allen had crept under a bush and even asleep was as difficult to see as a wild creature.
Hugh lay curled up, his head pillowed on the sack, his fair hair tousled about his head, his cheeks flushed, breathing rather heavily.
The last time she had woken from sleep it had been to find herself looking into the blue eyes of a dangerous enemy; now the enemy was a friend.
How was that?
She had no wish to wake her companions.
If they slept it was because it was safe to sleep.
They were her protectors, older, stronger, more clever and brave, and yet they had assumed it was for her to say what they were to do.
That was very curious, too.
In the thickest part of the forest she felt secure, later when the sun was higher and they had eaten they would have to move on, but now while the others were sleeping she did what she had scarcely ever done before — she set herself to think.
The strangest part of the adventure was the feeling that she knew what it was about when, in fact, she did not know.
Step by step she was finding out but still she did not know.
Why had Hugh changed sides?
He had been the one to capture her, it was he who had stolen the Friar's sack.
She thought he was a hard man because he had spoken of the sturdy beggars as no  better than wolves to be strung up on trees as a warning to others; he certainly had not helped her to escape out of pity.
Why then?
In some way it seemed that Why? was to be answered by the existence of a person.
What person?
Of this person she could form no idea other than that Hugh believed him to be the owner of whatever was in the sack and that he was in some way connected with the outlaws' Camp.
Which brought her back to the sack and to the Friar who had carried it and left it in their care.
Who was he?
And would he think they had stolen it?
For the sack itself — it was there, pillowing Hugh's head and although Hugh knew what was in it and believed they knew also, he had taken care not to show it to them.
That was very curious.
Was it that perhaps after all he was not absolutely sure that they knew?
And if she or Allen had an opportunity to look inside would they be any wiser?
Would they recognise what they saw?
Lastly there was the unicorn.
She was not entirely sure that she believed in the existence of the unicorn.
Certainly she had seen something moving in the forest that day on Ridgery Steep, something fairly large, something white, and Allen had failed to see it; but then it was possible that he had not looked in the right spot at the right moment and that his failure to see it was an accident.
Since coming into the forest she had seen no further sign of the beast.
But against that was the sudden action of the cripple at the bridge.
When she had casually mentioned that they were in the forest to hunt for the unicorn he had flung Allen into the stream.
And later, when they had mentioned the unicorn to the Friar his eyes had become angry and he had demanded to know what reason they had for believing the unicorn was in the forest and had not been calmed until they explained.
This pointed to the existence of the unicorn but now she was not sure whether it was a friend or an enemy, a beast with magical properties that only women could see or a creature to be feared and avoided.
Perhaps the magic lay in the fact that it was either or both?
And what part did the cripple play who had sat like a malignant spirit guarding a make-shift bridge over an unimportant stream?
Hugh breathed heavily like a man who was dreaming and opened his eyes with a start as though his dream had frightened him awake.
His arm was hurting beneath its bandage.
When Marian uncovered it the wound was raw and open and the flesh around it inflamed.
With Allen's help she bathed it with wine from the last of the Friar's bottles and then made a pad of cooling leaves and re-bandaged it.
It was Hugh's own suggestion to use wine.
‘We used it to heal sword cuts in the Holy Land,’ he said.
‘It burns but makes clean.’
They had noticed the jagged scar of an old wound on his upper arm.
‘Were you on the Crusade?’
Allen asked.
‘I understand now.
When you said you were at Acre you were there with the King.
Is the King dead?’
‘What have you been told?’
‘That he was drowned when his ship was wrecked.’
‘And what else have you heard?’
‘That he was not drowned but is on his way back to England.’
‘Do they say that?
Even at Ridgery Butts?’
‘I am not always at the village,’ said Allen, ‘sometimes I go east to Lincoln, or south to Peterborough, I have been as far as Lynn.
I heard it there.
But last week it was spoken of at the Inn.’
‘All England is whispering of it,’ Hugh said.
‘Is it true?’
Allen demanded.
‘I should like it to be true.’
‘Coeur de Lion is not a man who can be drowned.
I saw him often at Acre and other sieges besides.
I do not think such a man can be killed.
But I think,’ he said, turning to Marian, ‘that you know more than I.’
But although she did not deny it she knew nothing.
They set out towards the west, taking their direction from the sun, but the density of thorn thickets constantly drove them from their line.
After a mile or two which took an hour to cover they found the way blocked by sodden ground.
It was as though a stream had been damned in the heart of the forest and had gradually widened out making the centre of the great bowl they were trying to cross into a swamp.
On the verge the trees were sickly and dying, but further in they could see many trees were already dead with water standing brackishly about  their rotting trunks.
There was a sour smell and the growing heat of the sun was sucking up a mist from the waters.
The air was black with flies.
Several times they set out to make their way across by what seemed to be a path but each time they were forced to stop.
Soon they learned to recognise the treacherous brightness of grass that was too green and drew back before their feet began to make sucking noises in the black mud.
They gave up their attempts to cross the Swamp and set out instead to get round it.
There was no way of knowing whether it was better to go south or north; they went south because for a little the going seemed easier.
They were soon undeceived.
The day grew hotter and the flies more troublesome.
It was difficult to keep parallel with the watery ground because thorn thickets and fallen trees blocked their way.
They found that the swamp was forcing them back and that they could no longer keep even an erratic southward course but were withdrawing towards the east, away from where they believed the Outlaws' Camp lay.
Hugh, who had worn the uniform of a verderer for less than a twelvemonth, was no use to them as a guide and as the day grew on it became evident that his arm was causing him a great deal of pain.
He moved more heavily and slowly so that often they had to pause to allow him to keep up, and they rested for his sake more often than they would otherwise have done.
The flooded forest was loud with the noise of all kinds of birds.
Most persistent of all was the hammering of the woodpeckers, for it was as though the dying of the trees had drawn woodpeckers from half the counties of England.
Yet the sound that dinned most irritatingly into Marian's mind was the calling of the cuckoo that seemed to follow them, now near, now far, throughout the day.
The dry ground was alive with game.
Several times deer crashed away through the undergrowth on their approach, leaping up and down over obstacles.
Twice they disturbed foxes which had found sunlit corners in which to blink away the daylight, and the smell of fox was almost constantly about them.
Squirrels and martins moved in the trees, and once they came almost face to face with a boar.
They passed the beast cautiously, keeping as far away as possible, Allen and Marian with their  bows ready, and Hugh with his sword in his good hand.
But the boar watched them briefly and then trundled back into his dark thicket.
‘You need spears for those folk,’ Hugh said.
It was late in the afternoon when they decided they were too exhausted to continue.
By now Hugh was feverish.
They made camp at the top of a bank by a fallen tree.
Marian made a bed of dry bracken for Hugh while Allen lit a fire and fetched water from a brook that ran at the foot of the bank on its way to swell the nightmare of the Swamp.
The swamp water was black and sour but the water of the brook ran sparklingly pure.
They now had no idea where they were except that they must be east of the Ridgery and well to the west of where they believed the outlaws' Camp to be.
How far they were either north or south of their line they had no means of telling.
They passed an uneasy night.
Unidentified creatures paced about near their camp, and green eyes looked out on them from the bushes.
Allen thought they were wolves but though he kept the fire going all night he assured Marian that at this time of the year with the forest full of game they were in no danger from wolves or from any creatures but men.
Marian was tired but could not sleep.
She lay watching the eyes appear and disappear.
She felt no fear but only a strange sort of companionship with the creatures who populated the forest night.
Sleep would have come if it had not been for Hugh's tossing and moaning.
His misery made sleep impossible for all three of them.
They bathed his arm again but with the water of the brook instead of wine, and though this gave him brief ease he was soon moaning and tossing again.
Well before dawn came it was clear that the wound was poisoned and he would not be able to make another hard day's journey.
It was no longer practicable to seek a way around the Swamp, instead some sort of shelter had to be found as soon as possible.
If they failed another night in the open would probably be Hugh's last.
So far during three days and nights they had seen no sign of a human dwelling and since their escape from the verderers had crossed no man-made paths.
To get their bearings Allen once more climbed.
Once more it was impossible to get high enough  to see over the neighbouring branches but he called down that he was reasonably sure that they were now at the southernmost end of the depression which contained the Swamp and that if after another mile or so they turned westward they could do so on dry land.
This was not what Marian wanted, for they had worked out that the smoke of the outlaws' main Camp ready, and Hugh with his sword in his good hand.
But the boar watched them briefly and then trundled back into his dark thicket.
‘You need spears for those folk,’ Hugh said.
It was late in the afternoon when they decided they were too exhausted to continue.
By now Hugh was feverish.
They made camp at the top of a bank by a fallen tree.
Marian made a bed of dry bracken for Hugh while Allen lit a fire and fetched water from a brook that ran at the foot of the bank on its way to swell the nightmare of the Swamp.
The swamp water was black and sour but the water of the brook ran sparklingly pure.
They now had no idea where they were except that they must be east of the Ridgery and well to the west of where they believed the outlaws' Camp to be.
How far they were either north or south of their line they had no means of telling.
They passed an uneasy night.
Unidentified creatures paced about near their camp, and green eyes looked out on them from the bushes.
Allen thought they were wolves but though he kept the fire going all night he assured Marian that at this time of the year with the forest full of game they were in no danger from wolves or from any creatures but men.
Marian was tired but could not sleep.
She lay watching the eyes appear and disappear.
She felt no fear but only a strange sort of companionship with the creatures who populated the forest night.
Sleep would have come if it had not been for Hugh's tossing and moaning.
His misery made sleep impossible for all three of them.
They bathed his arm again but with the water of the brook instead of wine, and though this gave him brief ease he was soon moaning and tossing again.
Well before dawn came it was clear that the wound was poisoned and he would not be able to make another hard day's journey.
It was no longer practicable to seek a way around the Swamp, instead some sort of shelter had to be found as soon as possible.
If they failed another night in the open would probably be Hugh's last.
So far during three days and nights they had seen no sign of a human dwelling and since their escape from the verderers had crossed no man-made paths.
To get their bearings Allen once more climbed.
Once more it was impossible to get high enough  to see over the neighbouring branches but he called down that he was reasonably sure that they were now at the southernmost end of the depression which contained the Swamp and that if after another mile or so they turned westward they could do so on dry land.
This was not what Marian wanted, for they had worked out that the smoke of the outlaws, main Camp must be nearly two days march away and help and shelter for Hugh was needed far quicker than that.
As Allen turned to clamber down he spotted through a gap in the leaves a thin spiral of smoke not far off to the east.
For some time he hung like a bird watching it.
It seemed to be from a small freshly lit fire and it went unwaveringly into the still April air until it dissolved in the far blue.
It was near but how near was difficult to tell.
Whose fire was it?
Because of the Swamp they had come so far south that they must now be at least on a level with the path where they had fought with the sturdy beggars although the northern ride must lie between them and it.
If so how far off was the great ride?
It might be a fire lit by the beggars themselves who had certainly been in the area.
If so it was to be avoided, for Hugh was no longer a fighting man.
If on the other hand it was the morning fire of the returning verderers it would be possible for Hugh to stumble back to them pretending he had failed to recapture his prisoner.
The verderers had horses and within an hour or so could be carrying him back to some village outside the forest where he would have attention.
Or again, the Friar had been in that area when last seen.
Was he still?
Had he followed the verderers north and when they returned had he returned in their tracks?
The fire might be his.
Marian knew they had no choice but to make cautiously towards it.
Within a few yards of the bank on which they had spent the uneasy night they came across the first sign of man.
It was the body of a pine-marten lying in a deadfall trap at the foot of a tree.
The beautiful beast was motionless with its claws still clasping the bait.
Marian knelt and drew her fingers slowly over its glossy coat.
Allen cast around and within a few yards further came upon a man-made path, narrow and winding, but in frequent use.
It was easier going for Hugh who was now  in great pain, but Marian and Allen became more watchful and uneasy because the most uncertain and dangerous of all possible enemies, man, was near.
After ten minutes on this path Allen persuaded Marian to stop with Hugh while he went on ahead.
Within ten minutes he was back.
‘The ride is just over there,’ he said waving his arm.
‘There's a sort of cross-road.
I watched it for some time but there's nobody about.
The smoke is on the other side about a mile away or less.’
They went quietly on.
When they reached the drive Marian and Hugh lingered in cover at the edge.
Allen darted across.
There was no sound or sign of life other than the scolding of blackbirds and the sudden dash of a startled fawn that had been grazing absorbedly on the fresh grass at the forest edge.
Just to the south there was a broad space where five ways met.
The ride itself was very open and exposed and after being so long in the close embrace of the trees Marian found it difficult to step out into the clear daylight.
Allen stood on the far side, watchful with his bow in his hand.
She led Hugh across.
As they reached Allen's side a voice broke the stillness and made them spin round.
‘You are Marian Fitzwalter,’ the voice said.
There was a dry leathery quality about the voice that was like the breaking of a branch.
Simon the Trapper was sitting in full view of them, invisible until he spoke.
His garments were of the forest and he seemed a part of it as he sat there on a tree-stump, small, compact, a broken shape of browns, fawns, russets and greens.
Allen turned on him with his bow at full stretch, but the little man did not stir.
‘Friar Tuck told me of you,’ he said; and then as though it might be a password to their confidence he added: ‘He told me that you hunt the unicorn.’
‘Not hunt,’ Marian contradicted quickly, ‘seek.’
The Confused Ways
The three horses on the highway had been caught and tethered by the time Michael came back through the trees, leading the roan.
‘Where are Hugh and the girl?’ he asked.
‘I heard you calling.’
‘She's cut and run,’ said the thin man, licking his lips nervously, ‘and Hugh's gone after her.’
‘He'll be lucky to catch her in there, she's a lithe one.
How did she manage it?’
‘We were intent on the horses,’ said the Leader.
‘When we'd caught them they'd both gone.
No one saw them go.’
‘Or heard them,’ said the thin man, ‘Why didn't Hugh call out?
There's something wrong about that.
He should have shouted.’
‘He may have done, we'd not have heard him,’ said the Leader, ‘or thought he was shouting at the horses.
We were so intent.’
‘It doesn't seem natural to me,’ the thin man objected.
‘We should have heard something.’
‘I'll go after them,’ said Crane.
‘He must be stalking her or he'd have called out by now.
They must be within earshot.’
‘No good,’ said the Leader.
‘We stay here.
There's nothing to be done until he gets back.’
‘If he gets back,’ said the thin man.
‘We don't know much about Hugh,’ said Michael.
‘He may have gone over.’
‘Hugh?
Why should he?’
‘He was in the Holy Land.
At Acre.’
‘Bah!’ said Crane.
‘So were a good many others.’
‘And most of them are touched when it's a question of Coeur de Lion.’
‘We wait here,’ said the Leader.
‘He'll be back within ten minutes.’
‘What if he comes back without the girl?
We've lost the boy and the girl now.
That won't please the Warden.’
‘We found them once, we'll find them again,’ said the Leader.
‘It may have been an ambush,’ the thin man said.
‘Perhaps Hugh hasn't shouted because he can't.’
He looked anxiously towards the spot where Hugh and Marian had last been seen.
‘There's no sign of a struggle,’ said Crane who had been to look.
‘As far as I can see she simply ran and he ran after her, but there are other tracks there, I think the boy's.’
‘Very likely,’ said the Leader, ‘he's been following us all the way, I couldn't see him but I knew.
Michael knew too, didn't you?’
‘I wish I could get my hands on him,’ said the thin man viciously.
‘He's about your mark,’ Michael sneered.
‘Go on after him and try.’
The horses needed attention.
Two had lost a stirrup and the saddle of a third had slipped under its belly.
When the ten minutes was up and there was still no sign of Hugh the verderers began to get restive.
The thin man looked at the sky.
‘The sun will be down in an hour,’ he said.
‘We can't stay here.’
‘We must if we want to get the girl back.’
‘If he had caught her he'd be back by now,’ Michael said.
‘Look,’ said the Leader, ‘we know where she's making for — the Camp.
We know the forest and she doesn't.
We shall cut her off.’
‘We'll have to move quick.’
‘She can't get to the Camp by going that way because of the Swamp.
She'll have to find a path around it either north or south and there's no path except the ride.’
‘She won't be alone.
The boy will be with her.’
‘Perhaps she'll try to cross the Swamp,’ the thin man whimpered.
‘Perhaps that's why we've heard no more of Hugh: perhaps…’
But the others ignored him.
‘Whichever way she goes we can go more quickly because we can stay on the ride and she dare not.
And we have the horses,’ the Leader added.
But there was some question as to whether they would be able to stay on the ride because that depended on whether the outlaws knew where they were.
If they did know and blocked the main rides the verderers' chances of getting out of the forest were small.
And if Marian and the outlaws had already met there was no reason why she should not use the highway and move as fast as they.
Nevertheless they mounted and rode at a good trot up the great road towards the north.
Shortly before dusk they reached a fork and took the left hand track which led around the northern edge of the depression.
Within less than a mile the swift darkness closed around them and they stopped.
They concealed the horses and made camp among the trees, out of sight of anyone who chanced to pass during the night.
They arranged guards through the night in case the boy was still hanging around and made another attempt to chase the horses off.
It was Michael who asked the question that had been troubling them all.
‘What's so important about this girl anyway?’ he asked.
‘No small party like ours has been sent into the forest for six months past, not since Carl and his men were cut to pieces.’
‘There's something big working up,’ said Crane.
‘The expedition from the Ridgery isn't all of it.’
‘So why the fuss about a girl?’
Michael persisted.
‘Orders,’ said the Leader briefly as though that were enough.
‘Whose orders?’ the thin man complained.
‘It's not right to give orders like that.
It's not safe in the forest.’
‘Shut up!’ said Michael.
‘Count Guy is Warden of the Forest and Sheriff of Nottingham, Edward of Lynn is the King's man for Lincolnshire, and Watt is Fitzwalter's Steward for the Ridgery, put them together and what do you get?’
Crane asked.
Michael growled: ‘John Lackland.’
‘Not Lackland now,’ said the Leader.
‘King of England.’
‘And Ireland, Scotland, Wales, Normandy, Aquitaine , Poitou…when he can hold them,’ said Crane.
‘So what is the connection between King John and a girl who herds swine on Ridgery Steep and goes holidaying with outlaws?’
‘Holidaying?’ put in the thin man.
‘What holiday?’
‘In three days time, Beltane,’ said the Leader.
‘Hadn't you sense for that?’ sneered Michael.
‘You don't suppose the first of May was chosen by chance do you?
They'll all be in Camp for the festival.
By the third we should have them surrounded.’
‘It may work,’ said the Leader, ‘if they don't know we're coming.’
‘They'll know,’ said Michael.
‘The boy could warn them of the expedition as well as the girl,’ the thin man objected, ‘but nobody cares about the boy.’
Crane stretched himself luxuriously on his bed of dried grasses.
‘It's time I slept,’ he said.
‘Perhaps she is a wealthy ward and Lackland plans to make her Queen of England.’
‘He has a queen already.’
‘That's no hindrance,’ said Crane.
‘There's something else and I don't know what it is.’
Simon the Trapper led them by devious paths to the lakeside hut.
He and Allen seemed at once aware that the other was of his own kind.
They spoke little, for there was no need of speech between them, there was only the quick accord and understanding that exists between all wild creatures.
Hugh was now wandering in his speech and scarcely able to stand without Marian's help.
The fire from which the smoke came was not far from the hut door and the air was rank with the smell of pelts drying.
The darkness inside momentarily blinded them.
When their eyes became used to the gloom they could see the hut was tidily arranged with all manner of traps and tools.
There were long-handled spades for digging, short picks, saws, and broad-bladed knives for scraping.
The walls were hung with furs and there were piles of deer skins in the corner.
On one of these piles Marian made out what seemed to be a bundle of rags.
‘Mother,’ said Simon, ‘this man has fever and a poisoned arm.
Mend him!’
The bundle of rags stirred and sighed.
Marian heard a quick intake of breath from Allen, the sound a horse makes when it is about to bolt.
She laid a hand on his arm.
‘Mother,’ repeated Simon more loudly but with a rough caressing gentleness in his voice, ‘He needs your help.’
This time there was a prolonged muttering that sounded like a complaint and the rags shook as though in anger.
‘Who is she?’ whispered Marian.
‘Old Mel, a gipsy who years ago up on the Ridgery was nearly burned as a witch.’
There was a sharp hiss of indrawn breath from Allen whom talk of witches filled with terror.
‘She does no harm,’ Simon said, ‘no harm at all.’
‘Why did they try to burn her?’
‘She knows healing herbs.
They sent for her and a sick child died.
They said she put the eye on it.’
Hugh groaned and swayed.
Simon and Marian laid him down on a couch of deer-skins.
Marian crossed the hut and knelt beside the crouched bundle of rags.
‘You see, mother, he is very sick and needs your help.’
At last the muttering became distinguishable as speech.
‘Would the Earl of Huntingdon's daughter have me heal a sick wolf?’
Marian sat back on her heels and smiled up into the old woman's face.
‘You know me?
If the wolf were sick, mother, and I thought that you could.’
The old woman once again muttered incoherently as though complaining and then pulling herself together said clearly: ‘Does your father wish it?’
‘But my father is dead.
I never knew him.’
Old Mel answered with a grunt but made no further reply.
‘This man helped me to escape when I was a prisoner,’ Marian pleaded, ‘he is no enemy to me.’
Suddenly a long arm came out from under the rags and a bony hand grasped Marian's shoulder.
‘You are like him,’ she said quite distinctly.
‘Did you know him?’
But the old woman relapsed into silence.
‘It was your father, the Earl, who came up when they were already lighting the fire,’ Simon's voice said from behind her.
‘Then, mother, you will help me now,’ Marian said.
The rags trembled, stirred and stood up.
She was very bent but even so she was taller than Simon.
She gave orders to the Trapper using words neither Marian nor Allen understood.
All were made to work.
Water was fetched and boiled, herbs were powdered and mixed, infusions were made and stirred together.
A brown, strong-smelling fluid, thick with honey, was poured into a bowl and Hugh was made to drink from it.
Then his arm was bathed and the wound was lanced with a knife and bathed again.
By the time it was cleansed and bound about with broad cooling leaves the drug had worked and he was asleep.
Old Mel returned to her corner and became once more a shapeless dark bundle.
‘Will he be well?’
Marian asked Simon.
‘By the morning.’
‘Then we shall go now,’ Marian said, ‘and leave him here.’
‘Why do you go?’
‘We must hurry to the Smoke.
We are late already.
How far off is it?’
‘The Citadel?’
Simon said, and it was the first time she had heard that name.
‘A day's journey, a full day's journey, it may be more.
I have never been.
Why do you go there?’
‘To warn them that the King's men are coming.’
‘They know already,’ he said.
Marian's face fell.
She was silent for a while.
‘We must still go,’ she said.
‘Who told them?’
‘They have many friends outside the forest.
News comes, brought by travellers.’
‘Like the Friar?’ she ventured.
‘Did the Friar know?’
‘All the forest knows.’
‘We must still go,’ she insisted, ‘we have the Friar's sack.
He left it in our care.’
It was still lying on the ground near where Hugh was deeply asleep.
‘It will be safe here.
Does the sack matter?’
He seemed surprised.
Whatever was hidden in it, he clearly did not think it important.
She nodded.
She was quite firm.
They must get the sack to the Smoke.
Simon spoke to the old woman who suddenly burst into a spate of words, her rags shaking with the energy of what she was saying.
When at last the shrill voice was silent the Trapper said: ‘She says the boy may go but you are to stay here.’
‘Why?’
‘Because for a few days now it will be very dangerous in the forest.’
Marian shrugged her shoulders.
‘More dangerous than usual?’
‘Much more dangerous.’
‘Because of the unicorn?’
The old woman gabbled again but Simon did not translate.
Allen picked up the sack and slung it over his shoulder and they all three went out into the open air.
‘What can harm us?’ asked Marian.
‘The verderers have gone back to the Ridgery.’
‘They are still in the forest unless they left their horses and travelled by the paths.
No horses have been this way since you drove them off,’ he said to Allen.
His wrinkled face creased more deeply as though he were smiling.
‘I saw the spot where you lay hidden.
That was well done.
They went after their horses; did they catch them?’
‘It was not well done to be caught without my bow,’ Allen objected.
They were silent for some time as they picked their way in single file along the path that wound up the hillside.
‘Who is Robin?’
Allen asked suddenly.
‘Many people.’
Allen did not understand.
‘Many people?
They said it was his hunting horn they heard in the forest.’
‘Many and one.’
It was shortly before noon when they reached the highway where they had first met Simon.
He stopped there and described the way they were to go.
They were to follow the track that skirted the south of the swampy depression and were then to take a path to the right which was marked by a great stone shaped like the head of a horse.
This path climbed  to a stretch of wasteland, barren, treeless and stony.
In the middle stood a dark deserted tower.
He cautioned them to avoid crossing the Waste but to cling instead to the edge of the forest.
From there they should be able to see the Smoke very clearly.
There were many paths leading west but they must take the one which was marked by a riven oak.
At the first fork they must go left and at the next fork right and so on until they were challenged.
They would probably be challenged well before then.
‘Is there a password?’
Allen asked.
Simon looked at him thoughtfully.
‘I believe you know it,’ he said.
‘You must be careful to mention the lion — not the unicorn.’
‘I don't know what he meant,’ Allen said after they had been walking for some time on the soft turf at the verge of the track.
‘I don't understand about the unicorn.
Do you know what he meant?’
‘I am beginning to guess.’
‘And that's not all,’ he went on.
‘What is this about Robin being many and being one?’
‘That must be simple because simple things are more difficult than complicated ones.
But I think I understand that, too.’
Allen whistled, picked up a stone and flung it high into the trees.
If he did not understand about the unicorn or about the many and the one he understood Marian still less when she talked about simple things being difficult.
He knew at least that she was a different person from the girl he had taught to climb trees and to shoot with the bow and he was a little in awe of her.
They went on for some way in silence.
Once or twice Allen loosed off an arrow at a scampering squirrel, more in play than with any idea of hitting it, and then scrabbled about in the undergrowth to recover the shaft.
After the second of these excursions he came back to Marian's side with: ‘Is it not time that we took a look into this sack?’
It was a question Marian had been expecting and which she had been asking herself but to which she did not know the answer.
‘No,’ she said before she knew what she was going to say.
‘But…’
‘Not yet.’
Allen shrugged his shoulders.
‘I don't see why,’ he said.
‘There must be treasure in it of some sort.
I can feel it, it's hard and heavy and lumpy.’
Nor did Marian know why but she felt a decided unwillingness to open the sack.
The moment would come, quite soon perhaps, perhaps in the evening when they would turn aside into some thicket, light a fire, and prepare a meal, when it would seem right and natural to look this mystery in the face.
But in the meantime she was unwilling — no — afraid to know what secret thing it was that they were carrying.
The forest, so restless during the night, so uproarious at dawn, was quiet during the middle hours of the day.
The weather was hot and close.
The few creatures to be seen were drowsily unwilling to be disturbed.
A long-eared owl sat on a low bough overlooking the ride and watched them unblinkingly through his great eyes as they passed within a few paces.
From a leafless high branch of a dead tree the huddled heap of a kite regarded them thoughtfully.
Allen stopped whistling and walked quietly on at Marian's side.
Marian was deep in thought but what she was thinking about she hardly knew: only that there was distance and stillness all around her and that the forest seemed to be watching her, and waiting for something to happen.
The cuckoo continued calling in the far recesses of the wood undeterred by the surrounding stillness.
Cuckoo!
Cuckoo! it called over and over again.
It interrupted her thoughts.
When Simon the Trapper parted from him on the great north ride the Friar loosened the rope that girdled his waist, dragged up his gown a score of inches to free the movement of his lower legs, re-tied his girdle tightly, wiped his hands on the none too clean garment and taking hold of his staff set off up the highway in pursuit of his sack, of Marian, and of the verderers.
The Friar was easy-natured and slow to anger.
He was casual, careless and lazy unless roused; when roused he became energetic and tireless until his anger was assuaged.
As his judgement suffered in his calmer moments from overconfidence, so in his energetic ones it suffered from being too headlong.
After the fight with the beggars he had left the sack with Allen and Marian because it had seemed to him an ingenious way of saving himself the trouble of carrying it to Simon's hut and back again while at the same time it was a guarantee that the children would remain until he returned.
Now as he strode north determined on its recovery he was ashamed and astonished at his own folly.
He had little skill in forest lore but he knew the principal rides and paths of the forest well.
The hooves of the galloping horses had bitten deep into the soft earth of the ride so that a blind man might have followed them.
The verderers were travelling quickly, for they were anxious to recapture the horses and get out of the forest as soon as possible.
When the Friar reached the point where the horses had been caught and where Marian and Hugh escaped into the woods he was barely half-an-hour behind them.
He paid no attention to the confusion of hoof-marks at that spot, indeed he was so intent on fuelling his anger that he was barely aware of them.
A better woodsman than he would have known from the absence of game in the ride that the verderers were not far ahead, but the Friar did not read the signs.
His mind was set on walking down his quarry and had room for nothing else.
When he reached the place where the road forked the sky had already changed from palest blue to light emerald.
The day which since the rain had gradually become hot was now heavy and still and sultry.
He strode on along the right-hand fork; the sweat stood in beads on his neck and trickled about his ankles.
He stopped neither to rest or eat until it was almost dark.
Not until then did he cast a glance at the ground before his advancing feet to assure himself that the hoof-marks still led north.
There were none.
Frantically he cast about, searching the ground.
No horses had passed that way.
He turned back.
By the time he had regained the place where the track forked it was dark.
It seemed that the  verderers were going towards the outlaws' citadel, not away from it.
All night by the light of the night sky which showed faintly overhead between the darkness of the trees, the Friar strode on.
The verderers slept as he passed and he failed to hear the sound of their horses stirring uneasily in the thicket.
Trapped
Because there was no sign that Marian and Allen had regained the highway ahead of them the verderers agreed that there were three possibilities: the first, that the children would lie hidden for some time in dense woodland until it was safe for them to return to the ride; the second, that they would try to work their way around the Swamp to the north but that since they would be away from paths this would be difficult and slow; and the third, that they might try to reach the outlaws' camp by passing the Swamp to the south.
This last the verderers thought the least likely course because the escape had been made nearer to the north of the depression than the south and it would therefore take a day longer to get round it on that side.
In fact at the time the verderers were weighing these possibilities Marian, Allen, and Hugh had not yet even discovered the existence of the Swamp.
Other possibilities were also discussed by the verderers but dismissed.
It was suggested that the children, by now thoroughly scared by their experiences, might quite simply make their way back to Ridgery Butts and if that were so would be found moving openly along the rides.
‘Then why did they run for it?’ said Michael.
Or that they might try to cross the Swamp and if so nothing more would be heard of them, for they would inevitably perish.
Or that they would do as Allen had done already, dog the footsteps of the verderers, shadowing them from the cover of the forest, until they fell in with some outlaws.
This last prospect was the one that caused the thin man most unease and was therefore the one he thought most probable.
Crane was sent first thing in the morning into the forest to find out if there were signs that anyone had passed during the night between the ride and the Swamp.
There was nearly a mile of dense woodland at this point before the swampy ground  began and it was over an hour before Crane returned saying that no-one had passed on that side.
In the meantime the others had been out on the track and found the footprints of the Friar and the distinctive mark of his staff.
They were uneasy to think that he had passed so close while they were sleeping but, as Michael pointed out, there was an advantage in knowing that he was ahead of them.
They had no reason to suppose that he had been in pursuit of them, the western ride led in the general direction of the outlaws' Great Camp and they presumed that was where he was going.
Although Marian and Allen had not passed north of the Swamp in the night the Leader thought it probable that they might try to do so during the day.
If so the verderers' present situation was well placed for their recapture.
The thin man was sent back along the ride to the point where it left the northern highway with orders to watch there, while Crane returned to patrol the width of forest between the camp and the Swamp.
The leader and Michael remained hidden with the horses.
As to Hugh, his complete disappearance could best be explained if he were still doggedly pursuing Marian through the deep tangles of the forest; if he had lost track of her he would presumably find his way back to the highway and rejoin them later.
By midday neither of the watchers had reported.
As it seemed to be fairly certain that the children would now not come that way and the main rides need be watched no longer, the Leader went back and called the thin man in.
The gap between the ride and the swamp was a different matter, for if the children were attempting that route their progress was bound to be slow.
The verderers waited another two hours until the sun was well past the zenith before moving on.
Their confidence was beginning to lessen.
They now supposed that Marian and Allen must be trying to pass the depression to the south, and if this were so there was still ample time to position themselves to cut off that route although it involved going considerably deeper into the forest and into territory where their own danger was greater.
The day was unusually hot for late April and a still, almost oppressive air hung over the forest.
They rode silently and  watchfully, aware all the time of the footprints of the Friar ahead of them and of the silent menace of the trees on either hand.
They made slow progress and as there was no reason for haste they soon made camp again and this time were particularly careful to conceal themselves and their horses among the trees well away from the ride; they also arranged for watches through the night which they had not done before.
These preparations added to their general nervousness.
This was the night when Marian and Allen slept little and Hugh's condition became serious.
Nothing eventful occurred that night, and as Hugh had not returned, and as a careful search discovered no trace of Marian and Allen, it was decided to move on with every precaution into territory which with every yard became potentially more hostile.
The main track on which they were travelling led due west for a while and then turned slightly north.
Once clear of the Swamp a number of minor paths led off to left and right.
The verderers' familiarity with the district from earlier years could only serve them in a general way, for the woodland paths varied from season to season.
But they knew that on the left lay the Waste; and that somewhere west of the Waste, no one knew precisely where, was the Great Camp of the outlaws.
Towards the end of the afternoon Crane riding ahead as usual reported a smoke signal some miles to the west in the direction they were going.
Soon they could all see similar columns of smoke going up in every direction.
There were several behind them and to the south, but on their right, to the north, there were many more.
‘What are we to do now?’ asked Crane.
‘They are all around us.
‘Doncaster is nearest,’ said Michael, ‘but the signals are thicker on that side and we should never get through.’
‘We should not have come so far,’ the thin man said.
‘I always said we should have gone straight back.
There's nothing for it now but to get back as fast as we can the way we've come.’
‘Why that way?’ asked Michael.
‘They are signalling from behind us now.
Do you think the Highway isn't watched?’
‘Why have they let us come so far?’
Crane wanted to know.
‘It's a trap,’ the thin man moaned.
No-one answered that, but the thought was in all their minds.
The thin man returned to his earlier plan that they should cut loose the horses and make their way back as inconspicuously as possible by the paths and game-tracks.
For the first time Michael sided with him.
‘We've a good chance that way,’ he said.
‘There's only one ride that will get us back to the east of the Swamp and that's the one we've come by.
If we leave the horses and strike through the trees nearer the Swamp we might manage.’
He turned to Crane.
‘You've seen it.
What's the going like there?’
‘Heavy,’ said Crane.
‘We'd be a week getting back.’
‘Better that than not,’ said the thin man.
‘Once past the Swamp and across the Highway there are a dozen paths to choose from.’
‘We've still got to get the girl,’ the Leader said at last.
‘But surely it's too late?’
Crane objected.
‘They know what she has come to tell them.’
‘We don't know what they're signalling about,’ the Leader said.
‘In any case the way to get the girl is our safest way back.’
The others were silent, waiting for him to explain.
‘We've either got to go straight on and trust to slipping past their Camp in the dark…’ he paused; ‘any chance of that?’he asked.
‘None,’ they said.
,…or to strike south to the Waste, recapture the girl — remember, they may know nothing about her — and then ride back either by the track on the other side of the Swamp or carry on direct south towards Leicester.
That way we have two choices.’
‘Or none,’ said the thin man, wiping the sweat from his face.
‘There are fewer signals that way,’ Crane pointed out, ‘and they've no reason to expect us down there.’
‘As far as we know they've no reason to expect us anywhere,’ the Leader said, but no-one believed that.
They rode on, reluctantly, like men who knew danger was ahead and around them.
The afternoon was well advanced when they reached the Waste.
‘There will be a storm before long,’ Michael said, ‘we'd best be in the Tower.’
They waited while Crane trotted his horse across to the Tower.
They could see him dismount and go inside.
A moment later he came out, a small figure, and waved them to come on.
‘All clear,’ the Leader said.
‘We'll be all right for the night.’
The forest to the south of the Swamp was hilly and comparatively open.
The ride followed by Marian and Allen, although not so broad as the main Highway, was lighter because the trees that flanked it, being for the most part giant oaks, had quelled the subordinate vegetation and left airy vistas between their trunks.
Here and there were signs of old deserted charcoal workings.
This openness and variation in level of the track, now giving views over a mile or so of green tree-crowns, now limiting the sky and showing on every side a steeply climbing hillside of columns, would have made their walking pleasant had it not been for the unseasonable heat of the day.
Not a breath of freshness stirred in the upper air, and the ground at their feet steamed as the sun drew the moisture out of the earth.
The flies which on the previous day had been a nuisance to them were now a torment.
They abandoned the ride and walked instead in the shade of the trees beside the track, but although this protected them from the sun's rays the leaden heat was everywhere and there was no escaping it.
The declivities seemed to promise more ease than the heights because of the heavier shade and the caressing sound of the small brooks which ran clear and sparkling across their path.
Fording these cool inches gave momentary pleasure but they were no sooner down in the hot stagnant air of the valley bottoms than they imagined the more open hill-top ahead must bring relief.
Two sounds only broke the stillness, the underlying hum of millions of small flies, multiplying to a roar where the gnats swarmed, and the see-saw monotony of cuckoos calling in the depths of the wood.
It was impossible to hurry but they moved at a steady pace, pausing seldom.
They had left Ridgery Butts on the 24th of April, it was now the 27th and the outlaws' camp could not be far ahead.
From almost every hilltop it was possible to see the  great column of smoke, still far, but much nearer than they had ever seen it before.
Once Allen checked and called on Marian to come back to him.
Through a gap a long wave of treetops stretched to the horizon, in the middle distance the smoke was coming and going in irregular bursts as they had seen it do once before from Ridgery Steep.
‘Watch!’ said Allen.
‘They are signalling.’
‘I wish we knew what they are saying.’
‘I could see if there is any answer.’
Allen chose an isolated tree and climbed it.
He remained nearly half an hour turning from side to side as though watching some great action which extended over the whole visible forest.
When he returned to the ground his eyes were sparkling with excitement.
‘They were signalling from all round,’ he said.
‘There is one signal scarcely a mile behind us and there are three more towards the south.
There is another back the way we have come…
I can just make out the Ridgery in the distance.
And in that direction’ he waved to the north, ‘beyond the Swamp, there are many more.
I can just see the Waste, or rather I think it must be the Waste, for there's a tower there and it's bare of trees.
Most of the fires are dry leaf fires, made for smoke, they puff once or twice and then go out.
The forest must be full of people and yet we saw no-one except Simon and the verderers.’
‘I wish we knew where the verderers are now,’ Marian said.
‘Miles away,’ Allen reassured her.
‘But on horses.’
‘I should hear them,’ Allen said.
‘What do you think they are signalling?
Has the expedition started?’
‘perhaps they are signalling about us.’
But the idea that all the extraordinary activity in the sky could in any way be on their account was more than Allen could attempt to suppose.
‘One of those signals came from about where the Trapper's house was.
Do you think he is doing it?’
‘And where is the Friar?’
Marian asked.
‘Simon said that when he left him he was following the horses but he didn't catch up.’
‘Anything could have happened,’ Allen said.
They were both awed by the vastness of the forest in which so much could take place unseen.
Every few yards was a different world around which a curtain of leaves was drawn, and what went on there was hidden from all else.
A marten died in a trap.
A butcher-bird impaled a bee on a thorn.
A deer was stricken by an arrow; its abandoned fawn was seized by a wolf.
A fox pounced on a mouse and obliterated its deft life.
Hugh lay moaning in a lakeside hut.
Somewhere the sturdy beggars nursed their wounds and cursed.
The cripple haunted his bridge as though chained to the spot.
An eagle stooped on a clearing.
Unseen in all this great medley of hidden activity the verderers were riding.
North?
South?
Back to the Ridgery?
Somewhere among all these trees the Friar was in pursuit of his sack, not knowing that the sack was on Marian's shoulder.
Throughout the forest, in glades and clearings, unknown men were burning little piles of leaves so that they could send smoke signals up into the sky.
And ahead of them, somewhere beyond the Waste, a great column of smoke was being made to billow upwards in the windless air.
Before they reached the great stone shaped like the skull of a horse which marked the path they were to take to the right, the fires were all out and the smoke from them had dispersed into the general heat-haze.
The sun was a copper-coloured ball balanced briefly on the tops of trees, there was no relief from the heat when it went down but a little from the persistent ravages of the insects whose uproar, briefly louder and more piercing, diminished as the light faded.
They would willingly have stopped and made their camp before sundown but Marian was determined to reach the Waste.
The Waste lay on a high part of the forest so that when they reached it the sun, which had already sunk from sight in the valleys, was still poised above the dark low edge of the distant forest.
It was difficult to imagine a more desolate scene.
For more than a mile in each direction not a tree, not a bush, scarcely a blade of grass, grew.
A few stunted thistles thrust up, parched and distorted in the crevices of the stones.
The light from the copper sun threw long dying shadows from every pebble and fragment of herbage, shadows that travelled fast  along the ground like fingers pointing.
In the centre loomed a squat Tower of brown stone up which the shade steadily crept as the shadows on the ground reached out into nothing and were lost.
The last gleam of sun touched the ruined battlements as they watched, hung there for a moment like a tattered cloth caught on a briar, and was gone.
From the further edge of the forest right up to their feet the colour drained away leaving the last grey lassitude of irredeemable decay.
‘I do not like this place,’ said Allen.
The first low rumble of thunder sounded from behind them.
A strange light, lurid but colourless, heralded the onset of the storm and picked out every detail with the brittle sharpness of death.
Marian and Allen turned back to the wood for shelter from the coming blast.
The first lightning glimmered.
Among the trees were boulders heaped together, piled and scattered.
Ancient oaks, distorted by the stony struggle, grew lopsidedly, stunted and stag-headed.
Birch trees leaned awry.
One tumbled pile of rocks showed a broad gash of blackness which promised shelter.
The first great drops of rain splashed on the ground beside them as they ran.
They stumbled over the uneven ground and plunged, half-laughing, into the cave's entrance.
‘It will be a stormy night,’ Michael said, and Crane, leaning forward, took Allen's dagger from his belt and flung it outside where it clattered on the stones.
The Dark Tower
‘You're a bit too quick with that knife of yours,’ said Crane.
‘We don't like it.’
There was a more brilliant flash of lightning followed almost at once by a great crash of thunder.
‘Come on!’ said Michael.
‘Or we'll not get there before the rain comes.’
‘Where?’
Marian asked.
She forced herself to speak calmly.
‘To the Tower.
We'll be dry there.’
Allen saw the lightning gleam on the blade of his knife as they passed and made ready to snatch at it.
Crane kicked it out of reach.
Huge black clouds were rolling by from the south and the ghastly light that preceded the storm disappeared under an advancing curtain of rain.
‘Afraid of snakes?’
Crane called out to Marian as they ran.
‘No,’ she answered briefly.
‘You should be.
This place was thick with adders when we crossed.
They'll have gone to cover now.’
The curtain of rain caught them up and in a moment soaked them to the skin.
It was warm and ran down their bodies in rivulets.
Lightning played constantly, zig-zagging up the sky, tearing it into strips, throwing a flickering brilliance over the Waste and the Dark Tower.
Their feet were splashing now through deep puddles, and still the rain came down.
They were so wet that it was pointless to hurry more.
The Tower loomed above their heads, its stones riven with decay.
Although for a mile around no tree grew, some vegetation had found a root-hold in the crevices of its walls, and on the worn battlements the lightning revealed a dwarfed tree drooping like a flag under the incessant downpour.
A wooden gate, hanging on rusty hinges, dragged half open as Michael set his shoulder to it.
Inside, in the small paved yard, the four horses stood huddled close together, the rain streaming  from their flanks.
Beyond, up three stone steps, was the postern into the Tower itself.
The Leader and the thin man were seated on a pile of saddles and saddle-bags with their backs against the wall.
They had lit a torch which was flaring and smoking in an iron bracket.
It showed a small bare circular room with a flagged floor.
A narrow stairway of stone curled around a pillar near the door and disappeared through the beams of the roof.
Marian's first sensation was of relief from noise.
The thunder still battered overhead, and she could hear the splash and gurgle of water running in the courtyard, but here at least it was possible to believe in quiet, to think it might be possible to speak and to be spoken to.
The men who had not heard them arrive in the courtyard looked up in surprise.
The thin man reached for his knife.
‘So here you are,’ said the Leader.
And then to Michael and Crane: ‘Well done!’ he said.
A prolonged clap of thunder echoing round and round the building as though the Tower itself were the target of the storm's fury imposed silence for a full minute.
All four men seemed nervous.
‘Where is Hugh?’ the Leader asked when once again speech was possible.
It was Allen he asked as though he believed it was he who had been responsible for the verderer's disappearance.
‘He is ill.
We had to leave him behind,’ Marian answered.
The Leader looked puzzled.
‘You had to leave him?
You mean that he was with you?’
She nodded, the rain still dripping from her as she stood.
‘Why?’
Allen held his breath waiting for what she would say.
It was a question he could not have answered in words.
‘Because he knows King Richard is alive.’
The rain continued its rush and splash outside but the next clap of thunder was further off as the storm moved away.
The men were silent, staring at her.
Michael was the first to speak.
‘I said so,’ he growled.
‘He's gone over.’
‘There's got to be a ‘’ side'’to go over to,’said the Leader.
‘So he is alive!’ said Crane.
‘Because a slip of a girl says so?’ demanded Michael.
‘There are always plenty who will raise the dead if it suits them.’
The Leader said deliberately: ‘King Richard was drowned on his way home from the Crusade.
His brother has been king for more than three years.
If the report was false it would be known by now.’
‘What does Hugh know?’ the thin man asked.
He directed his question at no-one in particular.
He was pale and his voice trembled as though he was at breaking point.
‘Nothing,’ Michael asserted emphatically.
‘He can know nothing.
Has he seen Coeur de Lion since he died?’
‘It could be true,’ Crane said thoughtfully.
‘I'll believe it when I see him,’ said Michael.
‘How will you know it's him?’ asked Crane.
‘Yes,’ said the thin man.
‘How will you know?
Have you seen him?’
Michael did not reply to this but the Leader said: ‘What if it is true?’
He looked at Allen and at Marian.
‘What do you know?’ he asked.
‘Who sent you into the forest?’
‘No-one sent me,’ Marian said.
‘I came…’ and suddenly she found herself speaking words she had never thought, ‘…
I came to find my father.’
There were three rooms in the Tower, all alike save that the upper ones were floored with chestnut planks laid over oak beams.
The Leader took Marian and Allen up the winding stair to the topmost room.
‘It's dark,’ Marian said.
There were occasional flickerings of lightning visible through the narrow arrow-slit windows.
‘I'll bring a torch,’ the Leader promised.
They waited motionless until he returned with a light.
The floor was sound except near the wall where there were rat-holes in the planks.
Here and there the rain dripped through from above.
‘The torch should last an hour,’ he said and left them.
They heard him secure the trap below.
Allen went across and peered out of one of the arrow-slits.
Outside the Waste flickered into brilliance and died in darkness as the lightning played over it.
He crossed the room to the other slit.
Each aspect was the same…rain, rain, and desolation.
‘No wonder this Tower is abandoned,’ Allen said.
‘It's useless.
With only two points to shoot from, anyone could walk up to it.’
‘What about the battlements?’
Marian asked.
They looked up the spiral stair.
The trap above was secured by a rusty bolt.
Rain was dripping through the roof in several places, falling with a recurrent plop and splash on to the wet floor-boards.
Allen climbed the stair and struggled with the bolt.
It was rusted solid.
He heaved his shoulder against the trap and the nails gave instantly.
Rain poured in on them.
‘I'm going out,’ Allen said.
Marian stood away clear of the spatter of water that came off the stone steps.
The noise in the room was suddenly increased by the rush of rain on the leads.
Allen was up there some time.
Then his face appeared in the opening and he came down, circling round the pillar, stepping carefully because of the water on the worn stones.
Water streamed off him.
‘There's a pile of rubbish up there,’ he said.
‘Broken crossbows, wine-jars, and a rope scaling ladder with grappling hooks.’
Marian looked at him enquiringly.
‘Any use?’ she asked, but waves of tiredness were sweeping over her and she found herself hoping that his answer would be no.
‘Why not?’
‘Will it reach?’
‘I expect so,’ he said, ‘we can't be more than twenty-five feet up.
When shall we go?
Now or later?’
It was the same question he had asked of her on the Ridgery, a question that put the burden of leadership on her.
The thunder was still rumbling about the forest, now near, now far.
In here, in the Tower, it was at least dry, out there in the Waste the rain kept up its steady drumming.
Marian wanted to sink to the floor and sleep.
It was Allen's ‘Now or later’ that made her draw on her reserves of strength.
It must be now, for later it would be too late because she would be asleep.
Yet would it not be better to abandon this headlong errand and sleep rather than go out once more into the drenching darkness?
‘If we wait till the rain stops they may hear us,’ she heard herself saying.
‘Let's go while the torch is burning.’
Allen's face lit up.
He took the flare from its bracket and laid it on the top of the trap-door.
‘It may not catch,’ he said, ‘But we've nothing else dry to burn.’
Marian put her hands out to the flames.
The warmth of it was a lost temptation.
‘Why a fire?’
‘To stop them coming up here after us.
To burn the roof over their heads.
To cause trouble.’
‘You're a boy, you are!’ she said.
Together, by getting their fingers in the rat-holes, they managed to tug up a few feet of rotten chestnut boarding, tindery at the edges.
Quickly they built it into a pyramid over the torch.
They watched the flames begin to lick through it, then turned and hurried up the spiral stairway towards the battlements.
‘It will probably burn out without catching the floor,’ Allen said regretfully.
He paused before stepping out onto the roof, a look of horror on his face.
‘Where's the sack?’ he asked.
‘That's all right,’ Marian replied, looking up at him.
‘Hurry!
I slipped it off when they snatched your knife.
It's in the cave.’
The Cage is Open
They were back in the wildness of the night.
There was no wind now, just the steady downpour, the circling thunder, and the constant flickering of lightning reflecting on the wet surface of the Waste and illuminating the edges of the far forest as a line of blackness.
The rain was cold on their heads and streamed down their necks inside their clothing.
When her eyes grew accustomed to the night Marian could see Allen on his knees disentangling a coil of rope.
‘It seems strong enough,’ he said, pressing into her hands a great hook of rusted iron.
‘Feel that knot.’
But the rope was wet and the hook to which it was tied was wet and heavy and her hands had little strength in them.
Allen went on sorting out the rope and every now and then tugging at it to test it.
There were knots in the rope at intervals of a foot.
‘I think it's long enough,’ he said, ‘but it's slimy in places, especially near the bottom.
I wish we had sand to give us a grip.’
Then it was a question of finding a lodgement in the crumbling parapet the right size for the hook to hold and strong enough to take their weight.
Allen went carefully to work testing each possible place.
Twice stone broke off in his hand; once a chunk of battlement fell and plunged to the ground.
They held their breath and listened in case the verderers were alarmed, but the noise of its fall was lost in the rush and splash of the rain and nothing happened.
When Allen at last found a crevice secure enough to trust to he looked over to find that he was peering into the little courtyard onto the rain-wet backs of the dejected horses.
He called Marian to his side.
‘If we go down there we shall frighten the horses and that will bring them out.
We should be on the steps right in front of the door.’
They resumed their search for a way to anchor the hook.
It was Marian who picked up a broken cross-bow from the debris piled about on the roof and held it out to Allen.
‘Is that any use?’
He seized it at once.
‘Of course,’ he said, ‘of course !
Why didn't I think of it?
You are clever.’
Despite the misery of her weariness his praise warmed her.
It was as though they had returned to the relationship there had been between them on Ridgery Butts when he had taught her to use the bow, and encouraged her with gentle praise.
It was the stock of the cross-bow that was broken.
Allen placed the steel bow between the stone uprights of the parapet, dropped the hook over it and lowered the rope to the ground.
Once the weight of the rope was on it the hook stayed firmly in place.
Allen sat for a moment on the parapet, Marian saw him smile at her, then he slipped over the edge and the rope grew taut on the hook.
Marian leaned over the parapet; the rain, which still streamed down, was forgotten as she watched him rapidly disappear.
He moved as quickly as a squirrel, half-falling from knot to knot.
The rope swayed a little as he went down hand over hand, then he was on the ground and the rope went still again as he held it fast and turned his face up to her.
Marian suddenly felt very alone.
All around was the streaming darkness of the night, out beyond sight was the Waste, barren and abominable, beyond that again was the forest.
She stood alone in the centre of loneliness.
She felt the darkness sweep up to her and flood around her, and the wolves of solitude in a pack baying about her.
Allen was out of reach, only a face looking up.
Behind her was the circle of the roof and the deeper darkness where…
No, it was no longer a deeper darkness, there was a light that glinted on the glancing rain-drops.
Marian crossed to the stair and looked down into the chamber they had left.
The torch had caught the planks laid across it and the flames were reaching up towards the rafters above.
‘It will go out,’ she thought, ‘when the planks are consumed…
Perhaps the floor will smoulder, that is all.’
The sight of the fire brought her to herself.
She turned away, shutting her eyes to adjust them to the darkness, and then with no further hesitation she was going down the rope hand over hand, her feet and knees checking at each knot.
The descent was easy.
She passed within a few feet of an arrow slit from which a light showed, but she was too far away to see into the room where the verderers were.
Then she was on the ground with Allen beside her.
The storm that had been circling in the distance wandered far off, only an occasional casual flicker of light low in the sky showed that somewhere the enormous battle was going on.
Otherwise the darkness was intense and they could barely distinguish the ground at their feet.
Within a few paces the loom of the Tower was lost and the glint of light from the arrow-slit disappeared behind the curtains of rain.
This was the most terrible part of the journey.
There was no fear of pursuit even if their escape had been discovered, for if the Tower had disappeared from off the surface of the Waste so also had they.
Utter blackness submerged them.
There was no path and they had no means of knowing where they were.
The ground was rough and uneven, they stumbled into puddles, waded through water, but it was impossible to become more wet than they already were.
Several times they fell painfully on jagged rocks, so that they learned to move exceedingly slowly, edging forward and feeling for a foothold, and all the time they could not know whether they were not wandering in aimless circles and approaching no nearer to the security of the forest.
The distance was short but dawn must not find them exposed without cover.
They had lost all sense of time and did not know how long their night had lasted, whether dawn was near or far.
As suddenly as it began, the rain ceased.
First there was a vague lightening of the sky ahead, then the drumming of the rain was less persistent, the lesser darkness in the heavens spread until it was over them, they could distinguish the greater irregularities of the ground, the last few drops of rain splashed down and a blissful silence spread around them broken only by the sibillations of the water draining away among the rocks and the splash of their sodden feet.
Then, as though to celebrate the passing of the downpour, a flame reached out into the sky some distance to their left.
‘The Tower,’ cried Allen.
‘It's caught!
The rafters have caught!’
Soon their captors would be out again, driven into the night by the terror above their heads, but now Allen and Marian by keeping the Tower behind them could be sure that they were moving in the direction of the forest.
Already they knew that they were nearing the trees, for the burning Tower was low and far off.
Some stars appeared.
Allen knelt and put his head close to the ground.
‘There are trees over there,’ he said.
He had seen their silhouette against the night sky.
They pressed on with renewed hope.
The dark edge of the forest showed before them, advanced and embraced them.
The ground was soft once again beneath their feet, rain dripped from leaves and branches.
The sky was shut out.
They turned to look back at the emptiness they had crossed.
As they did so the distant flame shot higher and widened.
‘The roof has fallen in!’
The sight, the little bit of life and light in all the darkness, fascinated but had nothing else to tell them.
Somewhere out there the verderers were saddling their terrified horses and making, as they themselves had done, for the refuge of the forest; but whatever was going on out there was unseen, unknown.
They turned at last from this one point of certainty in their world and walked along the fringe of the forest, picking their way between the trees but keeping the Waste in view.
They were sodden and bruised and sore, and there were raw patches on their feet and bodies from walking in wet garments.
They could not stop because there was nowhere to stop.
They had neither shelter nor food.
Somewhere in the great ring of unseen trees that embraced the emptiness of the Waste was the cave in which Marian had left the sack.
Maybe it was close behind them and they were embarking on a long exhausting journey all the way around the Waste to reach what was near at their backs.
But how were they to know?
There were no landmarks, no features by which they could determine their position even if it had been light enough to see them.
They stumbled on, half unconscious with fatigue.
When the moon came up, a full moon that illuminated the wet stony surface of the Waste so that it shone like a polished  shield, they were able to go more quickly amongst the dappled and striped shadows of the trees.
Several times they crossed paths that led into the forest but it was not until another hour had passed and the moon was paling in the light of the false dawn that they were at last among strange scattered rocks like those which strewed the fringe of the forest where they had first entered the Waste.
The storm that struck Marian, Allen and their captors as they crossed towards the dark Tower struck with equal ferocity the greater part of England.
From the Wash in the east to the Dee in the west, as far north as York, to Amesbury in the south, the night had been one of monstrous destruction.
Rivers had overflowed their banks, sudden whirlwinds cut swathes through woodlands leaving a tangled pathway of mature trees savagely uprooted and torn upon the ground.
Laboriously tilled fields of corn became within a few hours torrents of mud, houses slipped down hillsides, church-towers were struck by lightning, sheep and cattle were carried away in swirling waters and dawn revealed their bloated corpses jammed against the piers of bridges that had themselves been partially destroyed by the weight and fury of the swollen waters.
On the sea-coast the destruction had been no less.
from Kingston to Lynn to Yarmouth the coast was strewn with wrecked vessels, cliffs had slipped into the sea and disappeared into the brown tide and over in the low-lying lands of Lincolnshire and Cambridgeshire the salt-waters swished and groped where no man remembered ever to have seen them before.
In the forest itself the streams became roaring torrents and the Swamp, doubled in size, became overnight a lake.
Paths were lost which the water had obliterated and silent highways were marked by great trees lying prostrate across the track.
When day dawned the home of Simon the Trapper was no longer on a peninsula but on an island and stood just clear of the water.
Throughout the whole of the preceding day Hugh, the verderer, had lain in pain and misery, barely conscious of his surroundings.
His arm lay against his side like another  body, his but not his, a throbbing strangeness grotesquely large, a companion to his every movement and one that gave him no peace.
Between the bouts of keen pain a curious life took possession of his brain, a life in which kings and queens floated on the water and white-clad saracens rode up and down before a cage in which was a crowned lion, and then, suddenly, the cage was empty and the saracens were knights in armour and the water on which they rode was a mountain like a tree in which birds nested and which burst into flames and was the phoenix; and somewhere was the Holy Grail for which he reached out in vain, and a jewelled sword, and a unicorn that spoke but said nothing.
Throughout the day the old woman bathed his arm and gave him cooling drinks that tasted, so it seemed in his fever, of wild water-mint, and thymy hillsides, and red rust.
Before the storm broke he fell into a sleep so peaceful and deep that he heard nothing of the thunder crashing overhead or of the rush of waters as the lake filled and spread and crept and grew like a living thing.
Nor, when he woke, did he remember dreaming, he was only aware that the sunlight was streaming through the window, that the air was fresh and cool, and that his arm lay lightly against his side.
The old woman was crouched like a bundle of rags in the corner of the hut and Simon was standing in the open doorway.
The old woman said something and Simon turned and came back into the room and stood by the deerskin pallet on which Hugh was lying.
‘Well?’ he said.
And although Hugh did not recall ever having seen him before he answered contentedly.
‘Well!’ and, unaccountably, smiled.
‘The storm is over,’ said Simon.
‘Was there a storm?’
‘I have never known such another.’
Hugh lay thinking about this.
Ideas drifted quietly like falling petals into his mind.
For the moment he was beyond alarm or concern.
‘Where are the children?’ he asked.
‘Somewhere in the forest.’
The old woman spoke again.
Her speech was like the twittering of bats.
‘She knew the storm was coming,’ Simon explained.
‘That is why she wanted them to remain here.’
‘Oh,’ said Hugh and lay quiet for a while.
Then: ‘Why did they not?’ he asked.
As Simon did not answer his question Hugh lay watching the sunlight on the water through the open door.
At last, as though he had answered it in his own mind, he said ‘What is the unicorn?’
‘There is no unicorn.’
‘The girl saw something white moving in the forest.’
‘There is a white stag in the forest.
It is rarely seen but many know of it and no man hunts it; but that is the white stag, not a unicorn.’
Again Hugh thought for some time.
‘There is another unicorn,’ he said, looking up at the Trapper.
‘You know?’
‘I know.
There is one whom some call the Unicorn and some call by another name.’
‘Ah!’ said Hugh, ‘then you know.’
He moved a little, felt his arm with his good hand, and sat up.
Then he said, not looking directly at Simon, but staring out onto the waters that lapped the roots of the trees: ‘Is the Lion in the forest?’
There was a long silence before the Trapper replied.
‘No,’ he said, ‘not yet.’
Hugh nodded.
‘I dreamed that he was,’ he said, ‘that the cage had been opened.’
‘The cage has been opened,’ the other said.
Hugh swung his feet to the floor and once again there was a sharp twittering sound of speech from the old woman.
Hugh stood up shakily.
‘Then the Unicorn must look to himself,’ he said.
On the morning of the day on which the storm broke Friar Tuck was north of the Waste and on the highway that led west towards Nottingham.
As the sun came up and he was able to make out the grassy track along which he had been striding  through the night he realised that once again he had missed the verderers, that there were no fresh hoof-marks.
The sense of urgency, of anger, of relentless pursuit, did not leave him but he felt once more the bitterness of inadequacy, the realisation that the task he had undertaken was beyond his personal power.
Not unconnected with this feeling was one of hunger and thirst.
He had been able to moisten his throat at the clear streams of water which crossed the track but the sustenance of ale or wine to which his great frame was accustomed was denied him and he had taken no food since he had shared bread, cheese, and ham with Marian and Allen after the fight with the sturdy beggars.
Reason demanded that he should recoup his strength before turning back after the verderers.
He left the highway by one of several narrow tracks that led south.
Within an hour he was at the northern boundary of the Waste.
He glanced briefly about him before continuing along the scattered fringe of trees that girdled it.
The Waste was utterly still and save for the dark Tower in the centre utterly empty; the birds which enlivened the forest avoided it, the morning sun, shining obliquely across it, lit the Tower down one side leaving the other in deepest shadow.
As the day wore on the air became humid.
The Friar broke off a young oak bough and waved it about his sweating forehead to keep off the flies that followed him in wavering clouds, a floating band of skirmishers that his ceaseless counter-attacks could not drive away.
By midday the Waste was behind him and the forest had become increasingly dense and the ground uneven.
There was a multitude of small tracks that began promisingly and died to nothing within a few yards, tracks that might be the paths of men or of deer, or wolves, or wild boar.
In this labyrinth the Friar was not at a loss but strode on purposefully.
He was threading his way along the side of a steep and thickly wooded declivity when a voice hailed him from the other side.
‘The Church Itinerant!’ the voice called cheerfully.
‘You are early.
You are expected tomorrow.’
‘Where are you?’ demanded the Friar.
‘Sitting on the sunny side of this yew bush.’
The Friar plunged down into the ravine and toiled up the other side.
‘I have walked all night,’ he said, the weariness sounding in his voice.
A slender man with a wisp of grey beard and an air of pleasant idleness was lying on one elbow beside a yew.
His bow lay within reach, there was a reed-pipe on the ground, and a flask of wine; in his hand was a book.
The Friar frowned.
‘What is that?’ he demanded.
‘A book,’ the prostrate man explained with a mischievous patience.
‘You will not put me off so easily, Alfred the Learned,’ said the Friar.
‘What book?’
‘A book of wisdom.’
He opened it and considered the title page.
‘By one Catullus.’
‘You will be damned,’ said the Friar.
‘So we all fear,’ was the cheerful reply, ‘but the labour of preventing it is yours.
Shall I give notice?’
He picked up his pipe and blew on it a descending series of shrill notes that scarred the tepid surface of the afternoon.
An answering halloo came from further down the ravine.
Alfred put his book in his wallet, slung his bow, and with pipe in one hand and flask in the other, stood up and walked on beside the friar.
‘There are verderers in the forest,’ the Friar said.
The other shrugged his shoulders.
‘They are getting brave.
Why should that make you walk all night?’
‘I have news that will make us all walk, even readers of Catullus.’
They passed the relief sentinel on his way down, then a knot of three men at the top of the rise who were playing at dice on the cut bole of a tree greeted them as they passed, then the path they were following entered a series of concentric earthworks, man-made mounds and ditches long since overtaken by the forest.
The way twisted between these ramparts, each one higher than the last, and then emerged on an open space several acres in extent.
Around the edge of this clearing, sheltered under the innermost wall, were huts.
They differed in size, the largest amongst them were rectangular, most were circular, all were built with rough timber walls and roofed with branches and turves.
At one point where there were no buildings the rampart was being used as an archery butt.
Two men were standing at the further end of the clearing shooting at a wand.
The twang of the bows, the thrum of shafts going through the air, and the pug as they hit the bank, were the only sounds to break the heavy sultriness of the afternoon.
Otherwise there were few people about and those only men who appeared to be doing nothing in particular.
The two archers ceased shooting and walked across the greet the Friar.
Alfred the Learned strolled off to one of the huts.
Of the two archers the younger was tall and fair with a ruddy complexion, the other was of medium height and stalwart build, his hair grizzled at the temples, his eyes grey, his mouth well set above a firm chin, and his expression one of habitual good-humour, as though of a man at peace with himself if not with the world.
The three men, talking earnestly, walked together to the largest of the huts and disappeared inside.
For nearly half-an-hour nothing happened, no sound broke the torpid silence of the village citadel.
Then the younger man appeared in the doorway of the hut and blew a long-drawn-out simple note on a horn.
Slowly the village awakened to life.
One by one the men emerged from the huts or appeared among the trees on the top of the bank.
They gathered together in groups which buzzed like many nests of bees as word passed from one group to the next.
It was then that the signal fire was lit which Allen watched from his tree-top. from end to end of the forest smoke rose in response, and when to east, to west, to south, and north the signal stations were assembled the message went out from the outlaws' camp: ‘The Cage is Open.’
Tom All Alone
It is doubtful if Marian and Allen would have found again the rock shelter where they had accidentally walked into the arms of the waiting verderers if Allen had not noticed his knife lying where Crane had kicked it.
Even then it was difficult to be sure which of the shadowy tumbled shapes was the one in which Marian had dropped the sack.
Nor were they altogether at ease in the neighbourhood, for though there was no reason to suppose that the verderers would return in search of them after their escape — after all why should they suppose the children would return to the very spot where they had been captured?— the shock of the moment when Michael's voice had spoken to them out of the darkness still hung about the place.
Throughout their journey they had felt little of the uneasy fear that smells danger behind every bush but despite the weariness that dulled their senses these half-seen forms of rock among the trees seemed now to imply a threatening human presence.
Allen held the knife ready in his hand as they moved warily forward.
It was only after they had peered into and groped about in what they felt certain was the right cave but found nothing that they decided to withdraw into the trees and wait for the dawn.
It was not long before the birds started into subdued and reluctant song as though not yet certain that they had survived the wildness of the night.
Allen stole forward to a point where he had a good view of the Waste.
There was no sign of life.
The distant Tower showed no mark of the flames that had consumed its upper floors.
Pools of water gleamed in the steely greyness before the dawn.
Of the verderers he could see nothing, but so strong was his sense of present danger that Allen remained half-hidden watching until the sun came up over the forest and the wet rock slabs of the Waste shone like glass and he could feel the first faint warmth of the sun's beams  striking on his face.
He was about to call Marian to his side when a movement a few hundred yards away where the forest and the Waste met caught his eye.
There was some dark object on the ground from which every now and again it seemed as though a piece of wood rose hesitantly and fell.
Intently he watched it and then searched with renewed care all the nearer part of the Waste.
There was nothing else to cause alarm but it seemed to him that every now and then the dark object from which the movement came itself heaved a little, grew larger, and then fell back.
Carefully he eased his way to where Marian was waiting.
She was sitting with her back against a tree more than half asleep.
He shook her awake and explained that he planned to make his way back into the forest, skirting the area of rocks, to get a closer look at whatever it was that had caught his attention.
Although the sun had risen it was still dusk between the trees, and Allen was able to move quickly from cover to cover keeping the Waste in view.
When he judged he had gone far enough he crept cautiously out to where the trees were more sparse.
The dark object was some twenty yards to his right and lay out among the stones of the Waste.
It was a bay horse on its side, and the waving object he had taken for a branch was a leg which in its faint struggles to rise the beast threshed weakly in the air.
He moved a little nearer but still kept close to cover.
He had no doubt it was one of the verderers' horses and that it was dying; indeed, even as he watched it the spasmodic movements seemed weaker and less purposeful.
It was saddled and bridled which meant, so Allen reasoned, that either its rider had been thrown in the darkness of the Waste and the horse had bolted, or that for some unknown reason the verderers had been content to abandon the harness with the horse.
He searched the scattered trees that fringed the forest in case an injured rider had struggled to cover, but there was nothing out of the ordinary to be seen.
Out in the Waste itself the body of a dead rider might be lying but if so it would be hidden by the inequalities of the ground.
It seemed probable to Allen that there were still four verderers but that now they had between them only three horses.
The possibility that the verderers  might be nearby increased his uneasiness.
The light was spreading fast and if they were asleep in one of the rock shelters they might at any moment wake and stumble on Marian.
Allen moved cautiously back.
Marian was not where he had left her.
His heart plunged with alarm.
Then he saw her, standing not far away, close to the trunk of a tree and peering round it.
She saw him and turned with a finger to her lips.
He crept across and joined her.
At first he could hear nothing but the dripping of rainwater from the trees and the singing of birds deeper in the forest.
Both listened intently.
Then came a sound that was partly chuckle, partly crooning song, partly snore.
It was apparent as the light grew that the rocks which lay scattered among the trees had at one time been arranged in order.
Several were in groups of four, three standing slabs of stone over which a fourth lay as a roof, others lay tumbled in meaningless heaps, but still others seemed to be set in distinguishable lines and circles.
The sound seemed to come from a heap of stones that lay well back among the trees.
Deep cushions of moss grew about the heap, and a fallen silver-birch trunk draped with moss lay across it.
The stones themselves glowed with orange and red lichens in the slanting sun.
The sound stopped.
Allen and Marian, moving one step at a time, circled it cautiously.
The chuckling began again and this time broke into distinguishable words.
‘What a wet night!
What a wet night!
What a wet night!’
Under a slab of rock which lay propped at an angle the earth had been scraped away to make a shallow burrow and lying in it, curled up comfortably on his side like a sleeping dormouse was a boy.
He had a large head and a round red face and while he repeated ‘What a wet night!
What a wet night!’ he was staring at them.
‘Hello!’ he said.
‘Hello!’
Marian replied.
‘Are you alone?’
Allen asked.
‘Oh, yes!’ he answered, ‘I am Tom All Alone.’
‘That is the name of a tree I know,’ Allen said.
‘But is there no one else here?’
‘No.
They've gone.’
‘Who have gone?
Who has been here?’
‘It was a wet night.
It was a wet night,’ the boy began again.
‘You are dry,’ Marian said.
He looked thoughtful.
‘That is because I am under this roof.’
‘Who has been here?’
Allen repeated.
Narrow though the form was in which the boy was lying he came out in one easy movement as though accustomed to it.
‘It's safe to come out now,’ he said.
‘They've gone.
How did you get away?
I hid.’
‘Do you mean the verderers have been here?’
‘Yes,’ he said, looking serious.
‘They marched you off.’
‘That was last night, before the storm,’ Allen said.
‘You saw them?
Did they know you were here?’
Marian put in.
He looked cunning and shook his head.
‘They heard you and hid.
I saw them.’
‘They have been here again,’ Allen told Marian.
‘There's a dying horse out there.’
Tom All Alone looked from one to the other.
‘That's right,’ he said.
‘It was a wet night.
They came because the Tower was burning.’
‘Here?’
He nodded.
‘Where are they now?’
‘They've gone,’ he waved his hands vaguely towards the forest.
‘All of them?’
‘No,’ he looked cunning again.
‘Not all of them.
Three.’
‘Where is the other?’
Again there was the sly look.
He beckoned and led them off between the Standing Stones.
‘There!’ he said triumphantly, standing to one side and pointing to the ground.
The body of a man lay face downwards on the grass.
There was a wound in his back.
They did not need to turn it over to recognise the Leader of the verderers.
He lay with his arms  widespread, one hand tight clutched in a clump of grasses as though in the last convulsive movement of death.
Numbed with fatigue Marian looked down on it without surprise.
It was there.
A body in the grass.
An experience one with all the other experiences of the night.
She swayed slightly.
Allen took her by the arm and led her to the nearest stone shelter.
‘You need to eat,’ he said; and turning to the idiot boy he pointed to his mouth and made the movement of eating.
Tom All Alone watched him carefully and burst out laughing.
Then he disappeared.
He was not gone long but returned with a large piece of tree-bark on which was a writhing heap of fat white maggots.
Marian closed her eyes and even Allen averted his gaze and flinched.
Tom All Alone laughed and repeated: ‘It was a wet night!
It was a wet night!’
Then he disappeared again carrying his maggots with him, but stuffing a handful into his mouth as he went.
Once more he came back.
This time he carried in one hand, carefully cupped, a broad leaf filled with honey; in the other hand he grasped a few nuts which he thrust out to Marian with an air of uncertainty as though he feared they might be rejected as the maggots were.
Marian took a nut and smiled at him.
He promptly took it out of her hand, smeared it with honey and pushed it towards her mouth.
The honey was fermenting but she chewed up the nut and swallowed it avidly; then, encouraged by Tom, she dipped her finger in the honey and licked it clean.
In a few moments she had finished it all while Tom All Alone watched her with obvious delight.
A third time he disappeared.
This time he was gone longer.
Then to Allen's astonishment he returned with a hambone from which most of the meat had been cut.
‘That is from our sack!’
Allen cried.
‘Where did you find it?’
He turned to Marian but she had already plunged far down into unconsciousness, overwhelmed by the need for sleep.
Allen and the boy exchanged glances; in the eyes of both, the idiot and the clever, there was a gentle caressive look as they stole with unnecessary care out of the cave.
It was afternoon before Marian awoke and her first thought was of the body lying face downward on the grass.
It seemed to have been present with her throughout her sleep so promptly had it appeared when she woke.
But it was not a dream or a vision of the dead verderer that woke her but hunger.
Save for the nuts and honey which Tom had given her she had eaten nothing since leaving the cabin of Simon the Trapper.
During the hours she slept Allen had extracted little by little from Tom All Alone the story of what had taken place there during the night.
The place of stones was apparently Tom's home.
For how long he had dwelt there Allen was unable to find out.
The form in which they had found him lying was but one of many places which he used.
Outlaws sometimes came by and gave him food and drink.
He said they were good to him whenever they saw him but often he didn't choose to let them see him.
Otherwise no-one troubled him and he saw no one but shared his strange corner of the forest with the beasts of the forest.
On the night before, he had watched from his perch on a pile of stones the four verderers ride up to the Tower from the far side of the Waste…
Yes, he had been to the Tower himself several times but did not like it there and still less did he like exposing himself in the Waste.
It was true there were many snakes there on hot days sunning themselves but that did not worry him.
It was the sky…the openness…
And then he had watched two men leave the Tower and walk across towards the Stones, towards his Stones, and he had clambered down from his perch and hidden himself where they would not see him but where he could watch them.
They had gone into the largest of the rock shelters, one which he himself used when he felt very bold and did not mind looking out over the vacancy of the Waste.
They had stayed while the sun went down and all the time Tom had lain watching and waiting for something to happen — for something was bound to happen, otherwise for what reason had they come?
Then he had heard Marian and Allen coming along the path from the forest.
They had come quietly but Tom had ears that could hear a mouse moving underground, or a squirrel breathing in a tree.
He had seen them take cover from the beginnings of the storm in the very  same darkness in which the two men were waiting.
He himself had often waited like that, hidden beside a path, ready to strike with a stick or a stone any prey that chanced to come along it.
He had watched all four go off towards the tower with the rain beating down on them.
He had hidden himself then in the deepest hole he could find because the lightning and the thunder alarmed him.
He always felt strange during storms and this had been an especially bad one.
Like most other living things he had not slept during the night.
When the worst of the storm was past he had looked out and seen with astonishment a flame blossom from the top of the Tower.
He had crept to the very edge of the wood to watch it and while he was there had heard the faint sound of hooves on stones and occasional voices.
For some time he listened as the sounds drew nearer.
When eventually the moon came up over the edge of the trees he was able to see a group of four men and three horses coming towards him.
The horses were being led and one of the men was limping badly and supporting himself by holding on to a stirrup.
The group was already quite close so that instead of retreating to one of his more inaccessible rock crevices Tom stayed where he was, relying on the deep shadows to keep him hidden.
It was apparent to Allen from what Tom told him that the verderers, driven out by the fire, had succeeded in saddling and bridling the terrified horses.
Although the thunder and lightning had moved further off the horses were still in a very nervous state when the roar of flames over their heads drove them wild so that they were very difficult to handle.
One had bolted having kicked and lamed one of the verderers who had tried to hold it.
This was the explanation of the beast Allen had found dying at the forest edge, its leg broken from a slip on the rocks.
Whatever had taken place in those few wild minutes the verderers had certainly not bothered their heads about their captives.
It must have seemed to them that Marian and Allen had perished in the flames and their own immediate concern was to remove themselves from the danger of the roof falling in on their heads and from the certain consequence that so conspicuous a fire in the night would be seen by the outlaws and would sooner or later bring them to the scene.
That the  outlaws had not in fact appeared was due to the violence of the storm and to the message which that very evening they received by smoke signal.
These were Allen's and Marian's guesses as to what had gone on in the darkness but the rest of the story of those two hours before dawn was easily pieced together from Tom All Alone's account.
He had given a more or less lucid report of everything that happened after the moon rose.
His solitary life had made him an accurate observer of wild creatures, and to him humans were but other creatures, rare, but the most dangerous and observable of all.
He trusted Marian and Allen because they were of the same kind as himself — children.
The verderers had arrived at the stones in no very comfortable mood.
Once clear of the Waste and the Tower which burned like a signal beacon behind them they stopped to rest and take stock of their situation.
It was not good.
They had come much further into the forest than they intended, much further indeed than those who ordered them in had intended.
They had twice had in their possession the girl they were sent to recapture and once had the boy.
Now, so far as they knew, both children were dead.
This might or might not suit the wishes of the Lord Warden of the Forest.
They might be blamed but that could not be helped.
More important to them was the defection of Hugh.
That unsettled them all and made them wonder who would be the next to go.
It was Crane who had been lamed and the question arose how they were to use the horses.
There were three horses among the four of them and they were in such poor shape that not one could bear a double burden.
It was Crane's horse that had bolted but there was no doubt that if they were all to get out of the forest alive Crane would have to be mounted.
This would slow the whole party to the pace of the one who walked and greatly reduce their chances.
The thin man said Crane should be left to make his own way so that the rest of them could ride as fast as they could down one of the tracks to the south.
When that was rejected he argued in favour of his old plan of travelling on foot by the secret paths; there were so many footpaths they could not all  be watched and there was a chance that if they came upon outlaws there would be no more than one or two.
That so far the outlaws had left them alone and kept out of sight troubled them all, this was so unexpected that it increased their fears rather than diminished them.
If they had not been attacked, why not?
The verderers had arrived at the tumbled stones soon after the moon rose.
They had been in no hurry to get away but intended to wait until the beginning of daylight before entering the forest.
In the meantime because he lay so close to them Tom was able to hear and see most of what went on.
According to him they had brought a great deal of food with them and despite the loss of Crane's saddlebags and wallet there seemed to be no shortage of provisions.
Tom's idea of what was a shortage of food Allen thought likely to be undemanding.
As it was no longer raining they had not taken shelter in any of the caves, but after a time the thin man out of sheer restlessness looked into the nearest and came out carrying a sack.
‘What's this?’ he asked.
The others looked up to see what he had got.
‘It looks like the sack the girl was carrying,’ said the Leader.
‘That's where they walked into us,’ said Michael, ‘she must have dropped it.
Be careful the Friar doesn't catch you with it; it was full of his bread and cheese.’
The thin man half turned away.
None of the others was interested.
He rummaged in the sack and brought out the hambone.
‘What about that?’ he asked, waving it at them.
‘That's better than bread and cheese.’
He laid it down on a rock and plunged his arm in the sack once more.
This time he did not withdraw it at once but stayed motionless, his arm deep in the sack.
Then he gave a furtive glance towards his companions before turning his back on them completely.
He pulled something partly out of the sack and seemed to be peering at it.
The others went on talking.
The thin man thrust whatever he had found back into the sack and hurriedly reknotted the neck.
Then he sidled in a conspicuously casual way back to the cave.
‘Hey,’ cried Michael, ‘where are you off to with that?
What have you got there?’
‘Nothing but the hambone,’ said the thin man coming back, but his voice trembled.
‘You can have it if you like.’
He picked the hambone off the rock where he had put it and held it out to Michael.
Michael stared at him.
‘You're up to something,’ he said.
‘Here, I'm going to have a look.’
‘Bring it out,’ said the Leader.
The thin man almost danced with anxiety and tried to get in Michael's way.
‘You are in a state!’ said Crane.
‘It's mine.
I found it,’ the thin man almost shrieked.
‘Leave it alone.
It belongs to me.,
Michael impatiently thrust him on one side and brought out the sack.
‘Now,’ he said ‘we'll see what this is all about.’
He undid the sack put his hand in and pulled out half a loaf.
He held it up for the others to see and then threw it at the thin man contemptuously who automatically caught it in both hands.
‘If you think that's yours you can have it,’ Michael said.
‘Hello, here's something else!’
He drew his arm out slowly.
‘Hello…what in…?’ but the words died on his lips as he drew out into the full brilliance of the moon something that shone with the colour of the moon itself, a circlet of gold on which stood a row of triangular shapes from each of which flashed a pebble, some green, some blue, some red the colour of rubies.