

The healthiest way to eat
When a smoker dies of lung cancer, the poor victim is almost always blamed for his or her own death.
‘It's not surprising she met an early grave, she's smoked forty a day ever since I've known her and that's thirty years,’ and, ‘What do you expect, smoking all her life — God rest her soul,’are common judgements made by those left behind.
Among many other factors, it is probably true that smoking may be a contributory cause of the disease.
But the point is that lung cancer is immediately connected with smoking, in everybody's mind.
On the other hand if someone dies of a heart attack it is just accepted that the cause is hereditary, ‘He over-exerted himself once too often,’ or most commonly, it was ‘Just bad luck’.
We have not yet been sufficiently educated to realize that the risk of dying from the greatest killer disease in the Western world could be drastically reduced if only we took preventative measures by eating sensibly and looking after our bodies.
The earlier we take these steps the better for everyone concerned.
One in four deaths in this country is caused by heart disease.
This year over 200,000 people will die from heart disease; that's Wembley stadium filled to capacity four times over!
No other condition claims so many lives — yet how many people really know what risks they run?
If you were to ask twenty men or women in the street what they should do to avoid heart disease the majority would say, ‘take more exercise and eat margarine instead of butter.’
We are, in reality, extremely ignorant of the various causes of this greatest killer disease.
Whilst there are many types of heart disease, the most common and the most tragic is the type that causes heart attacks and is called coronary heart disease.
Here's how it comes about:
Most of us have seen a heart in one form or another, whether on television or in school or even at the butchers.
The human heart is about the size of a fist and is a muscle filled with blood.
It contracts about seventy times a minute pumping blood around our body.
The heart needs a constant good supply of oxygen which it gets from the bloodstream.
However, the heart's own oxygen supply is not taken from the blood which is continually being pumped through it to service the rest of the body, but from separate little arteries which are called coronary arteries.
These branch off from the main artery, called the aorta, and then divide into lots of smaller branches which are all over the surface of the heart.
The problems start in early adult life when the walls of these coronary arteries become ‘furred up’ and narrower.
The narrowing is caused by a fatty deposit called atheroma and if it gets too thick and the coronary arteries too narrow, the blood supply to the heart becomes restricted or even blocked.
This condition is called ‘coronary heart disease’.
The disease has two main forms, angina and heart attack.
Angina occurs when the coronary arteries have become narrower very gradually and is only noticed when the heart has to work harder than usual.
The symptoms of angina are a heavy cramp-like pain across the chest which can spread to the neck, shoulder, arm and even the jaw.
Angina is quite different from a heart attack because it is usually relieved by a short period of rest or relaxation.
It can also be relieved or controlled by drugs and in severe cases, surgery.
On the other hand a heart attack occurs when there  is a sudden and severe blockage in one of the coronary arteries so that the blood supply to part of the heart is actually cut off.
The blockage is usually caused by a blood clot forming in an artery already narrowed by fatty atheroma.
This is called a coronary thrombosis or just ‘a coronary’.
In some cases the effects of the blockage can be so severe that the heart stops beating altogether and this is called a cardiac arrest.
Unless the heart starts beating again within a few minutes the person will die, and in fifty per cent of all fatal heart attacks the victim dies within thirty minutes.
The pain is a crushing vice-like ache felt in the chest.
It can also spread to the neck, arm or jaw and doesn't usually ease off for several hours.
Sickness, giddiness and feelings of faintness often accompany the pain.
There are many factors which affect our vulnerability to heart disease.
As well as our family history, sex and age, we must also consider how physically active we are, the amount of stress we have to endure, whether or not we smoke, what we eat and, very importantly, whether or not we are overweight.
Before I go on to talk about the diet and overweight issue let us first consider the other factors that can cause heart disease.
People who have a family history of heart disease are undoubtedly at greater risk.
It is obvious that they should take particular care to follow preventative guidelines to reduce their risk to a minimum.
There is no doubt that the older we get the greater is the risk of suffering a heart attack.
The narrowing of the arteries which can lead to angina and heart attacks tends to increase with age.
Men are more at risk from heart disease than women.
In fact a man in his late forties is five times more likely to die of heart disease than a woman of the same age.
But it would be a mistake for women to consider themselves reasonably ‘safe’, because after the menopause a woman loses the protective effect of her hormones and her chances of suffering from heart  disease are almost equal to a man's.
In recent years there has in fact been an increased incidence of heart disease in women in their thirties and forties.
Apart from age, sex and family history, the other contributory factors are voluntary so the choice really is ours!
Cigarette smoking can double our risk of dying from a heart attack and heavy smokers are even more likely to die young.
For instance a man who is over fifty and who smokes over twenty cigarettes a day is four times more likely to suffer from heart disease than a non-smoker of the same age.
Women smokers are at just as much risk as men and at even greater risk if over the age of thirty-five and on the pill.
The answer here must be to give up smoking — as soon as you do, you begin to reduce the risk of a heart attack.
And the good news is that you could be almost back to a non-smoker's risk level within a few years.
Cutting down or smoking low tar cigarettes will not protect you against heart disease.
The reason cigarette smoking adversely affects the heart is because the nicotine in tobacco smoke increases the blood pressure.
This is because the carbon monoxide content of cigarette smoke cuts down the amount of oxygen in the blood and accordingly the heart has to work harder yet it is getting less oxygen.
Smoking also speeds up the ‘furring up’ of the arteries in the heart.
Smoking is bad news from every direction — from being damaging to your health and the health of those around you to being smelly and totally antisocial.
A great deal of heart disease could also be prevented if everyone over the age of thirty-five had their blood pressure checked every few years by their doctor.
Blood pressure is the pressure which the heart and arteries apply in order to squeeze the blood around the body.
When we are sitting or resting our blood pressure remains at a steady resting level.
This level increases depending on our activity and the demand for a surge of blood to be sent where it is needed, for instance to  the muscles during exercise or to our brain when under pressure mentally.
As soon as we stop exerting ourselves the blood pressure returns to normal again.
Hypertension, or high blood pressure, is when the resting blood pressure is higher than normal.
Whilst high blood pressure is rare among young people it is common among those over thirty-five, no doubt caused by following an unhealthy lifestyle — eating too much, consuming too much alcohol, having too much salt in our food, smoking, lack of exercise, and suffering from too much stress.
Unfortunately most people have no idea that they have high blood pressure because it doesn't actually feel any different.
But high blood pressure makes the heart work harder resulting in heart disease.
There is also the danger of a stroke which is when a blood clot occurs in the brain and the blood supply is cut off.
The good news is that blood pressure can be helped enormously by reducing your weight to its correct level, by not drinking too much alcohol, by stopping smoking, eating less salt, increasing the amount of exercise and by learning to relax.
Stress and anxiety are often self-inflicted.
I believe that every problem can be resolved, and that if it can be approached sensibly and thoughtfully, it can even be turned to advantage.
If ignored, stress not only contributes to physical disorders such as heart disease, high blood pressure, ulcers and asthma, it can also lead to a variety of mental illnesses of which insomnia, depression and irritability are just early symptoms.
On the other hand, if we are under-stressed we will become lethargic and tired and psychosomatic illnesses could occur.
A certain amount of stress, therefore, is an essential part of our everyday life.
It keeps us on our toes.
Whilst exercise is regularly advocated as essential to a healthy heart this recommendation is often misunderstood.
If an overweight man in his fifties who is a heavy smoker, has a family history of heart disease and is working in a stressful job were to decide to ‘get fit’ and  invite a colleague for a game of squash for the first time in twenty years, he would be doing just about the best he could to give himself a heart attack.
His heart just would not be able to cope with the strain.
The heart will benefit most from the kind of exercise that builds up stamina — the ability to keep going without gasping for breath.
Stamina depends on the efficiency of our muscles and circulation and of course the most important muscle of all is the heart itself.
Regular moderate exercise such as brisk walking is the answer for the gentleman described above.
As he becomes fitter he may be able to do more and more, but moderation is the key factor.
Playing golf or walking the dog is ideal exercise for anyone and the fresh air will be beneficial too.
In order to build stamina something more energetic like swimming, cycling or keeping fit to music can be very beneficial and enjoyable.
Regular exercise of this kind improves the balance of fatty substances in the blood stream, lowers the resting blood pressure level and strengthens the heart muscle.
But whatever it is we decide to do, it must be continued in the long term.
A mad spurt of extreme physical activity for two weeks a year will do us nothing but harm.
It is therefore essential to find a form of activity we enjoy so that we are happy to practise it two or three times a week and continue it for life.
So now to the problem of obesity.
Obesity can also increase the risk of heart disease, not in itself but because of the many other conditions it can create, conditions which most certainly do contribute to heart disease (high blood pressure and diabetes are the most common).
The more overweight you are the more likely you are to get high blood pressure and diabetes.
Often members of my slimming classes have been referred to me by their doctors, anxious for their patients to reduce their weight and so help reduce their blood pressure.
As soon as they lose weight their blood pressure returns to normal.
Don't forget it is not just ourselves we are putting at risk.
If we serve bad-for-you foods at home we affect our own hearts, certainly, but worse still, we are serving the wrong food to our families.
We have their hearts in our hands too.
There is little doubt that to have become obese in the first instance we have simply eaten too much of the wrong sorts of foods.
In other words, too many fatty and sugary foods which are positively loaded with calories — bread spread with lashings of butter, an abundance of fried foods, cream cakes, biscuits, chocolate, crisps and so on.
The types of foods overweight people love.
The fat in our food is not only responsible for the extra inches on our hips.
It can also push up our blood cholesterol level.
(See chapter 11 for list of foods high in cholesterol.)
Cholesterol is a natural substance in the blood and is mostly made from the fat in the food we eat, though the body itself is quite capable of making an adequate supply.
If there is a lot of fat in our diet we have a high cholesterol level.
This can have the effect of accelerating the build-up of atheroma which in turn eventually leads to heart disease.
Therefore the higher the level of cholesterol in the blood the greater the risk of problems with the heart.
There has been so much talk of saturated and unsaturated fats that most people have heard of them.
Few, however, actually understand what they are.
The difference between the two types is their chemical make-up and whilst I don't want to go into lengthy explanations about the proportions of carbon and hydrogen atoms that determine the types of fatty acid it is important to realize that fat isn't just a single compound but comes in many forms.
All fats are made up of fatty acids: some of these are saturated fatty acids (called saturates), the rest are unsaturated and these include a special group called polyunsaturated fatty acids (or polyunsaturates).
Different fats have different proportions of various fatty  acids.
Most are high in saturates but some are high in polyunsaturates.
As far as the heart is concerned saturates are considered the main enemy.
If we eat too much food high in saturates it can increase our blood cholesterol level and that in turn increases our risk of heart disease.
Saturated fat is to be found mostly in animal products like cream, butter, eggs, offal, and in the fat on meat and poultry.
In place of butter or margarine, alternatives such as Flora are recommended as it is high in polyunsaturates.
It would be a mistake to increase the consumption of foods high in polyunsaturates in the belief that they will ‘do us good’.
We must, after all, remember that we can produce sufficient cholesterol within our own bodies and that fats high in polyunsaturates contain the same amount of calories as the original saturated products so they do not aid slimming in any way.
So this now leaves us with the view that if we reduce our intake of all fat our health will certainly benefit and so will our waistlines.
And whilst it is impossible to state categorically that heart disease can be caused by eating too much fat, in recent investigations it was observed that among the groups of people who consumed high amounts of fat the incidence of heart attack was far higher than among those who followed a low fat diet.
It would be easy to conclude from this research that fat can actually cause heart disease but with so many other factors to be taken into consideration it is impossible to make such a simple statement.
However, it is generally acknowledged that to reduce the consumption of fat in our daily diet will almost certainly reduce the risk of heart disease along with other medical conditions.
So how much fat do we actually need?
The average consumption of fat in the Western world at the present time is about 130 grams (over 4½ ounces) a day per person.
This fat includes everything from the obvious fats like butter and oil to those hidden in cakes, biscuits  and fried foods.
The amount of fat we actually need is staggeringly low at 5 grams (less than a quarter of an ounce) per day, providing it contains the right kind of fatty acids.
As I do not suggest or recommend that we reduce our intake to such a very low level, we need not concern ourselves that we will eat insufficient quantities to endanger our health.
However, it is clear that currently far too much fat is consumed and it is an ideal area in which to make a significant reduction without fear of nutrient deficiency.
So to sum up, if we want to help ourselves towards a healthy heart and a long and happy life we need to eat a low fat diet, take regular exercise and stop smoking.
If we can reduce our weight to around that of our youth and eat well enough to give us the energy to work and live our lives to the full, we will all benefit.
In addition, we will make our GPs very happy!
Tried and tested
All my adult life I had adored foods which were high in fat.
In fact I had never even imagined life without fat so it was something of a challenge to create a very low fat diet for myself, first of all, and then for my slimmers — a diet which at the same time as being very low in fat included all the necessary nutrients.
Butter, margarine and oil are obviously high in fat — in fact they are 99% fat.
Foods like eggs, avocado pears and peanuts are not so easily recognizable.
But first let's get everything into understandable perspective.
In the last chapter I said that the average consumption of fat in the Western world is about 130 grams (over 4½ ounces) a day.
So, 130 grams of fat is equal to almost 5 ounces of butter.
‘But I don't eat anywhere near that amount of fat in a day,’ I hear you say, and of course in the form of butter or pure fat, no doubt you don't.
You probably eat only one ounce or even half that!
So how do we eat the rest of our daily intake of fat?
Of course it's the cheese, milk, eggs, meat, fried foods, cakes, pastries, pies, nuts, cream, ice cream, mayonnaise, sauces…the list is endless.
What foods are left, then, which contain no fat or at least very little?
At first it is difficult to think of anything except apples and oranges!
I prepared a diet as free from fat as possible yet incorporating protein, carbohydrate, vitamins and minerals.
In formulating the diet I paid particular attention to moisture, realizing that, after all, the inclusion of fat in our daily diet added considerably to its palatability.
I also tried to incorporate a strong element of freedom so that a long term eating habit could be created.
I didn't want anyone to feel that this diet was a ‘prison sentence’ to be endured for a few weeks or months before old habits could be reintroduced.
No, this was a new healthy way of eating that was going to change previous diet failures into long term success stories.
It could also help towards healthier generations in the future.
After all, the way we feed our children has a great bearing on how they will eat in later life and in turn how they will feed their families in years to come.
I first gave the diet to some of the members at my classes.
Not only did they enjoy it but it certainly worked extremely well for those that followed it properly.
However, as they had mostly lost significant amounts of weight already and it hadn't occurred to me to ask them to measure their weekly progress in terms of inches, the results, whilst remarkable, were only visual.
I still needed evidence in black and white that the inches really did disappear from areas previously impossible to reduce — namely the hips and thighs.
As a regular broadcaster on local radio I went along to Radio Nottingham for one of my phone-ins on slimming.
It seemed like a good idea to ask for ‘guinea pigs’ to test the diet.
They were asked to monitor their progress not only with scales but with a tape measure.
One hundred ladies kindly volunteered and eight weeks later I asked them to complete a lengthy questionnaire.
I received twenty completed record sheets — and a load of very apologetic letters explaining why the remainder had been unable to do justice to the trial.
Reasons from holidays, family and work problems, moving house, and so on were given.
Nevertheless, the twenty who did reply offered most interesting statistics, observations and confirmation of the effectiveness of the diet.
At this stage I felt I had actually discovered something more than just another diet.
On the questionnaires there were comments such as: ‘It was a very nice diet, the first  that has actually worked for me all over my body!
I have more confidence and feel good in clothes again.
Thank you.’
And, ‘the ‘Bum and Thigh’ diet does work!
I shall certainly be interested in carrying on with it as part of my natural diet now.
Thank you.’
Another said, ‘I have been thoroughly happy with this diet, though I must admit I do enjoy bread, fruit and salads in the normal way of things.
There was very little inconvenience in leaving out the butter and salad cream, and I have enjoyed the diet even more whilst watching the inches disappear, and enjoying being complimented on how much slimmer I look.
Oh, and how lovely to be able to open the wardrobe doors and say ‘I haven't got anything to wear — they are all too big .’
Absolute Heaven!
Very many thanks.’
I was beginning to realize that this diet could in fact be a breakthrough for all those who were still left with the typical British ‘pear’ shape, even after losing weight successfully.
However, I felt we still needed more trials so that I could prove without doubt that my inch loss theory worked.
I was holding a slimming exhibition at the beginning of September at the Holiday Inn, Leicester, and wanted as much publicity as possible to attract visitors.
I rang my friends at Radio Leicester and Peter Crankshaw, the producer of the ‘phone-in programme Cross Talk said ‘Yes’ to my suggestion that I mention my exhibition.
I also told him about the new hip and thigh diet and said I could do with some more volunteers to try it out.
This all seemed ideal from everyone's point of view so the following week I went along.
The programme was being broadcast from Radio Leicester's shop in Leicester's Haymarket shopping precinct.
Morgan Cross, the presenter, and I chatted about my new diet and the telephone lines immediately came alive.
I discussed the format of the diet with various callers and then one of my members came in to the shop.
Di Driver had been coming to my classes  for some time and she knew I was appearing on the programme but I had no idea that she planned on paying me a visit ‘on air’.
In fact I was quite embarrassed by her arrival as I was aware that listeners might think I had invited her.
I honestly hadn't.
Her visit was spontaneous, she said, and her testimony on air really said it all.
She had lost three stones in four months and had extremely slim hips and thighs to prove it.
You would never have believed that she had ever had a problem in that area.
Well, volunteers for the diet seemed to be coming out of the woodwork!
People were coming over to us out of shops, pleading to be included in my trials.
The ‘phones just didn't stop ringing.
We gave my home address over the air so that volunteers could send me a stamped, self-addressed envelope so that I could forward them a diet sheet.
It was just as well I did request an s.a.e. as over the next ten days I received over five hundred requests!
My husband Mike and I spent the whole of the following week opening mail, printing diet sheets and letters of instruction and stuffing envelopes.
The names and addresses of every volunteer had to be entered on to our computer.
Our village Post Office had never seen so much activity!
It was all a lot of fun and of course very encouraging.
There were lots of letters of weight history and dietary abnormalities which had to be considered.
Various questions had to be answered.
It was a major operation.
The wide area covered by the enquiries was amazing.
I had letters which started, ‘We were travelling up the motorway from London to Glasgow and I heard you…’ or ‘I live in Devon but I was staying in Leicester when I heard you.
Please can I…?’
It was tremendous to get such a positive response.
I gave out my home address to save Radio Leicester having to handle the enquiries.
Here are some of the varieties of addresses which still managed  to find us.
I do hope the senders do not mind my reproducing them, but they certainly brightened Mike's and my days as we slogged through the sorting and despatching process:
My name received a variety of treatments too.
Here is a sample: Rosemary Garther, Rosemary Collenage, Rosemary Colledge, Rosemary Collins, Rosemary Cullis and Valerie Connolly.
I was also charmed that one lady called me Rosemary Clooney!
I emphasized to the volunteers that this was a trial and they were now a member of my trial ‘team’.
If they felt they could not follow the diet or didn't want to be committed I asked them to please return all the papers, and about seventy of them did just that.
Eight weeks later the questionnaires were sent out and again about 20 per cent responded with completed details.
There was another pile too, giving reasons why the remainder could not complete the eight week trial.
Nevertheless, I now had 120 people, 116 women and 4 men, who had followed the diet for a full eight-week period.
I was delighted and surprised that all 120 volunteers had lost weight, with losses varying from 3 pounds to 1 stone 12 pounds during the eight-week trial.
An amazing 98 of them stated they had lost inches from areas they had considered difficult to slim or had found impossible to reduce previously.
Needless to say I was staggered at this result.
Thirty-one of my trial team had never previously attempted to slim yet 25 of them said they lost inches from areas they considered a real problem and particularly wanted to reduce.
In the end only 11 per cent said they did not particularly lose more inches than previous dieting attempts had produced.
I was also overwhelmed by the tremendously encouraging comments made by my trial team.
Here are just a few.
Mrs A. W. wrote: ‘I would like to take this opportunity  to thank you for the time and effort you have put into compiling this diet which has made a bigger difference to my weight and dimensions than any other diet I have been on….‘
Mrs J. P. wrote: ‘I am very pleased with the results of the diet.
It took me about ten days to work my way into it, after that I found it very acceptable.
I feel great!
My stomach has flattened.
Buttocks have been a problem for years and now they are greatly reduced.
I am very grateful to you….‘
Mrs V. W. wrote: ‘Very easy to follow.
Most important was losing inches off my hips, which I haven't been able to do before….‘
Another Mrs V. W. wrote: ‘Many thanks for the diet sheet.
I feel a different woman!
I have angina which is very unpleasant but I can move about more easily since losing a bit of weight and I used to suffer every night with heartburn but since having no fat I can honestly say I haven't suffered at all:….
It's lovely to get into a size 16 instead of size 20….‘
Mr B. P. reported that he had already lost 3 stone some time before but had stuck at 15 stone and was pleased when he started to lose again.
‘Everyone has remarked on how I have slimmed in all the right places.’
Volunteers were asked to measure weekly their bust, waist, hips, widest body measurement,(usually around lower hips/tops of thighs), each thigh, each knee and each arm.
The results were collated and several quite unexpected facts emerged.
Some lost many inches but comparatively little weight and nearly everyone lost inches off their ‘fattest’ part.
This is unusual as with most other diets slimmers often complain of ‘losing it from the parts I want to keep’, usually the bust.
The results showed that only twelve volunteers lost 3 inches or more from their bust and all but two of these had measurements of 40 inches or more prior to following my diet.
The other two had measured 39 inches and 39½ inches respectively and both were  delighted to have reduced their bust size.
Inch loss from others varied according to their size but those with a 34–36 inch bust measurement either lost nothing at all or only an inch or an inch and a half.
The risk of losing what little bust they might have is enough to discourage many an overweight lady from commencing to diet, so this diet must therefore be good news for them.
Another interesting factor was that not only did hips and thighs diminish but waist measurements reduced amazingly too.
The league table for parts of the body to benefit most looks like this:
The number of inches lost from the various areas varied enormously, as did the weight losses.
A representative sample of case histories follows.
Because some of the volunteers subsequently joined my slimming and exercise classes which I hold weekly at the Holiday Inn in Leicester, I was able to hear first hand the kind of encouraging comments which only served to confirm what I was seeing with my eyes as each week passed.
Di Driver brought along some photographs taken just over a year ago.
She looked very ‘hippy’ in her denim jeans — a typical British pear shape.
She lost three stone on the low fat diet and reduced from a size 16 to a size 8!
Whilst she hadn't completed a weekly measurement chart she had kept a personal record of her waist and hip measurement.
She had lost 8 inches off her waist and a staggering 10 inches off her hips over a period of seven months.
Her ‘after’ photographs portrayed a very very different shaped lady — one you would not have believed could ever have been pear shaped.
Rose Mundy told me of her continual battle with overweight thighs, a problem that had been with her for as long as she could remember.
Rose, now 66, explained that she used to visit the doctor regularly as her thighs would continually rub against each other and actually bleed because they were so big.
She used to carry pads of cotton wool to dress the wounds from the chafing.
She tried all kinds of diets and even when she stuck rigidly to an Energen 1000 Calories a Day diet and lost over two stone not a single inch went from her thighs.
The doctor offered Rose slimming tablets to help her lose even more weight but he said he was not very hopeful that she would lose it from her legs.
He told her, ‘Some people are blessed with more weight in some areas than others.
Those parts are usually the most difficult to slim and as yet there is no diet to slim down-specific problem areas.’
When Rose's sister heard my broadcast on Radio Leicester she immediately rang Rose to tell her.
The following week Rose came along to my class with her sister and started the diet immediately.
It was two months later that she told me of her problem and the  discomfort it had previously caused her.
She proudly showed me the size 16 slacks she was wearing — eight weeks earlier she had been wearing size 22!
She had lost 2½ inches from each thigh, 3 inches from her hips and 3 inches off her waist.
She had lost only 1 inch off her 39 inch bust.
She said she felt a different woman.
‘Imagine,’ she said, beaming, ‘for the first time in my life.
I can walk down the road without my legs even touching — it's absolutely marvellous.’
Pat Bavester was another person for whom the low fat diet worked where others had failed.
Pat had been attending my classes for a long time — years in fact.
Not because she couldn't lose weight but because she enjoyed coming along for a weekly work-out session and it helped to keep her weight in check.
Pat always reminded me of my own shape — a reasonably well proportioned figure but very heavy on the hips and thighs.
As soon as I had the diet ready for issue at the classes, Pat was first on my mental list of people who I hoped would particularly benefit.
And sure enough, within a few weeks the inches disappeared.
Pat couldn't believe the comments she was receiving from people who noticed the marked difference in her shape.
‘Haven't you lost loads of weight!’ they would say, though in fact she had only lost 6 pounds.
However she lost 1½ inches from each thigh and 2 inches from her hips, and she can now wear size 12 clothes instead of size 16.
Apparently she had had heavy thighs all her life and still cannot get used to her new shape.
‘It's really wonderful,’ she says.
Perhaps the most remarkable inch loss of all was from Mollie Slack, one of my early volunteers from Radio Nottingham.
Mollie would send me a regular bulletin of her progress and since May 1986 she had reduced her weight from 12 stone 9 pounds to 10 stone 3 pounds (a loss of 2 stone 6 pounds).
Her bust has reduced from 39½ inches to 35 inches (a loss of 4½ inches), her waist from 35 inches to 28 inches (7 inches) her hips from 43 inches to 37½ inches (5½ inches) and her widest part  (around the lower hips and thighs) had reduced by 7 inches from 45 inches to 38 inches.
But perhaps the most staggering inch loss of all was from her thighs which have reduced by an amazing 5½ inches each!
Her knees have slimmed by 2½ inches each and her arms by 4 inches each.
Now when you think of the comparatively small measurement of a single limb, the inch loss is truly amazing.
Mollie can't believe her new shape and tells me that her colleagues can't get over the transformation either.
Recently at an important business function several of the managers from the company for whom she works came over to take a closer look.
‘You look twenty years younger since you've lost that weight,’— and it was more than one that said it too!
Mollie had always been heavy, even as a teenager, so as she approached her fiftieth birthday she said ‘it's good to feel better and younger than ever’.
Another Nottingham volunteer, Sue, said, ‘I may not have lost a lot in pounds but it's great to know I can lose inches from parts I didn't think I could ever reduce.’
Sue lost only
3 pounds but lost 2½
 and 3 inches off her thighs and an amazing 3½ inches from just above her knees!
Another lady who asked not to be named sent me her measurement sheet as well as the completed questionnaire.
Her comments alongside her weekly measuring sessions said so much that I felt you would enjoy reading them too:
Week 1: 2 pounds lost.
½ inch off my bust, 1 inch off my waist and ½ inch off my hips.
2 inches from the girth round my tum, nothing from my legs but ¼ inch off each arm.
A good week.
Feel less sluggish and taking 15 minutes exercise each day.
Week 2: 3 pounds off this week.
Only ½ inch from my waist, another inch from my tum but no change elsewhere.
My feet have reduced by one size!
Feeling  better but where has the 5 lbs gone from?
Don't feel any slimmer!
Week 3: Another pound gone, ¼ inch off my bust, ¼ inch from my waist and ⅜ inch off my hips but another inch off my tum!
Measurements of limbs remain unchanged.
‘Only a pound this week —not eaten too much as I've had a very sore throat and cold.
Week 4: 1½ pounds gone and another ¼ inch from my bust and waist but a whole inch off my hips.
Another ¾ from my tum and whilst my thighs and knees remain the same I've lost ¼ inch off each arm.
Terrible day — just wanted to eat and eat.
Controlled it by eating fruit — no gain in weight.
[Next day]Feel SO MUCH BETTER!
Cold gone — great!!
What a difference a day makes.
Week 5: Only ½ pound weight lost but another ½ inch from my bust and ¼ inch from my hips.
Everything else stays the same.
Look; and feel better — stepping out — inches are going!’
Week 6: Gained a pound.
½ inch on my bust measurement, ½ inch on my waist and hips, also my tum.
However, ¼ inch off each knee and 1 inch from one arm and ½ inch off the other.
Went away for half-term holiday.
Week 7: Lost 1 pound and the ½ inch off my bust.
¼ inch goes from my waist, hips remain unchanged but 2 inches from my tum.
½ inch goes from my thighs and ¾ inch from each knee.
Arms remain unchanged.
Walk so much more briskly.
One more week to go.
Feel better — not bloated.
Week 8: Another pound gone, ½ inch off my bust (now 40½ inches): ¾ inch from my waist, 1 inch off my hips, tum remains the same but have lost 5 inches already, no more off thighs but another ¼ inch off my knees and arms remain unchanged.
Love this diet — part of my life now.
This lady only lost ½ inch from her thighs.
She lost ¼ inch from each knee and ¾ inch from each arm.
It was interesting that when she started her thighs only measured 21½ inches which is slim by comparison with most of the other volunteers.
On the other hand her measurement around her tum was 44 inches and from here she lost 5 inches.
Her bust reduced from 42&½ inches to 40½ inches, her waist from 36½ inches to 34½ inches and her hips from 42½ inches to 40 inches.
Again we see that inches are lost from the areas most in need of reduction.
This lady also added, ‘My tum is so much flatter — feel much more in control of my body.
I don't feel bloated.
I always have a problem to lose weight and have problems with many ‘E’ additives which I have sorted out.
This is just my kind of diet — no junk food, plenty of fruit which I love.
Sincerely and Thank you…
Mrs X.’
I could fill a book with the other similar comments which were written on the questionnaires but I think we can take it as read that the trials proved beyond doubt that if you followed the diet moderately strictly you could definitely lose inches from parts usually untouched by normal dieting methods.
So the choice really is yours at the end of the day….!
Your good health!
Apart from the obvious benefits to those who, like myself, suffer with-gall stones, I was surprised to read so many other benefits to health that had been enjoyed by many volunteers.
A lady who suffers with a hiatus hernia wrote, ‘I have had to take Rennies after meals for years but since I have been on this diet I haven't had a Rennie for five weeks!
It's great.’
Another commented that she didn't suffer heartburn any more.
There were many who commented on improved digestion.
Perhaps the most general comment in this direction was the fact that many felt far less bloated and felt their mobility had consequently  benefited .
Said one gentleman, ‘I have felt a lot better in myself.
I can bend to fasten my shoe laces without being out of breath.
I would recommend it to anyone and I can't thank you enough.’
One lady who has arthritis in her knees and suffered from swelling feet said that she was ‘able to walk better now with not so much pain — easier to go up stairs.’
Another told me she had suffered for three years with a terrible pain in her back but since following the diet the pain had completely disappeared.
As her weight loss was so gradual she couldn't believe that this was the cause so she attributed the benefit to the diet itself.
Before anyone commenced the diet I asked them to seek approval from their G.P. There was no doubt from the comments I received that their doctors were delighted with the format of the diet and were equally delighted with the results it achieved.
Barbara Sewart, for instance, has angina and of course her doctor told  her that this diet was particularly suitable for her.
Since embarking on the diet Barbara has lost over a stone and her inch loss is quite remarkable.
She comes along to my classes each week and it is wonderful to see how much more she can exercise now compared with when she first attended.
She now participates in most of the exercises and her doctor can't believe the change and improvement in her.
One volunteer was a diabetic.
She reported that the diet was particularly suitable for her, just as it was for those with a high cholesterol level.
It was fun to read how many noticed an improvement in their temper as well as their waistline!
Normally so many slimmers become irritable as they feel deprived and hungry.
The majority on this diet, however, actually made a point of saying they never felt hungry, were able to eat similar foods to their family and never felt deprived.
Many said they felt full after every meal and never needed to eat in between.
In fact they positively loved the types of food included in the diet, particularly the freedom of choice, not having to count calories or units plus the fact that none of the food was expensive or difficult to purchase.
It was also surprising to hear that so many found it possible to stick to this diet when normally they found themselves lacking in the willpower department.
As well as the generous amount of food they could consume, perhaps it was all that extra energy 90 many enjoyed instead of feeling drained and lethargic as with many diets.
I asked a variety of health-related questions within the questionnaire.
I was particularly interested to hear if there had been any changes in the condition of skin, nails and hair.
With so little fat in the diet I wouldn't have been surprised to receive reports of dryness, but I had no reason to worry.
Hair apparently  benefited : of the 120 volunteers a total of 37 stated that the condition of their hair had  actually improved whilst almost all the remainder reported no deterioration whatsoever.
Skin benefited too.
Here are some of the comments: ‘My skin is more supple and not so dry.’
'My skin is a lot clearer.’
'My skin feels soft and healthy.’
'My skin is smoother and my hair more springy.’
And I must add here that my own skin also became smoother and whilst at times I used to suffer from dry skin, strangely I no longer do.
The effect on volunteers' nails varied.
Some reported incidence of splitting but many more reported that their nails had never been stronger and some said they now grew more quickly!
In fact 31 stated the condition of their nails had definitely improved whilst the majority of the remainder reported no change in the condition.
I also enquired whether anyone had suffered from constipation whilst following the diet.
Most who had previously suffered in this way reported a definite improvement and only a very few said they did suffer from constipation at first.
With such a wide choice of foods I have no doubt that by selecting foods high in fibre in preference to others the condition would soon regulate itself.
In general terms this diet is very high in fibre and should help everyone towards healthier bowels.
It was certainly good to read that so many people had never felt healthier or had more energy; and I was gratified to hear from those who had previously attempted to diet but without success that this diet had worked for them.
We all know only too well how disheartening it can be to try hard but achieve nothing.
The fact that my slimmers felt so much healthier encouraged them to continue on the diet while they were losing weight and it became clear that they had no intention of falling back in to their old habits.
Following a low fat diet in the long term would certainly ensure that they did not regain all they had lost so far.
I smiled at how this lady summed up her experience of following the diet: ‘I felt fine and was never hungry.
Now I can walk up hill without puffing and can bend down without grunting.
I thank you.’
And last Christmas I received this letter from one of my Nottingham volunteers.
Dear Rosemary, ‘I thought you would like to know that I'm still following your diet (almost anyway and I have never felt better for years.
I'm keeping at 11 stones and am fitter than I've ever been.
I've done my own cleaning ready for Christmas which I hadn't the energy for in the spring and my husband and I walk about 3–4 miles every day.
He has lost I stone and he is 73.
We thank you for giving us the incentive to do this and wish you a Merry Christmas and happy New Year.
Yours sincerely, K Gill P.S. I've just finished taking in all my skirts and trousers from 33 inch waist to 29 inch waist.
I can't stop looking in the mirror.’
The diet
The following diet is based on the original Trial Diet but has now been amended taking into consideration the observations made by the trial team.
For instance I have increased the skimmed milk allowance from 4 ounces to 10 ounces per day and I have allowed red meat to be included twice a week.
This will make dining out much easier and of course extends the variety of protein foods beyond fish, chicken and cottage cheese!
The menu selections provide a basic guide but as you become more familiar with the fat content of all foods by studying the tables in Chapter 10 you will soon be able to formulate your own.
I have given a list of strictly forbidden foods within this chapter to enable you to make a definite resolution, before you begin the diet, to ban them totally from your life!
If you are going to cheat and sneak bars of chocolate or packets of salted peanuts into your cupboard to eat when no one 's around then you might as well give this book to somebody else.
This diet, if followed properly, will help you achieve the kind of figure you never dreamed possible but there is only one person in the world who can actually make it work for you — and that's YOU .
You will probably be very pleasantly surprised at the volume of food you are allowed and how you will feel really quite full after each meal.
You will be delighted at how quickly you will begin to lose weight and inches and how different from previous diets this one proves to be.
My volunteers really loved it and they couldn't believe they could actually lose weight yet eat so much.
The additional energy they enjoyed after following the  diet for a few weeks helped them to take on a much more positive attitude towards life — I could sense a really happy attitude in the remarks on the questionnaires.
The Diet
Eat three meals per day, selecting one meal from the Breakfast, Lunch and Dinner menus listed.
And remember to restrict the consumption of red meat to just two helpings a week.
Daily allowance : 10 ounces (l/2 pint) skimmed low fat milk
Breakfast
1
Porridge made with water, served with milk from allowance and two teaspoons of honey.
2
Five prunes plus a natural yogurt.
3
Fruit compote e.g. grapefruit, oranges, peaches, pineapple, pears, etc. (6 ounces total).
Fruit may be tinned but must be in natural juice.
4
As much fresh fruit as you like, any type, but eaten at one sitting.
5
Tinned grapefruit in natural juice plus one slice wholemeal toast spread with one teaspoon of marmalade.
6
8 oz can baked beans served on a slice of wholemeal toast.
7
1 oz any cereal with a little sugar, moistened with fruit juice or skimmed milk from allowance.
8
8 oz can tomatoes served on a slice of wholemeal toast.
Lunches — select one
1
Four to five pieces of any fresh fruit.
2
Jacket potato topped with 8 ounce can baked beans.
3
Jumbo sandwiches made with four slices of wholemeal bread thinly spread with Waistline or similar low calorie dressing, filled with salad — lettuce, cucumber, cress, tomatoes, sliced Spanish onion, beetroot, green and/or red peppers.
4
2 slices of wholemeal toast with large (16 ounce) can of baked beans.
5
Rice salad: a bowl of chopped peppers, tomatoes, onion and cucumber mixed with cooked (boiled) brown rice and served with soy sauce.
6
Chicken joint (with skin removed) or prawns, served with a chopped salad of lettuce, cucumber, radish, spring onions, peppers, tomatoes, with soy sauce or yogurt dressing.
7
Jacket potato served with low fat cottage cheese and salad.
(cottage cheese may be flavoured with chives, onions, pineapple, etc.).
8
Four Ryvitas or similar crispbread with 3 ounces chicken (no skin) or I ounce lean ham or lean roast beef (remove any fat), and Branston pickle plus two tomatoes and one piece of fresh fruit.
9
One carton low fat yogurt plus 8 ounces fresh fruit salad.
10
4 ounces carton cottage cheese (with flavouring if preferred) with 4 Ryvitas or similar crispbread, plus salad.
11
Baked stuffed apple (one or two) filled with I ounce dried fruit, a few breadcrumbs and sweetened with honey or sweetener, served with plain low fat yogurt.
12
Clear or vegetable soup, served with one slice of toast and followed by two pieces of fresh fruit.
13
Jacket potato with I ounce roast beef, or roast pork or ham (with all fat removed) or 2 ounces chicken (no skin) served with Branston pickle and salad.
14
Two slices of wholemeal bread made into open sandwiches with prawns and salad, dressed with low-fat prawn cocktail dressing (see recipe).
15
Jacket potato served with sweetcorn and chopped salad.
16
Two slices wholemeal toast with small tin baked beans and small tin tomatoes.
17
8 ounce carton low fat cottage cheese served with two tinned pear halves, chopped apple and celery, served on a bed of lettuce and garnished with tomato and cucumber.
Dinners — select one from each section, i.e. a starter, main course and dessert.
Starters
1
Wedge of melon.
2
Half a grapefruit.
3
Clear soup.
4
Melon balls in slimline ginger ale.
5
Grapefruit segments in natural juice.
6
Garlic mushrooms (see recipe).
7
Melon salad (see recipe).
8
French tomatoes (see recipe).
Main courses
1
8 ounces steamed, grilled or microwaved white fish (cod, plaice, whiting, haddock, lemon sole, halibut) served with unlimited boiled vegetables.
2
6 ounces chicken (no skin) steamed, grilled, baked or microwaved, and served with unlimited vegetables.
3
Chicken curry (see recipe) served with boiled brown rice.
4
Steamed or grilled or microwaved trout, stuffed with prawns and served with a large salad or assorted vegetables.
5
Barbecued chicken kebabs (see recipe) served with boiled brown rice.
6
Vegetable bake (see recipe).
7
6 ounces calves’ or lamb's liver, braised with onions, and served with unlimited vegetables.
8
Fish pie (see recipe) served with unlimited vegetables.
9
4 ounces grilled rump steak with all fat removed, served with jacket potato and salad.
10
3 ounces roast lamb with all fat removed, served with dry roast parsnips (see recipe) and unlimited vegetables.
11
3 ounces roast leg of pork with all fat removed, served with apple sauce and unlimited vegetables.
12
4 ounces roast duck (all skin removed) served with unlimited vegetables.
13
6 ounces turkey (all skin removed) served with cranberry sauce, dry roast potatoes, and unlimited vegetables.
14
3 ounces grilled or baked gammon steak or gammon rashers, with all fat removed, served with pineapple and unlimited vegetables.
15
2 ounces bacon, grilled, with all fat removed, served with grilled tomatoes, baked beans and jacket or boiled potatoes.
16
8-ounce chicken joint (weighed cooked including the bones), baked, with skin removed, in barbecue sauce (see recipe) and served with jacket potato or boiled brown rice and vegetables of your choice.
17
Prawn, chicken or vegetable chop suey(see recipes) served with boiled brown rice.
Desserts
1
Sliced banana topped with raspberry yogurt.
2
Fresh fruit salad topped with natural yogurt if desired.
3
Stuffed apple served with plain yogurt.
4
Strawberries served with strawberry yogurt.
5
Raspberries served with raspberry yogurt.
6
Pears cooked in red wine (see recipe).
7
Oranges in Cointreau (see recipe).
8
Pineapple in Kirsch (see recipe).
9
Sliced banana topped with fresh raspberries.
10
Fresh peaches sliced and served with fresh raspberries.
11
Any two pieces of fresh fruit.
12
Fruit sorbet — any flavour (see recipe).
13
Meringue basket filled with raspberries and topped with raspberry yogurt (or fill with strawberries or any fruit).
14
Pears in meringue (see recipe).
Drinks
Tea and coffee may be drunk freely if drunk black, or may be drunk white so long as skimmed milk allowance is not exceeded.
Use artificial sweetener rather than sugar.
You may drink two alcoholic drinks per day.
One drink means a single measure of spirit, a glass of wine, a small glass of sherry or half a pint of beer or lager.
Slimline mixers should always be used and these may be drunk freely.
You may drink as much water as you like.
Ashbourne or Perrier water taste wonderful.
Grape, apple, unsweetened orange, grapefruit, pineapple, or exotic fruit juices may be drunk in moderation.
Some manufacturers are now producing juices with no artificial preservatives or added sugar — delicious and lower in calories too.
Daily nutritional requirements
Each day try to include at least the following:
6 ounces protein food (fish, poultry, meat, cottage cheese, baked beans).
12 ounces vegetables (including salad).
12 ounces fresh fruit
6 ounces carbohydrate (bread, cereals, potatoes, rice).
5 ounces low-fat yogurt
10 ounces skimmed milk
I would also suggest that one multivitamin tablet be taken daily to make doubly sure that you are getting all the vitamins you need.
The forbidden list
These foods are strictly forbidden whilst following the diet.
Some will be reintroduced for the maintenance programme.
Recipes
Garlic mushrooms
(Starter: serves 4 )
1 lb button mushrooms
½ pint chicken stock
3 cloves fresh garlic
salt and pepper
Wash mushrooms and drain.
Heat chicken stock with peeled and finely shredded garlic cloves.
Boil for 5 minutes on gentle heat then add mushroom — and simmer in a covered saucepan for a further 7 minutes.
Because this dish is almost like a soup, with lots of stock, it is best served in soup dishes and eaten with a spoon.
Melon Salad
(Starter: serves 4 )
1 honeydew melon
1 lb tomatoes
1 large cucumber
salt
1 tablespoon parsley
1 heaped teaspoon mint and chives (chopped)
oil-free vinaigrette dressing (see recipe)
Cut the melon in half, remove the seeds and scoop out the flesh, ideally with a curved grapefruit knife.
Cut the flesh into cubes.
Skin and quarter the tomatoes, squeeze out the seeds and remove the core; cut into quarters again if the tomatoes are large.
Peel the cucumber, cut into small cubes of similar size to the melon cubes.
Sprinkle with salt, cover with a plate and stand for 30 minutes.
Drain away any liquid and rinse cubes in cold water.
Mix the fruit and vegetables together in a deep bowl; pour over the dressing; cover and chill for 2–3 hours.
Just before serving, mix in the herbs.
As the salad makes a lot of juice it should be eaten with a spoon.
A herb loaf (see recipe) goes well with melon salad.
French Tomatoes
(Starter: serves 4 )
French Tomatoes are so called because in the traditional recipe French cream cheese is used in place of the low fat cottage cheese.
8 tomatoes
salt and pepper
6 oz Shape low fat cottage cheese
small bunch of fresh chives,
or chopped spring onion tops or parsley
watercress to garnish
oil-free vinaigrette dressing (see recipe)
Method
Scald and skin the tomatoes by placing them in a bowl, pouring boiling water over them, counting to fifteen before pouring off the hot water and replacing it with cold.
The skin then comes off easily.
Cut a slice from the non-stalk end of each tomato and reserve slices.
Hold tomato in the palm of your hand and remove seeds with the handle of a teaspoon, then remove the core with the  bowl of the spoon.
Drain the hollowed-out tomato and season lightly inside each one with salt.
Soften cheese with a fork and add finely chopped chives, parsley or spring onion tops and season well.
Fill the tomatoes with the cheese mixture, using a small teaspoon, until the mixture is above the rim of the tomato.
Replace their top slices on the slant and arrange them in a serving dish.
Make dressing (see recipe) and spoon over the tomatoes, reserving a couple of spoonfuls until just before serving.
Chill filled tomatoes for up to two hours.
Garnish with watercress and sprinkle remaining chives over tomatoes.
Stilton Pears
(Starter: Maintenance programme; serves 4 )
6 ripe pears (or 12 tinned pear halves if fresh not available)
2 oz Stilton cheese
8 oz Shape soft low fat cheese
2 tablespoons skimmed milk
salt and pepper
juice of 1 lemon
1 oz flaked almonds, baked until brown
Peel pears and cut in half lengthways.
Remove core with the bowl of a spoon and paint lemon juice all over pears to prevent discolouration.
Crush Stilton with a fork and work until creamy, then mix with the Shape soft cheese and skimmed milk until smooth.
Season to taste.
With a teaspoon, pile cheese mixture into cavities left by the removal of the cores in the pear halves.
Sprinkle browned flaked almonds on top and serve on a bed of lettuce.
Chicken curry
(Main course: serves 2 )
2 chicken joints with all fat and skin removed
16 oz tin tomatoes
bay leaf
1 eating apple, cored and chopped small
2 teaspoons Branston pickle
1 teaspoon tomato purée
1 medium onion, finely chopped
1 tablespoon curry powder
Place the chicken joints and all the other ingredients in a saucepan and bring to the boil.
Put a lid on the saucepan and cook slowly for about one hour, stirring occasionally and making sure the chicken joints are turned every fifteen minutes or so.
If the mixture is too thin, remove the lid and cook on a slightly higher heat until the sauce reduces and thickens.
Serve on a bed of boiled rice, preferably brown rice.
Barbecued Chicken Kebabs
(Main course: serves 2 )
For kebabs:
2 large chicken joints, preferably breasts, boned and with all fat and skin removed
2 medium sized onions peeled and cut into quarters
1 green pepper with core and seeds removed, cut into bite-sized squares
1 red pepper
6 oz mushrooms, washed but left whole
8 bay leaves
For barbecue sauce:
2 tablespoons tomato ketchup
2 tablespoons brown sauce
2 tablespoons mushroom sauce (optional)
2 tablespoons wine vinegar
Cut the chicken flesh into cubes about ½–¾ inch square.
Place on to skewers alternately with pieces of onion, green and red peppers and the mushrooms, adding a bay leaf to the skewers at intervals to give flavour.
Mix all the sauce ingredients together and brush on to the skewers filled with the chicken and vegetables.
If possible, brush the sauce on a couple of hours before cooking as this will add greatly to the flavour.
Keep any remaining sauce ready for basting.
Place the skewers under the grill and cook under a moderate heat turning frequently to avoid burning.
Baste frequently with the sauce mixture to maintain the moisture.
Use no fat.
Serve on a bed of boiled rice (preferable brown rice) and grilled fresh tomatoes.
Vegetable Bake
(Main course: serves 1 )
Selection of any vegetables, e.g. carrots, parsnips, potatoes, peas, cabbage, leeks, onions
4 oz mushrooms, washed
cup of breadcrumbs — preferably wholemeal
½ pint vegetable stock
1 teaspoon mixed herbs
Partly cook the vegetables, chop them up and place in layers in a large ovenproof dish.
Sprinkle the mixed herbs between each layer and finally slice the mushrooms and place over the top of the vegetables.
Sprinkle with the breadcrumbs and then moisten the contents of the dish with the vegetable stock.
Bake in a moderate oven (180 °, 350 ° F, Gas Mark 4) for 20 minutes until piping hot.
Fish Pie
(Main course: serves 4 )
1½ lbs cod
1½ lbs potatoes
Salt and pepper
For those on the maintenance programme only: 2 oz Shape or Tendale ‘Cheddar’ if desired
Bake, steam or microwave the fish but do not overcook.
Season well.
Boil the potatoes until well done and mash with a little water to achieve a soft consistency.
Season well.
Place fish in an ovenproof dish.
Flake the flesh, remove the skin and evenly distribute the fish across the base of the dish.
Sprinkle the grated cheese at this point if desired.
Cover the fish completely with the mashed potatoes and smooth over with a fork.
Sprinkle a little cheese on the top if desired.
If the ingredients are still hot just place under a hot grill for a few minutes to brown the top.
Alternatively the pie can be made well in advance and then warmed through in a moderate oven for 20 minutes, or microwaved on high for 5 minutes.
Vegetable Chop Suey 
(Main course: serves 2 )
1 large onion, finely sliced
1 sweet pepper (green or red) with core and seeds removed and flesh finely shredded
2 large carrots, peeled and coarsely grated
3 sticks celery, finely sliced
1 can (8 oz) bean sprouts
Heat a large non-stick or stainless steel frying pan (or wok) and add the onion, pepper, carrots and celery.
Shake the pan over moderate heat until the vegetables are barely cooked, then add the drained bean sprouts and fork them together well.
Keep moving the contents of the pan to avoid burning.
Prawns or sliced chicken can also be added with the bean sprouts if desired.
Serve hot with soy sauce.
Baked (Jacket) Potatoes
1 large potato per person
salt
Scrub the potatoes well and make a single cut along the top of each.
Roll them in salt and bake for one and a half hours (or until they ‘give’ when pressed) in a moderately hot oven (190 °, 375 ° F, Gas Mark 5).
Make cross-cuts on top of each potato and squeeze to enlarge cuts.
Add filling of your choice.
Serve at once.
Alternative serving suggestion
(Maintenance programme: serves 4 )
Remove potato centres and place in a bowl, carefully preserving ‘jackets’.
Add one chopped onion, 2 oz Shape or Tendale cheddar flavour cheese, coarsely grated, salt and black pepper.
Mix thoroughly and replace in potato skins.
Return to the oven for ten minutes to heat through before serving.
Dry Roast Potatoes
Choose medium to large potatoes of even size.
Peel and blanch by putting into cold salted water and bringing to the boil.
Drain thoroughly, lightly scratch the surface with a fork and sprinkle lightly with salt.
Place in a non-stick baking tray, without fat, in a hot oven for about 1–1½ hours.
Dry Roast Parsnips
Choose evenly sized medium parsnips.
Peel and blanch halved parsnips in cold salted water and bring to the boil.
Drain thoroughly and sprinkle lightly with salt.
Place in a non-stick baking tray, without fat, in a moderate oven for 30 minutes.
Cook until soft in the centre when pierced with a fork.
Stuffed Mushrooms
(Starter )
2 large mushrooms per person, and two or three over
2 oz stock (vegetable or chicken)
1 teaspoon chopped onion
1 tablespoon fresh white breadcrumbs
Salt and pepper
1  teaspon parsley
pinch of dried mixed herbs
Cup mushrooms are best for this dish.
Wash and peel 2 mushrooms per person and cut the stalks across level with the caps (this helps prevent shrinkage).
Chop the trimmings along with the rest of the mushrooms.
Cook the chopped mushrooms for 1–2 minutes  in the stock with the chopped onion.
Add the crumbs, season and add herbs.
Spread this mixture on to the whole mushrooms and arrange them on a baking sheet or in a fireproof dish.
Bake for 12–15 minutes in a moderately hot oven (190°C, 375°F, Gas Mark 5).
Serve immediately.
Pears in Red Wine
(Dessert: Serves 4 )
6 ripe pears, peeled but left whole
2 oz brown sugar
10 fl oz red wine
2 fl oz water
½ level teaspoon cinnamon or ground ginger
Combine wine, water, sugar and spice in a glass jug and microwave on high for approximately 4 minutes or until boiling, or boil in a saucepan.
Either:place the pears in the saucepan with the boiled wine mixture and simmer for 10–15 minutes, turning the pears carefully from time to time to ensure even colouring.
Or:(for microwaving) place the pears in a deep dish, e.g. soufflé type, pour wine sauce over them and cover with cling film.
Microwave on high for approximately 5 minutes or until just tender but retaining their shape.
Serve hot or cold (with Shape Single or ice cream if desired by those on maintenance programme only).
Oranges in Cointreau
(Dessert: serves 4 )
6 oranges — medium size
wine glass of medium to sweet white wine, or fresh orange juice
sherry glass of Cointreau or Grand Marnier liqueur
artificial sweetener if desired
Heat white wine or orange juice and liqueur in a saucepan and add sweetener to taste.
Allow to cool.
Carefully peel the oranges with a sharp knife to remove all pith.
This can be done by slicing off the peel across the top of the orange and using this flat end of the orange as a base.
Cut strips of peel away from the top downwards with a very sharp knife so that the orange is completely free from the white membranes of the peel.
Squeeze the peel to extract any juice and pour this into the wine mixture.
Slice the orange across to form round slices of equal size.
Place in the cooled liquid and allow to stand in a refrigerator for at least 12 hours.
Serve in glass dishes 
Pineapple in Kirsch
(Dessert: Serves 4 )
1 fresh pineapple
3 fluid oz Kirsch
Remove skin and core from the pineapple and slice into rings.
Sprinkle the Kirsch over the fruit and place in a refrigerator for at least 12 hours to marinate.
Keep turning the fruit to ensure even flavouring.
Serve with Shape Single or ice cream if desired by those on maintenance programme only.
Fruit Sorbet
(Dessert: serves 6 )
1 lb fruit making: ¼ pint fruit purée (preferably a strong-flavoured fruit e.g. blackcurrant, blackberry, strawberry, raspberry or black cherries.
Canned fruit may be used but remove syrup before liquidizing)
2 large egg whites
Artificial sweetener to taste (if desired)
If fresh fruit is used cook approximately 1 lb of fruit in very little water together with a sweetening agent if desired.
When the fruit is soft and the liquid well coloured either place the cooked fruit in a sieve and work the pulp with a wooden spoon until as much as possible of the fruit has passed through the mesh or use a liquidizer.
Allow to cool and place the purée in a plastic container; cover with a lid and freeze until it begins to set.
When a layer of purée approximately ½ inch thick has frozen, remove the mixture from the freezer and stir it so that the mixture is a soft crystallized consistency.
Whisk the two egg whites until stiff and standing in peaks.
Fold into the semi-frozen purée to give a marbled effect.
Immediately refreeze the mixture and freeze until firm.
Serve straight from the freezer.
Pears in Meringue
(Dessert: serves 4 )
6 ripe dessert pears, peeled but left whole
10 fl oz apple juice
3 egg whites
6 oz caster sugar
Cook the pears in the apple juice until just tender but still firm.
Cut a slice off the bottom of each pear to enable them to sit in a dish without falling over, and place in an ovenproof dish well spaced out.
Whisk the egg whites in a large and completely grease-free bowl, preferably with a balloon whisk or rotary beater.
(Do not use an electric whisk as this is too strong and it will over-beat the egg whites.)
When the whites are firm and stand in peaks, whisk in I tablespoon of the caster sugar for I minute.
Fold in the remainder of the sugar with a metal spoon, cutting the egg whites rather than mixing them.
Place the egg white and sugar mixture into a large piping bag with a metal nozzle (any pattern) and pipe a pyramid around each pear starting from the base and working upwards.
Place in a warm oven (160°C, 325°F, Gas Mark 3) and cook until firm and golden.
Serve hot or cold (with Shape Single or ice cream if desired by those on maintenance programme only).
Apple Gâteau
(Maintenance programme: Makes one 20 cm/8 inch cake, serving 8 )
3 eggs
4½ oz caster sugar
3 oz plain flour
pinch of salt
1 lb eating apples, peeled, cored and sliced
grated rind and juice of 1 lemon
1 tablespoon apricot jam
artificial sweetener for apples if desired
1 teaspoon icing sugar
Very lightly grease 8 inch cake tin; dust with caster sugar and then with flour.
Shake out the excess.
Place the eggs and caster sugar in a mixing bowl and  whisk with an electric whisk/mixer for 5 minutes at top speed.
When thick and mousse-like, fold in the sifted flour and salt.
Pour into the prepared tin.
Bake in the centre of a moderately hot oven (190°C, 375°F., Gas Mark 5) for 25 minutes or until golden brown and shrunk from the edges of the tin a little.
Run a blunt knife around the inside edge of the tin and turn out the cake on to a wire rack to cool.
For the filling, place the apple slices in a pan with the grated rind and juice of a lemon and the jam.
Heat slowly.
Add the artificial sweetener to taste if required.
Cover and cook until the apples are just tender.
When the cake is cool, slice it across with a large knife to make two cakes.
Spread the bottom half with the cooled apple filling and cover with the top half of the cake.
Sprinkle with icing sugar on top.
Hot Herb Loaf
(Maintenance programme )
1 French loaf
4 oz St Ivel Gold or similar low fat spread
1 tablespoon mixed dried herbs
juice of ¼ lemon
black pepper
2 cloves of fresh garlic, crushed
Cream the low fat spread with the herbs, lemon juice and seasoning.
If you like garlic, add a little now.
Cut the loaf into even slanting slices about 1 inch thick.
Spread each slice generously with low-fat spread mixture and reshape loaf Wrap in foil and bake for 10 minutes in a hot oven at 220°C, 425°F, Gas Mark 7.
Then reduce oven setting to 200°C, 400°F, Gas Mark 6 and open the foil so that the bread browns and crisps.
This should take a further 5–8 minutes.
(For those wishing to avoid the use of any fat, leave some slices without the spread, sprinkling them with herbs, lemon juice and garlic only).
Barbecue Sauce
1 teaspoon plain flour
1/3 pint potato stock
1 tablespoon soy sauce
dash Worcester sauce
salt and pepper
small tin tomatoes
Skim off all fat from grill pan after cooking meat or poultry, leaving any sediment.
Stir in the flour, add a tablespoon of the stock and cook very gently for 2–3 minutes.
Remove from the heat, and blend in potato stock, sauces and seasoning.
Return to heat and stir until boiling.
Add the tinned tomatoes finely chopped (scissor snipped).
Simmer for a minute or until the sauce has a creamy consistency.
This sauce goes well with kebabs and with grilled or baked chicken.
Prawn Cocktail Dressing
serves 2 
2 tablespoons tomato ketchup
1 tablespoon low calorie salad dressing (e.g. Waistline, Heinz Weight Watchers' Dressing)
squeeze of lemon juice
Mix all ingredients together and add to prawns.
Oil-free Vinaigrette Dressing
3 tablespoons white wine vinegar or cider vinegar
1 tablespoon lemon juice
½ teaspoon black pepper
½ teaspoon salt
1 teaspoon sugar
Chopped herbs (thyme, marjoram, basil or parsley)
Mix all the ingredients together.
Place in a sealed container and shake well.
Taste and add more salt or sugar as desired.
Drinks
Grapefruit Fizz
unsweetened grapefruit juice
slimline tonic water
Pour approximately 4 fl oz unsweetened grapefruit juice into a tall glass and add plenty of ice.
Top up with the slimline tonic.
This drink is an excellent ‘filler’ before a meal.
St Clements
Slimline Orange
Slimline Bitter Lemon
Pour equal quantities of each into a tall glass filled with ice.
Top up as required.
Far an extra special drink use freshly squeezed orange juice with the bitter lemon.
Spritzer
5 fl oz white wine
Sparkling mineral water
Pour the wine into a large wineglass and add the mineral water.
This provides a long and very enjoyable drink that can accompany a meal, or just be drunk for pleasure socially.
What is cellulite?
Cellulite is the particularly ugly type of fat found around the hips, thighs and upper arms.
The texture of the skin is quite different from the skin elsewhere on our body; it appears puckered, dimpled and can resemble orange peel when it is pinched.
If you sit on a chair next to a mirror, without the cosmetic benefits of tights of course, you will see the skin texture clearly.
A friend of mine realized how much cellulite she had when her little girl spotted her sitting on the loo, bare flesh displayed.
‘Why have you got holes in your leg, Mummy?’ she enquired and that, I am afraid to say, is what cellulite looks like.
An ugly area of fat which is very uneven and very unattractive.
In more technical terms cellulite is a modified form of fat tissue to be found just below the surface of the skin.
It all begins with the stagnation of the blood in capillaries (tiny blood vessels), and this leads to a flow of blood fluids (plasma) through the capillary walls which separate fat-storing cells known as adipose cells.
Small groups of these cells become surrounded by collagen fibre bundles in what are known as micronodules.
These in turn group together to form macronodules which are responsible for the skin's irregular, wrinkled appearance.
It is this uneven appearance that distinguishes cellulite from neighbouring fat on the tummy or waist which is almost always relatively smooth and uniform.
Our bodies use these fat cells and the connective tissue as a kind of storehouse for waste products and because these particular fat cells are metabolically less active than other cells in the body they make an ideal location  for whatever toxic waste products the body would like to keep out of the way so that they don't pollute the bloodstream.
It is easy to see, therefore, that the problem is a particularly difficult one to solve as the area is partially ‘cut off’ from our normal circulation.
Consequently these areas are the first to exhibit extra fat and the last to actually reduce.
In fact it is not only the overweight who suffer from cellulite, it can also be witnessed on thin women.
Men do not suffer with cellulite even when obese.
It is a problem only afflicting women and only after puberty, so it is easy to see that the condition is connected with our hormones.
Clinical investigations produced evidence that 75% of the women questioned who developed cellulite, did so at a time of hormonal change.
In fact 12% developed it at puberty, 17% during pregnancy, 19% when they started taking the birth pill and 27%, at the onset of the menopause.
The link between.
the female hormones and predisposition to cellulite becomes even clearer when you consider that oestrogen is also instrumental in controlling fluid retention and this in itself is the crux of the cellulite problem.
The female hormonal cycle is finely synchronized with the circulatory system and lymphatic drainage in particular.
Faulty circulation is thought to be the root cause of the disorder.
Stress and our inability to cope with it can be an important cellulite trigger because it affects the hypothalamus ‘master gland’ which controls all other hormonal functions.
Dietary factors also have a very important part to play as a diet high in junk food encourages the deposit of fat, particularly in the ‘waste ground’ around our hips, thighs and arms.
Foods such as sugar, salt, spices, fat and alcohol can therefore aggravate a cellulite condition by cluttering up the system with additional waste matter that is poorly eliminated.
Constipation can also encourage cellulite formation — if the waste matter is not  leaving the body through the normal channels the body will store it away from the bloodstream and again the islands of fat cells causing cellulite provide the perfect storehouse.
Our lifestyle should also be taken into consideration.
A sedentary existence or a job that keeps you standing around for hours is liable to encourage a poor circulation as well as allowing the buttock and thigh muscles to become weak and flabby, making cellulite much worse.
For similar reasons bad posture can be to blame for congestion and erratic circulation in the lower part of the body.
There is also the hereditary factor and cellulite does tend to run in families, so you may have your mother to thank for passing it on to you!
Obviously we cannot choose our parents but we can do a great deal to improve the shape, form and texture of these problem areas.
This can be done in three forms — diet, exercise and treatment of the surface of the skin.
A combination of all three would certainly be the ideal.
Diet
A diet high in fresh fruit and vegetables is obviously to be recommended as it encourages digestion and elimination.
These are also very healthy foods rich in vitamins and minerals.
Wholegrain cereals are also good for the same reasons, and protein foods (meat, fish, eggs and cheese) taken in moderation help to balance the diet and give all the necessary nutrients.
Skimmed milk and low fat spreads should also be preferred to the full fat equivalents in the family diet.
Foods high in sugar, salt, fat and spices should be kept to a minimum, and the consumption of alcohol should be restricted too.
Exercise
Slow, rhythmic or stretching exercises should be undertaken in preference to jogging and jumping-about type exercises.
A stretching type of exercise will  encourage muscle tone without jolting the fat cells and therefore encouraging the development of the clusters of sedentary fat cells which form cellulite.
Surface treatment
As cellulite is caused by poor circulation any massage or activity to stimulate the circulation will certainly help to improve the texture and the appearance of the affected areas.
Massage gloves and creams designed to help the particular problem will help improve the contours of the body.
Ever since I reached my teens I have suffered with cellulite.
My mother also had it and when I had previously attempted to diet and had successfully lost weight there was little improvement, if any, to the appearance of my ugly dimpled thighs, that is until I went on my low fat diet.
I just couldn't believe the remarkable improvement.
My thighs were far from being perfect but, my goodness, they did look much better.
After a while I thought I would help them along with some cellulite massage cream.
I used Vichy's Hip and Thigh Massage Cream and I could actually feel the nodules of fat cells disintegrating after a few weeks of applying the cream daily, and the improvement became more and more obvious as I continued.
Just as I was fascinated with the reduction in inches from my own thighs when I first embarked on my special diet, I was equally interested to hear whether my trial team had benefited in the cellulite department and I included a question to this effect in my questionnaire.
Forty-three out of the 123 reported a definite reduction in cellulite and a further 35 said they thought it had improved.
This meant that 78 had witnessed a benefit.
Only 13 said they saw no improvement; 27 weren't sure but didn't think there was any change; and the remaining 5 didn't answer the question.
So here we see again that whilst most diets are ineffective  in reducing inches and cellulite, my new diet again came up trumps.
The evidence in terms of inch loss recorded by my trial team proves without doubt that the reduction of fat and the increase in fresh fruit and vegetables in our diet really does reduce cellulite, despite all the hormonal, stress, lifestyle and postural factors which could have caused it.
I am not saying that the diet will completely eliminate cellulite but I do believe it will significantly reduce it.
Of course the foods suggested within the diet are very wholesome with very little junk food.
Many of my volunteers commented on how much they enjoyed eating so much fruit and vegetables and how much fitter they felt, so I have no doubt that it is the reduction of fat and the increase in better, healthier food that together helped produce such positive benefits.
There are, of course, other ways cellulite can be reduced, for instance by Mesotherapy which is the multi-injection of substances such as hormones, local anaesthetics, thyroxine, theophylline, lipolytic agents, Centella asiatica, aminophylline, mild diuretics, hyalase, mucopolysaccharides, and B vitamins.
There are also a wide variety of more drastic therapies ranging from laser beam therapy to selective lipectomy which is the insertion of a hypotonic solution into the problem areas and suction of lipolysed fat.
I have seen some of these treatments carried out on patients and it looks horrific.
I've heard also of courses of injections which remove it in the short term but result in a worse incidence of cellulite after the treatment has worn off.
All of these methods are extremely costly and frankly are not helping the initial cause of the problem.
Topical creams, such as the hip and thigh cream which I used, are usually based upon plant extracts which affect the circulation just below the skin.
The choice of cream base is very important in maintaining the stability of the active substance and in controlling its absorption by the skin.
The ease of application, fluidity and prompt absorption are of prime importance  for such products and the massaging action on the affected area helps to activate the ingredients of the cream and improve circulation.
The cream need only be lightly massaged with the finger tips either once or twice a day and the manufacturers stress that you do not have to knead or use a special applicator.
After two weeks of regular use an improvement should be visible, with a further improvement if the applications are continued for four weeks.
Vichy conducted their own test on 47 women.
Thirty-one showed positive results after four weeks and everyone reported that their skin felt smoother, more supple and better toned.
One of the latest surface treatments has been produced by Biotherm.
It is called the Ten Day Thermo Active Body Contouring Treatment and it contains methyl nicotinate.
This gives a warming effect to stimulate the microcirculation and aids penetration of the other active ingredients.
The treatment is quite expensive but produces visible benefits after just ten days.
It brings about a shrinkage of the cellulite areas, recontours the silhouette, and improves the skin's elasticity.
If it is as effective as the researchers say it is I am sure it is going to be a very big hit with cellulite sufferers world-wide.
If you have a really bad cellulite problem I suggest you follow the diet and try and take some sensible form of daily exercise even if it is only walking the dog for a couple of miles.
A treatment cream will then help you to improve the condition to an acceptable level and I would certainly try all of these methods conscientiously before even considering the much more serious courses of action — injections or surgery.
Exercises — Do they help or hinder?
Regular moderate exercise offers three main benefits.
Firstly it is good for our health since it strengthens the heart, secondly it burns up extra calories and helps to increase our metabolic rate, and thirdly it improves the contours of our body.
As we all know, a well-toned body is a delight to be seen.
The fact that regular exercise is beneficial is therefore beyond question.
Only those with a medical problem which might be aggravated by physical activity should hesitate before stepping into action, but providing they have a word with their doctor first, even severely disabled people will usually benefit from some kind of exercise.
Exercise is a word which covers a vast array of activities.
It could mean being energetic, as in running a marathon, or tranquil, as in practising yoga.
Whatever the activity, most forms of exercise are good for us, but often the benefits are as varied as the activities themselves.
True physical fitness is something more than being able to cope with the stresses and strains of everyday life.
It consists of three important ingredients —stamina ,suppleness and strength .
Whilst running a marathon requires a great deal of stamina, yoga is undoubtedly the best way to improve suppleness while weight-lifting obviously develops strength.
Swimming incorporates all three aspects, and a good squash player depends more on suppleness and stamina.
So let's look more closely at these three ‘S’ factors, as they are often called.
Perhaps the most important is stamina as this provides the staying power and the ability to keep on going without feeling you're going to collapse.
For stamina we  need a good circulation in the heart muscle and the other muscles of the body to ensure that oxygen reaches the parts that particularly need it.
A person Who has plenty of stamina will have a slower and more powerful heartbeat and they will cope more easily with prolonged or heavy exertion.
Suppleness or flexibility gives you a greater range of movements which will help you avoid the problems of pulled muscles and tendons and sprained ligaments.
The greater your mobility the less likely you will be to suffer aches and pains brought on by stiffness.
Suppleness helps to keep you looking younger too as you will be able to move and walk better in later years.
The development of strength can prevent a multitude of problems occurring throughout our lives.
We all find ourselves in a situation at some time where we have to carry a very heavy suitcase, or where a parcel has been delivered and has to be lifted into the house.
All kinds of little situations like this can cause enormous problems, so having a bit of extra muscle-power will insure us against possible injury.
Your choice of exercise must also depend on your general state of health.
It is stupid to rush into the sort of vigorous exercise that may aggravate a medical condition and, of course, it also depends on how fit you are already.
Always wear the right clothing for the activity you choose — clothing worn too tight can hinder circulation.
Be sure to wear the correct footwear to prevent injuries to your feet, legs and back, not only because they can be acutely painful but because such injuries can take months to mend.
Perhaps the most important thing to remember about exercise is that it must be enjoyable.
If it isn't, you are unlikely to continue.
Exercise isn't a craze we take up seriously one day and dismiss as ‘not for me’ two weeks later because we've overdone it.
No one will benefit from such a short spell.
Rather like good eating habits, the  rewards are reaped weeks, if not months or even years later.
If you want to tone up your body and develop a better shape there is no doubt that swimming, keep-fit exercises and yoga will help enormously.
You can expect to see a visible improvement within a few months of regular practice.
If it's stamina and feeling ‘fitter’ that you want then probably a sport such as badminton, squash or tennis will do the trick.
Strength can be developed by digging the garden, weight-lifting, rowing or swimming hard.
In fact swimming is undoubtedly the b–st possible form of exercise — not only because it develops stamina, suppleness and strength but because the buoyancy of the water removes the danger of straining an otherwise unfit body.
Your stamina will dictate your endurance and you will soon be able to measure your improved fitness by seeing how much further you can swim.
Certain exercises can have the effect of developing muscles to an excessive degree — for instance cycling, whilst good for the thighs and hips, will possibly overdevelop the calf muscles.
Running or jumping exercises can encourage cellulite and swimming will develop the muscles in the shoulders.
Obviously weight-lifting will develop many muscles.
However we are unlikely to develop a great deal of extra muscle by normal sporting activities; we are much more likely to improve muscle tone.
Before you undertake any form of exercise it is very important that you warm up properly.
Failure to do so is likely to cause injury.
Circulation of blood around the body is comparatively slow when we are just going about our normal daily tasks.
Our pulse rate tells us how slowly if we count the beats.
A normal resting heartbeat is around 70–80 beats a minute.
But when we exercise we need more oxygen and we can only get that by pumping more blood around our body.
This increased blood flow then increases the circulation into our muscles and the body becomes warm and ready for action.
If we  don't warm up first we can easily pull a muscle or tear a ligament, just as the elasticity in a rubber band is greater if it is warm than if it is cold.
A walking jog on the spot combined with various gentle stretching movements will help to build up the heartbeat and improve the circulation of blood throughout the body.
You can, if you wish, test your heartbeat by taking your pulse for ten seconds and multiplying it by six thus making a minute.
You are sufficiently warmed up when your pulse rate is significantly faster than when taken at rest.
It is easy to calculate your personal maximum heartrate by deducting your age from 220, and you are sufficiently warmed up when your heartrate is between 60% and 90% of your maximum.
Skipping with a rope for a few-minutes is also a good way to warm up.
Alternatively, a few exercises suitable for the warm up are shown over the page.
In order to become fitter, develop muscle tone and flexibility, we must exercise ideally three times a week.
Each session can be different, for example a game of squash or badminton on Monday, keep fit class on Wednesday and a good walk on Saturday.
The secret is to keep it varied, keep it interesting and enjoy it.
And if you practise at least some of the exercises described in this book every day, you will soon see a change in your hips and thighs.