

HALIBORANGE The family range of great tasting Vitamins
At all stages of our lives, from childhood and the teenage years through to middle-age and beyond, an adequate intake of vitamins and minerals is essential to enjoy the full benefits of health and fitness.
A good diet based on a wide variety of foods, such as bread, milk, cheese, meat, fish, eggs, cereals, fruits and vegetables will provide all the right nutrients you and your family need.
And of course, three balanced meals a day are what most of us are aiming at.
But in our rushed, modern lifestyle we often rely on convenience foods and snacks which may be lacking in proper nutrition.
Even fresh food can become depleted of vital nourishment such as vitamins, through incorrect storage, preparation and cooking.
The result can be a dietary deficiency in the vitamins and minerals essential at all ages for the maintenance of physical and mental health and well-being.
A vitamin supplement can be an excellent safeguard if you are concerned about the nutritional adequacy of what you or your family are eating.
With over 50 year's heritage you can trust the family range of great tasting vitamins from Haliborange to give you and your family peace of mind.
WHAT ARE VITAMINS?
Vitamins are natural food constituents essential in helping to provide complete health.
As our bodies can only make a few of the necessary vitamins we need, they must be provided by what we eat.
Vitamins were first discovered by scientists around the turn of the century.
Originally they were termed ‘accessory foods factors’ but is was then found that the first of these ‘factors’belonged to a group of substances called amines.
In the belief that all ‘accessory food factors’ were likely to be amines, one of the early researchers suggested that they be called vitamins, that is vital amines.
When it was later discovered that this was not the case, the final ‘e’ was dropped and the name became vitamin.
WHAT ARE MINERALS?
Minerals are essential substances naturally found in both animal and vegetable goods.
Often required in combination with vitamins in many bodily processes, they are also vitally important for the maintenance and healthy development of bones, teeth and blood.
Since our bodies cannot make minerals, a daily balanced supply must be obtained to ensure good health.
Vitamins and minerals are only needed in tiny amounts for good health.
We weigh foods in ounces or grams but vitamins and minerals are measured in milligrams (one thousandth of a gram) or micrograms (one thousandth of a milligram).
THE IMPORTANCE OF VITAMINS AND MINERALS IN YOUR DIET
 Main dietary sources 
Liver, carrots, milk, margarine and butter Leafy Green vegetables
Bread and cereal products, potatoes, milk and meat
Milk, meat, wholegrain breakfast cereals, eggs, and green vegetables
Meat and meat products, potatoes, bread, breakfast cereals, cheese and eggs
Potatoes and other vegetables, milk, meat, liver, eggs Why we need it?
Vitamin A used to be called the anti-infective vitamin because a deficiency reduces the resistance of certain parts of the body to infection.
Vitamin A is essential for healthy skin and eyes.
It is need for vision in dim light.
Thiamin is need for the proper function of the heart, nervous system and muscles.
It is also needed for the release of energy from food.
Riboflavin is needed for healthy skin hair and nails, and for the release of energy from food.
Niacin helps maintain a healthy nervous system and skin.
It is also needed for the release of energy.
Vitamin B6 is necessary for keeping blood healthy.
It is also needed for the release of energy.
Vitamin 
Vitamin B12
Folic Acid
Pantothenic Acid
Vitamin C
Vitamin D
Main dietary sources
Liver, kidney, other meat and meat products, milk, eggs
Many foods provide small amounts but it is especially rich in liver, kidney, raw green leafy vegetables and oranges
Meat, healthy fish, cereals and legumes are especially rich sources
potatoes, fruit juice, citrus fruit and green vegetables
Margarines, oily fish, eggs, breakfast cereals and butter.
Can also be made in the body by the action of the sunlight on the skin.
Why we need it?
Vitamin B12 is necessary for formation of healthy blood cells.
This vitamin is missing in a vegan diet and may be difficult to obtain in vegetarian diets
Folic Acid is necessary for healthy blood formation.
Pantothenic acid is necessary for the release of energy from fat and carbohydrate in foods
Vitamin C is vital for the growth and maintenance of healthy bones, teeth and gums.
It also aids the absorption of iron.
Vitamin C is the nutrient most vulnerable to loss in storage, cooking and processing.
Vitamin D is essential for absorption of calcium in the body and is essential for strong bones, teeth and gums Vitamin 
Vitamin E
Calcium
Iron
Main dietary sources
Most foods contain vitamin E. The richest sources are vegetables oils, cereal products and eggs.
Milk, cheese, bread and green vegetables
Meat, bread, potatoes and vegetables Why we need it?
Vitamin E helps to keep body cells healthy and protects Vitamin A and C from destruction
Calcium is essential for the formation of bones and teeth and is especially important for children.
Adequate calcium levels are essential for women of child bearing age and helps keep bones strong and healthy for the elderly
Iron is needed for the formation of healthy red blood cells.
This is particularly important in women who have periods as they often lack energy and feel tired 
The Government has advised that women who are pregnant or may become pregnant should not eat liver, as very large doses of vitamin A taken over a long period may be associated with foetal abnormalities.
Vitamin A is essential in pregnancy but supplement pack recommendations should not be exceeded.
MULTIVITAMIN
ORANGE FLAVOUR LIQUID
It is only natural to worry about whether your child is getting a healthy diet.
Especially if more of the carefully planned meals end up on the wall than in the mouth.
Sugar free Multivitamin Liquid from Haliborange, with the sunshine orange taste, is specially formulated for children between 1 month and five years.
It contains a carefully balanced range of essential vitamins A to E in the proportions that a growing child needs.
All in a delicious fruity tasting daily spoonful.
Doctors and other health experts consider it wise to safeguard infants by giving supplementary vitamins.
In a recent Government report, experts say, ‘We recommend that vitamin supplementation (including A, C and D) should be given to infants and young children aged from 6 months up to at least 2 years and preferably 5 years.’
The report goes on to say: ‘Many professionals advise giving vitamin drops from the age of one month and we would support this practice, particularly if there is any doubt whatsoever about the vitamin intake at this time’.
Which is why our Multivitamin Liquid is specially formulated for children whose vitamin requirements differ from those of adults.
So you can be sure they won't be missing out on anything important.
As you would expect, Haliborange Multivitamin Liquid does not contain artificial colours or flavours.
And it's completely sugar free, making it kind to teeth.
For very young children our Multivitamin Liquid can be mixed into milk or diluted fruit juice, or simply given on a spoon.
And the special easy to carry plastic bottle comes with a handy pourer which cuts out mess.
Trust Haliborange for those vital growing years.
Present Day Practice in Infant Feeding: Third Report.
HMSO 1988.
VITAMINS AC&D
Children are always on the go.
Form the moment they wake up until the time they go to bed, whether they are playing with friends or at school, their minds and bodies are always active.
So the importance of a healthy, well-balanced diet that gives children all the nutrients vital for physical growth and energy cannot be over-emphasised.
As every parent knows, children's eating habits can be unpredictable and when your child is away from home it is difficult to be sure what they are eating.
A poor diet, with low nutrient snacks can lead to nutritional deficiencies.
So it can make sense, in these early formative years, when vitamins have such a positive effect on healthy development, hat your child takes a supplement.
This can help to sustain, protect and help healthy growth as well as give you peace of mind.
VITAMINS AC&D
Haliborange A, C & D the delicious tasting chewable vitamin tablets are specifically formulated to provide an excellent source of vital vitamins A, C and D, with each Haliborange tablet providing 100 per cent of the Recommended Daily Amount.
Haliborange tablets are available in traditional orange and blackcurrant flavours as well as packs containing four individual fruit flavours — orange, lemon, tropical and blackcurrant.
Hygienically packed in blister trays Haliborange A, C & D tablets contain natural colours and flavours and are an ideal vitamin tablet for children in those crucial early years from three upwards.
One tablet daily will help give added protection during winter and throughout the school year.
MULTIVITAMIN
PLUS CALCIUM AND IRON
Despite good intentions we do not always eat what we should, when we should.
We miss meals and replace them with snacks which may mean missing out on vital nutrients.
And if you're on a weight-loss diet, the risk of missing out on vitamins is even greater.
Your lifestyle an special biological and social role make it especially important for mothers to have good understanding of nutrition.
And then there are special times; when planning a family: as an expectant or nursing mother; when it's that time of the month; or simply when you run out of time to eat properly.
Haliborange Multivitamin contains a careful balance of essential vitamins A, C, D and E together with seven important B vitamins, including vitamin B6, and folic acid.
What's more there is the added benefits of calcium and iron.
Calcium helps strengthen growing bones and teeth as well as helping to keep them healthy.
And maintaining adequate calcium levels is important for women during the child-bearing years.
Iron helps in the formation of red blood cells and supplies you with energy, particularly important for women during their monthly cycle when you may often lack energy and feel tired.
A recent Government survey found that in women, the average intakes of iron from food were below the recommended levels.
And one third of all women, and over 40% of those under 50, had low iron stores.
Haliborange tablets taste great!
Each bite releases the refreshing tangy orange and lemon flavour.
These tasty orange flavour tablets are suitable for the whole family but especially so for women, to help your body meet busy demands of busy, modern living.
The Dietary and Nutritional Survey of British Adults.
HMSO 1990
FISH OIL
WITH VITAMINS A, C, & E
Natural fish oil has been used as a traditional folk remedy at least as early as the eighteenth century.
Rich in essential fat soluble vitamins A and D, fish oil has been used by the whole family for the maintenance of healthy joints and for general well-being.
But although the natural health benefits of fish oil have been enjoyed for generations only now is it becoming clear how fish oil can provide the essentials for maintaining health.
Fish oil contains special substances, just as important as vitamins, known as essential polyunsaturated fatty acids EPA and DHA.
Recent scientific research suggests that daily fish oil can help to maintain a healthy heart, and circulation.
Haliborange Fish Oil tablets, the first alternative to liquids and capsules, bring together all the good things from natural fish oil with added essential vitamins A, C, D and E. And best of all in a tasty, crunchy fruit flavour tablet, without the fish oil taste or inconvenience sometimes experienced with taking fish oil in liquid form.
Haliborange — all the goodness of natural fish oil in a crunchy fruit flavour tablet you will enjoy taking.
Give your family the healthy benefits of daily fish oil without the fuss.
Carry the Card for Life
Donor Card I would like to help someone to live after my death Let your relatives know your wishes and keep this card with you at all times
1.
What is organ donation?
It means saying that you want your organs to be used for transplantation after your death to help others.
2.
What use is organ translation?
Parts of the body can be used after death to replace the organ of a sick person.
A heart, liver or lung transplant can save the lives of those whose own organs have failed.
A corneal transplant can help someone to see again.
A kidney transplant can free a person from having to spend many hours every week on a machine which cleans the blood (dialysis).
A pancreatic transplant can mean a person is no longer dependent on injections.
3.
Will doctors give up trying to save me if they know I want to donate my organs?
No.
Doctors don't thin about donation until all attempts to save the patient have failed.
4.
Will I be when my organs are removed?
Yes.
Doctors must use tests to prove the stem of the brain itself is dead.
When this happens, the person is dead.
Only a machine keeps the heart beating.
5.
Will my organs be usable?
In many cases organs can be used despite age and previous illness.
It will be up to the doctor responsible to decide whether or not your organs can be successfully transplanted.
6.
Which organs are used?
If the KIDNEYS stop working, poisons will build up in the blood.
The patient will die within a dew days unless either a special machine is used to clean the blood or he/she has a kidney transplant.
A transplant is cheaper and more effective.
The CORNEA is the clear part at the front of the eye.
Disease may cause it to cloud over.
No light can enter and the person will be blind.
Damage to the cornea is a major cause of blindness.
A corneal transplant is usually the only effective form of treatment.
The HEART pumps blood around the body.
Blood carries essential food and oxygen.
If the heart becomes diseased the blood will no longer reach the organs.
Without food and oxygen, the person will die.
Oxygen from the air goes through the LUNGS into the blood.
Without oxygen, the heart will fail and the brain will die.
Some diseases affect both heart and lungs, so sometimes they are transplanted together.
The LIVER breaks down poisons and keeps the blood balanced.
Without a liver transplant those with liver failure will die.
The PANCREAS produces insulin which controls the amount of sugar in the blood.
If it fails, diabetes may develop, which can cause blindness and kidney failure.
7.
What happens after death?
After death, a machine called a ventilator keeps the blood circulating until the organs are removed.
This stops the organs decaying.
The organs are removed in an operating theatre by a surgeon and the body is treated with respect throughout.
The organs can then be used to replace those of the sick person.
8.
What happens to the body afterwards?
Arrangements for the funeral can be made as in any case of death.
The body can be seen after the organs have been removed.
Removal does not cause disfigurement, even after corneas have been removed.
9
What can I do to help?
Get an organ donor card, fill it in and show it to your relatives to let them know your wishes.
10.
Where can I get a card from?
Cards are available from many places, such as libraries, chemists, doctors' surgeries, police stations and supermarkets.
You can also obtain a card by phoning 0800 444136 at no cost to yourself.
ARE YOU PREGNANT?
How to protect your unborn baby from toxoplasmosis
TOXOPLASMOSIS
Important advice for all pregnant women
If you catch toxoplasmosis while you are pregnant it can seriously affect the health of your unborn baby.
To protect yourself and your baby from the risk of infection, always follow the precautions shown in this leaflet.
HOW TOXOPLASMOSIS IS CAUGHT
Toxoplasmosis can be caught from:
Eating raw or undercooked meat.
Unpasteurised goat's milk and unpasteurised goat's milk products.
Unwashed, uncooked fruit and vegetables.
Dirty cat litter.
Soil contaminated with cat faeces.
If you love cats you can still enjoy them, but a little extra care is so important while you're pregnant.
THE SIMPLE FACTS ABOUT TOXOPLASMOSIS
Toxoplasmosis is not dangerous to healthy adults or children, but there is a risk that if a woman catches the infection during pregnancy, her child may become infected.
Should this happen, the baby can develop severe symptoms, such as water on the brain (hydrocephalus); brain damage which can cause mental handicap and epilepsy; and eye damage which can cause partial loss of sight and sometimes blindness.
HOW COMMON IS TOXOPLASMOSIS?
By the age of 30 many people will have already had the infection, probably without realising it.
Once you have had toxoplasmosis you are immune for life and cannot infect a baby.
The symptoms of toxoplasmosis for healthy adults may be like mild flu, but often there are no symptoms.
Occasionally a person will suffer from a long and unpleasant illness like glandular fever, but this is rare.
It is not known exactly how many pregnant women in the UK catch toxoplasmosis but it could be up to 1,400 cases each year.
Only 40% are likely to pass it to the child.
A small proportion of babies born with toxoplasmosis (1 in 10) will be severely affected with damage to the brain and eyes.
Most of the others may develop eye damage later in life.
FINDING OUT MORE
It is not easy to diagnose toxoplasmosis.
If you are concerned that you might have been exposed to sources of infection, especially if you have been unwell for some time, you can discuss your concerns with your family doctor or antenatal clinic.
The Toxoplasmosis Trust helpline 071 713 0599 is also available to answer your questions.
Treatment can help prevent the infection from seriously damaging the foetus.
If, in spite of treatment, the foetus is shown to be severely affected the woman may be offered the choice of terminating the pregnancy or undertaking a further course of treatment to help prevent more damage.
HOW TO AVID CATCHING TOXOPLASMOSIS
Only eat meat which has been cooked thoroughly right through i.e. brown with no trace of blood or pinkness.
Thorough cooking will kill the toxoplasmosis cyst.
Wash your hands and all cooking utensils and surfaces after preparing raw meat.
Wash fruit and vegetables thoroughly to remove all traces of soil.
Avoid unpasteurised goat's milk and unpasteurised goat's milk products.
Wear rubber gloves when handling dirty cat litter.
Clear out faeces daily.
Always wash your hands and the gloves afterwards.
If possible get someone else to do the job.
Always wear gloves when gardening.
Wash hands afterwards.
Cover outdoor sandboxes to prevent cats using them — although toxoplasmosis is not dangerous to children a pregnant woman could be infected in this way.
It is quite alright to continue no enjoy handling your cat as usual and it is almost impossible to catch toxoplasmosis from a cat scratch.
It is always a good idea to wash your hands after handling pets, and before eating or preparing food.
Take extra care to do this while you are pregnant.
If your cat or kitten is unwell take special care with hygiene and consult your vet.
You could discuss these preventative measures with your pharmacist.
The Toxoplasmosis Trust helpline is also available to answer your questions.
THE TOXOPLASMOSIS TRUST
The Toxoplasmosis Trust provides information advising women how to avoid toxoplasmosis.
The Trust provides fact-sheets and support for anyone affected by toxoplasmosis and educates health professionals.
If you would like a free set of fact-sheets or any other information, or would like to talk to someone about toxoplasmosis, please contact:
All donations are welcome.
Registered Charity No. 328290.
SMART COOKIES DON'T BURN
UVB and UVA Protect the soles of your feet tan gradually stay in the shade re-apply every 2–3 hours wear your sunglasses
Despite its recent bad press, a golden suntan isn't all bad — providing it is developed safely, slowly and sensibly.
Unfortunately, ‘going for the burn’ in a quest for quicker colour can exact a high price in both your appearance and your health.
For a safer suntan you should know how the process works.
YOUR SKIN
A tan is part of the skin's defence against sun damage.
How deeply we tan depends on our genes, not on our suntan lotion.
The tanning process begins when the sun's Ulta-Violet (or UV) radiation penetrates the skin and stimulates production of melanin (tanning pigment) in the lower levels of the skin.
Cells containing this pigment take some time to reach the skin's surface, depending on how recently the skin was last exposed.
It is very important that you don't allow impatience to tempt you into over-exposure and sunburn.
It is not true that you have to burn before you tan.
The obvious symptoms of sunburn include hot, painful skin, redness and tautness.
Less painful, even painless — but once the skin turns visibly pink or red, even some hours after sun exposure, it has burned.
Since the tanning mechanism is stimulated before this, burning is not only unattractive but pointless and dangerous.
REMEMBER!
UVB FOR BURNING
BURNING ISSUES
Since sunburn obviously heals, why is it vital to avoid it?
Superficially, the most immediate effect of sunburn is to kick-start the skin's healing process.
This means the damaged areas are rapidly replaced with new skin, and the burned-but-browned skin flakes off faster.
A more long-term effect is that over-exposed skin will age and wrinkle prematurely, and will thicken to take on a leathery look.
Age-spots and permanent freckles are other symptoms of sun-abuse.
More sinister however is the skin's memory for remembering sunburn.
Skin cancer, which is directly linked to sun exposure and damage, is now the UK's second most common form of cancer.
While most skin cancers are easily treated, some (like malignant melanoma) can be deadly.
PROTECTING CHILDREN
Children have thinner skin than adults and are therefore more sun-sensitive.
Many adults skin problems begin with childhood sunburn.
Always use high SPF protection (15 and above).
Reapply frequently.
Choose long-lasting and highly water resistant products if they like to play in or around water.
Keep children covered with T-shirts and wide brimmed hats, even in the UK.
Apply suncare products even in the UK, in the shade or on cloudy days.
Keep babies under six months out of the sun altogether.
WHO'S MOST AT RISK
THOSE WHO WORK INDOORS AND ARE EXPOSED TO INTENSE SUN ONLY OCCASIONALLY (IE: TWO WEEKS ANNUAL HOLIDAY).
PALE SKINS WHICH DON'T TAN.
FAIR SKINS WHICH TAN LIGHTLY BUT BURN EASILY.
SKINS WHICH HAVE SUFFERED SEVERE SUNBURN IN THE PAST, PARTICULARLY IN CHILDHOOD.
CHILDREN.
UVA FOR AGEING AND ALLERGIES
TIPS FOR TANNING SAFELY
Avoid hot sun between the hours of 11am–2pm.
Don't rely exclusively on shade as a shield.
Water, sand and concrete all reflect a high proportion of UV-light.
UV can penetrate glass, cloud, water and even fine fabrics (likely hosiery) so wear a sunscreen at all times in hot climates.
Reapply a sunscreen frequently (usually every 2–3 hours but check pack instructions) or whenever you ‘towel-off’, otherwise your protection will be reduced.
Pay special attention to sensitive areas like the nose, nipples, ears, soles of feet and, if hair is thinning, the top of the head.
THERE'S SAFETY IN NUMBERS
Despite recent publicity over UVA protection, always take into account your skin type and the SPF (or Sun Protection Factor) category you require.
SPF (which measures UVB protection) is still the first priority as UVB rays are more dangerous, causing damage more quickly and more easily than UVA.
So always look at the front of the pack first to choose the right SPF.
The SPF number indicates how long you can stay in the sun without burning by simply multiplying your natural protection time.
In other words, if you estimate that your skin could remain exposed for 10 minutes without burning, SPF 15 allows you 15 × 10 minutes, or 150 minutes exposure without burning.
WARNING SIGNS
MOST FORMS OF SKIN CANCER CAN BE SUCCESSFULLY TREATED IF THEY ARE CAUGHT EARLY.
CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR IF YOU NOTICE:
MOLES WHICH ARE GROWING OR CHANGING.
AREAS OF SKIN WHICH BECOME THICKENED AND LUMPY WITH IRREGULAR RED-PINK EDGES.
SLOW-GROWING PEARLY PATCHES WHICH MAY BLEED OR WEEP.
As your suntan develops, so does your natural protection, which means you can reduce your SPF as your holiday goes on.
High protection numbers are SPF 15 and above
Medium protection are SPF 2–6
If in doubt as to which are most suitable for you and your destination, ask your pharmacist for advice.
The hotter the climate or higher the altitude, the higher the protection you will need.
The SPF does not indicate the level of UVA protection.
A system has been devised which measures the degree of UVA to UVB protection, but some products will feature the measurement as a star rating system on the back of pack.
The ideal aim is to reduce UVA and UVB equally, so you are not exposed to more of one than the other.
Therefore the higher the SPF you choose, the higher the star rating you should look for.
Four categories exist, the more stars there are and the higher the SPF the better the UVA and UVB protection.
If displayed, choose products which offer superior or maximum UVA protection (ie 3 or 4 stars) after choosing your SPF.
Do not select on UVA star system alone.
Ask your pharmacist for advice if you are confused.
ARE YOU THE SENSITIVE TYPE?
Skin which reddens or burns easily is considered sensitive and should always use high protection suncare.
Certain medication (like antibiotics, the Pill, etc.) may make your skin sun-sensitive.
Check with your pharmacist for advice.
Rashes, itching and irritation can be due to heat, inadequate UVA protection or the ingredients in some suncare products.
Choose products which are fragrance-free, hypoallergenic and which offer superior UVA protection.
Products containing mineral ingredients (such as zinc oxide or titanium dioxide) offer the best defence against UVA.
(N.B. Some allergy-prone skins may react to chemical ingredients so ask your pharmacist about mineral-only products).
AFTER SUN
Keeping the skin well-conditioned, even before sun exposure, helps prevent dryness.
apart from feeling taut, uncomfortable and itchy, dry skin is prone to flaking which will lead to the early loss of your tan.
After sunbathing, always apply a soothing, unperfumed moisturiser over face and body to delay peeling and prolong your tan.
RATING THE RAYS
UVB RAYS ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR SUNBURN.
THEY ARE AT THEIR MOST INTENSE AROUND MID-DAY, DURING MID-SUMMER, IN HOT CLIMATES AND AT HIGH ALTITUDES.
THE NEARER THE EQUATOR YOU TRAVEL THE MORE INTENSE THEY BECOME.
UVA — RAYS PENETRATE DEEPER INTO THE SKIN AND ARE IMPLICATED IN PREMATURE AGEING AND WRINKLING, AS WELL AS SKIN ALLERGIES AND RASHES.
THEY ARE PRESENT ALL-DAY AND ALL-YEAR ROUND.
ENTER THE FLU protected ZONE
YOU SHOULD CONSIDER A VACCINATION
What is flu?
Flu is a viral infection which can make even the fittest person feel quite ill.
The symptoms of flu may last several days, usually starting with a high temperature often with a headache.
Your limbs can ache and your muscles can feel weak.
You may also have a dry irritating cough, a sore throat and a runny, itchy nose.
Who can catch flu?
Flu can spread very rapidly, so it is easy to catch and to pass on to others.
Flu is most likely to affect you in the autumn and winter, e.g. from October to March.
In other words, anyone!
However some people are more at risk than others.
If you are elderly, have a heart, lung or kidney disorder or have diabetes, you should take particular care not to catch flu.
How can I protect myself and my family against flu?
If you are one of those patients who are at greater risk from flu, you should try to avoid catching it.
A flu vaccination can help to protect you from flu.
One simple injection, normally given in the autumn, can help to protect you right through the cold months when flu is most prevalent.
Who can give me a flu vaccination
Your doctor will normally be able to vaccinate you with a flu vaccine.
Only one quick injection is necessary to help give you the protection you may need from flu.
Who can help if I do get flu?
It may be advisable to speak to your local pharmacist who is professionally qualified to offer advice on how to cope with the symptoms of flu.
The pharmacist can also suggest medicines to help reduce your symptoms.
If your symptoms persist for more than a few days, then contact your doctor for advice.
ONE SIMPLE VACCINATION CAN HELP PREVENT YOU CATCHING INFLUENZA ASK YOUR DOCTOR OR NURSE FOR ADVICE
What to do if you have flu
1
Go to bed
2
Drink plenty of liquids to avoid fluid loss caused by sweating.
3
Ask you local pharmacist for advice on medications to help relieve symptoms.
4
Use a hot water bottle if you feel shivery.
5
Call you doctor for advice if symptoms persist for more than a few days.
6
A dose of flu means you could be off work for at least a week.
You will need a self certification note for your employer (available from your doctor's surgery.
Why risk catching flu?
If you are a person at greater risk from flu, consider having a flu vaccine this autumn.
APPOINTMENT DATE:
APPOINTMENT TIME:
HUMAN HEART VALVE DONATION
Something so simple…
Human Heart Valve Donation
What are heart valves?
There are four valves inside your heart.
Each valve has two or three ‘pockets’(leaflets) which keep blood flowing in one direction only.
Blood flowing forwards opens the valves and flattens the pockets.
As the blood tries to flow backwards, the pockets fill up, closing the valves so that blood is prevented from flowing in the wrong direction.
A simple mechanism, but a crucial one.
Who needs heart valves?
Heart valves are vital for transplantation into children born with valve defects and adults with diseased or worn valves.
The operation is well established; there are no rejection problems and only size matters when matching a suitable valve to the patient's heart.
In fact, surgeons have been successfully transplanting valves for almost thirty years, saving thousands of lives.
Why use a human valve?
There are commercially produced alternatives, such as pig or mechanical valves, but the natural human valve is best for many adults and is ideally suited for children.
Transplanting human valves rather than commercial alternatives also makes economic sense, reducing the cost of the operation by almost 50%.
That means twice as many operations could be performed and twice as many lives could be saved.
The Oxford Heart Centre Valve Bank
The Oxford Heart Centre, based at the John Radcliffe, has recently set up a human heart valve ‘band’ to organise donation in the Oxford region.
Most of the heart valves collected will be transplanted in to local patients, many of them children.
If you donate your valves, you could be saving their lives.
Think about it.
Could I be a donor?
Heart valves can be removed very simply from the body up to three days after death…you do not need to have been on a life support machine…even heart attack victims can be suitable donors.
In fact, 80% of people who die under the age of 60 are suitable donors.
That could be you.
What should I do?
Nobody likes to think about death…especially premature death…but the miracles of modern medicine now make it possible for someone who dies to give life to another.
If you think you would like to donate your heart valves, here's what you should do:
Discuss it with your family and friends.
Make sure they know and understand your wishes.
Carry a donor card.
Call our advice line.
It's open 24 hours a day, seven days a week, and will give you more information about heart valve donation.
The number to ring is 
Remember…human heart valve donation…something so simple…could mean so much.
Cusps flattened against valve wall to allow blood to pass through the valve in the correct direction
Cusps (pockets) filled with blood trying to flow in wrong direction preventing it passing through the valve and stopping backflow
Valve open
Blood flow (correct direction)
Valve closed
Blood cannot flow back through valve
Top view of open valve
Top view of closed valve
Valve cut open to show cusps
MALE and FEMALE STERILISATION
STERILISATION
Sterilisation is a permanent method of birth control which involves a minor operation for a man or woman.
Medical advances in recent years have made male and female sterilisation simpler and more acceptable to many people.
Sterilisation may be the ideal method of birth control for couples who are sure they have completed their family.
FEMALE STERILISATION
This involves an operation in which the fallopian tubes are closed so that the egg cannot travel down them to meet the sperm and start a pregnancy.
There are several ways in which this can be done.
The fallopian tubes can be reached through a small cut in the skin of the abdominal wall, either directly (this is called laparotomy) or via a delicate telescope (this is called laparoscopy).
The most common method used is laparoscopy.
Occasionally the fallopian tubes are reached through a cut in the vagina, or through the uterus.
Once the fallopian tubes have been reached they can be artificially blocked by trying and removal of a small piece (tubal ligation) or sealing (diathermy) or by the use of clips or rings.
PORTION OF TUBE CLOSED
Uterus
Fallopian Tube
Ovary
Cervix
Vagina
Where is the operation carried out?
Female sterilisation is usually carried out in hospital or in a well-equipped clinic.
It can be done under general or local anaesthetic.
The length of time spent in hospital depends on the method used, but it can be as little as one day.
Are there any physical or emotional changes?
The sex hormones which give a woman her femininity, and control ovulation and the menstrual cycle should not be affected.
The operation should not change a woman's feelings or emotions, or make her feel less feminine.
The womb, cervix, fallopian tubes and ovaries are all left in place.
The only physical change should be that she is no longer able to have children.
However in a few women the periods may become a little heavier.
For the great majority of women sterilisation provides peace of mind by removing the fear of unplanned pregnancy and this can lead to a happier sex life.
When is the operation effective?
The operation is effective immediately.
However it is important to take reliable contraceptive precautions until the operation is performed, and some doctors also advise the use of contraceptive precautions until the first normal period after the operation.
This is because an egg that has already almost reached the womb could still be implanted after the operation.
MALE STERILISATION
In male sterilisation, or vasectomy, the tubes (the vas deferens) through which sperm travel from the testes to the penis, are cut or blocked so that sperm can no longer enter the ejaculate (the fluid released when a man reaches climax).
The two tubes are reached through a small cut (about 1 cm long) either in the middle, or on each side of the scrotum (bag holding the testicles).
A small amount of each tube may be removed or the tubes may be cut and the ends closed.
Vasectomy is usually carried out under local anaesthetic, and the whole operation only takes about 10 minutes.
Where is the operation carried out?
The operation can be carried out as an outpatient procedure in a clinic, hospital or in some specially-equipped GP surgeries.
Male Sterilisation is technically simpler than female sterilisation because the vas deferens is more easily reached than the fallopian tube.
Are there any physical or emotional changes?
Vasectomy has no effect on the male sex organs — testes prostate gland, penis, nor on the secretion of the male sex hormone which is responsible for masculine qualities.
Nothing is taken away except the ability to have children and the only difference after the operation is that the seminal fluid ejaculated when a man reaches a climax contains no sperm.
Since sperm only constitute a tiny proportion of the seminal fluid this is not even noticeable.
Vasectomy does not change who you are and how you feel about sex, it only prevents pregnancies.
When is the operation effective?
When the operation is carried out there will still be many sperm left in the tube leading to the penis.
It usually takes between 10 and 20 ejaculations to clear these sperm.
For this reason the man is asked to provide two semen samples for examination about three months after the operation, to see if the seminal fluid is free of sperm.
It is important to use contraceptive precautions until two consecutive tests show there are no sperm left in the ejaculate 
Urethra
Penis
Vas Deferens
SECTION OF VAS REMOVED OR BLOCKED
Bladder
Prostate Gland
ANY QUESTIONS?
What happens to the eggs and sperm after the operation?
The egg from the ovary is the woman and the sperm from the testicles in the man continue to be produced but as their pathway through the fallopian tubes or vas deferens is blocked after the operation, they are removed by normal body process.
Is sterilisation 100 per cent successful?
It is rare for fertility to return after a sterilisation operation but, occasionally, the pathway through the fallopian tubes in the woman or the vas deferens in the man does re-open and fertility returns.
The chance of this happening is approximately one in a 1,000 for vasectomy, and one in 500 for female sterilisation.
Is it reversible?
It cannot be stated too strongly that sterilisation should always be regarded as a permanent step.
Operations to reverse sterilisation do exist but the chances of success are not high and depend to some extent on the type of sterilisation operation carried out originally.
Success rates for reversals are improving as a result of new and delicate surgical techniques which are only available in some specialist centres.
Why is counselling necessary?
Because of the permanent nature of the operation, counselling is necessary.
This provides an opportunity for any worries, problems and questions about any aspect of sterilisation to be discussed with the doctor before the final decision is made.
People who have never had a child should think very carefully indeed, before considering sterilisation.
IF EITHER PARTNER HAS ANY DOUBTS ABOUT STERILISATION AFTER COUNSELLING DO NOT GO AHEAD, but continue with another method of contraception.
If you think you may regret having the operation, do not proceed.
Is a partner's consent required?
Sterilisation operations are governed by the same legal requirements as any other operation, that is the patient should give informed permission for the procedure that is to be carried out.
Neither partner in a relationship has rights over the other's body and the permission of the partner is not legally necessary.
However, normally a doctor would seek the agreement of the partner before doing a sterilisation operation.
Nearly all clinics providing such a service insist on this.
HOW TO GET ADVICE
Where can I find out more about sterilisation?
By visiting your general practitioner (GP) or your nearest family planning clinic.
Do I have to pay?
All family planning services, including sterilisation, are provided free on the National Health Service if you are ordinarily resident in the UK.
The services are available from hospitals, clinics and family doctors who have agreed to provide family planning advice.
If for any reason you prefer not to discuss birth control with your own GP, you are entitled to go to another GP for this service.
How do I find my local clinic?
There are NHS family planning clinics all over the country.
You can get the address and times of your nearest clinic from your:
Health Centre
Midwife
Telephone directory or Yellow Pages under ‘family planning’
There are a few free-paying clinics too.
If you wish you can ‘phone or write for details of NHS or free-paying clinics to the A final word The information provided in this leaflet is not intended to be exhaustive, but tells you the basic facts about male and female sterilisation on the basis of evidence available at the time of publication.
DON'T FORGET — ring or visit the clinic or your doctor if you are worried or unsure about anything.
AIDS: Safer Sex
Anyone, male or female, can get AIDS form intercourse
The more partners, the greater the risk
So stay with one partner, or use a condom — carefully — every time — to protect against AIDS whatever your contraceptive
TETANUS ARE YOU SUFFICIENTLY AWARE OF TETANUS?
UNDERSTANDING TETANUS
Understanding tetanus (lockjaw) may help to encourage you to seek protection.
Tetanus is caused by bacteria which are present in soil.
They may be introduced into the body during injury, often through a puncture wound, and also through burns or seemingly trivial wounds, for example, caused by pricking your finger on a rose thorn.
Makes you think doesn't it?
The tetanus bacteria grow at the site of the injury and release a toxin which produces rigid muscles and muscle contractions.
PREVENTION
Tetanus is extremely serious.
But it is preventable.
The sooner in life that you are protected the better.
Children may be given tetanus vaccination in the first few weeks of life and its importance is underlined by its inclusion in the primary recommended vaccination schedules which begins at two months.
BOOSTERS
Tetanus vaccine is very effective.
You do, however, need to boost the effect from time to time.
Immediately before school entry (provided at least three years have elapsed from the third and last dose of the primary course) and between 15–19 years or before leaving school are the times for boosters.
And then at intervals of ten years/
PLAYING SPORT
For some people, boosters may be recommended after five years.
For example, sportsmen and sportswomen.
In recent years two rugby players and a footballer developed tetanus from cuts.
Unfortunately only one survived.
Sports players should not continue to play with open wounds.
TRAVELLING
Tetanus is more common in the developing and warmer countries than in the UK.
So, most travellers should be protected.
Facilities for treatment may be few and far between and inaccessible, especially for overlanders and for those taking more adventurous trips.
Boosters at five-year intervals are recommended.
OLDER PEOPLE
People do not build resistance to tetanus with time or age.
Older people need to be protected as much as younger people.
Many in their forties and older, especially women, have never had tetanus vaccination or boosters.
It's never too late.
PREGNANCY
Tetanus vaccination may be given in pregnancy.
ADVICE
Ask your doctor or practice nurse for any further information or to make an appointment.
It really does make sense to protect yourself against tetanus.
IT'S HARD TO believe but tetanus still kills people in this country.
People in good health.
People of all ages.
Often in the prime of their lives.
It just doesn't make sense to allow this situation to continue.
And there's no reason why it should.
Tetanus vaccine is effective.
And you can have the course of vaccinations in the familiar surroundings of your general practitioner's surgery.
Free.
Sports injuries
When injury or strain keep you away from your sport
CHIROPRACTIC…so often the answer 
An Official Publication by The British Chiropractic Association
From rugby to snooker…every sport has its own problems
Of course sport is part of a healthy lifestyle as well as a hobby or profession.
But people who take part in sport are liable to injury or strain.
Some sports have obvious dangers, such as rugby and football.
Some have even given their name to conditions, such as‘Tennis’ elbow and ‘Golfers’elbow, both being pains on different sides of the elbow joint.
But it is often forgotten that even less physical sports such as bowls, and even snooker, where the same movement is repeated many times, can cause problems, too.
Accidents in sport, whether to the ribs, legs, feet, head or shoulders, nearly always jar the spine.
Muscles and joints in the arms and legs suffer too, as every sportsperson knows.
The result is not only pain, but an enforced lay-off that can cause as much distress as the discomfort.
Chiropractic can get you fit again
Most sports injuries are to the mechanical structure of our bodies, the very areas that chiropractic was developed to treat.
By specific adjustments, your highly skilled chiropractor can restore normal mobility and relieve strain whether the problem is with the spine, joints or muscles.
You may remember that, when Olympic diver Greg Louganis struck his head on the diving board, in a surprisingly short time he returned to the board to win a third Gold Medal.
What startled spectator did not know was that a chiropractor on the Olympic Staff had given him a spinal adjustment immediately after the accident.
Even though not all the results of chiropractic adjustment are this dramatic, many sportsmen and women have  benefited from chiropractic treatment.
In fact, it is recommended that all people who take part in sport should have regular check-ups with a qualified chiropractor.
Find out the name and address of your nearest qualified chiropractor.
Apart from treating injuries and strain, it could be extremely useful if you asked your chiropractor to advise your team or club.
Golden Rules to avoid backache
Watch your posture
Stand up straight
Sit up straight with support for the lower back
Never bend when you can kneel or squat
Prepare yourself properly when lifting a heavy weight
Never stoop or bend for prolonged periods
Use one pillow and a good supportive mattress
Distribute heavy weights equally
Never take exercise without a warm up and cool down
Chiropractic
As usual, the Greeks had a word for it
Like many medical terms, Chiropractic springs from the classical languages.
Originating from ‘cheiro’, a hand, and ‘proktos’, to use, it literally means ‘done by hand’ or ‘manipulation’.
But Chiropractic, now the largest primary health care profession in the western world after medicine and dentistry, is so much more than just manipulation.
In fact, in Chiropractic, the emphasis is on prevention and ‘adjustment’.
According to the condition being treated, one or more of a whole range of different Chiropractic adjustment techniques could be employed.
With these, the highly skilled and trained chiropractor effects a purely bio-mechanical correction to restore normal movement and function.
Surgery is never used and drugs very rarely employed.
Chiropractic is based on a very simple fact.
Your body is literally a ‘machine’.
It has power sources, wiring, electricity and lubrication etc.
But, like all machines it also has a mechanical structure.
That mechanical structure, with the spine as its most important support and carrier of the major nervous system, can get damaged, distorted or irritated.
When it does, the result is acute or nagging pain, not only in the back, but often in the neck, shoulders, arms and legs.
Those who can benefit from chiropractic treatment range from children to the elderly, sportsmen to pregnant women.
From the British Medical Journal, June 2nd, 1990:
‘…chiropractic almost certainly confers worthwhile, long-term benefit in comparison with hospital outpatient management.’
(Report on Chiropractic treatment for low back pain)
The skill that takes five years to learn
To become a chiropractic, students must take a four year, full time course at a recognised college, leading to a BSc degree in Chiropractic, followed by a further year post graduate course at an established clinic.
Only then can an application be made for full membership of the British Chiropractic Association.
Any patient contemplating chiropractic treatment should always establish that their chiropractor is qualified and has been accepted for membership of the British Chiropractic Association.
Not a ‘miracle cure’
Chiropractic is an established branch of primary health care treatment.
As such, although dramatic results can be obtained, every qualified chiropractor will tell you that there is no average length for the course of treatment your condition may require.
When a condition is diagnosed that cannot benefit from chiropractic, such as acute inflammatory disease or rheumatoid arthritis, your chiropractor will refer you elsewhere.
Where diagnosis shows that your condition can benefit from chiropractic treatment, you will also get professional advice on bending, lifting and any other preventive precautions you should take.
As Chiropractic is only available on the payment of fees, your qualified chiropractor will, if required, give you an estimate of the probable cost involved.
The average chiropractic fee is usually well within the means of most patients, and is also an available benefit on many private health insurance schemes.
You may ask to be referred to a chiropractor by your GP, or arrange a consultation on your own initiative.
Chiropratic…so often the answer 
For any further information or other helpful leaflets, and a 9″ × 6″ stamped addressed envelope and cheque/postal order to:
Set of 5 leaflets — £1.00: Backache and leg pain, Headache and Migraine, Neck, shoulder and arm pains, Sport Injuries, and Back pain is an overhead.
CERVICAL SMEARS
You have just had a cervical smear.
This is to pick up changes in the cells on the cervix (neck of the womb) which might in time go on to become cancer.
The majority of smears are normal.
However, if the test shows any abnormality you may need further investigation or treatment.
Repeating the smear may be all that is required.
In some cases you will need to be seen for further investigation and/or treatment.
YOU NEED TO KNOW THE RESULT OF YOUR SMEAR
PLEASE CHECK WITH YOUR DOCTOR AS TO HOW THIS WILL BE DONE.
While examining the smear other minor changes not connected with cancer are often found.
When this happens we repeat the smear.
Sometimes it is best to wait for 3 to 6 months or even a year to do this.
The commonest reasons are:
1.
Vaginal infection which may or may not be causing symptoms.
2.
The presence of an I.U.D.
(coil) in the uterus (womb).
3.
The smear may have been taken too near a period.
Vaginal infections are very common in women and can usually be easily treated.
If there are signs of infection on the smear, you may be asked to see your own doctor for treatment before having the smear repeated.
REMEMBER
Most smears are normal.
Only very few smears show signs suggestive of cancer.
Most minor abnormalities are not caused by cancer at all.
FUTURE FOLLOW-UP
1.
Women need to have smears taken regularly.
Your cervical screening card will tell you when your next smear is due.
Your doctor would send you an appointment, but if you move or do not hear, please contact your doctor or clinic and arrange for a further smear.
2.
After the age of 65, provided your smears have been normal and you have no symptoms, there is no need to have any more.
3.
When arranging your next smear, do not make an appointment during your menstrual period.
4.
If you develop symptoms such as ABNORMAL OR UNUSUAL DISCHARGE OR IRREGULAR BLEEDING before your next smear is due, please consult your doctor.
PLEASE KEEP THIS LEAFLET AS A REMINDER
YOUR HEALTH A Guide to Services for Women
Personal Record
Fill in your personal details and keep handy for immediate reference
Make sure you are registered with a GP.
Remember to notify the practice of any change of address 
YOUR HEALTH A Guide to Services for Women
In general, women are healthier and live longer than ever before, indeed on average they can expect to live 5 years longer than men.
But although anyone can catch a cold or break their leg only women have babies or get cancer of the cervix, and some health problems, like osteoporosis and cystitis,mostly affect women.
In recent years, a lot of work has gone into improving the quality of care that patients receive from the health service.
Particular emphasis has been placed on women's health.
Many women have a special, influential role in family health, such as in making decisions about the family's diet and in educating children by their example.
This booklet, however, concentrates on women as individuals and outlines the help and services available.
It is not a comprehensive guide to symptoms and services, but it should point you the right direction and show you where to go for help.
AT YOUR SERVICE
Good health is not just about providing efficient, high quality medical services.
In many ways it is also a partnership.
There is much that each of us can do to help ourselves — by not smoking, by eating sensibly, by taking regular exercise, and by not drinking too much.
There is also a wealth of support and expertise throughout the health service to turn to when you need help.
Your Doctor
It is likely that your first point of contact for most medical services will be your Family Doctor or General Practitioner.
The GP and the health team (which may include a practice nurse) will know about the health resources in your area and can arrange specialist help when you need it.
Your GP will also keep your details for the systematic screening programmes (for breast and cervical cancer).
It is essential you are registered with a GP, who needs to have your latest address.
GPs are not simply there to give help to people when they are ill.
They promote health and help prevent illness in the first place.
All will offer general health checks, write prescriptions and immunise against disease.
Other services which they and their health team may provide include:
Well Woman Clinics
Family Planning
Health Promotion Clinics (which cover aspects of health such as diet, alcohol control, giving up smoking and coping with stress).
Different doctors offer different services.
All provide a leaflet telling you about the range of services on offer.
Before choosing a GP, think about you needs and the  services that a particular surgery offers.
The sort of questions you might like to ask the receptionist are:
Is a health visitor or nurse attached to the practice?
I a woman doctor available?
Are there family planning services?
Are there arrangements for surgeries or clinics out of working hours?
Does the practice work with or employ a midwife?
Are there facilities for young children (e.g. play area)?
Is there a disabled access?
If a service or facility you would like is not available, ask about it.
The practice might not know that a need exists and may be able to help.
Making the most of your doctor
Your GP is an expert in health care — but only you will know exactly what and how you feel.
The more openly you and your doctor can talk together, the better the service he or she will be able to give you.
Questions you might ask about any problem could be:
what caused it?
how is it treated?
what can I do about it?
are there any long term effects?
how can I prevent it happening again?
to make sure everything is covered you could write your questions down before you go.
It might also help to make a note of your doctor's answers as a reminder of what is said, for example about any medicines you should take.
Sometimes it's not easy to talk about intimate things like sex or your body.
Remember it's likely your problem will be common to many other women who attend the same surgery.
You might find it helps to bring a friend or relative with you.
Service and Choice
Everyone has a right to first-rate care and everyone has the right to complain if they're not satisfied.
If you aren't happy with the service you're getting from your GP, dentist or optician, then discuss it with them first.
They are there to help you and will want to clear away any misunderstanding.
If you are still unhappy you can change to another practice.
A full list of GPs in your area is obtainable from the library or from your local Family Health Services Authority (FHSA)(address in your local telephone book) and you don't have to tell your doctor your reasons for changing.
You just ask the doctor of your choice whether you can be taken onto their list.
ETHNIC MINORITIES
To take account of differences in language and culture a number of services are available for women from ethnic minority communities.
Link workers
Some health authorities and general practitioners employ ling workers.
They work in many clinics, health centres and surgeries where there are large ethnic minority communities.
The link worker can help overcome language and cultural barriers between the doctor or nurse and the patient.
If you wish they can stay with you during a consultation.
If you think a link worker might be helpful ask the doctor or nurse if one is available.
Advice
There are booklets, videos and audio tapes available in ethnic minority languages to advise you on particular health issues.
You can ask the Health Promotion Unit of your local health authority (address in phone book) what material is available and how you can get it.
Enquiries
Your doctor or the local Family Health Services Authority can tell you about the services available 
COMMON HEALTH CONCERNS
There are several complaints that may affect women at some time in their lives from period pains and pre-menstrual tension to thrush and cystitis.
Often these problems are merely irritating, but for some women the problem can be so severe that they way they live their life can be affected.
There is a range of information available on how to cope.
Cystitis
This usually takes the form of a burning pain when you pass water and the feeling you want to go to the toilet more often than usual.
It is very common — more than half the women in this country suffer from cystitis at some point in their lives.
Drinking several pints of water should help to relieve the symptoms in the short term, but, if they persist, you should see your GP as soon as possible.
This condition generally responds rapidly to simple treatment.
For more information:
Available from:
Continence
Many women suffer from incontinence.
If you have a problem, do mention it to your doctor, health visitor or midwife.
They will be able to advise you and may recommend exercises to strengthen your pelvic floor muscles or other treatment.
Thrush
Thrush is caused by a yeast infection.
Common symptoms include an intense itching in the vagina and possibly a whitish discharge.
If it is recurrent your sexual partner may also need treatment.
To soothe the discomfort, if the thrush is severe, your doctor might give you pessaries — pills you put directly in the vagina — or cream.
For more information:
Available from:
Pre-menstrual tension
Pre-menstrual tension covers a range of emotional or physical problems that many women suffer before a period.
These can include swelling and breast discomfort as well as tension, depression or irritability.
If you suffer badly form these symptoms, go and see your doctor who should be able to help.
Period Pains
Period pains can be severe and disruptive.
Sometimes, a mild painkiller is enough to ease the pain but, if it's more of a problem, your doctor will be able to prescribe medicines or give you other advice.
For more information:
Available form:
Depression & Stress
Events in a woman's life like childbirth (see page 23), a break-up in a marriage or partnership, or bereavement, can lead to depression.
In some cases this can be painful, distressing and can affect your family and work.
If you are depressed, see you doctor, who will be able to discuss your difficulties with you and offer advice.
This may involve putting you in contact with specialist help or one of the voluntary organisations that are expert in this field.
(For help with problems in a relationship see ‘Relationships’ on page 32.)
For additional support contact:
Sometimes depression is caused by circumstances.
In this sort of situation the local Social Services Department may be able to help with many practical problems, such as caring for a dependent relative.
VIOLENCE
Physical and sexual assaults against women occur both inside and outside the family.
Violence in the home is as much a crime as violence from a stranger, so do not put up with it.
You are entitled to legal protection and reporting assaults to the police makes it less likely that they will occur.
You can get help from you GP or from your local Social Services Department and you could contact a local rape crisis centre or women's refuge.
If you are experiencing domestic violence you can ring the Women's Aid National Helpful on 
BREAST AND CERVICAL SCREENING
Each year, more than 15,000 women in Britain die from breast cancer and about 2,000 form cancer of the cervix.
Many of these deaths could have been prevented if the disease had been discovered earlier.
To reduce these figures, two major national screening programmes have been introduced — the first of their kind in the European Community.
Women in the age groups described below are now entitled to free and regular screening.
If you are on GP's books, then you'll be picked up by the schemes.
Make sure you take advantage of the service.
Cervical Cancer
The cervix is the neck of the womb.
In certain cases its cells undergo changes in the cells mean that cervical cancer can be prevented before it starts.
By carrying out a smear test, doctors can detect the abnormal cells that might become cancerous in time and then treat them easily and simply.
The national screening programme will enable all women between the ages of 20 and 64 to be tested at least every five years (you should have received your invitation for screening by 1993).
The smear test takes less than five minutes and normally only causes slight discomfort.
The great majority of women won't have any abnormalities.
If your smear isn't normal it doesn't always mean you need treatment.
Sometimes all that is needed is for the  smear to be repeated in 6 months or a year.
If treatment is needed the success rate is very high.
Major surgery is rarely necessary.
You generally won't have to stay overnight in hospital.
The early treatment of abnormal cells will not affect your sex drive or fertility.
For more information:
Available from:
Breast cancer
Breast cancer kills more women than any other form of cancer.
It is more common in older women but, if the small changes are discovered early, there is a better chance of a successful recovery — and less likelihood of serious surgery.
The national breast screening programme is free a d offers mammography (breast X-rays) every three years to all women between the ages of 50 and 64.
Older women can also be screened every three years on request.
The service is provided by nearly 80 special screening centres throughout England — at hospitals, clinics or mobiles units.
If you are in the relevant age-group, and have registered your address with your GP, then you should automatically get an invitation by the end of 1993.
Women below 50 will not be invited routinely.
Mammography is less accurate at detecting cancers in younger women.
This can lead to unnecessary investigations.
Also it is not advisable to have X-rays more often than is really needed.
For more information:
Available from:
Although routine screening is available for certain groups of women it is still important for you to maintain an awareness of your own health.
You should know what is normal for you and consult your GP if any changes occur which concern you.
All women should register with a GP and ensure that they notify the practice of any change of address.
This will ensure that you are invited for screening as appropriate.
Some may find it inconvenient to take the time off work to be screened.
Your GP may be able to off out-of-work-hours cervical screening and you should ask your employer about workplace screening or getting the necessary time off to have it done.
Help and counselling about breast and cervical cancer are available from:
FAMILY PLANNING
Free family planning advice and services are available under the NHS from most family doctors and family planning clinics.
In some areas there may be special clinics for particular groups such as young people, or services provided by voluntary organisations to complement NHS facilities.
Women are free to choose where they want to go for advice and treatment.
Forms of contraception
There are many different types of contraception available.
You can discuss with your doctor or family planning clinic which is most suitable for you.
They include:
the oral contraceptive pill
the intra-uterine device (IUD or coil)
the diaphragm or cap
the condom
the sponge
injectable contraceptives
sterilisation (for you or your partner).
This is a permanent method of contraception and is only recommended for those who are absolutely sure that they do not want any more children.
Most forms of contraception are available from family planning clinics but GPs are not able to prescribe condoms on the NHS, although some may have agreements with local Health Authorities to supply them to their patients.
You can, however, buy some forms of contraceptives like the condom or sponge from chemists or other retailers.
GPs and family planning clinics can also provide advice to those who wish to use natural methods of seeking to avoid pregnancy.
Contact your local Family Health Services Authority or District Health Authority for information on the availability of local services (the address will be in the phone book).
Information can also be obtained from:
For advice on natural family planning methods:
In case of emergency
Emergency contraception (sometimes called ‘the morning after pill’) may protect you against pregnancy if you have had sexual intercourse without contraception or if you think that the method you have used may not have worked — but it should never be used up to 72 hours after intercourse and an IUD method that may be fitted within five days.
GPs or local family planning clinics will be able to advice you on these.
Safer Sex
Sex is a natural way of expressing human feelings but sometimes there are risks, including the possibility of catching a sexually transmitted disease — for example gonorrhoea, syphilis or chlamydia.
Most sexually transmitted diseases are curable.
Now there is the risk of infection with HIV, the Human Immuno Deficiency Virus which causes AIDS.
There is as yet no vaccine against HIV infection and no cure for AIDS.
You can get confidential help from your GP or local Genito-Urinary Medicine clinic.
Remember that, although in this country the impact of HIV and AIDS has up until now been mainly confined to homosexual men and injecting drug users, the infection can also be transmitted between men and women by unprotected sexual intercourse.
This is the most common cause of transmission worldwide.
Also, remember that many people with HIV infection may remain perfectly well for some years, and it is not possible to tell who is infected just by looking at them.
So if you have any doubts at all…use a condom.
Used properly they act as a contraceptive and can protect you from HIV and other sexually transmitted diseases.
Contraceptives, such as the pill, do not provide protection against these.
For free, confidential advice and help you can ring the National AIDS Helpline on, any time, any day.
The Helpline will also give you details of the telephone advice services available in various ethnic minority languages.
For more information:
Available from:
PREPARING FOR PREGNANCY
It helps to plan for your pregnancy before you become pregnant and above all to concentrate on your health.
The healthier you are when pregnant, the healthier your baby is likely to be.
Get immunised
For adults, catching German Measles (Rubella) won't do you much harm.
But if you do catch it when you are pregnant, you unborn child could be seriously affected and born deaf, blind or brain damaged.
Your GP will be able to immunise you free of charge if you need it.
After immunisation you must wait at least 1 month before becoming pregnant.
Eat properly
Eating well before and during pregnancy is very important.
It keeps you fit and helps you to have a healthy baby.
You don't need a special diet and ‘eating for two’ could mean you put on too much weight.
Enjoying a variety of foods gives you all the nourishment you need.
There are certain precautions women should take during pregnancy, for instance, avoiding certain foods and being careful about contact with animals.
Your doctor, midwife or health visitor will tell you about these.
(For general advice on diet, see page 27–28.)
Stop smoking
If you smoke when you're pregnant, it is not just your own health you are damaging.
Smoking can affect the developing baby by holding back its growth.
There is a higher risk that your baby will be underweight at birth and you run a greater risk of complications when your baby is born.
(For further information and ‘Smoker's Quit Line’ number see page 29.)
For more information:
Available:
Cut down on alcohol
It is probably best to cut out alcohol altogether when pregnant.
Never drink heavily during pregnancy.
(See page 29–30 for more information and contact addresses.)
Medicines
Some medicines, whether prescribed or bought from the chemists, can damage your baby very early in a pregnancy.
If you take any form of medicine or tablet, check with your doctor first.
Drugs Misuse
Misusing drugs in pregnancy can seriously harm your baby and even lead to the birth of a baby dependent on drugs.
If you are involved in any form of drug misuse consult your doctor.
Infertility Services
It takes different people different lengths of time to conceive.
Indeed, one in ten couples find it takes them over a year, while for others it is much quicker.
But if you're worried, go to your doctor for advice.
Some cases of infertility are easy to treat, although others require complex treatment which may, in any case, not be successful.
Maternity Services
There's a wide range of services offered by the NHS to help you through every stage of your pregnancy, including regular ante-natal classes, designed to keep you well and to prepare you and your partner for the birth and for looking after your child.
All services are free.
Make sure you go to see your doctor as soon as you suspect you are pregnant.
There is a wealth of of useful information about pregnancy and birth, available from organisations like the Health Education Authority.
The Pregnancy Book is given free through the NHS to all first-time expectant mothers.
Screening
When you are pregnant, it is possible your GP will suggest a number of tests — an ultrasound scan for example— to check that both you and your baby are in good health.
Such tests are normally safe.
Make sure you understand what you are being offered and why, and also the possible effects they may have.
For further information:
Abortion
Sometimes, because of the circumstances, termination of a pregnancy may need to be considered.
A GP is generally in the best position to advise, but advice can also be obtained from a pregnancy advice bureau registered by the Department of Health or one or more of the voluntary bodies (which may include religious organisations) which offer help to pregnant women.
Details of these can be found in your local telephone directory: look under ‘pregnancy test services ’ in the Yellow Pages.
The loss of a baby
Unfortunately, some pregnancies result in miscarriage or stillbirth; or a baby does not survive beyond the early stages of life.
Professional staff, including your GP, hospital consultant or midwife, with be able to provide you and your partner with immediate support and advice.
The following organisations can also provide help.
BIRTH AND BEYOND
Your midwife or GP will be able to tell you about the types of care available which may include: a hospital maternity unit, a GP maternity unit, or a home birth.
Soon after the birth, you and your baby will be visited by a health visitor who will tell you about health checks for the baby either from your GP or from your local child health clinic.
Breastfeeding
There is no doubt that breastfeeding is best for your baby and you.
It's natural, promotes your child's growth and helps to protect against allergy and infection.
It's also convenient and free.
For mothers who choose not to breastfeed, bottlefeeding provides a safe alternative.
Depression
It's not unusual for many women to feel depressed a few days after giving birth.
For most it's a temporary phase, caused by a variety of factors — not least tiredness.
But if the feeling persists then see your doctor or health visitor and let them know just what you're feeling and for how long you've felt it.
Immunisation
You should get your child immunised as soon as possible against Diphtheria, Tetanus, Whooping Cough, Polio, Measles, Mumps and Rubella.
Your GP or health visitor will make the necessary arrangements at the correct time.
GROWING OLDER
As you get older, the pressures of work, home and family can make it very easy to forget your own health.
Events like bereavement or retirement can increase the pressure.
The Menopause
The menopause is a natural event in every woman's life.
It marks the end of her periods and her capacity to bear children.
At the same time, for many women it can also mark a new beginning.
The average age for the menopause to occur is 50 — in some women it can start as early as 35 and in others as late as 60.
But just as adolescence brings about major changes in your body, most women experience some physical and emotional change during the menopause.
Sometimes this can be very unsettling.
Common symptoms include hot flushes an dryness of the skin an vagina.
Some women also go through varying emotions, including depression and irritability.
If your everyday life is affected by menopausal symptoms see your doctor.
If it is suitable for you, your doctor might suggest Hormone Replacement Therapy (HRT) to relieve the symptoms.
If further bleeding occurs a year or more after your periods have stopped, you should always consult your doctor.
Osteoporosis (Brittle bones)
Osteoporosis is a condition that mainly affects women after the menopause.
Their bones become fragile and break more easily leading to fractures of wrists, hips and bones the spine.
There may be back pain and loss of height.
A healthy lifestyle, including taking exercise and avoiding smoking and heavy drinking (see page 27–30) will reduce the possibility of developing osteoporosis.
Your doctor will advise you whether any other action is necessary.
If you have already developed osteoporosis, they may be able to treat it or refer you to a specialist.
For help and information:
Elderly People
Getting older does not necessarily mean losing independence.
Though people expect illness to become more frequent in old age, you should not assume that nothing can be done, but should consult your doctor if you think you have a health problem.
You should continue to lead a healthy life, such as eating a balanced diet, taking  exercise and keeping warm.
GPs must offer an annual health check to all their patients aged 75 and over.
You do not have to accept this offer, but it makes sense to do so.
It is free of charge and can help to detect early signs of health problems and prevent them developing.
When necessary, the health and social services can offer help to people to keep their independence with a range of special services including domestic help, delivery of cooked meals, sitters-in and night attendants.
For more information:
(See phone book for local branches).
LOOKING AFTER YOURSELF
Being healthy is more than a question of not being ill.
Although the health services outlined in this book can give you vital help and treatment, you need to help yourself as well, by taking care of what you do and eat.
Exercise
Taking regular exercise is one of the healthiest things that women can do.
Not only can it help control your weight and prevent heart disease, it will make you look and feel better.
And exercise is not just a matter of jogging or sport — it can mean other enjoyable activities like dancing, swimming and walking.
If you can exercise just two or three times a week, for about half an hour at a time, you will keep your body in shape.
For more information:
Available from:
Healthy Eating
Eating regular nourishing meals is important to keep yourself fit and well.
Make sure you eat a wide variety of the foods you enjoy.
Go easy on fatty foods and avoid adding extra sugar but include plenty of fruit, vegetables and cereal foods in your diet.
You also need to be aware of certain precautions that should be taken in the handling, preparing and storing of food.
For more information:
Available from: and:
Available from:
For your health's sake, it is important not to let yourself get overweight.
See where you are on this chart.
Underweight .
Maybe you need to eat a bit more.
If you are very underweight, see your doctor.
O.K. This is the desirable weight range for your health.
Overweight .
Your health could suffer — don't get any fatter!
Fat .
It's important for you to lose weight.
Very fat .
This is severe and treatment is urgently required.
Smoking
There is not doubt at all that smoking can seriously damage your health.
Not only are you much more likely to die from lung cancer or heart disease, but other illnesses highlighted in this booklet, including cervical cancer, are associated with smoking.
You should not smoke if you are pregnant (see page 19).
Giving up is not easy, but many women manage it.
You could too.
For further information, help and advice contact:
Alcohol
Alcohol in moderation is fine — but if you over-indulge, then you can do yourself serious harm.
In the long term, too much drink can cause high blood pressure and stomach disorders.
It can cause severe problems at home or at work for you, your family and others.
Alcohol affects women and men differently because of the way their bodies are made, so remember that for women the sensible drinking limits are lower.
(See page 19 for alcohol and pregnancy.)
For more information:
Available from:
One unit of alcohol equals 
1 single measure of spirits
1 small glass of sherry
1 single measure of aperitifs
1 small glass of wine
½ pint of ordinary strength deer lager or cider
WEEKLY UNITS
Low Risk
Increasing Danger
Harmful
For advice, information and access to over 40 local centres around the country contact:
If you've got family or friends with a problem:
Drug Misuse
It is dangerous to misuse drugs in any way.
You can get treatment for drug dependence, mostly as an outpatient.
The voluntary sector also provide advice, counselling and rehabilitation services.
Tranquilliser Dependence
Many local drug treatment centres provide services to meet the particular needs of people dependent on drugs such as tranquillisers.
Your GP can also advise you.
For further information:
OTHER HELP AVAILABLE
Social Services for Women and Their Families
A wide range of services is available from your local Social Services Department (address and telephone number under local authority (or council)in you phone book).
These services are not just for women, but you may find them useful.
They include services for: families with children; elderly people; mentally ill people; physically handicapped people including those with poor sight or hearing; and people with learning difficulties.
Help may also be available for those who care for others, for example if you are looking after a disabled person or an elderly relation.
Ask your local Social Services Department for advice and for detailed information about the services they provide.
They will also be able to give information about local voluntary agencies which may be able to offer you advice or support, and also about local services for people with special difficulties such as problem with alcohol, drugs or gambling.
Relationships
Every area will have a Relate office for advice on marriage and partnerships.
Counsellors are available to talk to and advise individuals and couples about marital or partnership problems, preparing for marriage and parenthood.
For information contact your local Relate office (address and telephone number in your local phone book).
Other Difficulties
Many problems can cause stress or personal difficulty, which in turn can affect your health.
You can get advice on a wide variety of subjects including money (or debt), legal difficulties and housing from the Citizens Advice Bureaux.
(See the local telephone book for the address and telephone number of the nearest branch).
The services provided by the NHS are there to be used.
You are not wasting your doctor's time by asking about something which worries you.
Your doctor wants to help you.
If you are concerned about the provision of any part of the health services in your area you can contact your local Community Health Council.
The address can be found in the library, post office or the GP's surgery.
This booklet covers some of the many services available and more importantly how to make use of them.
The leaflets and organisations mentioned are just some of the sources of information and advice.
Your local library, Citizens Advice Bureau, or the Social Services Department or your local authority will be able to give details of help available in your area or tell you where detailed advice can be sought.
The Health Education Authority gives people the information they need to look after themselves.
For more information on looking after your own health, or the health of family and friends, contact:
INCONTINENCE A VERY COMMON COMPLAINT
DO YOU HAVE TROUBLE CONTROLLING YOUR BLADDER?
If you do, you are not the only one.
Roughly one adult in twenty has trouble with leaking urine or ‘incontinence’.
Many sufferers are embarrassed by it and avoid talking about it, even to their doctor.
This is a pity as it is usually curable.
You may notice that you:
need to pass water more often;
have very little warning before you need to go, and sometimes do not reach the lavatory in time;
leak urine when you cough, sneeze or make some physical effort such as lifting or running (stress incontinence);
dribble urine most of the time without realising it;
wet the bed at night.
WHAT CAN BE DONE?
Don't suffer in silence.
The first and most important thing is to talk to your doctor .
It is never too late, but the sooner you do so the better.
Meanwhile, you can help yourself in the following ways:
If you have stress incontinence this exercise will help if you do it regularly and keep it up for several months:
Sit on the lavatory and start to pass water; stop the flow for a second or two, then continue.
When you to this your are making use of internal muscles which can be strengthened by exercise to give you greater control.
When you have got the idea of how to tighten them in this way, you can do the exercise anywhere.
Repeat them movement, while counting to 4 slowly, as often as you can — for instance while washing the dishes or waiting for a bus.
If you have difficulty getting to the lavatory,it could be made more accessible by special adaptations such as hand rails or a raised seat.
In some circumstances a hand-held urinal or a commode may make life easier.
Clothes can make a difference — for women a loose skirt and loose elastic in the waist of slacks or knickers are easier and quicker to manage.
For men, trousers with a long fly and easy fastening such as Velcro make it easier to use the lavatory or a special bottle.
If you dribble a lot,spend a little extra time in the lavatory and try to make sure the bladder is empty (but try not to strain).
When you urgently need to go to the lavatory try to practice ‘holding on’ to get your bladder into the habit of holding more urine.
Don't cut down on the amount you drink as you need a regular amount of liquid, but don't have too much after teatime.
And remember that alcohol will make you need to pass water more often.
Do have a milky drink at bedtime if it helps you to sleep.
If you are taking water tablets (diuretics) check the best time to take them and the correct dose with your doctor.
Above all,don't hide the problem,it is not likely to get better on its own.
Professional help
Doctors : your doctor will talk to you about your problem and will probably test a sample of your urine.
You may be referred to a hospital specialist.
There are many medical treatments for incontinence, which include medicines, exercises, ‘retraining’ the bladder and occasionally an operation to repair the bladder.
Nurses : Your district nurse, health visitor or continence adviser can give you practical advice on how to manage.
The nurse may be able to supply you with pants and pads, and could tell you if there is a laundry service or a collection service for disposable pads in your area.
Obstetric physiotherapists can teach you exercises to strengthen your bladder and may also help you to move about more easily so that you can get to the lavatory more quickly.
Occupational therapists can help advice about equipment, adaptations to clothing or to the lavatory.
Social workers can give advice on financial help and may arrange for a Home Help to visit.
Additional information and advice
can be obtained if you write to the 
WHAT CAUSES INCONTINENCE?
Continence is the ability to control the contents of the bladder and to pass urine only when you want to.
Incontinence is the medical term for loss of that control.
There are many different types of incontinence and many possible causes.
The most common causes are:
an overactive bladder (sometimes called ‘unstable’ bladder) which you can't control;
weak muscles around the bladder outlet (especially in women who have had children or after the menopause) causing stress incontinence;
incomplete emptying of the bladder (especially in older men, who may have enlargement of the prostate gland);
difficulty getting to or onto the lavatory because of a physical disability;
the bladder may be disturbed by certain drugs, by an infection, constipation or an emotional upset.
Incontinence always as a cause — it doesn't ‘just happen’ and is not an inevitable part of getting older.
AN IMPORTANT MESSAGE
for women of childbearing age
GERMAN MEASLES is not so harmless as you think
This leaflet is about German Measles or, as the doctor calls it, Rubella.
It explains why it is important that you are protected against it.
German Measles is a very infectious disease, but usually very mild.
You may not even know you have had it.
The usual symptoms are a faint pink rash with a slight fever, perhaps swollen glands or aching joints and a general feeling of being off-colour.
It sounds harmless enough, doesn't it?
But German Measles can damage your unborn child.
If a woman catches German Measles when she is pregnant, it can seriously harm her baby.
It can damage the baby's brain, sight, hearing or heart.
Some babies affected like this die in the first year of their life, those who do not die can face a lifetime of handicap.
This need not happen
Vaccination can protect you against German Measles.
What to do?
Even if you have no intention of becoming pregnant, don't take a chance.
If you have not been vaccinated already, see your doctor now and ask him to check whether you are immune to German Measles.
This is done by a quick and simple blood test.
If you are already immune, the test will make it clear.
Ask for a blood test even if you think you have had German Measles.
It can be such a mild disease, and so like other childhood illnesses, you can never be absolutely sure you have had it.
So don't rely on your memory.
Have the test done.
Some family planning clinics will also arrange for you to be given a blood test.
Ask at your next appointment.
One simple injection gives protection.
If the blood test shows you are not immune, one injection will give you the protection you need.
It's free and easily arranged.
Ask your doctor or at the family planning clinic.
Side effects Side effects from the injection are uncommon.
You may perhaps have some mild symptoms of the disease itself.
But you won't be infectious and most people are able to carry on just as normal.
People especially at risk.
Remember, if you are often in contact with young children, either at home or in your job, you run a higher risk of catching German Measles.
So it is particularly important for you to be protected against it.
Precautions
Vaccination should be delayed if:
you are unwell with a fever
you are or think you may be pregnant
you have had certain other vaccinations within the last three weeks — you can check these with your doctor.
You should not have the vaccine if:
you suffer from cancer or an immunity disease
you are on steroids, or on any other drug or medical treatment affecting immunity.
You must tell your doctor if you're allergic to certain antibiotics (not penicillin), or to rabbits.
If you are already pregnant you must not be given German Measles vaccine.
But you can ask the staff at the antenatal clinic for the results of your Rubella blood test.
If they tell that you're not immune, you should be vaccinated soon after your baby is born.
After the birth, make sure you get your German Measles vaccination so you can be certain you're protected for the future.
It is very important that you don't become pregnant for at least three months after you have had the vaccination.
If you would like advice on contraception, talk to your doctor or local family planning clinic.
REMEMBER.
When you protect yourself against German Measles, you're protecting your unborn child.
SAINSBURY'S LIVING TODAY
Sensible Drinking
NEW ADVICE FOR SAFER DRINKING
LOW-ALCOHOL DRINK TO BUY AND MAKE
NEW SUPPLEMENT INSIDE — alcohol contents of more than 60 drinks
A LITTLE OF WHAT YOU FANCY
A small amount of alcohol is far more likely to be beneficial than harmful to healthy people who enjoy a drink
Alcohol has been an integral part of parties, celebrations and other happy social gatherings for centuries.
It helps people to relax, to feel cheerful and to be more sociable.
As long as drinking is controlled, there's no reason why that should change.
But staying in control and knowing when to stop is the key.
That's good news for the millions of men and women in Britain who like the taste of wine, spirits or beer.
But how much alcohol can be taken without risk to health?
This publication aims to help you to make sensible decisions and choices about alcohol so that it gives pleasure without putting anyone's health at risk.
GOVERNMENT INTERVENTION
In recent years, various government ‘don't drink and drive’ campaigns have become as much a part of Christmas as turkey, trees and tinsel.
The objective is, of course, to reduce the number of road accidents caused by the effect of too much alcohol on the nervous system.
But drinking too much over a period of months or years damages far more than the nervous system.
Liver, heart, glands, stomach and intestine may all suffer, even though the person concerned rarely, if ever, gets drunk.
The real concern is not about social drinkers who never go over the limit and don't drink every day of their lives.
The concern is for the increasing number of people with alcohol-related disorders.
Twice as many people died of alcohol-induced liver disease in 1986 compared with 1956
About one-third of deaths in road traffic accidents are associated with blood alcohol levels that are over the limit
Estimates of the number of deaths among men caused each year by alcohol abuse range from 8,000 to 25,000
Between 8 million and 15 million working days are lost each year because of excessive alcohol intake 
Convictions for drink/ driving offences among women are three times the 1974 level.
The increase among men is about 40% Note that a standard measure of sherry, spirits and beer each contains the same amount of alcohol — 100ml.
This is often referred to as ‘1 unit’ of alcohol.
A glass of wine (⅙ bottle) and half-pint of cider each contains 1½ units of alcohol.
Alcohol and energy contents of some drinks
kcal
1 glass sherry
single spirits
½ pt light ale
½pt cider 3–4% alcohol
glass red or white wine (⅙ bottle)
g alcohol
60
8
55
8
90
8
100
12
90
12
SCRAPING THE BARREL FOR NUTRIENTS
If anybody tries to take enough alcoholic drink to make a real contribution to his vitamin or mineral intake, he's certainly drinking too much!
Spirits don't contain any vitamins or minerals.
A glass of wine — red or white — contains about 15% of the recommended daily amount of iron for a man; 10% for a woman.
Half-a-pint of light ale provides about 7% of two B vitamins — riboflavin and nicotinic acid.
And that's about it.
Tonic wines are nutritionally little different from sweet, high alcohol ‘ordinary’ wines but some have added iron.
THE VITAL ORGAN
Alcohol begins to get into the blood less than one hour after drinking begins.
This very rapid absorption occurs partly because alcohol dies not have to be digested first and partly because a significant amount is absorbed from the stomach.
Absorption can be slowed a bit, but not much, if alcoholic drink is taken with food.
Once it's in the blood, alcohol is quickly distributed throughout all the water in the body so it appears in almost every organ and tissue, including blood.
Because women have a smaller proportion of body water (but more fat), and because they are, generally, smaller than men, one drink will raise the blood alcohol concentration more in women than in men.
Alcohol certainly affects most organs, but only the liver can convert it to other substances and clear it from the body.
So, the rate at which blood alcohol level falls depends almost entirely on the speed at which the liver can process it.
Beer, wine and spirits are often referred to as ‘alcohol’.
Strictly speaking, these are alcoholic drinks which contain anything from 2% to 40% alcohol.
Some contain sugar, too.
Alcohol is one of the five energy-containing components of ‘food’…the others are proteins, fats, starches and sugars.
Unlike proteins, fats and many other nutrients, alcohol does not form part of any body structure and is not essential to any of life's chemical processes.
Its sole nutritional function is to supply energy.
Beer or wine?
It depends on where you live
UK
WEST GERMANY
FRANCE
PORTUGAL
ITALY
Of these countries, West Germany as the highest consumption of spirits at about 8 litres a year, Portugal the lowest at 2 litres.
ALCOHOL AND THE LAW
For 20 years it has been an offence for anyone to drive a motor vehicle if he has more than 80mg of alcohol in ever 100ml of blood.
That is the law, but it is a fact that, at a blood alcohol level as low as 30mg/100ml, which may result from drinking just 1 pint of beer or two small sherries, many people's judgements and reaction speeds are impaired.
Young people and those who are not accustomed to drinking are likely to display signs of alcohol excess at these low alcohol levels.
Even though they may protest that they are perfectly capable of driving, they won't be.
Alcohol depresses brain and nerve function, it is not a stimulant.
The rising scale of alcohol As blood alcohol levels rise, initial feelings of cheerfulness and self-confidence are replaced by impaired judgement followed by inability to walk straight and other
Remember 1 ‘unit’ of alcohol is 8g of alcohol.
It is contained in ½ pint of beer OR 1 small sherry OR ⅓ pint of cider.
10 ‘units’ is in 5 pints of beer OR 5
DRINK IN HASTE, REPENT AT LEISURE
It will probably surprise many people to know that jut five units of alcohol can push them over the legal limit.
Blood alcohol levels rise at pretty much the same rate in infrequent and habitual drinkers.
The law makes no allowance for the fact that habitual drinkers don't display some of the signs of intoxication until blood alcohol is above 80mg/ 100ml.
Anyone who drinks 2½ pints of beer or ½ bottle of wine and then drives a car is almost certainly breaking the law unless he waits patiently for the liver to reduce blood alcohol levels.
And that could take longer than you think.
Although many ‘remedies’ have been tried, none is very useful in speeding up the process.
Black coffee won't help.
Neither will large doses of vitamin C. And rushing around trying to ‘burn off’ the alcohol is futile because muscles can't use alcohol directly.
They can only use it as a source of energy after alcohol has been processed by the liver.
For most people, it takes about one hour for the liver to reduce blood alcohol by 15ml/100ml.
So, if you drank a whole bottle of wine, blood alcohol would rise to about 150ml/100ml or 70mg above the legal limit and it will take nearly 5 hours (70 ÷ 15) to fall to that limit.
It's a fallacy to think that ‘a good night's sleep’ will necessarily overcome the indiscretions of the night before.
If somebody went to a party and drank 12 units of alcohol (far more than he should have) it will take about eight hours before blood alcohol is even approaching the legal limit.
The liver needs even longer to remove all the alcohol from that one night's binge — about 13 hours.
Because it takes so long for blood alcohol levels to fall, it's easy for someone who drinks ‘modestly’ at lunch time and after work to go over the limit, even though he may take only four units on each occasion.
There simply hasn't been time for the body to clear the first lot before it's topped up with a second dose of alcohol.
The food and drink industry is responding to the undoubted demand for low and no-alcohol drinks.
For example, Sainsbury's have ‘spritzers’(mixtures of wine and mineral water or fruit juices), low-alcohol lager and alcohol-free wine.
And some German wines naturally contain as little as 8.5% alcohol in contrast to the more usual 11% or 12% in other wines.
symptoms of impaired nerve function.
In general, women develop higher blood alcohol levels and suffer greater ill effects than men for a given number of drinks
Effect on a normal weight man
Cheerfulness, increase in self-confidence
Increased risk of having an accident
Usually increased happiness but significantly impaired judgement
Loss of driving licence if caught
Slurred speech, loss of self-control
Inability to walk straight, loss of memory
Oblivion, maybe coma
double scotches OR 1 bottle of wine.
18 ‘units’ is in ¾ bottle of spirits OR about 2 bottles of wine OR 9 pints of beer.
How much do you know about alcoholic drinks?
1.
How many grams of alcohol are in 1 unit? a.2 b.4 d.10
2.
If you drank a small sherry, two glasses of wine and a small brandy, how many units of alcohol would you be taking? a.5 b.10. c.25. d.40
3.
It is illegal to drive if you have more than 80mg alcohol in each 100ml of blood.
How many units of alcohol could a normal weight man take without going over the limit? a.2 b.4 c.8 d.10
5.
If a man drinks 6 pints of beer in fairly rapid succession, about how long will it take to clear all the alcohol from his body? a. 6 hours b. 9 hours c. 11 hours d. 13 hours
6.
What is the recommended maximum number of units per week of alcohol for a non-pregnant woman? a.7 b.14 c.21 d.28
Now turn to page 7 to find out how you scored.
Under-age drinking
It is an offence for anyone under the age of 18 to sell or buy drinks.
This is something which Sainsbury's takes very seriously.
Teaching children and adolescents to take a responsible attitude to alcohol is an essential part of their education
SENSIBLE DRINKING SUPPLEMENT
If you enjoy wine or gin or beer and care about your health, you'll probably want to keep a check on the total amount of alcohol you're taking.
Or you may want to compare the alcoholic strength of one wine or beer with another.
The chart inside this special supplement enables you to do both
But remember that alcohol affects different people in different ways.
INDIVIDUAL VARIATION
Some people seem to ‘hold their drink’ better than others.
It's usually put down to practice!
There's a lot of truth in the popular belief but other factors are important too.
People taking certain medicines should not take alcohol at the same time, or maybe not take it at all because the alcohol will have a more pronounced effect under/or the effect of the medicine will be altered.
These medicines include anti-biotics and antihistamines as well as those for depression, diabetes, rheumatism and epilepsy.
But if you are taking any medicines, it's wise to ask your doctor whether you can drink alcohol nor not.
The outwardly obvious effects of alcohol (such as slurring of speech, inability to walk steadily) are all caused by alcohol acting on the brain.
The more quickly alcohol gets to the brain, the sooner its effects become evident.
Many people know, for example, that alcohol taken on an empty stomach is absorbed more quickly than alcohol taken with food.
Alcohol in fizzy drinks is absorbed more quickly than alcohol in still drinks.
And the warmer the drink the faster alcohol is absorbed.
So, alcohol will be absorbed more quickly from warm than from chilled beer; and more quickly from sparkling wines than from still varieties of the same strength.
BUT, no matter how quickly or slowly you absorb alcohol, it doesn't take long before all the alcohol you've drunk is absorbed.
If you drink four units of alcohol, four units will get into your blood.
MAN AND WOMEN ARE NOT THE SAME
Women feel the effects of alcohol more quickly than men do.
Once alcohol is absorbed, it distributes itself in the body's lean tissue (muscle).
Women are generally smaller then men but even if a man and a woman are the same height and weight, the woman is likely to have a smaller proportion of muscle.
So, if a woman tries to keep up with a man, drink for drink, she is likely to feel the effects of alcohol sooner.
ALCOHOL REMOVAL
Once alcohol has reached the blood, the only way it can be removed is by the liver.
This organ works at its own rate and there's almost nothing you can do to speed it up.
Although individuals vary a great deal, a very rough guide is that the liver removes one unit of alcohol each hour.
So, if you drink four units (is two pints of beer or two double gins) over a period of four hours, there is likely to be only one unit or less remaining in the body when you finish.
DO YOU KNOW HOW MUCH ALCOHOL YOU DRINK?
HOW DOES THE ALCOHOL CONTENT OF ONE BRAND OF BEER COMPARE WITH THAT OF ANOTHER
The alcohol content of drinks is measured as % VOL, sometimes referred to as ‘alcohol by volume’ or ABV.
For example, a beer may have 3% alcohol by volume.
This is just another way of saying that it has 3ml of alcohol in every 100ml.
A wine may have 7% to 14% while whisky must have 40%.
All wines and spirits, and most beers and lagers, now show the percentage (%) of alcohol they contain.
The chart below shows the number of units of alcohol in different amounts of a range of drinks.
One unit is equivalent to 10ml of alcohol.
If you want to know how many units of alcohol you drink, look up the type of drink in the left column.
Then look along to the number of units in one glass or one can or one bottle.
Of course, if you drink two glasses, double the number of units shown.
To find out how different drinks compare for alcohol content, use the % alcohol column.
You should do this only to compare one beer with another or one wine with another.
If you use it to compare the alcohol contents of a wine and a beer, remember that you'll probably drink more beer than wine so the % alcohol figures may not give an indication of the amount of alcohol you are really drinking.
To get this information, you'll need to use the column on the right.
If you can't find the particular brand name, find one with a similar % alcohol.
Make sure the quantity in the can or bottle is the same if you want to find out the units in the can or bottle you are drinking.
In each section of the chart, drinks are arranged in order of their % alcohol.
HOW IS SAINBURY'S HELPING
One way of persuading people to drink sensibly is to provide good-tasting alternatives with less alcohol.
That's just what Sainbury's is doing.
From small beginnings in the 1980s, there is now a wide range of low- and no-alcohol beers, lagers and wines in all stores.
And, of course, there are lots of soft drinks such as bitter lemon, tonic and fruit juices.
As well as branded drinks such as Tennents LA and Kaliber, there are Sainsbury's own label lager, ciders, beers and wines.
No matter what you drink, remember to do your bit for the environment by using the bottle and can banks which are now available in most Sainsbury's car parks.
REMEMBER
Young and elderly people can't tolerate alcohol as well as other adults.
If you drink in a party with lots of other people, it's easy to drink more than you planned.
Jobs which involve entertaining may tempt you to drink more than you intend.
Home measures are often more generous than those in pubs.
Drinking on your own or to drown your sorrows can get out of hand.
There is an increasing number of low- and no-alcohol beers, lagers and wines on the market — they taste good, look good and are becoming more and more socially acceptable as people realise the dangers of taking too much alcohol.
Low-alcohol beers contain about 1% alcohol instead of the usual 3 + %.
So you can't ignore their alcohol content.
LONG-TERM EFFECTS
It's pretty obvious, at least to onlookers, when someone has had too much to drink.
That person is a menace to everyone but he may well think that, in a few hours' time, he'll be back to normal and no harm will be done.
That may be over-optimistic.
Going over the limit in the privacy of your own home just once or twice a year probably won't do any lasting damage.
Doing so regularly will, over months or years, increase the risk of harm to almost every body function.
Almost all damage is, in the early stages, reversible provided people stop drinking alcohol.
If they don't, these are some of the problems they may eventually face:
Liver damage — enlarged liver, fatty liver, jaundice, maybe cirrhosis
Increased risk of oesophageal and pancreatic cancer
Inflammation of the stomach causing severe pain
Deficiency of many nutrients if people lose interest in food
Damage to the immune system resulting in greater susceptibility to infection
Obesity, with its attendant health problems.
Alcoholic drinks have high energy values
Weaker and less regular heart beat.
But alcohol does not increase the risk of having a heart attack
High blood pressure.
But the good news is that moderate alcohol consumption (up to 2 units a day) seems to lower blood pressure!
Impaired sexual and reproductive function in both men and women
Short-term effects on the brain (see page 4) and long-term brain and nerve damage
‘SAFE’ ALCOHOL LIMIT LOWERED
Twenty-one units a week for men, just 14 for women.
That's the recommendation made by the Royal College of Physicians in they 1986 report.
But the report also says, ‘Doctors are not prohibitionists’, and points out that ‘…findings suggest that abstainers do not necessarily enjoy better health than moderate drinkers’.
(It must also be said that only about one in ten of the adult population in Britain in teetotal and it could be that at least some people in this group are unwell, rather than the other way round.)
The report says that the amount of alcohol that may be taken without harm varies considerably from one person to another.
SAFER UPPER LIMITS PER WEEK
Man-21 units 2 or 3 days without alcohol
Women-14 units 2 or 3 days without alcohol
Pregnant woman ideally none, at most 4 units 5 or 6 days without alcohol
LOW-ALCOHOLIC DRINKS TO MAKE
If you're watching calories as well as alcohol, use diet or low-calorie mixers and artificial sweetener.
Pink Fizz Mix the juice of 1 lemon with 1¾ pints/1 litre tonic, about 2 tbsp of grenadine and sugar to taste.
Fruit fizz Mix together the juice of 1 lemon, about ⅓ pint/200ml each of orange juice, pineapple juice and grapefruit juice.
Top up with ¾ pint/450ml of soda water.
Melon sling Cut ¼ of a small green melon in pieces and soak in 1 to 2 tbsp ginger wine or syrup.
Add ½ bottle Sainsbury's alcohol-free wine and 1 pint/600ml soda water.
PREGNANT PAUSE
The current advice to pregnant women is, ‘Cut out alcohol, especially during the first three months’.
If you really enjoy the occasional drink, make sure it's very occasional — an absolute maximum of 4 units a week taken on one or two days.
The advice can be difficult to follow because many women don't know they're pregnant until the third month.
The solution is to go very easy on alcohol when you're planning to become pregnant.
If both partners do that, there's an increased chance of pregnancy, anyway!
The extreme condition of fetal alcohol syndrome is seen only in babies born to women who habitually take more than 10 units of alcohol a day.
Affected babies are small, deformed and brain damaged.
Recent research suggests that even small amounts of alcohol, way below the amounts needed to produce fetal alcohol syndrome, may have a detrimental effect on some unborn babies.
It's difficult to isolate the effects of alcohol from other factors such as smoking, but, until more is known, it's sensible to limit alcohol as much as possible.
Tipple control tips
Some alcohol is enjoyable.
Too much may be dangerous.
Make sure you know where to draw the line.
Do make sure your own decisions and don't let others persuade you to ‘have just one more’
Do take advantage of the new low- and no-alcohol drinks available in Sainbury's
Do eat something before or with alcoholic drink, but remember that nothing will keep blood levels low!
Do drink slowly — take sips and put the glass down between sips
Try not to drink alcohol during the working day
If you're really thirsty, drink something non-alcoholic to quench thirst
Good health
Other free leaflets in the Living Today series include:
Your food and health
Understanding food labels
Keeping food at its best
Pack a healthy meal band, coming soon:
Food about food additives
Food for one
A DRINK FOR EVERY OCCASION FROM SAINSBURY'S
Solvents A Parent's guide The signs The dangers What to do
What is solvent sniffing?
Solvent sniffing usually means getting ‘high’ by breathing in the fumes from butane, aerosols, glues or other products found around most people's houses or which are easily available from shops.
The most common term for this is ‘glue sniffing’, but there are many other products that can be sniffed:
butane gas (in cigarette lighters and refill canisters.
Butane is also used as a propellant in many aerosols)
aerosol sprays (virtually any aerosol may be used; hairsprays and pain-relieving sprays are common)
solvent-based glues (such as Evo-Stik)
correcting fluids (such as Tipp-Ex)
dry-cleaning fluids
the contents of some types of fire extinguishers
thinners
petrol
In the average home there are over thirty sniffable products.
If you think that sniffing has ‘gone out of fashion’, think again — there are over 100 deaths each year from solvent sniffing, and most of those who die are teenagers.
Some youngsters who sniff have accidents while they are intoxicated and some suffer damage to their health.
This booklet has been written to help you understand more about solvent misuse and to suggest ways in which you can help your children, whether they are sniffing or not.
Solvent misuse related deaths 1971–1989  
(information for ‘89 incomplete
How many young people sniff?
Only about one in ten secondary school children try sniffing, and most of these will only experiment; they won't sniff for very long.
But a few may become heavy and frequent solvent misusers.
The number of youngsters sniffing varies from place to place and at different times.
Some people say there is more sniffing in the summer, but perhaps it's just more obvious in the long summer evenings.
Sniffing will vary from school to school, from youth club to youth club and from one residential children's home to another.
It can be quite a craze in a neighbourhood for a while and then almost disappear.
Most young people will never try sniffing.
And most of  those who do will only try it once or a few times.
A few youngsters may go on sniffing for a while — perhaps regularly with their friends.
A very few will carry on, sometimes very heavily, for a number of years.
[Proportions]
Only tried it.
7%
Sniffed for a few weeks or months.
2%
Long term users.
1%
Who sniffs?
It can be anyone.
Children from any social class and from ‘good’ homes may try sniffing.
This does not necessarily mean that their parents have failed or brought them up badly.
It's more likely to be one of the ‘disobedient’ and sometimes risky things that youngster do.
Not many children try solvents before the age of 11, and it seems that the peak age for experimenting is around 13 or 14 years.
Girls sniff too, although, perhaps a slightly smaller proportion than boys.
More children in inner-city areas try solvents.
How do they do it?
Because there is such a wide range of substances there are many ways they can be misused.
Butane gas and aerosols may be sniffed from bags, but are sometimes sprayed directly into the mouth.
Glue is generally sniffed from bags, often freezer or crisp bags.
Sniffing is not really the right word because the vapours are inhaled through the nose and mouth; some users call it ‘huffing’.
There are other methods as well.
Thinners such as Tipp-Ex may be sniffed from a cloth or a coatsleeve.
Some may put their heads inside a plastic bag.
Where do they do it?
Sniffable products are widely available and they are portable.
So people can sniff while walking around, they can sniff in school or anywhere around their home.
They may sniff in bed, using the bedcovers as a tent to contain the fumes.
Some solvent misusers may absorb the product onto a rag (which they carry in their pocket) or onto a piece of their clothing.
Some may go to out-of-the-way places to sniff which can add to the dangers.
What are the effects?
The effects of sniffing are similar to being drunk on alcohol.
But people get the effects more quickly from sniffing because the substances enter the blood-stream from the lungs instead of the stomach.
This can take new users by surprise — they become intoxicated before they realise it.
But the effects of sniffing wears off quickly, too.
To keep ‘high’ it is necessary to keep sniffing, so if the solvent is taken away, the sniffer will soon ‘sober up’.
What are the dangers?
Sniffing these substances can be lethal or cause long-term damage.
sniffing can have an effect on the heart, so if it is followed by exertion or fright, death may result.
if butane gas or aerosols are sprayed directly into the mouth, they may cool the throat tissues causing swelling and perhaps suffocation
most sniffable products are a mixture of chemicals and the manufacturers may change their formulation.
This makes it hard to assess the dangers of particular products
some solvents contain poisonous substances such as lead in some petrol or n-hexane in some glues
since many of these products are inflammable there is a fire risk, especially when youngsters combine sniffing and smoking
using solvents with other drugs, like alcohol, may add to the dangers
getting intoxicated is always potentially dangerous: people may become more reckless than usual and be less able to deal with danger
young and inexperienced users run greater risks
some youngsters have died at their first sniffing session
some solvent misusers may do bizarre and possibly dangerous things in response to their ‘hallucinations’
if solvent misusers use large plastic bags, they may suffocate themselves
if solvent misusers become unconscious they may choke on their own vomit
because solvent misusers often sniff in out-of-the-way places (such as on railway embankments, near canals and in derelict buildings) they may face hazards in these dangerous environments
some solvent misusers sniff on their own in isolated places.
If they have problems, help is not at hand
some people are more vulnerable than others to the harmful effects of solvents and may suffer lasting damage.
However, the substances themselves only rarely cause long-term damage to the body.
Damage to the liver, kidneys, lungs, bone marrow or nervous system is known, but it is not common and is generally reversible.
Why do they do it?
Young people have their reasons for misusing solvents.
Adults won't get very far in trying to help someone unless they find out what their reasons are.
For some young people, sniffing is a pleasurable activity.
When asked if his first sniff made him fee sick, Carl had this to say: ‘No, it's something I enjoyed and I wanted to do more.
When I first started to smoke a cigarette, I felt ill but I kept on because everyone else was doing it, but with sniffing glue when I first tried it I enjoyed it, it's something I did enjoy, that's the reason I started anyway.’
David added: ‘Yeah, when we're on it we have a great laugh like.’
Here are some other reasons why young people sniff:
solvents can be an alternative to alcohol
some young people like the excitement of sniffing solvents, perhaps partly because of the element of danger
if adults are shocked by sniffing, that can be an attraction
for some young people there is the attraction of playing with a new physical sensation.
After all, there are whole businesses devoted to giving people weird sensations, like the fairground industry
solvents are cheap and easy to buy or steal
hallucinations when sniffing can be interesting and exciting.
hallucinations can also be dangerous, unpleasant and frightening, but even these can be enjoyable (think of horror films) and allow youngsters to ‘escape’— if only temporarily and only in their imagination.
Sniffers may be able to exercise some control over their hallucinations and use them as part of group activities.
In this way, hallucinations can be an exciting and sought-after part of intoxication by solvents.
For example, Steven reported:
‘We used to have these games, like we used to have this big trunk, and we used to call that ‘the dream machine’ and we used to get all things like Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs coming down a conveyer belt, lasers, spaceships, everything.’
Why do they carry on sniffing?
A few sniffers may use solvents in an attempt to blot out problems that they already have.
Use of solvents may temporarily disguise their problems but will generally make things worse.
But it doesn't seem like that to them at the time.
Adults can help by getting misusers to see that solvents won't solve their problems.
Until they accept this they're not likely to stop.
Sometimes, sniffing may be a reaction to problems in the family.
For instance, Kathy (aged 14) started sniffing and although she was a very bright girl, she couldn't explain why.
Her father wanted her to go to Cambridge University and get a good degree but she wanted to become a photographer.
Her challenge to her father's expectations for her.
It was also an escape from the pressure he was putting on her.
Graham (aged 12) seemed to be sniffing to relieve the tension he felt  because his parents' marriage was breaking up.
He felt responsible for their separation and he knew that when he had had problems in the past, his parents had stopped arguing so much and pulled together to help him.
Can you recognise a sniffer?
There are no clear-cut signs and symptoms that will identify someone who has been sniffing.
Many of the effects are indistinguishable from the normal processes of growing up.
Moodiness may be a result of sniffing, but many teenagers are moody without having tried solvents.
Look out for:
finding quantities of empty butane, aerosol or glue cans, or plastic bags in a place where you know your child has been
chemical smell on clothes or breath
‘drunken’ behaviour
sudden change in behaviour or lifestyles, for example going around with a new set of friends
wide swings in mood or behaviour
spots around nose and mouth (but ‘glue sniffers’ rash only occurs with some glues, it isn't common, and may be acne)
loss of appetite
asking for money without explaining what it is for
secretiveness about leisure-time activities
frequent and persistent headaches, sore throat or runny nose (whatever the reason, a visit to the GP would be wise).
ANY OF THESE MIGHT BE HAPPENING FOR OTHER REASONS.
DON'T JUMP TO CONCLUSIONS.
REMEMBER, MOST YOUNG PEOPLE NEVER TRY SOLVENTS.
As a parent you know your own child best.
You can build your relationship together through those sometimes difficult teenage years.
Your care will mean that you'll probably know if anything untoward is happening and you'll be able to deal with any problems early on.
Growing up isn't easy.
At certain times in their development young people will face particularly difficult problems.
Perhaps it will be changing school, losing a close friend, being bullied, getting overweight or the death  of a loved relative.
To you these might not always seem like severe difficulties, but for young people problems like these can loom large.
Your help can make all the difference.
You are the expert on your child.
What is the law doing?
The Intoxicating Substance Supply Act, passed in 1985, makes it an offence to supply to a young person under 18 a substance which the supplier knows, or has reason to believe, will be used ‘to achieve intoxication’.
So although the law is mainly directed at shopkeepers, it could also be applied to anyone who sells or gives a young person a sniffable product.
Only a few prosecutions have been brought under this Act.
But in many cases the threat of legal action has been enough to stop those few shopkeepers who attempt to profit from glue and solvent sales to solvent misusers.
If they persist, the police can be informed.
But the law can't solve the problem of solvent misusers:
it's not easy to recognise solvent misusers and it's hard for shopkeepers to know whether a young person will use a product for sniffing rather than for its legitimate purpose.
it's difficult to keep track of all the products that can be sniffed
there are so many places where youngsters can get solvents
the law doesn't affect those solvent misusers over the age of 18
Could the law do more?
it's impractical to make solvent sniffing illegal.
Anyway, this would make solvent misusers even more secretive and harder to help them
making-sniffable substances smell nasty is difficult
manufactures have had some success in making less harmful products, but these have not always been popular with users
stopping people sniffing one thing may turn them to other substances which might be more dangerous.
Can we reduce the problem?
Education in schools, colleges and youth projects to try and prevent young people from sniffing may help to reduce casualties.
Many schools have education about drugs and  solvents built in to the curriculum.
But the educational message must be the right one.
Education is not just about giving people the facts.
We know that doesn't work very well — it hasn't stopped people smoking.
Horror stories don't seem to help and may even encourage young people to try sniffing.
Instead, teachers, parents and other adults who come into contact with young people need to:
talk with them about their feelings on drugs and solvents
help them to have new and exciting experiences without using chemicals
get them to think about how they might refuse to try drugs or solvents without losing their friends
teach them to care for and value their health
assist them in developing self-esteem and respect for themselves.
There are many ways that adults can achieve this.
Here are some:
treat young people with more respect for their individuality and opinions
take an interest in young people's own interests and concerns
be actively concerned with and involved in children's school work
check out any school problems as soon as possible
take part in and encourage children's educational and leisure activities
set an example by giving up smoking or alcohol
think about and discuss with young people the way in which medicines and prescribed drugs are used
keep an eye on sniffable products in the home.
Store them out of reach
help young children to develop a sensibly cautious attitude by taking care with everyday household products, and by using all manufactured chemical correctly and for their intended use
dispose of old, unwanted prescription drugs 
monitor current prescriptions to make sure that children are not using them for their first experiments with drugs.
How can we help solvent misusers?
Most young people who try sniffing (and remember, those who try sniffing are only a small minority) will only do it a few times and stop without any help from adults.
But if you discover that a child has tried solvents, what can you do?
some young people don't realise that sniffing may be all that they need
you may feel like expressing your concern very strongly.
But you need to do this in a constructive way which will help them to change their behaviour
more important than talking, you will need to listen.
Perhaps there are problems that you don't know about
you may find that sniffing isn't the main problem, and it's more urgent to tackle other problems
if they have been sniffing for so e time, arrange a health check
you may want to ensure that they don't carry on sniffing.
But it may be difficult to stop a determined sniffer
instead, arranging activities together will help the young person to know that you care and will give them other things to do.
It will also help you to keep track of how they are using their free time
you might think about your own use of drugs like alcohol and tobacco
you may want to get advice from a local helping agency.
There are some addresses in this booklet to put you in touch with the right people.
for those young people who refuse to stop using solvents you may want to give advice on how to avoid, or reduce damage to their health.
If a child is sniffing with a group of young people, and has been for some time, it may help to provide other more interesting and exciting leisure activities.
You might be able to get the local youth or recreation service to help.
Trips out of town, physical activities, and chances to meet other young people are all good ways of making sniffing less interesting.
Don't just leave this to youth workers, but get involved yourself if you can.
A few young people are really ‘stuck’ on glue or products and it may take a long time to help them.
It isn't a good idea to focus on the use of solvents.
They'll have other problems and difficulties.
Helping them with these problems will probably help them to stop sniffing.
To safeguard their health in the meantime you could give them advice about how to reduce the risks they are taking.
This might include the fact that aerosols and butane seem to be especially dangerous products, particularly when sprayed directly into the mouth.
Putting plastic bags over the head is dangerous.
Sniffing alone or in dangerous places, such as railway embankments and by canals, can be more risky.
Exertion after sniffing might cause heart failure.
parents sometimes need more help in getting young people to make the difficult change from childhood to adulthood.
There are agencies and groups who can help with the problems young people and their parents have.
Theses are listed at the back of this booklet.
What happened to Sally?
Sally is 13 and doing OK at school.
She went around with a group of friends of about the same age, and one evening they were messing around at a friend's house when his parents were out.
But it was rather boring, and one of the gang got a can of anti-perspirant and suggested that they each have a sniff to get high and have ‘dreams’.
Each member of the group inhaled from the can, and some felt a strange effect, rather like being drunk.
When it was Sally's turn she took a large breath.
She became frightened by the effects.
She ran up the stairs to go to the toilet to be sick but collapsed on the landing.
Fortunately, one of her friends had done a first aid course so he put her in the recovery position and cleared her airways, then gave her the kiss of life.
The others called an ambulance.
The doctor in the Accident and Emergency Department told them that Sally had been very lucky; sniffing aerosols can kill at the first attempt, and some people's hearts are affected.
Sally arrived home late in the evening looking very pale and exhausted.
She got told off for being late, but it wasn't until the next day that Sally's parents were phoned by the school who had heard about a gang of young people being at the hospital the previous night.
Her mum, having spent the afternoon fearing the worst, met Sally from school and started questioning her right away.
This embarrassed Sally in and (perhaps more importantly) listen to her side of the story.
However, Sally did try sniffing a few more times (fortunately, without coming to any harm) but then decided it wasn't for her, and instead started drinking alcohol with her friends.
Her mother is now worried about this and concerned that Sally will escalate her drinking.
Sally's parents keep themselves aware of her circle of friends and make sure they know where she is going when she goes out.
They also negotiate with her a ‘coming home time’ if she is going to be out later than usual.
Some of Sally's friends continued to sniff and one of them, who they all said ‘had a lot of problems’, sniffed every day.
Sally tried to persuade him to stop but he said it wasn't doing him any harm, even though he looked pale and drawn.
Then, he started getting interested in banger-racing and got a steady girlfriend.
Gradually he sniffed less and less, and his health improved.
What else can you read
If you want to find out more about drugs and solvents you can read:
publications from the Institute for the Study of Drug Dependence (ISDD) including ‘Drug Abuse Briefing’; a booklet on solvents in their ‘Drugnotes’, series; and a booklet for professional workers with young people
publications from Re-Solv, the Society for the Prevention of Solvent and Volatile Substance Abuse.
If you want more information to help you as a parent, you could read:
leaflets on ‘Adolescents and Drugs’ and ‘Adolescents and Alcohol’published by the organisation, Exploring Parenthood at 50p each.
‘Living with teenagers’ By Martin Herbert (Basil Blackwell 1987).
the Open University study pack, ‘Parents and teenagers’(price £25 from the.
Or try your local library).
Where can you get help and advice?
After reading this booklet you may feel that you need more information or some extra help.
If so, contact one of these organisations:
Re-Solv, the Society for the Prevention of Solvent and Volatile Abuse, is a charity solely concerned with solvent misuse.
They publish leaflets, booklets and videos and know about local agencies who can help.
Contact them at
can provide information on counselling services for young people throughout the country.
Exploring Parenthood is an organisation which offers help and advice to parents.
They run an advice line during office hours at
The National Children's Bureau has an information project on solvent sniffing for professionals who work with young people.
Their books, ‘Soluble Problems’ and ‘Sniffing Solutions’, cover practical responses to solvent sniffing.
A reading list is available.
They are at
The Institute for the Study of Drug Dependence (ISDD) has information on research about solvents and other drugs.
Their address is:
SCODA, the Standing Conference on Drug Abuse, has information on agencies around the country where drug and solvent misusers and their families can get help..
Emergency!
What do you do?
Stay calm.
If a person is drowsy or unconscious:
because of the small risk of ‘sudden sniffing death’, discourage exertion and keep person calm
remove any solvents and make sure that there is plenty of fresh air
make sure they are lying on their side so that if they are sick their vomit won't stop them breathing
call a doctor or ambulance if the user is unconscious.
(Although the user may recover before the ambulance arrives, it is better to be safe than sorry.)
What you do with someone who is not in such a bad way will depend on your relationship with the young person and on what situation you are in:
stay calm.
realise that this is not the best time to discuss their drug or solvent use
try to stop them sniffing — without using force
stay with them until the effects have worn off
don't chase solvent misusers around or over-excite them because of the small risk of ‘sudden sniffing death’.
SAINSBURY'S living TODAY
Keeping Food Safe
New Act aims to improve food safety Your ‘good food handling guide’
How safe is our food?
The demand for food without preservatives is increasing.
Taking preservatives out is easy, but it means that everyone in food handling — producers, distributors, retailers, caterers and consumers — has to pay even more attention to food hygiene.
During the last few years there has been a lot of publicity about food poisoning.
We've had Salmonella in chickens and eggs, and Listeria in chilled foods and soft cheeses.
There have been reports about an increasing number of people suffering from food poisoning and accusing fingers have been pointed at food manufacturers, distributors, caterers and even consumers.
Just how safe is our food?
What is the Government or anyone else doing to ensure that the food we buy is safe, and what can you, the consumer, do to help matters?
Before you begin to think that it might be safer to starve than to eat and run the risk of food poisoning, it's important to get the whole matter of food poisoning into perspective.
A sense of proportion
Nearly all the undesirable changes that go on in food after it is harvested make it less pleasant, or decidedly horrible, to eat.
A few make it dangerous.
But a great deal can be done by everyone involved in food handling — including people in their own homes — to reduce the incidence of food poisoning dramatically.
By and large your five senses tell you when food is a bit past its best.
Milk smells ‘off’; lettuce looks floppy, celery loses its crispness and bread stales.
These foods are unpleasant, but probably not dangerous.
Unfortunately, there is no certain way of knowing of food is dangerous…until a few hours after it is eaten.
Quite often food that will cause bacterial food poisoning looks and smells perfectly acceptable.
Over-long storage in poor conditions affects different food in different ways.
This depends on their structure and chemical composition
Food
Leafy vegetables such as lettuce, watercress
Green vegetables
Apples, peaches, pears
Fatty fish, cream and high-fat foods
White fish
Meat and poultry
Milk
Bread
Cause
Water loss from cells especially if air is warm and dry
Oxygen in the air and natural enzymes change the structure of chlorophyll
Bruising, general ageing allow plant enzymes to cause ‘odd’ chemical reactions
Oxygen changes fats, especially polyunsaturates
Bacteria and fish enzymes act on natural chemicals in flesh
Bacteria multiply
Bacteria act on proteins and sugar
Water moves from crumb to crust
Mould growth
Effect
Wilting, loss of crispness
Colour becomes dull green then brown
Off flavours and browning
Rancid flavour
‘Fishy’ odour, and worse
Off flavour
Souring and curdling
Change in texture
Visible mould
Government Action
So it is vitally important to know how to reduce the risk of food poisoning.
We have, for many years, had legislation aimed at protecting the consumer from harmful food, but recently the law about food safety has been modified and extended to give even greater protection.
The food Safety Act 1990 is concerned with food safety in farms, food factories, retail outlets and catering establishments.
But it's important that all this good work is not undone by unhygienic practices after the food is bought — when it is taken home, stored and cooked.
The Food Safety Act 1990
In January 1991 the main part of the Food Safety Act 1990 came into operation.
This Act is wide ranging but some of the provisions are:
Government Ministers have increased powers to act if they suspect that food on sale may be a danger to health
Food premises will have to be registered so that they may be inspected and action taken if they are considered to be a health risk.
Ministers are empowered to require hygiene training for food handlers.
Law enforcement officers have increased powers to deal with or seize food they suspect is dangerous.
Penalties for contravening the law have been increased
In addition the Food Hygiene (Amendment) Regulations 1990 specify temperatures at or below which certain foods must be kept during distribution and display
The Importance of temperature
‘The refrigerator is the most powerful weapon we have in the fight against food poisoning, provided it is used properly.’
A Principal Environmental Health Officer Wandsworth Borough Council
How food poisoning is caused
To understand why the refrigerator is so important, you have to know how bacteria react to temperature.
Most food poisoning in this country is caused by five groups of bacteria — Campylobacter, Salmonella, Clostridium, Listeria and Staphylococci.
Even small numbers of Salmonella cells can cause food poisoning but other types of bacteria have to be present in large numbers before they make food dangerous.
In other words, they have been allowed to grow and multiply for a sufficiently long time to produce large numbers of cells.
If Salmonella and Listeria are to cause problems, living cells of the bacteria have to be present in the food when it is eaten.
Normal, but thorough, cooking should destroy these cells and render them harmless
Staphylococci are different inasmuch as they produce toxin (poisonous chemical) when they are actively growing.
Even though cooking may destroy the bacterial cells, it is unlikely to inactivate the toxin.
Food producers do their best to make sure that food is not contaminated with any food poisoning organisms.
But if some should be in food, the maintenance of a cold temperature can do a lot to minimise growth and thereafter the risk of food poisoning The Food Hygiene (Amendment) Regulations 1990 requires that, from 1 April 1993, most short life food must be kept at 5°C or colder after manufacture and throughout distribution and display.
Keeping such a cold temperature will require many food companies to buy better refrigeration equipment so, until April 1993, a temperature of no warmer than 8°C must be maintained for those foods.
Although there is no law governing the performance of household refrigerators, you should use a thermometer to make sure your refrigerator is operating at 5°C or colder.
Suitable thermometers are available in Sainsbury's stores which sell freezer accessories.
Once food has cooled to 5°C or colder, if any food poisoning bacteria are present most will grow only very slowly and it would take a long time for them to reach large enough numbers to cause a problem.
But, if Listeria should be present, it will grow and multiply, even at refrigerator temperatures.
And if the food is at 10°C, Listeria will grow more rapidly than any other organism
How much do you know about food poisoning?
Answer these questions to find out how much you really know about keeping food safely.
1.
At what temperature should fresh food be kept to minimise the risk of food poisoning?
a)
— 18°C
b)
5°C or colder
c)
10°C
d)
room temperature
2.
If there is a power cut for 3 hours, what should you do about the contents of your freezer?
a)
Throw everything away
b)
Distribute the food among your neighbours and tell them to eat it straight away 
c)
Leave the whole thing alone until several hours after the power is restored
d)
Keep opening the door/lid to see what is happening
3.
You have a chilled recipe dish containing chicken.
It is 2 days past the ‘use by’ date.
You think it has been kept in the ‘fridge so what do you do?
a)
Throw is away
b)
Cook in the usual way and eat it
c)
Cook it for a few minutes longer than stated and eat it
4.
Which of these is the most important?
To wash you hands:
a)
Before handling raw meat/poultry
b)
After handling raw meat/poultry
c)
Before handling cooked meat/poultry
d)
a b and c are equally important
5.
Some foods such as meats, fish and bacon are now packed in gas-flushed packs to extend their storage lives.
Where and for how long should you keep them?
a)
In the ‘fridge for up to 3 days
b)
In the larder for up to 3 days
c)
In the ‘fridge for up to 5 days
d)
in the ‘fridge for the time stated on the pack
6.
Which of these should you NOT cook from frozen?
a)
Rib of beef
b)
A whole salmon
c)
Commercially frozen chicken rissoles
d)
A rolled breast of lamb
Now turn to page 7 to find out how well you scored.
There are 3 lines of attack against food poisoning organisms:
Make sure food is as free as possible from food poisoning organisms and that it is handled hygienically at all times — see Good Food Handling Guide on p 6&7.
Keep foods, especially milk, all cheeses, cooked and fresh meats, pâté, fish, eggs and ready-made dishes, in the refrigerator operating at 5°C or colder to inhibit bacterial growth.
Cook food thoroughly to destroy bacterial cells.
Frozen foods are stored at — 18°C throughout distribution and there is no possibility of bacterial cells growing and multiplying at that temperature.
But remember that neither chilling nor freezing kills all bacteria so it is very important to keep chilled foods chilled and frozen foods frozen until they are used.
Once they reach room temperature, bacteria become active again and food deterioration starts or resumes from where it left off.
the good food handling guide
All food needs to be stored and prepared carefully if it is to be enjoyed at its best.
But meat, meat products and poultry need special care.
These foods are responsible for about two-thirds of food poisoning outbreaks.
They are preventable
1.
When you've bought chilled or frozen foods, get them home quickly.
At the checkout, pack frozen and chilled foods together, ideally in a cool-bag, and take them home quickly.
Don't leave them in a warm care for three or four hours.
In that time just one Salmonella cell in a previously chilled food could multiply to a million cells.
Once home, put chilled food in the refrigerator, frozen food in the freezer or frozen food storage compartment of the ‘fridge.
2.
Keep hot food and cold food cold.
All food, but especially meat, poultry, fish and milk, should spend as little time as possible at temperatures between 5°C (41°F) and 63°C (145°F).
Any bacteria that may be in the food will have a field day and grow.
Very few food poisoning bacteria grow if they are colder than 5°C and they are killed if heated above 63°C.
In fact, Salmonella are so vulnerable to heat that they are killed if they are at 70°C (160°F), or hotter, for 2 minutes.
Any bacteria in whole meat joints will be on or very close to the surface and the outside of roast meat gets hot enough to sterilise it.
Rolled joints and poultry are different.
Bacteria may be deep in the flesh or joint or extra care is needed to make sure enough heat penetrates right through the flesh.
It's most unlikely that will be achieved if the rolled joint or poultry is cooked from frozen.
3.
In the ‘fridge, store raw meat below food that's not going to be cooked/heated before it's eaten.
By its very nature, raw meat will contain some bacteria.
It also tends to drip.
This drip could contain bacteria and contaminate other food.
Prevent this by storing raw meat on the bottom shelf of the ‘fridge in a dish with a rim rather than on a flat plate.
4.
Keep raw and cooked food apart.
Good food handling and thorough cooking should make all food safe.
Keep it that way by preventing it coming into contact with raw meat, poultry and fish.
This is especially important if you're going to cool the cooked food and eat it cold.
5.
Wash chopping boards, knives, other equipment and your hands after they've been used in the preparation of raw food.
Wash your hands before handling any food.
Bacteria like warm, moist conditions such as those found on chopping boards and other pieces of kitchen equipment.
Remove them by frequent scrubbing and careful drying.
Wash dish cloths and tea towels frequently.
Spread towels and allow them to dry completely after use.
6.
Cool left-overs quickly and keep them cool.
If food is not going to be eaten as soon as it's cooked, either keep it hot (above 63°C) or cool it quickly.
As soon as it's stopped steaming, put it in the ‘fridge.
Once it's cool, cover it and keep it at 5°C or colder, or freeze it.
If you don't have a ‘fridge, put the food in the coldest place you can find and eat it within one or two days.
7.
Don't keep food beyond its ‘Use by’ or ‘Best before’date.
If food is kept for too long its taste will deteriorate and, more importantly, it may become harmful.
To help customers keep food in good condition, the new Food Labelling (Amendment) Regulations 1990 requires almost all foods have carried one of two types of date mark —‘Use by’ or ‘Best before’.
8.
Keep food covered.
Good packaging protects food from flies and other insects.
You don't know where they've been before they came into your kitchen.
It also prevents food losing moisture.
The colder the temperature, the quicker water is lost.
Poorly wrapped frozen food may lose so much water it eventually develops freezer burn.
It's not dangerous, but it makes food unappetising or even inedible.
As good packaging also prevents flavours migrating from one food to another.
9.
Keep pets in their place
There are some places pets should not be allowed…work surfaces, for example.
Their feet can carry all sorts of undesirable bacteria.
Get chilled and frozen food home quickly
In the ‘fridge store raw meat on the lowest shelf
Keep raw and cooked food apart
After use with raw food, wash all equipment
Keep all food covered
To refreeze or to refreeze?
It's perfectly acceptable to thaw food, such as meat, cook it and put it back in the freezer.
If food to be eaten raw or without further cooking has thawed, it's acceptable to refreeze it if just the surface has softened but you can still feel some ice.
How did you score?
1.
b) Fresh food should be kept at 5°C — ie. in the refrigerator.
2.
c) A 3 hour power cut won't have any significant effect on a well-stocked freezer — provided you DON'T keep opening the door/lid.
3.
It is recommended that ALL food is eaten by the ‘Use by’ date.
4.
d)
5.
d)
6.
a) b) and d).
Thorough cooking of these foods is very difficult or impossible unless they are thawed before cooking begins.
Good healthy food cost less at SAINSBURY'S