

GOOD SUCCESS IN IRELAND
At the moment all depends on good success in Ireland.
William III to Lord Portland, 7 February 1690
What soon became known as ‘The Glorious Revolution’ was to shape England's defence policy, and affect her place in the world, for at least the next century.
That James would attempt to recover his lost throne seemed inevitable, especially since he had taken refuge in France.
Immediately on his arrival, Louis had installed the exiled Stuart in a palace at St Germain-en-Laye, where he lived in a far more impressive style than most royal exiles.
Louis described James as ‘the best fellow in the world’ and was distinctly smitten by his wife, Mary of Modena, though the French were puzzled that, as a beautiful woman of 30, she should be faithful to a husband 26 years her senior.
James would probably have been content to live quietly for a time but both Mary and Louis were insistent on immediate action and his chief remaining ally in the British Isles, Richard Talbot, Earl of Tyrconnel, Lord Deputy and Commander-in-Chief in Ireland, wrote urging him not to settle into comfortable inactivity in France when Ireland offered a kingdom of his own ‘plentiful in all things for human life’.
Men were not lacking in Ireland but Tyrconnel needed both money and arms, specifying his requirements as 500,000 crowns [£125,000], 16,000 muskets and 12,000 swords.
Over supper on 20 January 1689 (English style), Louis persuaded James, who would have preferred to begin the recovery of his lost throne via Scotland, to respond to Tyrconnel's plea, offering a handsome contribution in money and arms plus five experienced officers to help train the raw Irish troops and a diplomatic adviser, formerly French envoy at the Hague.
James sailed from Brest on 24 February 1689 with 25 ships and landed at Kinsale, about 15 miles [24 km]from Cork, on the southern coast of Ireland, on Tuesday 12 March.
He was the first English king (as Irish Catholics still considered him) to visit the country since Richard III in 1394 and when he entered Dublin on 24 March, with his old friend, Tyrconnel, whom James had created a duke, riding before  him, he received a rapturous reception, with bells ringing, girls in white scattering flowers in front of him, and the clergy carrying the host in a monstrance.
Dublin Castle, like most things in Ireland, was somewhat dilapidated, but here he set up his new court.
Ireland in March 1689 presented a mirror-image of the situation in England.
By James's landing in mid-March the Protestants had been forced to abandon most of their strongholds and soon after his arrival they gave up Dungannon, 35 miles [56 km]west of Belfast, and Coleraine, a seaport on the north coast, which succumbed to an Irish force under a French commander.
That left two places in ‘enemy’ hands.
One was Enniskillen, on an island in the River Erne, which offered the only crossing point between Connaught and Ulster; the other was Londonderry, or Derry as Catholics called it, a major port four miles [6.4 km]from the mouth of the River Foyle, near the centre of the northern coast of Ulster.
It was strongly protected by walls completed in 1618 and occupied by the descendants of the Scottish Presbyterians ‘planted’ there earlier in the century.
James decided to concentrate his efforts on subduing Londonderry, but in the end had to ride back, damp and disappointed, to Dublin, where, on 26 April, as he wrote in his memoirs, ‘he found the arms not arrived from Cork, Kinsale or Waterford; and that in the arsenal nothing had been done for preparing of tools’.
While he was struggling to put things right, and to organise the manufacture of cannon, of which his vast, mainly barefoot, army was desperately short, a large French convoy of 24 ships of the line and ten fireships docked at Bantry Bay, near Cork, bringing welcome supplies and reinforcements.
James's private quarrel with William now became irretrievably caught up in the greater feud between England and France.
William's navy had failed dismally in not intercepting James's convoy on its way from Brest in March and now the Comte de Châteaurenault [or Château Renault]had made the same voyage unchallenged, only being brought to battle on Wednesday 1 May 1689, as he prepared to leave his anchorage.
Admiral Herbert, who had emerged with credit from William's invasion of England, had hastily assembled a squadron at Portsmouth to pursue the French but now, with 17 ships of the line and three bomb-vessels, one of their earliest appearances on the maritime scene, found himself outnumbered.
The French lost about 40 men, the English about 80, and only a quarrel between the French commanders prevented a disaster.
When James was told that the French navy had beaten the English he commented patriotically, ‘It is the first time then,’ while William, as a face-saver, created Herbert first Earl of Torrington.
Bantry Bay was the first engagement of the Anglo-French war officially declared by William on 7 May 1689; Holland had already begun hostilities in February, the start of that great international effort to prevent  Louis XIV dominating Europe which was to be William's main preoccupation till his death and to shape English naval and military policy for years to come.
For the moment the immediate danger to William lay in Scotland, which was still an independent country, with no longer the same king as England.
A Convention, similar to that in England, which met in Edinburgh on 14 March 1689, eventually decided to offer William the throne, though many Scots, especially the chieftains in the Highlands where the old religion remained strong, still regarded James II as their king, and others, not necessarily Catholic, saw in the dispossessed Stuarts the best hope of regaining Scotland's lost independence.
Hence Jacobitism, the belief that James II and his heirs were the rightful rulers of Scotland (and possibly England as well) took far deeper root in Scotland than England, where it soon became the mere dream of a few impractical romantics.
In Scotland the new dedication to ‘the king over the water’ found its first solid manifestation on 18 March 1689, when one of the most famous of Scottish noblemen, and the ablest soldier in the country, John Graham of Claverhouse, led his troop of horse out of Edinburgh and in April raised James's standard in Dundee.
‘Bloody Claverse’ as his enemies described him, ‘Bonny Dundee,’as his admirers and a later poet immortalised him, with his ‘long dark curled locks’and ‘melancholy haughty countenance’, was one of those colourful, charismatic leaders who lend authority even to a bad cause.
Dundee had received a commission from the deposed James II as his Commander-in-Chief in Scotland, and fled into the Highlands to gather support among the clans.
They assembled, on 18 May 1689, in Glen Roy [or Glenroy]in Inverness-shire, near the hamlet of Roybridge [or Roy Bridge], which is about ten miles [16 km]north-east of the site of the future Fort William.
Early in June 1689 Edinburgh Castle, which had been held for James, surrendered, but Blair Castle, at Blair Atholl in Perthshire, eight miles [13 km]north-west of Pitlochry, had now declared for the Jacobite cause.
Perched above the main route which runs alongside the River Garry through the mountains separating southern Scotland from Inverness, it commanded the link between the Highlands and the Lowlands, giving a vast strategic advantage to whomever held it.
Both sides now hastened towards it, Dundee with a single troop of horse, 2500 ‘irregulars’ on foot and 300 supposedly trained soldiers from Ireland, Major-General Hugh Mackay, William's newly appointed Commander-in-Chief in Scotland — he had commanded the English and Scottish contingent in the 1688 campaign — with 3000 infantry, eight troops of cavalry and dragoons.
On the afternoon of Saturday 27 July 1689 the two armies came face  to face at the pass of Killiecrankie, about midway between Pitlochry and Blair Castle, where the road ran through a narrow valley beside a deep gorge.
As Mackay emerged from the Pass he saw Dundee's army approaching down the valley, just ahead of him, and hastily deployed his troops on the slopes on his right flank, ‘a ground fair enough to receive the enemy,’ he later wrote in his memoirs, ‘but not to attack them’.
Half an hour before sunset Dundee's Highlanders swept down upon Mackay's troops, following the natural curve of the ground and charging headlong through the enemy front.
Before William's men could reload, or fix their old-fashioned plug-in bayonets, the enemy were upon them, fearsome in their kilts and ferociously wielding the dirks, claymores and broadswords that had always been the clansmen's favoured weapons.
When Mackay launched his cavalry at the attackers' flank to try to restore the situation, they were caught up in the rout of the demoralised infantry, now stampeding from the field, while the victorious Highlanders pressed on unchecked until distracted from killing by the chance of plunder as they reached Mackay's baggage train.
Dundee himself was fatally wounded while leading the final victorious charge, thereby becoming a legend, one of 600 casualties among the Jacobites.
Mackay fell back on Stirling, having lost three-quarters of his men on the battlefield or through desertion.
Following Dundee's death the Jacobites suffered a series of defeats, the last, and decisive one, on 1 May 1690, at Cromdale in Moray, about 30 miles [48 km]east of Inverness.
Organised resistance to William in Scotland ceased, though the last clans did not formally submit for another 18 months.
While Bonnie Dundee was establishing in Scotland the Jacobite tradition of romantic failure a different legend was being born in Ireland, that of ‘No surrender’, the slogan adopted by the protestant defenders of Londonderry.
The fight to hold Londonderry began heroically when, in an episode still commemorated today, the ‘apprentice boys’ barred the gates but the governor, Robert Lundy, proved a broken reed, if not a covert traitor, recommending that the citizens surrender and actually sending away two regiments despatched to the town's relief.
He was driven out, with most of his officers, on 17 April, but the first attempt to relieve Londonderry from England failed.
On 19 April 1689 the siege had begun in earnest, with the arrival of French troops outside the walls.
A boom was now built across the River Foyle which connected it, via Lough Foyle, with the open sea, and the 30,000 citizens began a long ordeal by privation and disease, in which many thousands died, while enemy bombs plunged down upon the town.
The population, though reduced to eating cats and dogs, fought back, however, so long as their ammunition lasted, with 16-pounder [7.3-kg]and 24-pounder [11-kg]cannon, continuous musket fire and  frequent sorties and on 30 July an expedition led by General Kirke rammed the boom; the following day, as the first stores were being unloaded, the siege was abandoned, having lasted 105 days.
Simultaneously, Colonel William Wolseley, landed by Kirke to organise the loyalists around Enniskillen, totally defeated, on 30 July 1689, a much larger force at Newton Butler, 15 miles [24 km]south-east of Enniskillen, capturing its commander.
James had now failed to seize either of the main Protestant strongholds in Ireland and could clearly not feel secure till they had been subdued.
The presence of the deposed Stuart sovereign, and of French officers and troops, in Ireland posed a continuing threat, however, to William III which he could not simply ignore, and in August 1689 he sent another large army there, under a 74-year-old Huguenot general, Frederick Herman, first Duke of Schomberg.
Half of Schomberg's force perished through disease, the autumn rains being appalling even by Irish standards, without a shot fired against them.
William, who was already bored by court life in London and still found spoken English hard to follow, decided he must go to Ireland and take command in person.
‘He understood that better,’ he was reported as saying, ‘than how to govern England.’
The king's arrival in Belfast on 25 June was greeted with bonfires, followed by a warm welcome wherever he went.
William was visibly more relaxed than at home.
‘The country is worth fighting for,’ he remarked as they marched through Louth towards Drogheda, at the mouth of the River Boyne, where James's army was preparing to make its stand.
On 29 June 1690, described as ‘excessive hot’, William's army camped behind the hills on the north bank of the Boyne, while James's troops occupied the other bank.
James was up at 1 am on Tuesday 1 July 1690, in immaculate uniform decorated with star and garter, ready for the battle to decide who should rule England.
It was to be fought with far larger armies than on similar occasions in the past: about 36,000, with superior troops, cannon and equipment on William's side, about 25,000, some of them first-class French troops but mainly ill-trained, poorly equipped Irish, on that of the man the English called ‘the late King James’.
Schomberg dismissed William's plan, to force the river crossing, as too dangerous but the normally cautious king overruled him.
The scene that followed was one of the most dramatic in the history of warfare and destined to live, like the defence of Derry, in Irish Protestant annals.
In bright sunshine and intense heat the Dutch Guards, ten abreast, led by their massed drums, deployed out of a narrow valley between the hills and plunged into the river, to wade across, sometimes up to their necks in water, under heavy fire, emerging with ardour undimmed, to storm the enemy breastworks.
‘My poor Guards!
My poor Guards!’
William was heard to exclaim as, with their  foot beginning to give way, the Jacobite horse charged three times to restore the situation, forcing some of the attackers back into the river.
Old General Schomberg was killed there; so was another of William's commanders.
William himself survived, riding straight through a line of 40 grenadiers in a trench, who coolly stood to fire their muskets at him.
Soon the Jacobite infantry were in full flight, with William himself leading the pursuit across seven miles [11 km]of countryside, where many stragglers died amid the dykes and hedges, though quarter was, on his order, given to all who asked for it.
It was after ten when the long day ended, the king having busied himself visiting the wounded, including those from the enemy army; he had, it soon appeared, decisively won the Battle of the Boyne for the loss of 500 men; James's casualties were put at 1600.
James had meanwhile reached Dublin, blaming the Irish, whom one eye-witness had described as ‘like sheep flying before the wolf’, for his defeat.
His only hope now, he believed, was a direct invasion of England from France and he moved on almost at once to Kinsale, where a French frigate was waiting to take him to Brest.
He landed on 10 July (English style) and went on to find Paris en fête celebrating the supposed death of William III; sadly, James knew better.
William himself rode into Dublin on Sunday 6 July, and, wearing the crown of Ireland on his head, attended a thanksgiving service in Christ Church cathedral.
He did not return to London until early September, leaving his subordinates, especially John Churchill, recently created first Earl of Marlborough, to complete the subjugation of Ireland.
‘No officer living who has seen so little service as my Lord Marlborough is so fit for great commands,’ commented William prophetically after the 40-year-old general had, in the autumn of 1690, rapidly captured Cork and Kinsale.
In May 1691 a new French general reached Limerick, with further arms and other supplies, but in August the Duke of Tyrconnel died, and on 3 October 1691 an uneasy peace was restored to Ireland by the Treaty of Limerick.
Under its terms any soldier who wanted one was offered a free passage to France.
The 11–12,000 who accepted were greeted by James on their arrival in Brittany at the end of 1691.
They formed, in theory, a private army of his own, for though Louis XIV paid them they were organised into regiments under Irish officers, but William preferred to have them confronting him openly on the far side of the Channel rather than lurking, disaffected, in his rear on the other side of the Irish Sea.
While William III had been occupied in Ireland the French had been active in the Channel.
The new Earl of Torrington faced his first challenge on 21 June, when a French squadron 75 strong, with 6 frigates and 20 fireships, was sighted off the Lizard, moving up channel as if to blockade the Thames.
Late on 29 June 1690, having so far evaded  battle, he was ordered by the government to engage the enemy, being goaded into action by a message from the queen herself: ‘We apprehend the consequences of your retiring to the Gunfleet to be so fatal, that we choose rather that you should, upon any advantage of the wind, give battle to the enemy.’
On the morning of 30 June 1690, while 360 miles [573 km]away near Drogheda, William III and ‘the late King James’ prepared to fight the Battle of the Boyne.
Torrington, with a fleet of 58 English and Dutch warships, backed by a favourable wind, reluctantly engaged a French fleet of 77 sail under Admiral de Tourville [Anne Hilarion de Constantin, Comte de Tourville].
Torrington's mishandling enabled the enemy to drive a wedge between the English and Dutch ships and by 1 pm the former were in shameful retreat, a disaster only being averted when the wind suddenly dropped, though Torrington did not drop anchor until safely within the Thames.
Only one warship and some fireships had been lost but during Tuesday 1 July Torrington had to burn five more ships of the line, mounting from 72 to 50 guns, to prevent their falling into enemy hands, leaving Louis XIV master of the Channel.
The Battle of Beachy Head was recognised as a national disgrace and Torrington, in spite of his earlier services, was court-martialled, though acquitted.
The news of his defeat caused a panic.
John Evelyn, writing on 6 July, reflected the national mood:
The whole nation now exceedingly alarmed by the French fleet braving our coast even to the very Thames mouth; our fleet commanded by debauched young men, and likewise inferior in force, giving way to the enemy, to our exceeding reproach; God of his mercy defend this poor…nation.
The familiar routine of anti-invasion preparations was soon well under way.
Trinity House was ordered to remove the navigation buoys from the Thames estuary; the militia in the south-western counties was called out, seriously disrupting the bringing in of the harvest; Essex, Buckinghamshire and Bedfordshire between them raised 22 troops of cavalry who occupied Hounslow Heath; while the foot from Kent and Surrey were mustered at Blackheath.
The bonfires of the beacon chain were again built and guarded.
The City of London raised a loan of £100,000, which was gratefully accepted; an elderly duke volunteered to emerge from retirement to lead the fleet, an offer which was declined.
While England was in the grip of anti-invasion fever James was desperately urging Louis XIV to seize a unique opportunity.
He well  understood that the real defence of his former kingdom lay in sea-power and that, with the fleet beaten and the king and field army away in Ireland, there would never be a better chance to get an expedition across the Channel.
But Louis XIV was not to be persuaded.
The Battle of the Boyne had shaken his confidence in James's value as an ally and his admirals were well aware of the difficulty of maintaining a large fleet in the Channel, with no port east of Brest able to accommodate their large ships whatever the state of the tide and wind, while the English fleet had a choice of harbours from Plymouth to Chatham, and of splendid natural anchorages from Torbay, via Portland, the Downs and the Nore, to the Gunfleet, usable in any weather.
During July 1690, demonstrating the French command of the Narrow Seas, small landing parties were put ashore on the Sussex coast to put up posters urging local residents, and especially army and navy officers, to support their former king, a somewhat pointless propaganda exercise, but a much more serious incursion followed.
The accounts are, as usual, contradictory, but according to the fullest account de Tourville next despatched nine of his ships back to Brest to collect additional troops, who were to be transported across the Channel in shallow-draught galleys, collected from the Mediterranean, with a mere two feet [0.6 m]of freeboard between waterline and deck.
Although they carried ancillary sails, the galleys' principal means of propulsion was 50 or 60 oars, each manned by five or six galley-slaves — criminals, captured Moslems or, worst of all in English eyes, Huguenots — with 336 rowers required for every 155 soldiers carried.
The French were so proud of introducing these alien craft to unaccustomed northern waters that they struck a special medal to commemorate their proposed use, at which English sailors laughed aloud.
They had, however, smiled too soon.
On Monday 21 July 1690 a huge fleet put at 111 sail appeared off Portland in Dorset, but de Tourville instead sailed on, appearing next day in Torbay, opposite the fishing hamlet where Torquay now stands.
At sunset, however, after a day sunning themselves on deck, in perfect invasion weather, and with not an English ship or soldier in sight, the French weighed anchor and left, leaving the news of their presence to be spread by beacons and horsemen all over Devon and Cornwall.
Five miles [8 km]away by sea, but nearly twice as far by road, lay the small fishing town of Teignmouth, consisting of about 40 houses, clustered round a Norman church, and with a wide, gently sloping shingle beach, where today a broad promenade overlooks stretches of firm sand.
Here, early on the morning of Wednesday 23 July 1690, the French fleet anchored offshore, while a stream of large oar-powered  galleys carried about 1000 soldiers ashore, in a procession as orderly as on an exercise.
All the occupants of Teignmouth had fled as the French came ashore and the 500 horse militia which assembled on Haldon [or Halden]Hill, some two miles [3.2 km]behind Teignmouth, simply watched as the invaders tore down the thatch from the cottages before setting them on fire.
Others looted the communion plate from the church, mockingly dressing themselves in the despised Anglican vestments, before that building, too, caught fire, bringing the walls crashing to the ground.
Some fishing smacks in the harbour were also burnt.
Still the English did nothing.
By the first evening 16–17,000 men had already been mustered on Haldon Hill and other reinforcements, including 7000 tin-workers from Cornwall, were on their way, but the Lord Lieutenant of the county, the Earl of Bath, who arrived to take command, was an experienced regular officer and was not prepared to risk sending the militia against Louis XIV's troops.
Had the French attempted to move inland he would, it seems likely, have fought a defensive battle on ground of his own choosing, but after a few days, with not a shot fired on either side, the French re-embarked and de Tourville sailed home with his fleet intact.
It was an inglorious episode in English history, little remembered since, and regarded at the time less as a disgrace than as a deliverance.
Queen Mary had mixed feelings about her countrymen's humiliations.
‘I think,’ she remarked, ‘it has pleased God to punish them justly, for they really talkt as if it were impossible they should be beaten.’
John Evelyn made little of the episode.
‘The French domineering still at sea,’ he recorded on 3 August 1690, ‘landed some souldiers at Tinmoth in Devon and burned some poore houses.’
Ten days later the earlier panic had subsided.
‘The French fleete returned to Brest and from our coast,’ he noted on 13 August, ‘the militia of the trained bands, horse and foot, which were up [i.e. mobilised]throughout England now dismiss'd.’
After the signing of the Treaty of Limerick in October 1691 the risk of an invasion via Ireland was slight, but unrest continued in Scotland, with whose problems William III had no sympathy; he is said to have remarked that he wished it were a thousand miles away.
He was content to leave matters there to his Secretary of State for Scotland, Sir John Dalrymple, Master [later Earl]of Stair, who offered a pardon to all those chiefs who would swear allegiance to the new king by New Year's Day, 1692.
Owing, however, to a series of accidents, including bad weather, the head of one small clan, Macdonald of Glencoe, a wild valley in Argyllshire, was late in taking the oath, and those on the spot  seized the chance to make an example of him and pay off some private scores.
In the early hours of Sunday 13 February 1692, Captain Campbell, from a clan hostile to the Macdonalds, along with 120 of his soldiers, whom the Macdonalds had been entertaining for the previous fortnight, suddenly fell upon their hosts and butchered them, shooting Macdonald himself in the back and killing nearly 70 men, women and children.
Worse atrocities had occurred in Scotland, but ‘the massacre of Glencoe’ was taken up by the government's critics, and has remained a convenient stick with which to stir up nationalistic sentiment ever since.
Louis XIV was in 1691 persuaded by James to support a new attempt by the deposed monarch to regain his throne.
He was given not merely men but the specialist help of a French general, Marshal Bellefonds, who was to command the expedition on land, and an intelligence and political adviser, François de Bonrepaux, who had served recently as French ambassador in England.
These now formed, with the former king, a three-man invasion committee to plan the military operations while shipyards from Brittany to Provence, and factories in Toulon and Brest, were turning out the shipping, munitions, clothing and harness needed.
James's original idea was for a short sea crossing from Ambleteuse near Calais, where he had landed at the start of his exile, and from here he proposed a descent on Kent.
Dover was to be captured first, then Rochester, the invaders seizing its naval stores and ships; its occupation would, James believed, discourage the English seamen whose homes and families were there from further resistance.
From Rochester the Irish-French army would march on London.
James planned a diversionary landing in Scotland and Major-General William Buchan was sent to Dunkirk with such few troops as he had been able to assemble to sail direct to Aberdeenshire.
Once Louis's advisers were involved these grandiose plans gave way to more realistic ones.
The diversionary attack towards Scotland was dropped and the new objective for the main force was now Torbay, which appealed to James because William of Orange had landed there and to the French because of de Tourville's successful raid on Teignmouth, which had revealed the weakness of the local defences.
The new target date was April 1692 and the main assembly area lay directly behind the Baie de La Hogue, where the Irish troops who had come to France under the Treaty of Limerick had disembarked.
A fleet of 80 ships was assembled at Brest under de Tourville, who was to be joined off Ushant by others sailing from Rochefort and Toulon, but in the event neither force was ready on time and when de Tourville sailed on 2 May he had only 37 ships, excluding fireships, under his command, though seven more arrived later.
Their role was to clear the Channel of the Dutch and English fleets, before returning to escort across the invasion army in its transports.
Too late, on 12 May, the French learned that the Dutch fleet had already joined the English.
A fast ship was sent to recall de Tourville but fog in the Channel delayed it and the French prepared, all unknowing, for a battle in which they would be seriously outnumbered.
William III was, as usual, absent on the Continent and the forces which Queen Mary had at her disposal to repel James were far fewer than those available to James himself five years before.
They totalled only some 10,000 regulars, perhaps 3000 of whom were needed to hold the 38 fortified strongholds in the country, particularly Plymouth, Portsmouth and Tilbury.
Most of the available forces were concentrated between the south-east coast and London, with a major camp on Portsdown Hill, behind Portsmouth.
There were also the militia, who were duly called out, and the usual routine of beacons and watchers was set in motion.
Little was done to protect the south-west.
The nation's real shield was the navy.
Louis was told that it was substantially smaller than in the previous year, but in fact the allied fleet assembled at Portsmouth consisted of 63 English ships and 36 Dutch, with a combined fire-power of 6736 guns, plus 38 fireships; the French, moving up-Channel from Brest, could muster 44 warships with 3240 guns and 38 fireships.
On Wednesday 18 May 1692 Admiral Edward Russell (later Lord Orford) put out to sea and at 4 am next day, Thursday 19 May, one of his frigates reported the enemy in sight.
At 10 am, with the French heavily outnumbered but enjoying the weather gauge, as a ‘small gale’ was blowing from the south-south-west, some miles off Cap Barfleur, at the north-east point of the Cotentin peninsula, de Tourville, who had no faith in the proposed invasion, led his ships towards the enemy.
A fierce battle followed, lasting until around 4 pm when a thick fog descended.
The Anglo-Dutch fleet pursued the beaten French as they withdrew and the Battle of Barfleur now merged with the Battle of La Hogue [or La Hougue]by which name both are sometimes known.
During Friday 20 May and Saturday the 21st the fierce chase continued, during which some of the French ships were scattered all over the Channel; a few, like the Spanish Armada before them, only escaped by sailing right round the British Isles.
Fifteen ships of the line, caught by the flood-tide, were carried into the unprotected bays of Cherbourg and La Hogue, where, on Sunday 22 May, Russell at last caught up with them.
De Tourville's flagship, the Soleil Royal , and two other large vessels were promptly burnt and next day Russell turned his attention to the remaining 12, every one of which, during the night of 23/24 May 1692, and the following morning, was destroyed by the English fireships or by small raiding parties.
With them burned the transports and troopships waiting to carry James's army to England.
James himself, watching from the shore with the rest of his ‘invasion committee’, could not restrain his admiration as he watched his last hope of regaining his throne go up in smoke.
‘Ah!’ he observed, as he had done at Bantry Bay, ‘None but my brave English could do so brave an action!’
La Hogue re-established England's mastery of the Channel and ended the immediate risk of invasion.
On 28 December 1694, vindicating her husband's foresight in having himself made joint sovereign, Mary II died, but William III now went on to rule alone, with no dispute over the succession.
The hopes of the Jacobites came to be centred on James's offspring, who were agreed on all sides to be enchanting children: Louise Marie, born in June 1692 after the great disappointment of La Hogue, whom James himself nicknamed ‘la consolatrice’, i.e. his ‘Solace’ and — the real threat to William and his heirs — the so-called Prince of Wales, James Francis Edward, the ‘warming-pan baby’whose birth, on 10 June 1688, had really cost James his throne.
The young James was, at seven, nicknamed ‘The Blackbird’ because of his dark hair and eyes, but was fair-skinned and unmistakably his father's son.
Pictures of the royal family in exile, with their dogs, were soon circulating in both England and Scotland, the start of an enduring cult.
Louis XIV and his admirals had, meanwhile, after the Battle of La Hogue, licensed numerous ‘corsairs’ to make a nuisance of themselves in the Channel and North Sea, some of whom, actually held naval rank and had guns — up to 50 or 60 in the larger ships — lent them by the French navy.
These licensed pirates were often outstanding seamen, and the most famous, Jean Bart, son of a Dunkirk fisherman, became a legend, if not a hero, on both sides of the Channel.
He became a great favourite at Versailles, where he demonstrated his tactics by breaking through a line of courtiers by the use of his fists and elbows.
In 1692 Bart took more than 100 prizes into St Malo within a year and in the following year, with three frigates from Dunkirk, he made three destructive raids into the North Sea, spreading panic as far as Newcastle.
On 21 September 1697 the long war with France was ended by the Treaty of Ryswick [or Rijswijk], to which Spain and Holland were also signatories.
It contained a most important provision, the formal recognition by Louis XIV that William was King of Great Britain par la grâce de Dieu, i.e. with divine approval, and an undertaking not to give aid to any of William's enemies, but this undertaking did not extend to William's successors; here lay the seeds of future invasion attempts.
The English Parliament, somewhat ungratefully, used the restoration of peace to revive all its old objections to a standing army and eventually forced the king to get rid of all but 10,000 of his 30,000 troops, £350,000 a year being voted for the remainder, considered the minimum needed for home defence.
Separate establishments were provided for Scotland and Ireland.
Half-pay was to be granted to disbanded officers, to enable them to be recalled if necessary.
In December 1697 a civil list of £700,000 a year was established, which, for the first time, distinguished between money provided for defence purposes and that for the other expenses of government.
The most important innovation of the reign, however, was the Mutiny Act, first passed in 1689, which provided a legal basis for military law, and, since it had to be passed afresh each year, acknowledged, by implication, that a standing army had come to stay.
Not surprisingly, in view of the dangers and discomforts of a life at sea, the navy could still only be kept up to strength by the press gang, but everyone did his best to obstruct the activities of the pressmaster, as one, writing from Hull on 13 May 1694, made all too clear:
My trouble has increased mightily every day for want of places to secure my men…
And the people here consisting generally of seamen, neither I nor the pressmasters can be safe from…curses; and not a house that I know of that would not receive a fugitive and shut the door on him…
I prevailed with the gaoler (the sheriff denying me) to take some of the seamen that I thought most dangerous [i.e. the likeliest to try to escape]a week ago, and, notwithstanding the strength of the place, from a turret…four men slipped away by a cord in a minute…
Now a pressmaster dare scarce carry an impressed man through the streets…
I might as well be desired to drive twenty foxes to market.
In 1700 Parliament passed the Act of Settlement, laying down that if Anne died without any surviving children, as now seemed highly likely, the throne should pass to her nearest Protestant relative.
It was a prudent precaution, for the former James I's death, on 5 September 1701, was followed only six months later by that of William III, who died after a fall while riding, on 8 March 1702.
The Jacobites abandoned their customary toast to drink, with grim humour, to ‘the little gentleman in the velvet coat’, the mole whose burrowings had caused the king's horse to stumble.
A POPISH PRETENDER
This crooked disciple pretends he will bring
A Popish Pretender, whom he calls a king.
Verse on the Earl of Mar's rebellion, September 1715
Queen Anne was 37 when she came to the throne, a plump, somewhat dumpy woman, more likely to inspire affection than passionate devotion, but immensely conscientious and unshakeably Anglican.
‘As I know myself to be entirely English…’ she told Parliament in March 1702, three days after her accession, ‘there is not one thing you can expect or desire of me which I shall not be ready to do for the happiness or prosperity of England.’
Her husband, Prince George of Denmark, was a large, hard-drinking, notoriously dull ex-soldier, of whom Charles II had observed, ‘I've tried him drunk and I've tried him sober but there's nothing in him.’
George was merely the queen's consort and by his death in 1708 had left no mark on English history.
Within a few hours of becoming queen Anne wrote to the Dutch States-General setting out the basis of her policy.
Like William III, she would, she declared, support ‘all measures which it will be necessary to take in preserving the liberty of Europe and reducing the power of France to its just limits’.
On 4 May Parliament endorsed the declaration of war on France and Spain, thereby becoming involved in the War of the Spanish Succession, which had followed the attempts of Louis XIV to  install his grandson on the throne of Spain, and his invasion of Holland.
Louis joked that he must be getting old ‘when ladies declare war against me’, but it proved an ill judged jest.
Apart from one major attack on a convoy off Kent in 1706 the French were content to rely on their privateers to menace English shipping and it was the achievements of her army that formed the great glory of Anne's reign.
No major developments in military technology occurred but, significantly, in 1704 pikes were finally phased out, and in 1706 a musket and socket-bayonet became the standard small-arm.
The British infantry, firing a heavier bullet — 16 to the pound against the French 24 — than their enemies, and trained to do so rapidly, by platoons instead of in cumbrous ranks, now achieved a mastery of the  battlefield that was the envy of continental commanders.
So, too, was the success of John Churchill, Earl of Marlborough, whom Anne in December 1702 created a Duke, an almost unprecedented honour normally reserved for the sovereign's sons, a promotion which he rapidly justified by a series of brilliant victories, from Blenheim in August 1704 to Malplaquet in September 1709.
From 1702–1711 he was also simultaneously Captain-General and Master-General of the Ordnance, responsible both for commanding the nation's armies in the field and for its land defences against invasion.
It was largely the desire to create a diversion away from Flanders for Marlborough and his triumphant armies that led to new plans for a Jacobite invasion of the British Isles.
Louis XIV had promised the dying James II in September 1701 to recognise James's son as ‘King of England, as he surely will be’ and the 13-year-old boy was that month duly proclaimed in France as King James III of England and VIII of Scotland.
In the spring of 1705 Colonel Nathaniel Hooke [or Hookes], an Englishman who commanded a regiment in the French army, was sent to Scotland to spy out the land.
He received little except somewhat vague offers of support but early in 1707 went back to Scotland, this time returning to St Germain with a formal invitation to ‘James III and VIII’ to reclaim his kingdom.
30,000 men would, James was assured, rise to support him, provided he came with at least 5000 French troops and arms for the whole Scottish force.
The government in London was kept well informed of what was happening and the rebellion might never have got off the ground but for the effects of the Act of Union of the Two Kingdoms of England and Scotland, which came into effect on 1 May 1707.
Although the two countries retained their distinctive systems of law and church government, they had henceforward ‘one and the same Parliament, to be styled the Parliament of Great Britain', common citizenship, a common currency and the same taxes.
Article II laid down that if Queen Anne failed to leave an heir the succession should pass to a relatively distant claimant, ‘the most excellent Princess Sophia, electress and duchess dowager of Hanover, and the heirs of her body being protestants’.
The Act of Union stirred up the latent nationalism even of non-Jacobite Scots.
Three out of four, it was said, were now Jacobites.
‘Different interests, differing parties, all join in a universal clamour,’ wrote Daniel Defoe from Edinburgh on 9 August 1707, ‘and the very Whigs declare openly they will join with France or King James or anybody rather than be insulted, as they call it, by the English.’
Late in February 1708 news reached England of a French fleet being assembled at Dunkirk to carry 12 battalions of infantry, plus artillery, to Scotland and having, like his father before him, been presented by Louis XIV with a jewelled sword as a good-luck present, on Thursday 26th (English style) James Edward Stuart reached that port, having issued a proclamation denouncing Queen Anne as a usurper.
‘The Old Pretender’, as he is commonly known, although at this time still only 19, was a tall, dark figure, said to resemble Charles II in appearance, though not in character, for he was cold, reserved and prematurely pious, carrying candles in religious processions.
His health was poor, for he suffered constantly from a malarial type disease, quartan ague, which left him feverish and weak.
To this was now added, untimely as his father's nose-bleed at Salisbury, a bout of measles.
The young James bore up bravely, although having to be carried about his flagship wrapped in blankets.
‘My courage is so high that it will uphold the weakness of my body,’ he declared in a letter to his mother from Dunkirk.
‘I hope that when I write to you again it will be from the palace at Edinburgh.’
On Thursday 4 March 1708 (English style) the queen informed the House of Commons of the expected invasion, and a powerful English fleet, 64 strong, plus frigates and fireships, under Vice-Admiral Sir George Byng, was sent to take station off Dunkirk.
Adverse weather conditions, however, caused it to withdraw into shelter and while it was away the French fleet, consisting of eight sail of the line and 24 frigates under Admiral de Forbin, managed, on 8 March, to get out to sea unintercepted.
By the time Byng got back to Dunkirk the birds had flown.
James had won the first round, though, suffering agonies of seasickness, he was in no mood to celebrate, while Admiral de Forbin, in an excess of caution, stood so far out to sea that they overshot their intended destination, Leith in the Firth of Forth, and instead made their landfall 60 miles [96 km]north of Aberdeen and 150 [240 km]from the real objective.
By the evening of 12 March they were opposite Crail.
De Forbin now turned back, but a French frigate, sent into the Forth to contact supporters on shore, failed to receive any response and with the appearance on 13 March 1708 of Admiral Byng's 28 ships on the horizon, de Forbin, not the most heroic of commanders, hastily stood out to sea.
James, having pleaded to be allowed to land and take his chance, was, much against his will, whisked back to France, having merely glimpsed his intended kingdom through the mist and rain.
Before de Forbin could get all his ships away Admiral Byng managed to open fire, and captured one, the Salisbury , with 400 French soldiers aboard.
Three of de Forbin's remaining ships made a brief appearance in the Moray Firth, about 45 miles [72 km]east of Inverness, where they landed a foraging party, but with these exceptions not a Frenchman set foot on what, since 1707, could properly be called British soil.
Though all de Forbin's fleet, except the Salisbury , got home safely the men on board suffered heavily from sickness, the final  casualty list being put at around 4000, a high proportion of those taking part.
As James himself came ashore, pale and exhausted, he was greeted by cries of ‘Vive le roi!’ but it was evident that what might, copying later usage, be called ‘The ‘08’had been a disastrous failure.
The queen's popularity soared still further when, on 9 April 1713, she was able to announce to Parliament the final signature, two days before, of the Treaty of Utrecht, restoring peace to Europe and bringing to Great Britain such solid benefits as the destruction of the fortifications of Dunkirk and the retention of Gibraltar as a British possession.
The French also agreed to acknowledge Anne's right to be queen of England and to expel the Old Pretender from France.
Few wars can have achieved so much and, as one MP wrote from Westminster on 4 April 1713, ‘In the churches the bells, in the streets the bonfires, and in the windows the illuminations, proclaimed the joy of the people.’
The nation had rejoiced too soon.
On 8 June 1714 the Electress Sophia of Hanover, who had been expected to succeed Anne, died suddenly, and on 1 August 1714 so did Queen Anne, aged only 49.
The throne now passed to Sophia's son, a 54-year-old German, who automatically became King George I of England, the founder of a new dynasty, the Hanoverians.
His right to the throne was distinctly tenuous; there were said to be 57 people, if Roman Catholics were included, with a better claim.
He was clearly far more remote from the succession than William III, or at least his wife, had been but he was a Protestant and he duly landed at Greenwich on 18 September 1714, with two mistresses in tow, both very plain.
(They became known to his subjects, from their poor but different figures, as ‘The Maypole’ and ‘The Elephant and Castle’.)
Although conscientious, the new king was a dull, uninspiring figure, rather below middle height, with heavy features, an awkward manner and very little command of English; German was his preferred language but state papers were translated for him into French.
Louis XIV duly carried out the letter of the Treaty of Utrecht by forcing the self-styled James III to move into Lorraine, technically a separate province, 100 miles [160 km]from Paris, but James II's widow still resided at St Germain, a centre for Jacobite intrigue, from which messages were carried to England by French diplomatic couriers.
The pro-Stuart exiles were greatly strengthened early in the new reign by the arrival of two formerly powerful new allies.
Queen Anne's former chief minister, Henry St John, Viscount Bolingbroke, who had been ousted from office by a Whig on George I's accession, arrived in Paris that spring, to be followed in August by another influential figure, James Butler, Duke of Ormonde, who had succeeded Marlborough as Captain-General and had contemplated leading a military rebellion against the new king.
Soon afterwards they became respectively the Pretender's Secretary of State and one of his leading generals.
The British government's intelligence system on the Continent was, as always, first-class.
Bolingbroke found himself spied on as he travelled from Paris to Lorraine to see the increasingly unappreciative Pretender, and his letters, with their easily-deciphered substitutions —‘Lady Mary’ for ‘England’, ‘Nelly’for Scotland — intercepted.
The British ambassador in Paris, John Dalrymple, second Earl of Stair, a former general who had served as an ADC to Marlborough, soon revealed a natural talent for espionage.
‘Stair has his spyes in every quarter and even at the first posts on the several roads,’ complained one irate conspirator, but often their work was easy for, as Bolingbroke observed, the most secret plans were a subject of gossip ‘among women over their tea’.
The planning of the new invasion was nevertheless more realistic than for any previous attempt.
There were to be diversionary rebellions in Scotland and the north of England, supported perhaps by spontaneous risings in other areas like the already restive Midlands, but the main effort was to be in the south-west, centred on Bath.
Bristol and Plymouth were to be secured by local sympathisers and then James was to arrive somewhere on the south coast, to lead a march to London.
By mid July, thanks to the vigilance of Lord Stair, the British government had ample indication of what was afoot.
During the summer a fleet under Admiral Byng was despatched to keep watch on the Channel ports and early in September it appeared off Le Havre, where, Lord Stair had reported, some seven or eight ships had been hired under a false name and loaded with 10,000 ‘stand of arms’, i.e. muskets and ammunition sufficient for that number of men.
The Duc d'Orléans refused Stair's demand to hand over the ships and their contents to Byng but did agree to unload the weapons and remove them for safe keeping to a French arsenal, a notable diplomatic triumph.
On 9 September 1715 Bolingbroke wrote to James's leading supporter in Scotland, John Erskine, sixth (or, under another reckoning, eleventh) Earl of Mar, to convey this and other bad news, but if he intended to discourage any immediate action he was too late.
Mar was a 40-year-old former Secretary of State for Scotland who, dropped from office by George I, had turned Jacobite, making his house in London a centre of the anti-Hanoverian conspiracy before, in August 1715, sailing from London on a collier to Newcastle and thence to Elie in Fife.
He now invited eight fellow earls and other leading noblemen to join a ‘hunting party’ at his castle, Kildrummy, near Braemar, 50 miles [80 km]west of Aberdeen.
The assembled guests well knew they were after bigger quarry than hare or stag and it the small town of Kirkmichael, Mar, on Tuesday 6 September, formally proclaimed James King of England, Scotland and, as tradition required, France, a poor return for all the help the Bourbons had given to  the Jacobite cause.
The rising in Scotland provoked an outburst of loyalty amid King George's English supporters, including at least one set of verses denouncing the rebel leader:
This crooked disciple pretends he will bring
A Popish Pretender, whom he calls a king,
For which both himself and his master may swing;
Which nobody can deny.
The Jacobites had planned to follow the proclamation at Braemar by seizing Edinburgh Castle, which would have got the rebellion off to a flying start, for with the Castle gone the city would almost certainly have been captured.
The night chosen for the attempt, Friday 9 September 1715, was suitably dark and stormy but, as so often, Scottish throats had imbibed too freely, Scottish tongues had wagged too readily and the raiding party, scaling the walls in the darkness, were driven off or captured.
The securing of Edinburgh Castle was to have been announced by the firing of three cannon from the ramparts, the signal for a chain of beacons to carry the news to Braemar, 70 miles [112 km]to the north, but in the end the rising went ahead without this symbolic success.
The main fear of the government in London was still of a rash of insurrection spreading across England.
Sentries in all the major towns now kept watch for suspicious-looking strangers, checkpoints were mounted at crossroads and a round-up of suspect gentry in Cumberland and Westmorland left many whose loyalty was doubtful safely lodged in Carlisle Castle.
Two suitably romantic leaders, who escaped in time, now emerged, the 26-year-old third Earl of Derwentwater, a grandson of Charles II by one of his mistresses, who had been brought up with the Old Pretender at St Germain, and become a major landowner in Westmorland, and Thomas Forster, an MP for Northumberland.
On Thursday 6 October 1715 Derwentwater and Forster, with a mere 60 horsemen, occupied Rothbury in central Northumberland, a small market town about 27 miles [44 km]north of Newcastle and about 14 [23 km]from the Scottish border.
They moved on to Warkworth, on the coast, where Forster was now more or less elected to the post of James's general in England, though he and his followers knew little of the art of war, being described by one observer as ‘fox hunters armed with dress swords’.
He was, however, a protestant, and now duly proclaimed King James III as King of England, the first such ceremony on English soil.
On Monday 10 October ‘General’ Forster's little army reached Morpeth and were joined by some well-off Scots, riding their own horses, from across the Border, swelling their numbers to 300 but, lacking arms, Forster was unable to accept the volunteers who flooded in offering to serve as infantry.
Had he pressed on he might none the less have taken Newcastle, which contained many Jacobite sympathisers, but while he dallied, turning aside to Hexham, 15 miles [24 km]west of the city, the Newcastle magistrates called out the militia and trained bands, mobilised a force of 700 tough keelmen, who worked on the lighters in the harbour, patched up the ancient city wall, though they lacked cannon to defend it, and bricked up the gates.
Forster now withdrew to Rothbury, which he reached on 19 October.
The bulk of Mar's forces were still with him at Perth and his total force was now perhaps 10,000 strong; the Duke of Argyll, in command of George I's army in Scotland, had no more than 4000.
Instead of making use of this superiority in numbers, however, Mar seemed determined to throw it away by constantly dividing his army.
One detachment was sent on westwards to attack Argyll's home, Inverary Castle, on Loch Fyne, 65 miles [104 km]west of Perth, but the attempt failed.
About the same time, Mar sent his best soldier, Brigadier-General William Mackintosh [or Macintosh], to make a second attempt to seize Edinburgh, but this was also unsuccessful.
Eventually, after a series of confrontations in which both sides seemed curiously reluctant to come to blows, Mar's and Argyll's main armies were left uneasily eyeing each other at Stirling, while Mackintosh, around 22 October, joined up at Kelso in Roxburghshire, on the River Tweed, a mere five miles [8 km]short of the Border, with ‘General’ Forster's English rebels, forming a combined force of around 2100 men, of whom 600 were well-armed cavalry.
Here a series of councils of war revealed that the Highlanders did not want to cross the Border into England, while Forster's Northumbrians were more interested in reclaiming England than Scotland for King James.
By 1 November 1715, when Forster at last led his depleted army across the Border towards Penrith, most of the disgruntled Highlanders had gone home.
James and his immediate circle had always regarded Scotland as a sideshow and while Mar, Mackintosh and Forster were engaging in their bloodless manoeuvring in the north, he had despatched the Duke of Ormonde [or Ormond]to make another attempt in the south-west.
Sailing with about 50 men in mid-October, Ormonde had an uneventful passage from Normandy to Torbay, but failed to see any signs of a rising there and thereupon returned to St Malo.
Here, on 28 October, he met James, who agreed that he, James, should go to Scotland to try and exploit the rebellion there, while Ormonde should make one more attempt on the West Country.
Ormonde duly did so, but this time a storm drove him back to France, and he got into St Malo just as an  English squadron arrived to blockade it.
While James was making preparations for his voyage the English rebels scored their first real success.
On 2 November 1715, General Forster, who had now received a commission from the Earl of Mar appointing him Commander-in-Chief of the Jacobite forces in England, led his somewhat reluctant army through Longtown and Brampton towards Penrith, though the Highlanders with him had cheered up, and become noticeably more loyal, on being promised the handsome pay of sixpence [2.5p]a day.
The whole horse militia of Westmorland and northern Lancashire, and all the militia of Cumberland, were drawn up in front of the little Lake District town, under the chief local landowner, Lord Lonsdale, and with 10,000 men they easily outnumbered the rebels, but a mere sight of Forster's advance guard was enough and the whole body fled in terror, leaving the field littered with horses and arms.
Lord Lonsdale had to take refuge in his castle at Appleby while Forster captured the town and, via Kendal and Kirkby Lonsdale, marched on into Lancashire.
This was a strongly Catholic area and about the campaign there was now an almost holiday quality.
‘The gentlemen soldiers,’ it was recorded, ‘dressed and trimmed themselves in their best clothes, for to drink a dish of tea with the ladies of this town,’who ‘appeared in their best rigging’.
If Lancaster, with its castle and harbour, could have been garrisoned for James it could have provided a connecting link with France, but Forster could not spare the men and had to press on south, through wretched weather and along increasingly miry roads.
The rebels' immediate objective was the bridge at Warrington, from which they proposed to swing west and seize Liverpool, an important prize.
Preston, at the mouth of the River Ribble, lay roughly halfway between Lancaster and Warrington, and Forster's horsemen reached and occupied it on 9 November, to be followed a day later by the slower-moving infantry.
Four barricades, three of them protected by cannon, were built at the ends of the main streets, and 200 or 300 men posted at the bridge over the River Ribble, but no defences were built there.
The task of dealing with the mainly English force of rebels commanded by the M.P.
Thomas Forster had been assigned to General George Carpenter, a highly experienced cavalry officer.
He had been drawn away to Newcastle by a false report but was now, unknown to the Jacobites, hurrying back towards them, while Carpenter's subordinate, General Sir Charles Wills, another successful career soldier, spent 11 November assembling at Wigan, 15 miles [24 km]away, the troops previously distributed all over Lancashire.
On the morning of Saturday 12 November 1715 he suddenly advanced on Preston with six regiments of cavalry and one of foot.
The rebels on the bridge rapidly fell back but the troops manning the street barricades were made of  sterner stuff and beat off Wills's men, killing and wounding 76 for 42 casualties of their own.
Next morning, Sunday 13 November 1715, General Carpenter reached Preston with three regiments of dragoons and blocked off the rebels' only escape route, towards Liverpool.
Forster, without consulting his officers, sent to Carpenter to ask for terms, though the Scots threatened to kill him and fight on.
‘The poor man,’ a contemporary recorded, ‘had little to say but that he was sorry for what he had done, and wept like a child.’
On Monday 14 November Carpenter reluctantly accepted the lachrymose Forster's capitulation ‘at discretion’, i.e. unconditionally.
What followed was tragic, if predictable.
The recent recruits from Lancashire were allowed to go home, but about 1300 others were taken prisoner, four officers on half-pay being shot as deserters and 150 of the more prominent civilians being led through London, amid mocking shouts from the crowd, with arms tied behind their backs and preceded by — a final gesture of contempt — a man carrying a warming-pan.
Young Lord Derwentwater was later beheaded, but Thomas Forster escaped from prison to France, where he died in exile.
Before news of the collapse of the invasion of England had reached the Earl of Mar in Scotland he, too, was facing military defeat.
On the night of Saturday 12 November, just as Forster, 180 miles [290 km]away at Preston, was fighting off General Carpenter, he faced Argyll at Sheriffmuir, a large open space six miles [10 km]north of Stirling.
On the bitterly cold morning of Sunday 13 November 1715 the two armies were woken respectively by bagpipes and trumpets.
The Jacobites, with 800 horse and 6300 infantry, easily outnumbered Argyll's 960 dragoons and 2200 foot soldiers.
The opposing sides took up conventional formations, initially two miles [3.2 km]apart, in two lines, with the cavalry on either flank in both.
The Highlanders were eager to get to grips with the enemy and, after an opening volley of musketry, charged forward to attack Argyll's right, only to be taken in the flank by his dragoons.
Resisting stubbornly, the Highland units were pushed back through a 180° arc for nearly two miles [3.2 km]and driven across the River Allan, while the Jacobite right forced Argyll's left to retreat towards Stirling.
Eventually, as the winter darkness descended, the fighting ceased, both sides boasting of a victory, though as Argyll re-occupied Sheriffmuir the following morning he had the better claim to have won.
The respective casualty figures are, as usual, uncertain.
Modern research suggests 600 dead on both sides, with the Hanoverian forces suffering most of them.
Even in the south of England it was an exceptionally severe winter.
Conditions in Scotland were far worse and with Argyll now securely holding the Forth, ruling out any hope of a fresh advance southwards, many of Mar's Highlanders simply went home.
So far ‘King James III and VIII’, for whom all this sacrifice was being made, had not yet set foot in either of his kingdoms.
He now travelled in disguise from St Malo on 18 December 1715, to Dunkirk, from where, after a six-week wait, he was at last able to set off on a small eight-gun 200-tonner, for Scotland.
After an appallingly rough five-day voyage the self-styled monarch was unable to land, as intended, at Montrose in Angus, because of the presence of a suspicious-looking vessel, and had to sail on for a further 60 miserable miles [96 km]to Peterhead, beyond Aberdeen.
Here, with no one to meet them, he had to be carried ashore through the icy sea by the captain, more dead from seasickness than alive, to make his wretched way to Glamis, Dundee and — 100 miles [160 km]to the south of Peterhead — Perth, still held by Mar's troops.
On 29 January 1716 Argyll, assisted by one of Marlborough's favourite staff officers, General William Cadogan, who had brought with him to Scotland the 6000 Dutch troops who had swollen the Hanoverian army, began his advance on Perth where that same night the rebels decided on a retreat towards Dundee.
By then James had, somewhat unwillingly, been persuaded by Mar and a few of his leading supporters that it was his duty to preserve the dynasty by making his escape.
From Montrose, on 3 February 1716, he wrote a final despairing appeal to the French regent seeking immediate help, but the following day he sneaked out of the back door of his house, just as his father had left Whitehall nearly 30 years before, taking Mar with him, having appointed a new Commander-in-Chief in Scotland, Lieutenant-General Alexander Gordon.
Two French ships were waiting at Montrose.
By the time the remnants of his army learned of his flight he was well on his way to Gravelines.
His followers now escaped as best they could.
Some made hazardous, roundabout trips to join the Pretender via the Orkney Islands and Norway, but the government's vengeance on those who could not get away was relatively restrained.
Twenty-six officers were sentenced to death, three peers, including Derwentwater, were executed; of the rank and file 700 were sentenced to seven years' transportation to the West Indies.
The heaviest punishment fell on the areas that had supported the rebellion.
‘[There was],’ recorded one Jacobite, ‘nothing but an entire desolation from Stirling to Inverness.
The Dutch have not left a chair, nor a stool, nor a barrel, or a bottle…undestroyed and the English troops were very little more merciful.’
So long as the Old Pretender remained at large an invasion of England or Scotland continued to be an ever-present possibility.
During the summer of 1716, a sensitive time since i August marked the anniversary of King George's alleged usurpation of the throne, considerable unrest occurred in London where taverns associated with the Whigs were attacked by mobs which would break up the premises but leave enough of the stock undamaged to drink the health of ‘James III’.
James had to take what comfort he could from such events, for with the failure of ‘The Fifteen’ his prestige in Europe had been greatly diminished, and the Duke of Orleans even threatened to arrest him if he did not leave France.
James settled briefly in the papal city of Avignon before, as a result of British government pressure, he was obliged to move on to Italy.
Conscious that he needed an heir, James now acquired a wife, having instructed the envoy sent to find him a suitable bride that she should not be ‘too horrible’.
He ended up in fact with a high-spirited beauty, the Polish princess Clementina Sobieska, who was smuggled out of Austria and across Europe in the most romantic circumstances, although George I ungallantly offered a £10,000 dowry to any other suitable candidate who would marry her first.
After James's ignominious arrival back in France in February 1716, the international situation had changed dramatically.
As Elector of Hanover George I had been at war with Charles XII of Sweden, one of the outstanding soldiers of his time, since October 1715 and England now became involved due to the frequent presence of an English fleet in the Baltic, which the Swedes were inclined to regard, as the English did the Channel, as a private sea of their own.
Along with‘The king over the water!’
James's supporters now began to toast ‘The gallant Swede!’
The British government took decisive steps to disrupt any threat from Sweden.
On 2 April 1719 Sir George Byng sailed from the Thames to blockade, or if necessary to attack, the Swedish ships gathered at Karlskrona, on the south-east coast of Sweden, in the Baltic, and Gothenburg [or Göteborg]on the west coast, at the head of the Kattegat, facing the northern tip of Denmark, 500 miles [800 km]from the nearest British port, Peterhead.
(Karlskrona, since no canal yet linked the Baltic and the North Sea, was at least another 300 miles [480 km]distant.)
The Swedes, however, took shelter within their fortifications; the invasion, if ever planned, had, it appeared, been called off and in August 1717 the arrested Swedish ambassador was exchanged for the English resident in Sweden, who had been detained in a tit-for-tat reprisal.
In November 1717 Byng and his ships returned home, to counter another, far more threatening, invasion plot now being hatched by a far older enemy of England, Spain.
This once mighty state was now again becoming a major power in Europe, thanks less to its nominal  ruler, Philip V, than to his prime minister, Cardinal Giulio Alberoni.
Exploiting other nations' internal difficulties was Alberoni's speciality and he eagerly encouraged the Pretender in order to make trouble for England.
In August 1717 Alberoni began trying to persuade Charles XII of Sweden and Czar peter the Great of Russia to sink their differences in return for a present of £100,000 from the Pretender, to pay for their armies to restore him to his throne.
On 17 December 1718 England declared war on Spain.
That month the Earl (or by Jacobite reckoning Duke) of Ormonde visited Spain, at Alberoni's invitation, to be followed by two other leading Jacobites, George Keith, the tenth Earl Marischal, who had commanded the cavalry at Sheriffmuir, and his brother James, known as Marshal Keith, who had also taken part in that campaign.
The Spanish Cardinal and the three Scottish soldiers rapidly worked out a plan for a new invasion of Great Britain, to be based, as intended in 1715, on a two-pronged assault.
Ormonde was to make another attempt on the West Country, being promised by the Spaniards 5000 infantry, 1000 cavalry, ten cannon and arms for the 15,000 English Jacobites expected to rally to the cause.
He would sail from Corunna with ten men-of-war and 19 frigates, as well as the Pretender himself.
Meanwhile the Keith brothers, with three frigates, would cross from San Sebastian to Scotland, with six companies of Spanish troops and arms for 2000 local recruits.
Such lack of success had greeted all of James's earlier attempts that loyal Englishmen had dubbed him ‘Old Mr Misfortune’, but when invited to leave his luxurious refuge in the papal state of Urbino for yet another amphibious expedition, this time courtesy of Cardinal Alberoni and Spain, he did not hesitate.
The Duke of Mar, unwelcome in Scotland following his much-criticised flight after ‘The Fifteen’, was employed as a decoy, leaving Rome with a large retinue, by way of Florence, and by the time the imposture had been discovered the real Pretender had, on 8 February 1719, himself left Rome undetected, the start of a journey which, had the stakes not been so high, would have belonged to the realm of farce.
In Marseilles he was laid up with his familiar fever; at the Iles d'Hyères, near Nice, he found himself obliged to dance with the proprietress of a rough tavern to avoid embarrassing enquiries about his identity, while as always when the Stuarts set sail, the weather was appalling.
It was not until 27 March that he reached Madrid, to be given a flattering reception, as if a reigning monarch, by Philip V, before hurrying on to Corunna, where he arrived on 17 April.
The Spaniards had put about a cover story that the fleet assembled at Cadiz was being made ready to sail to Sicily and Ormonde was forbidden  to go near the port; he was to be picked up from Corunna.
The original intention had been for the expedition to sail on 10 February but the usual bad weather made this impossible and Ormonde became progressively more reluctant to leave, suspecting that all hope of surprise had now been lost.
James, when he finally reached Corunna, was to remain there until a successful lodgement in England had been made.
The British government was well aware that another invasion was being planned.
The Jacobites used a simple cipher in private correspondence — a reference to Frederick being attached to Patricia, for example, meant that Mar was still loyal to James — but this presented little difficulty to the British code-breakers, as one Jacobite warned another:
In this art they are skilful to perfection…
And they spare no cost; there are proper officers for every part, and there is one reader and decipherer has £500 a year pension, besides other perquisites…
Whenever they let a letter pass, it is only to encourage and watch for the answer.
On Saturday 7 March 1719 (English style) the Spanish invasion force, consisting of 5000 men, plus some horses and with food and water for a month, sailed from Cadiz in 25 transports, escorted by only five weakly armed warships which would have been outnumbered and out-gunned if they had encountered either of the British squadrons.
They had so few experienced seamen on board that an English prisoner was released from his chains to take the helm of one vessel during what was said to be the worst storm for 20 years.
The ships soon lost sight of each other and for three days were tossed violently about while cannon, horses, weapons and even food were thrown overboard to lighten them.
One by one, from about 5 April, their supplies depleted, badly damaged, often without masts and rigging, and with exhausted crews, Alberoni's armada crept into any ports its captains could find.
James got to Corunna, where the whole force had been supposed to rendezvous and pick up Ormonde, in time to see the last battered casualties arrive, grateful perhaps that, so soon after his own recent sufferings in the Mediterranean, he had been spared this further ordeal.
All now depended on the landing in Scotland, originally intended only as a diversion, though few who remembered James's disaster-prone record can have felt very optimistic about it.
On Sunday 8 March 1719 (English style) the Earl Marischal, George Keith, at around 26 the youngest of James's commanders, sailed from Los Pasajes [or Pasjes]Bay, near San Sebastian, with two frigates, carrying 327 Spanish soldiers and one influential Scottish nobleman, William Mackenzie, fifth Earl of Seaforth, who had been involved in ‘The Fifteen’.
After an eventful journey to Stornoway on the Isle of Lewis in the Outer Hebrides, off the north-west coast of Scotland, he was joined by his younger brother, aged around 23, James Keith, who  had travelled through France to Paris like a military pied Piper, collecting Jacobites as he went, before embarking on a little 25-ton ship at Le Havre to sail round the west coast of Ireland.
The invaders assembled at Stornoway were now divided by a bitter quarrel over whether or not they should move on to the mainland, only ended when one of the Earl Marischal's supposed subordinates, William Murray, Marquis of Tullibardine, suddenly produced a commission granted to him two years before by James which appointed him Commander-in-Chief of all his forces in Scotland.
The Earl Marischal, who had supposed himself to be in charge, immediately yielded his position to Tullibardine, though retaining command of the ships which had brought them there.
The change of leader meant a change of plan, for the Earl Marischal had agreed with Alberoni, before setting out, that the expedition would march at once on Inverness, to await there news of Ormonde's proposed landing in England.
Tullibardine, far more cautious, was reluctant even to cross to the mainland and when they did at last set sail they suffered the usual Jacobite bad luck.
Adverse winds carried them not to Kintail, from which they could have got within a few miles of Inverness by water, but to the shores of Loch Alsh, a sea-water inlet separating the Isle of Skye from the south-west tip of Ross and Cromarty.
Here they established themselves in a former clan stronghold, the island castle of Eilean Donan, at the point where Loch Alsh divided into Loch Long and Loch Duich, the latter giving access, via Glen Shiel, Glen Moriston and Loch Ness, to the route to Inverness.
Eilean Donan provided a strong, almost impregnable, base, the invaders still enjoyed the advantage of surprise and Inverness, supposed to be lightly held, lay a mere 56 miles [90 km]away, but, after several days of indecision, Tullibardine lost his nerve completely and proposed a return to Spain.
He had, however, reckoned without the Earl Marischal, who, as naval commander, had sent their two frigates back empty, without consulting his Commander-in-Chief.
The little party, under a ‘general’ with no faith in the enterprise and with an ‘admiral’lacking ships, was irrevocably committed to going on.
A garrison of 45 Spaniards was left behind in the castle, to guard the bulk of their weapons and supplies, while the rest prepared to advance eastwards.
The operation, likes others before it, depended on local recruits pouring in and the Spaniards had provided both officers and men to form a nucleus for rapid expansion.
The total establishment, of 327 regular soldiers, included 24 companies, of 12 men each, to serve as a cadre for the expected flow of Highlander recruits, along with 19 officers, ranging in rank from a lieutenant-colonel, with six captains, lieutenants and ensigns respectively.
The response, however, as news of the invaders' arrival spread, was disappointing.
‘Not a thousand men appeared,’ the Earl Marischal summed up, ‘and even those seemed not very fond of  the enterprise.’
The navy, which had failed to catch the invaders en route, now struck the first counter-blow against them.
On Sunday 10 May 1719 three warships subjected Castle Eilean Donan to a fierce bombardment which left gaping holes in its walls and the small garrison, in their alien white and yellow uniforms, surrendered, in the most gratifying fashion, to a few boatloads of English sailors, who seized the rebels' stores and blew up the old fortress.
No way of retreat, and no safe base, now remained for the remaining Spaniards and their Scottish allies.
After the rising of 1715 the British government had made a somewhat half-hearted attempt to tame the Highlands.
Small numbers of Highlanders had been recruited to serve as scouts and guides and installed in four fortified barracks, each with a garrison of 30.
These were not expected to withstand a regular siege, but the walls were loopholed for muskets, with two turrets at the corners sited to cover the intervening area with fire, to enable a casual attack by armed clansmen to be held off until help arrived.
The four were sited at Inverlochy, later Fort William, at the south end of Loch Ness, the future site of Fort Augustus, Bernera, on Glenelg Bay, about 32 miles [51 km]north-west of Fort William, and Ruthven near Dalwhinnie in the central Highlands, 35 miles [56 km]south of Inverness.
None of the four played any part in the 1719 invasion, and the real centre of British power in the Highlands was Inverness, where Major-General Joseph Wightman was in command of some 130 Highlanders, 120 dragoons and about 850 foot soldiers, including four companies of infantry from Holland.
Wightman was a sound and cautious general.
Having marched from Inverness along the side of Loch Ness he waited for a day in the hope that more pack-horses would turn up, but when none were forthcoming left behind most of his supplies and provisions, though his men were still heavily burdened as they crossed the mountains in search of the enemy; roads in the Highlands, and local sources of supply, were almost non-existent.
At around 4 pm on Wednesday 10 June 1719 he found the invaders barring his way at Glenshiel [or Glen Sheil], between Loch Cluanie and the head of Loch Duich, about 21 miles [34 km]north-west of Invergarry, which is itself 35 miles [56 km]south-west of Inverness.
The Jacobites were protected on their right by the River Shiel and on their left by a cliff.
With the two sides more or less equally matched in numbers, and Wightman's horse unable to deploy effectively, Tullibardine was well placed to achieve a modest victory.
Wightman began the action with a bombardment by his four Coehorn [or Cohorn]mortars, light support weapons which hurled grenades, and then attacked uphill.
In this initial skirmish his men suffered badly with some 20 killed and 120 wounded, while the  rebels, well dug in, had only a single casualty.
But the bursting grenades set the heather on fire, forcing the Highland right to withdraw, and after a brisk fire-fight lasting some three hours the whole Jacobite line took to its heels.
They had now suffered around 100 casualties, and next day a council of war agreed that the Highlanders should disperse to their homes while the Spaniards, conspicuous in their white and yellow uniforms, should surrender.
The idea of marching them the length of the British Isles, to Plymouth, as a propaganda exercise, was not pursued.
In the end, though England was still at war with Spain, they were, on 27 October, put on board ship at Leith and sent home.
The Keith brothers and the other leaders of the rebellion managed, as was traditional after such affairs, to escape to the Continent while Cardinal Alberoni, the driving force behind the whole affair, fell from power that December and became, like James himself, an exile in Italy.
‘Old Mr Misfortune’ found consolation for his latest failure by marrying his 17-year-old bride, on the very day they met for the first time, 2 September 1719.
Their home, the Palazzo Muti, a large, gloomy house off the Via del Corso, not far from the papal palace, now became the international headquarters of Jacobitism.
It was a red-letter day for his supporters everywhere when, on 31 December 1720, a son was born to James's new young wife, in the presence of no fewer than 100 cardinals, ambassadors and other important witnesses; clearly the charge of being a ‘warming-pan’ changeling was not going to be laid against Charles Edward.
The infant was at once created Prince of Wales, to indicate that in Jacobite eyes he was the real heir to the throne of England, and the Young Pretender was soon to become universally known as Bonnie Prince Charlie.
Even after two Jacobite invasions had failed the Highlands remained in a more or less permanent state of lawlessness.
Finally, in July 1724, George I sent one of his ablest officers, Major-General [later Field Marshal]George Wade to investigate the situation.
In December 1724 Wade reported that of the 22,000 fighting men who, he estimated, might be raised in the Highlands, 12,000 were active or potential Jacobites, some with hidden weapons, and that the best way to keep them in check was with independent companies of loyal Highlanders, under their own Whig but Gaelic-speaking officers.
To enable them to police such a large and inaccessible area he recommended the building of a number of new fortresses, to be linked, by road and water, for rapid reinforcement.
Wade's plan was immediately accepted and by the summer of 1725 he was back in Scotland with a new appointment, that of  Commander of the Forces in North Britain.
The easiest part of the scheme was the raising of the six companies of 70–110 men each, increased in 1739 to ten, and as a concession to national sentiment the new units were allowed to wear the kilt; its dark tartan, of blue, green and black, soon gave them a distinctive name: the Black Watch.
The second part of Wade's work was repairing Edinburgh Castle and Fort William, at the western end of the Great Glen which runs diagonally from Inverness right across Scotland and forms a natural barrier separating the northern third of the country from the rest.
At Inverness Wade built a new fort on Castle Hill, Fort George, a name later transferred to a much stronger building north-east of the town.
Roughly mid-way along the Great Glen line, between Loch Lochy and Loch Ness, at Killiehuimen, Wade replaced the existing minor fort with a new, much stronger one, finished in 1742.
To enable it to keep in touch with Fort George he built the 30-ton Highland Galley , capable of carrying 60 soldiers or 20 tons of supplies and, he claimed, ‘seldom above three or four hours in her passage’.
She was not primarily a warship but did carry eight ‘patteroes’, anti-personnel guns which fired a lethal scattering of stones.
Wade also rebuilt the existing barracks at Ruthven and Bernera, already described, and over the next ten years or so a total of more than 30 other forts to protect his new, Roman-style, network of roads.
Like the Romans, Wade built wherever possible in a straight line, going over hills rather than round them.
The roads were exceptionally wide, 16 ft [4.9 m], and solidly built.
First a trench to hold the foundations was dug out, then large stones, broken up by gunpowder if necessary, were moved into position, followed by smaller ones, smashed by sledgehammer, then at least two feet [0.6 m]of gravel, delivered by cart, which was pounded into place by shovels and the soldiers' boots.
When the ground was marshy, brushwood and timber provided a ‘raft’ for the first layer of stones.
Almost all the work was done by manual labour alone and the order which Wade sent to Edinburgh Castle in 1726 for ‘94 shovells, 82 pickaxes, 42 spades, 3 iron crows’ is typical and could have been repeated many times over.
The road-builders' diet, mainly cheese and biscuits, was monotonous, but for the average soldier if the beer supply was adequate everything was all right and Wade met the problem of a lack of local supplies in a typically sensible way, as he reported to London in 1733
In…the Highlands…their [sic ]was no other drink for the soldiers than brandy and spirits; which rendered them incapable of performing their work, for remedy of which the officers did provide utensills and stores for brewing and did supply them therewith.
The men needed their beer.
The working day was ten hours long, sometimes starting at 3 am, and the expected rate of completion was  one and a half yards [1.4 m]a day, though, with extra inducements two yards [1.8 m]or even more could be achieved.
The results were remarkable.
As early as July 1728 Wade was able to report: ‘I am now with all possible diligence carrying on the new road for wheel-carriages between Dunkeld and Inverness, of about 80 English measured miles [128 km]’, but it was 1731 which saw the creation of his masterpiece, the road from Dalwhinnie to Fort Augustus, in the middle of the Great Glen.
The problem here was not the distance, only 28 miles [45 km], but the intervening ridge of high ground, which rose to a height of 2500 feet [760 m], and the River Spey, across which he built his first double-arched bridge, 180 feet [55 m]long; another four single-arch bridges were required elsewhere on the route.
It was the Corrieyairack [or Corriearrack or Carriearrack]Pass, however, the narrow, winding route along which the road would have to run, which presented the real challenge.
This required 18 traverses, short stretches of road linked by sharp bends, with beyond it a ravine.
In spite of six weeks of unceasing rain Wade was, by October 1732, able to write, ‘I still hope in a fortnight to pass the Coriarick Mountain in my coach’, and sure enough by the end of October the road was finished, ‘made through a part of the country,’ as he justly claimed in his report to the Treasury, ‘that was scarcely passable for man or horse…now made as easy and practicable for wheel carriages as any road in the country’.
The completion of the Corrieyairack road — it was also the end of the road-building season for that year which ran from April to October — was made the occasion of a notable celebration, here described by an eye-witness:
Upon entering into a little glen among the hills…
I heard the noise of many people, and saw six great fires, about which a number of soldiers were very busy…
An officer invited me to drink their majesties' health…
It being the 30th October, His Majesty's birthday, General Wade had given to each detachment an ox-feast and liquor; six oxen were roasted whole, one at the head of each party.
The joy was great, both upon the occasion of the day, and the work's being completed, which is really a wonderful undertaking.
All told, between 1726 and 1737 250 miles [400 km]of road were built in the Highlands.
The backbone of the system was the 60-mile [96-km]road along the Great Glen linking Fort William and Fort George, to build which vast quantities of solid rock had to be blasted away along the eastern side of Loch Ness.
The fords at first included were later replaced by some 40 bridges, many of which still stand, and many miles of the original road were in use until only a few years ago.
After Wade's departure in May 1740 further extensions were made to the road network, especially between 1743 and 1760, under the  direction of his former Inspector of Roads, Major William Caulfeild.
These included a new, 30-mile [48-km]section from Dumbarton to Inverary on Loch Fyne, near the head of which the weary soldiers inscribed a stone providing its name, still in use: ‘Rest and be thankful’.
Even the death of George I, in June 1727, while en route to Hanover, did not lead to a new Jacobite invasion and he was succeeded, without any public disturbance, by his 43-year-old son.
George II resembled his undistinguished father in appearance, in character and in his strong preference for Hanover.
Dull, physically unattractive and solidly Germanic, the new king was hardly the sovereign to arouse his subjects' patriotic enthusiasm, and that in the opening years of his reign no invasion attempt occurred was due largely to his chief minister, the all-powerful Sir Robert Walpole.
Walpole was not deceived when, in 1738, Jacobite MPs argued in the House of Commons that since their cause was clearly dead the regular army could be reduced.
He replied that an army of 5–6000 men might still successfully evade the Royal Navy and descend anywhere on the coast, so that the nation needed a minimum of 18,000 under arms, one-third to protect London, another third distributed throughout the country to crush any supporting rebellions, and the final third to provide a strategic reserve — an admirable analysis of the problem.
The Old Pretender could at any time become a menace if taken up by England's enemies.
Constant friction between the two nations at sea led, on 23 October 1739, to the British government declaring war on Spain, the resulting conflict being known as ‘The War of Jenkins's ear’; Robert Jenkins was the master of a British ship who had had his ear cut off by a Spanish officer during a search.
The new war led in turn to a breach with France, and during 1740 the British government became seriously alarmed at the simultaneous assembling of a French fleet at Brest and a Spanish one at Ferrol [or El Ferrol], Spain's chief Atlantic base, 12 miles [21 km]north-east of Corunna.
The 1740 invasion scare revealed some serious weaknesses in the nation's defences.
Only 80 of the Royal Navy's 124 ships of 50 guns or more had proved fit for service, fewer than the 40 Spanish and 50 French ships of the line, and both in seaworthiness and weight of gunfire the best French and Spanish ships out-classed the finest English vessels.
The war brought, however, a number of naval victories and 1740 saw the first performance of Rule Britannia , which soon acquired the status of a second national anthem.
The navy's real weakness, as always, lay in manning.
During 1740 the First Lord of the Admiralty, with Walpole's support, tried to carry a bill to create a national register of sea-faring men from which suitable recruits could be sought in time of crisis, but it was denounced by the Opposition as being akin to slavery and thrown out.
The army at the start of the war with Spain probably had somewhat  poorer officers and somewhat better quality Other Ranks than the navy.
George I had tried, but failed, to end the pernicious practice of the purchase of commissions, which encouraged officers to recoup what they had spent by making what profit they could on clothing and feeding their men or through claiming the pay for ghost-like soldiers who existed only on the nominal rolls.
Each regiment still tended to be regarded as almost the private property of its colonel and until 1753 was usually known by his name.
The army suffered from separate ministers or officials being responsible for plans of campaign, billeting, pay, stores, engineering and artillery matters and movements, this last being designed to keep the military firmly under civilian control, and for similar reasons, instead of being billeted together, units were scattered over as many as six villages.
A proposal to build more barracks was rejected by Parliament in 1739 on the grounds that ‘the people of this kingdom have been taught to associate the idea of barracks and slavery’.
Curiously enough, the same MPs who opposed the building of barracks never objected to the press-gang nor to the occasional use of conscription to keep the army up to strength.
In 1739 (and, later, in 1763) Acts were passed empowering the justices ‘to raise and levy such able-bodied men as have not any lawfyl calling or employment…or do not make use of any lawful means for their support and maintenance, to serve as soldiers’.
Each of these enforced recruits was consoled with a bounty of £1, a similar amount being paid ‘to the constable or other officer’ who had rounded him up.
The first permanent companies of artillery, to replace the basically civilian gunners hired ad hoc when required, had been formed, on Marlborough's advice, in 1716, and in 1727 their number was increased to four and they were united as the Royal Regiment of Artillery.
This, in 1741, acquired its own base and training school, the Woolwich Academy, still the home of the Royal Artillery today.
By 1761 the artillery consisted of 31 field companies, totalling 3200 officers and men; the former, unlike their infantry and cavalry colleagues, did not have to purchase their commissions but were appointed and promoted solely on merit, and the British artillery was soon recognised as the best in the world.
A corps of Military Engineers, formed in 1717, had by 1751 attracted only 61 officers, and the first school of military engineering, set up in 1741, was very slow to rival the success of Woolwich.
From the beginning, however, the engineers, like the artillery, were free of the incubus of purchased commissions.
In February 1742 Robert Walpole was created Earl of Orford and resigned.
John, Lord Carteret [later Earl of Granville], who succeeded him, was under no illusions about France, which he identified as ‘the enemy always aiming at our destruction’; periods of peace with her he considered ‘only an intermission of hostility’.
His attitude was justified  when, during 1743, the French government again began to give active encouragement to the Old Pretender.
James Edward, 57 that June, had lost his taste for active campaigning, but on 23 December 1743, a week before his elder son's twenty-third birthday, James issued a Declaration of Regency, uncompromisingly dated ‘In the forty-third year of Our Reign’, passing on the claimant's torch to his son.
‘Bonnie Prince Charlie’ had been a strikingly attractive and charming child and he lost neither characteristic as he grew older though he lacked both his father's scholarly bent and his younger brother Henry's piety.
(’ Cardinal York', as he became known, was a fervent believer in the Stuart cause and eventually called himself Henry IX, but plays little further part in the invasion story.)
His father considered Charles ‘extreme backwards’ and chided him for his ‘aversion to all application’and his reluctance ‘to cultivate the talents which Providence has given you’.
But from Rome the British agent sent a warning while Charles was still a boy: ‘Everybody says that he will be in time a far more dangerous enemy to the present establishment of the government of England than ever his father was.’
Although France and Great Britain were technically at peace, constant clashes occurred between their forces both on sea and on land.
The French reacted by opening negotiations with the Jacobite exiles in Paris, who responded with the usual optimistic accounts of the prospects for an invasion.
Thus encouraged, the French began to assemble in November 1743 an army, variously estimated at 6–10,000 strong, at Dunkirk, under the command of Marshal Maurice Saxe [or de Saxe], one of the ablest generals in Europe.
The French had, like the Old Pretender, lost faith in the strategy of the roundabout approach via Scotland or the south-west of England and now planned to land at Maldon in Essex, a mere 42 miles [67 km]from London.
Late in 1743 a messenger was sent to alert James in Rome, and at dawn on 9 January 1744 Charles left the Palazzo Muti in Rome with his brother Henry, who was to serve as a decoy, on the pretence of a hunting trip, but made off to the north, leaving Henry to send off to Rome presents of wild geese supposedly from Charles.
Disguised as a courier, Charles made his way through a winter-gripped Europe to Savona, on the Gulf of Genoa, and thence, with fewer disasters than his father had encountered 30 years before, to Antibes in the south of France.
On 20 January 1744 he reached Paris, and moved on to Gravelines near Dunkirk, where he lived in strict privacy under the name of the Chevalier Douglas.
As usual, British intelligence had easily penetrated the Jacobites, security.
The principal cipher clerk in the Vatican was on the Hanoverian  pay-roll, as was a senior clerk in the French Foreign Office, and the latter, in February 1744, supplied details of the French invasion plans, which were sufficiently convincing for George II, on 15 February 1744, to send a warning message to Parliament.
Reinforcements were now poured into Kent, Sussex and Hampshire while of the 10,000 soldiers immediately available in England 7000 were earmarked to defend London and the south-east.
Marshal Saxe had never been happy about the operation he was to command; nor was Louis XV, who had been talked into supporting the attempt by his ministers.
But, as so often, no one was prepared to halt the machine once set in motion and on Friday 26 January 1744 Admiral Jacques de Roquefeuil sailed out of Brest with a fleet of 22 ships, with instructions to cover the embarkation of the army at Dunkirk and then to lure the English fleet away towards the Isle of Wight.
By the time de Roquefeuil had reached the island Admiral Sir John Norris, a first-class sailor, had assembled his force in the Downs off Dover.
On Saturday 17 February 1744 de Roquefeuil, having found the seas off the Isle of Wight apparently free of English warships, sent a despatch-boat to Dunkirk advising de Saxe to embark his men.
He then sailed on to Dungeness where Sir John Norris's fleet now appeared in strength.
It delayed attacking till the following morning, and a calm during the night enabled the French ships, showing no lights, to make their escape and simply drift down Channel, only to be overtaken around midnight by a ferocious north-east gale.
This not merely scattered them but wreaked havoc on the transports which had got out of harbour; 12 were sunk of which seven went down with all on board.
The remaining transports crept back into Dunkirk, while de Roquefeuil's warships, driven far to the west, only managed several days later and badly battered to re-enter Brest, the nearest friendly port for vessels of their size.
The English ships, though separated, escaped with only trivial damage.
The 1744 invasion attempt was abandoned and Marshal Saxe, with great relief, led his surviving troops to attack Flanders instead.
GOING TO SCOTLAND
I am determined to go to Scotland, though unaccompanied even by a single company of soldiers.
Prince Charles Edward, May 1745
The failure of the 1744 invasion left Prince Charles Edward with no occupation except to hang about in Paris, getting into debt and bad company, whom he described, in his distinctive spelling, as ‘very preety yong men’.
He took what comfort he could from France's declaration of war on England on 4 March, followed by George II's counter-declaration on the 29th, which gave the attempted invasion of his kingdom, not unreasonably, as a casus belli .
Prince Charles spent the next few months planning a new invasion, to be financed by the sale of his late mother's jewels.
‘I have,’ the young man told his father, ‘taken a firm resolution to conquer or dye, and [to]stand my ground as long as I have a man remaining with me.’
To another correspondent he wrote, in a letter clearly corrected since, ‘I am determined to go to Scotland, though unaccompanied even by a single company of soldiers.’
The prince's enthusiasm and persistence were such that French scepticism, following so many previous failures, was overcome and King Louis's government finally put at his disposal 60 volunteer officers and cadets to help man the 64-gun Elisabeth , captured from the Royal Navy, and the 18-gun light frigate the Du Teillay .
On 5 July they set sail with a fair wind, but the adventure ended almost before it had begun for, 120 miles [192 km]off the coast of Brittany, the little taskforce was challenged by the 60-gun Lion .
Much to the prince's disgust the captain of the Du Teillay refused to join in the action for fear of endangering his passenger's life, but the Elisabeth suffered 57 killed and 176 wounded and such serious damage that she had to be sent back to Brest, taking with her her precious cargo of arms and French volunteers.
The Du Teillay , against the advice of the prince's officers, went on alone.
‘You'll see.
It will be all right,’ he replied to all objections, and on 25 July 1745, he landed at Borrodale, on the Scottish mainland, about 27 miles [43 km]west of Fort William.
The government in London proved remarkably complacent about the re-appearance of a Stuart claimant on British soil.
George II was, very typically, in Hanover and there was a disposition to postpone doing anything decisive till he got back.
The government did offer a reward of £30,000 for the Pretender's capture, to which he cheekily replied with an offer of the same sum for ‘The Elector of Hanover’, but the authorities in Scotland reacted feebly and reluctantly to the news.
The Commander-in-Chief in Scotland was Lieutenant-General Sir John Cope, later the subject of a derisory song ‘Hey, Johnny Cope’, and unkindly described at the time as ‘a little, dressy, finical [i.e. fussy]man’.
An officer for nearly 40 years, he should have been more than a match for a 24-year-old civilian but the first brush between the two sides, though neither commander was present in person, suggested otherwise.
Early on the morning of Friday 16 August the governor of Fort Augustus, in the middle of the ‘Great Glen’ line, sent two companies of foot soldiers south-westwards to reinforce Fort William, along General Wade's new military road.
Eight miles [13 km]short of their destination they had to cross a narrow, single-arch bridge over the River Spean, which gave its name, High Bridge, to the locality.
A sergeant and soldier whom the officer in charge, Captain Scott, had sent forward to reconnoitre were seized by Highlanders hidden behind the parapet, and, uncertain of the enemy's strength, Scott decided to retreat.
When, after five or six miles [8–10 km], his men reached another defile, between Loch Lochy and a steeply sloping mountain to the east, they found the Highlanders had arrived before them, and after a brisk action, in which he eventually found himself hemmed in on three sides, Scott, himself wounded, and with two men dead, accepted terms of surrender.
The action at High Bridge, a trivial engagement in military terms, was of great psychological importance.
The Jacobites had drawn first blood and totally defeated a regular force sent against them.
News of the victory spread as the clans began to muster at the appointed time at Glenfinnan, which, with the mountains rising all around the tranquil waters of the loch, provided an intensely dramatic setting for the formal beginning of the campaign.
At first, Charles found only 150 clansmen, all of them Macdonalds, waiting to greet him but then the distant skirl of bagpipes was heard and the Camerons, 700 or 800 strong, came down the hillside in orderly columns, escorting the prisoners captured at High Bridge.
The veteran Jacobite who had arrived with Charles on the Du Teillay , the Marquis of Tullibardine, climbed a small knoll and hoisted Charles's white, blue and red silk flag before reading James's proclamation, quoted earlier, appointing Charles as his regent.
It was Monday 19 August, 1745.
Soon after the ceremony more men came in, and the remaining arms were distributed, each ‘stand’ consisting of a musket, bayonet and  brass-hilted infantryman's sword, though some of the Highlanders preferred their own basket-hilted broadswords.
Charles also had around 24 light guns of 1–2 lb [o. 5–1 kg]calibre, on field carriages, but, draught horses being scarce, they proved more of an embarrassment than a help.
By the end of that first day, however, Charles already had under his command 1200 men and one horse, his troops' first equine prisoner, the charger captured from Captain Scott.
While Charles had been summoning the clans to Glenfillan Sir John Cope, 100 miles [160 km]away, as the crow flew, in Edinburgh — though far further even by Wade's splendid new roads — had been making his counter-preparations.
His first, probably sound, instinct had been to keep most of his available troops to shield Edinburgh, while reinforcing Fort Augustus, the central point in ‘the Chain' of three forts linked by the military road along the Great Glen.
On 13 August Sir John issued orders for his various detachments to assemble at Stirling, the key strategic point controlling the approach to Edinburgh and the road into England, and on the 19th, the very day that Charles was hoisting his standard, Cope himself moved up to Stirling, 80 miles [127 km]from Glenfinnan, where he organised his column for the coming march.
He had under his command about 2000 men with four light field pieces, four heavier guns and a cumbersome wagontrain, carrying three weeks’ provisions.
On 21 August the expedition reached Crieff, 18 miles [29 km]from Stirling, and on the evening of Thursday 22 August, moving along Wade's military road, the royal army camped at Dalnacardoch, near Dalwhinnie.
Here he learned from one of the officers captured in the High Bridge action and since released that Prince Charles was preparing to block the passage of the royal army at the Corrieyairack Pass, through which it would have to pass to reach Fort Augustus.
This famous pass, about seven miles [11 km]south-east of Fort Augustus, was, as mentioned earlier, Wade's most masterly feat of engineering.
To reach its summit anyone approaching from the Dalwhinnie direction would have to negotiate 17 sharp zig-zag bends, exposed on every stretch to small-arms or artillery fire.
Once over the peak, during the long decline towards Fort Augustus, the troops would also have been highly vulnerable to bombardment, before reaching an even more dangerous point, a ravine crossed by a bridge.
Cope decided the risks were too great and, rather than attempt to fight his way through to Fort Augustus, led his men instead down the other military road, from Dalwhinnie to Inverness, a distance of 58 miles [93 km].
On 29 August, after hurrying away from the sound of gunfire, the royal army marched into Inverness.
Charles now faced his own crucial decision, whether to pursue Cope or continue south, leaving an undefeated and hostile army in his rear.
Boldness triumphed and they moved on towards Perth after sending a detachment of the Camerons to try to capture the fortified barracks at Ruthven, where it was left to stalwart Sergeant Molloy of Guise's Regiment to give them their first rebuff.
The Highlanders surrounded Ruthven, offering Molloy and his dozen men the choice of moving out unharmed or being overrun and hanged, but he refused, and beat off an attack by 150 Highlanders.
‘I expect another visit this night,’ he reported to General Cope, ‘but I shall give them the warmest reception my weak party can afford.’
The main Jacobite army now moved on from Dalwhinnie to Perth, and from there to Edinburgh.
On the morning of Monday 16 September the mere approach of a small reconnaissance party firing pistols was enough to send the defenders fleeing in terror.
On Tuesday 17 September 1745 King James VIII was proclaimed at the Market Cross and his chosen regent, prince Charles, rode in to the city wearing Highland dress, crowned by a blue velvet bonnet and the now ubiquitous Jacobite badge, a white cockade.
While Prince Charles had been capturing Perth and advancing on Edinburgh Castle Cope had led his main army east from Inverness to Aberdeen and then, making use of his superiority in seapower, had it shipped to Dunbar on the East Lothian coast, about 34 miles [54 km]due east of Edinburgh.
Both sides were now eager to come face to face, and as General Cope moved forward from Dunbar towards Edinburgh the Jacobite army moved out to meet him.
The government forces took up a position near Tranent, ten miles [16 km]east of Edinburgh, just inland from the village of Prestonpans on the Firth of Forth.
Determined not to be taken unawares by an attack under cover of darkness, Cope's men, on his orders, ‘stood all night under arms’ only to find, as dawn broke through the morning mist, that the Jacobites were attacking from a totally unexpected direction, the east, to his rear, instead of the west, to his front.
Cope commanded about 2300 men, with the main body of infantry in the centre, a detachment of dragoons on either flank and three more behind.
On his right were six small, one-and-a-half pounder [0.73-kg]guns and six Coehorn mortars protected by a 100-strong guard.
Prince Charles had about 2500 inexperienced men, no horse and no guns.
Cope's monopoly of artillery ought to have been decisive but the Highlanders were only 400 yards [365 m]away when with a ‘hideous shout’ they burst out of the mist, with the sun behind them, and charged towards the inexperienced gunners, broadswords in hand, with a bloodcurdling yell.
The mere sight and sound, accompanied by  a few shots, was enough to send these unblooded troops fleeing in terror, carrying with them most of the powder horns needed to prime the guns.
The infantry detailed to guard them let off only a couple of volleys before also taking to their heels.
As the dragoons beside the cannon prepared to advance, the Highlanders dashed forward and slashed at the horses' noses, which sent the unfortunate animals, maddened with pain, into headlong retreat, scattering the supporting line behind them.
The whole of Cope's foot, after firing three volleys, found themselves within five minutes of the start of the battle fighting hand to hand, bayonet against broadsword, and a mass slaughter, mainly by claymore, followed.
Cope's army ultimately lost around 300 men dead and 400 wounded, with another 80 officers and 1000 men captured.
The Jacobite losses were about 40 dead and 90 wounded.
In almost a quarter of an hour, an incredibly short time for an encounter battle, it was all over, and, to round off a crushing defeat Cope's baggage train, including his money chest containing £4000, was captured without a fight.
He eventually managed to assemble about 170 of his foot, all that had survived, and some 450 horsemen, and led them southwards towards Coldstream, by what was long remembered as Johnny Cope's road', and thence next day to Berwick.
Here he was coldly received by an elderly general who, according to later legend, greeted him with the remark: ‘Good God!
I have seen some battles, heard of many, but never of the first news of a defeat being brought by the General Officers before!’
Charles's decisive victory at Prestonpans transformed his prospects.
Already he was well enough off to pay his army, with 6d [2.5p]a day for the rank and file and 1s 0d [5p]for the gentry, and soon after Prestonpans a ship bringing money, arms and a French ambassador-cum-political-adviser arrived at Montrose, 62 miles [99 km]from Edinburgh, followed by two others carrying six field guns and a number of Irish officers.
Even without French intervention, the situation in Scotland was serious enough.
The initial tendency, on the part of both government and public, to assume that the Jacobite adventure would soon peter out, was replaced, as the news of the fall of Edinburgh and Cope's defeat at Prestonpans sank in, by feelings of outrage and alarm, which were soon expressed in a fervent outburst of patriotism.
The anniversary of King George's coronation, on 11 October, provided the occasion for great patriotic demonstrations, with at Newcastle, which might soon be in the front line, ‘bonfires in several parts of the streets and beer given to the common people’.
The king's birthday, on 30 October [English style]brought another outburst of anti-Scottish and anti-papist sentiment.
Versions of the recently introduced song God Save Great George Our King were now heard on all sides; a little later the text was finalised and it became the national anthem.
Devotion to the throne also manifested itself in a popular demand for the king's third son, William Augustus, Duke of Cumberland, to be made Commander-in-Chief of the anti-invasion forces.
Cumberland was four months younger than Prince Charles, though, like him, he had seen action at the age of 13.
Still only 24, he was currently campaigning in the Low Countries, but once the allied army on the Continent had gone into winter quarters he was brought home and his arrival in England, on 19 October, caused morale to soar.
While Charles remained, apparently inactive, at Edinburgh, the British government was making vigorous preparations to give him a warm reception when, as expected, he advanced into England.
During the next few weeks three armies were assembled, forming a pattern of defence in depth.
The former road-builder, now Field Marshal, Wade, with 6000 men, was despatched to Newcastle, prompting a notable pun by a local woman: ‘Since we could not COPE with out present difficulties, we must WADE through them.’
Command of the main army was entrusted for the moment to a veteran Huguenot general, Sir John [later first Earl of]Ligonier, aged 65, who had also been called back from the Continent, though it was understood he would become subordinate to Cumberland as soon as the latter was ready to take over.
This army numbered ultimately around 10,000 and was assembled in the Midlands around Coventry, the artillery, cavalry and main force of infantry being billeted on Meriden Common, six miles [10 km]away.
A third force, of about 4000 regulars, was collected around Finchley, on the northern approaches to London.
To bring the regular regiments up to strength handsome bounties were offered.
Anyone who joined the Guards between 6 and 24 September was promised £6, or, between then and the end of the month, £4.
With, as always, the important exception of the London trained bands, who formed a reserve several thousand strong for the troops at Finchley, no one felt much faith in the militia.
When on 5 September the Lords Lieutenant of the four most northerly counties were ordered to make their respective militias ready for immediate service, it emerged that neither Northumberland nor Durham had been reimbursed by central government for the money they had previously spent in keeping the force mustered, while the authorities in Cumberland admitted candidly: ‘Tis so long since the militia was raised that we are apprehensive the arms are either lost or in bad order.’
If the Young Pretender had marched into England directly after Prestonpans, which had been fought on 21 September, he would have found a country ill-prepared to resist him, but many of his followers were reluctant to cross the Border.
Since Charles's father claimed the throne of England as well as Scotland, however, he was virtually obliged to take the initiative and eventually, on Friday 1 November 1745, the 5–6000 men of the Jacobite army, of whom 300–500 were  cavalry, marched out of Edinburgh heading south and at Dalkeith split into two columns, one led by the Duke of Perth, going via Peebles, Moffat, Lockerbie and Ecclefechan, the other, led by Charles on foot, through Kelso, Jedburgh and Hawick.
On 9 November they crossed the English border and were re-united at Longtown, nine miles [14 km]north of Carlisle.
The Whigs had contemptuously dismissed the invaders as ‘bare-arsed banditti’, an ill judged description, for many of their officers had served in the English army and the force had been organised in an orthodox fashion, into divisions and regiments, often based on individual clans.
Charles's best general, Lord George Murray, had persuaded him to take the south-west route into England, to keep the Pennines between himself and Field Marshal Wade, and the Jacobites therefore advanced on Carlisle, while the deputy-mayor and clergy observed their approach apprehensively through ‘a very large spying glass’ from the cathedral tower.
Their untrained but nervous eyes, and rumour, vastly exaggerated both the ferocity and size of the advancing army.
The Highlanders were said to live on a diet of children, while the prince's quartermaster put in a well-timed but no doubt inflated demand for the town to provide billets for 13,000 foot and, a more accurate figure, 300 horse.
Colonel Durand, in command of the defences, who had only a few militia and the usual garrison ‘invalids’ under him, sent a desperate appeal for assistance to Field Marshal Wade, while the sudden departure of people returning to the surrounding countryside — Saturday 9 November 1745 was a market day in Carlisle — added to his difficulties, as an eye-witness recorded:
It was impossible for the garrison to fire upon them for some time without risk of injuring their neighbours along with their enemies.
But in less than half an hour, the country people dispersed themselves, when the garrison of the castle fired a ten-gun battery upon them, which it is believed killed several.
On 13 November Colonel Durand learned from Wade that he was not coming to the relief of Carlisle since the roads through Yorkshire were inadequate for his artillery.
The militia lost heart at this news; they had already been on duty for a month, and had been treated with extraordinary meanness by the citizens they were defending, who, they complained, ‘would not even allow straw for the poor men to lay upon’ while ‘some were eight, some seven, and all six nights and days under arms upon the walls’.
At a meeting with the Lords Lieutenant, it was recorded, ‘many of them being so sick by this great fatigue, and out of all hopes of relief from His Majesty's forces, absolutely refused  to hold out any longer’, whereupon the city corporation, conscious that already some of the militia had disappeared over the walls and fearing further desertions, voted by 24 to 15 to capitulate.
The white flag was thereupon hoisted on the city walls and Durand led 400 still loyal militia into the castle and prepared to hold out there until help arrived.
The Jacobites now threatened to bombard Carlisle if the castle did not surrender, causing the remaining militia, on 15 November, to desert, leaving Durand with only the ‘invalids’ to form the garrison, while the civil authorities, horrified at the threat to the town, seem to have encouraged him to capitulate.
At all events a Council of War, called by Durand, decided that ‘the castle being not tenable, it is for His Majesty's service that it be abandoned’.
Wade himself described the surrender of Carlisle as ‘very scandalous and shameful, if not treacherous’, but it would have held out if he had been more encouraging.
The sad truth was that, at 72, he was past his prime.
‘The marshal,’ complained one of his officers even before they set out on the futile march to Carlisle, ‘is infirm and peevish…both in body and mind, forgetful, irresolute and perplext.’
‘Many of the soldiers,’ it was recorded, ‘were obliged to lye on the ground tho' [it was]covered with snow,’and ‘could get nothing to eat after marching thirteen hours.’
Another general consoled himself with the thought that ‘as the rebels are flesh and blood as well as us…they must, while this bad season lasts, suspend all operations’, but was rapidly proved wrong.
After leaving a small garrison in Carlisle, and richer by a number of cannon, 1000 stand of arms and 200 horses, Prince Charles, on Wednesday 20 November 1745, resumed his march south.
By the 24th the invaders were in Kendal and town after town now capitulated without resistance.
Lancaster, Preston, where the Old Pretender's advance had foundered, and which his son reached on 26 November, and Wigan all fell at the mere approach of the all-conquering young prince.
But still the expected flood of recruits failed to come pouring in, though 200 unemployed, given the proud title of the Manchester Regiment, were enrolled in that city when, on 28 November, it was, as legend had it, captured by ‘a drummer and a whore’, the latter being the lady companion of the recruiting sergeant.
The English armies could hardly be said to have been outfought since they had not yet fought at all.
Now their generals were to be outmanoeuvred.
Like Charles himself, the government had seriously over-estimated the likely degree of Jacobite sympathy he would encounter and they were particularly apprehensive about the security of Chester, which barred the way into North Wales.
Cumberland's initial appreciation was that Charles would attempt to cross the Mersey either at Warrington or Crossford and he ordered the Lord Lieutenant of Cheshire, who was also official governor of Chester Castle, to make  both bridges impassable, though they were not destroyed.
The Jacobites in fact opted for Crossford, where they repaired the bridge, and on 1 December marched on to Macclesfield.
Prince Charles managed to keep his opponent guessing as to his real intentions, for he now divided his forces.
The bulk of them he himself led south-east towards Leek and Derby, and beyond that, perhaps, London, while Lord George Murray took the remainder south-west towards Congleton, apparently en route to Chester.
Cumberland decided that Wales was the more likely objective, though he tried to cover himself by arranging for the road between Buxton and Derby to be broken up by the Derbyshire militia to slow Charles down should he take it instead.
If no great tactician, the Duke was already justifying his popularity with his men by showing concern for their health, insisting that they should be housed in billets.
Without this precaution ‘half the battalions,’ he believed, ‘would have been at the hospital already’.
To find sufficient shelter, however, meant spreading his forces over a wide area, the cavalry between Stone and Stoke on Trent, a distance of eight miles [13 km], the infantry over more than 40 miles [64 km]between Stafford and Warwick.
On 1 December Cumberland moved some of his cavalry forward to Congleton, from which they withdrew after confirming the presence of Lord George Murray's troops, but this intelligence left the Duke more undecided than ever about the Jacobites' real objective, as his private secretary admitted in a letter, dated 2 December 1745, to London:
To this hour we can't judge with any certainty whether they really intend to slip by us into Derbyshire or to march to Wales through Cheshire…
If by staying at Lichfield His Royal Highness had resolved to provide against their reaching Derby, he must have left them at liberty to have got into Wales without any difficulty…
If the motion was a feint, then indeed we shall by our advancing be less in reach of keeping them out of Derbyshire.
Lord George Murray's march had indeed been a feint.
From Congleton he turned south-east for Leek instead of going westwards into Wales and on 3 December rejoined the main Jacobite army at Leek.
From there, unimpeded by the militia's earlier road-breaking, they pressed on to Derby, which was reached on Wednesday 4 December.
Prince Charles Edward had now, against vastly superior forces, advanced 500 miles [800 km]in 19 weeks from a remote comer of the Outer Hebrides to the very heart of England, a mere 125 miles [200 km]from the capital; his advance guard, at Swarkestone Bridge, six  miles [10 km]beyond Derby, was even closer.
That evening he devoted to discussing the agreeable question of what he should wear for his triumphant entry into London.
Victory, perhaps to their own surprise, now seemed almost within the invaders' grasp but at a Council of War, held at the prince's headquarters in Exeter House, Derby, on the morning of Thursday 5 December, Lord George Murray, whose tactics so far had been masterly, astounded his fellow-commanders by remarking that ‘the first thing to be spoken of was how far it was prudent to advance further’.
They could not, he pointed out, avoid a battle indefinitely and even if they defeated Cumberland's army, estimated at 12,000, the remnants would still bar their way to London, while Wade's 9000 men would be undefeated in their rear.
It would be better to withdraw while the going was good.
To this unheroic proposal Charles retorted passionately that ‘rather than go back, I would wish to be dead and buried 20 feet underground’, but Murray's reputation was by now such, and his arguments so well mustered, that he won over his colleagues.
The decision leaked out among the officers, one of whom burst in on a later meeting to protest passionately against it: ‘What is this?’ he demanded.
‘You are going to fly without seeing the enemy?…
It would be far better to take the risk and push on.’
’ Never were our Highlanders in higher spirits notwithstanding their long and fatiguing march…’commented another.
‘We judged we were able to fight double our number of any troops that could oppose us.’
To prevent an outcry by the troops, or even a mutiny, against the decision, they were told they were turning back only to dispose of General Wade.
Thus deceived, lied to by the leaders they had trusted, in the chill, grey dawn on Friday 6 December 1745 the unbeaten Jacobite army turned its back on its objective and the long and pointless retreat — pointless because they could never hope for a better opportunity than this — began.
The news of the Young Pretender's invasion of England had initially been received in London with complacency, which gave way to concern and then serious alarm.
‘Coffee houses in town are now like Quakers’ meeting houses,’observed one Londoner at this time.
‘Hope and fear may be read in every man's face.’
False atrocity stories, misguidedly spread to encourage a spirit of resistance, and well-founded rumours that the French were waiting on the far side of the Channel to  launch a second invasion added to the prevailing gloom and when, on what the diarist Horace Walpole described as ‘Black Friday’, people in London learned that the Jacobites were already at Derby something approaching panic swept the capital.
But the panic soon subsided, helped by the news that the Scots had already turned tail.
A contemporary cartoon by William Hogarth, now at the height of his reputation, showed the soldiers sent to Finchley being plied with drink and welcomed by grateful young women and a positive passion for raising funds to provide clothes and other comforts for the troops now swept the capital.
The Scots were meanwhile retreating along the same route by which they had advanced, but to a very different reception.
The Derby Mercury published on 12 December a description it would not have dared print a week earlier: ‘They were dressed in dirty plaids and as dirty shirts, without breeches and some without shoes.
They really commanded our pity rather than our fear.’
At Manchester Charles's advance guard, instead of being welcomed by bonfires, was greeted by an angry mob and was lucky to get away unharmed.
Hating the enemy as he did — it was, after all, their aim to deprive his father of the throne — Cumberland was incensed at seeing them get away.
As soon as he learned of the rebels' withdrawal from Derby, he sent orders to Field Marshal Wade to intercept them from the west while his own army set off in pursuit from the south.
Without prompt action, Cumberland warned Wade, ‘these villians may escape back unpunished, to our eternal shame’.
Wade was with his cavalry at Doncaster when he received Cumberland's orders on 8 December, his infantry being 12 miles [19 km]further north at Ferrybridge [or Ferry Bridge]near Castleford.
By 10 December he had reached Wakefield, but Bonnie Prince Charlie was still 37 miles [59 km]south-west of him, at Manchester.
He therefore decided to send the bulk of the army back to its base at Newcastle, while 500 cavalry, commanded by General James Oglethorpe, set off across the Pennines to try to harass the enemy flanks and rear.
An army in retreat was very different from one advancing.
Apart from rifling the chests of the Excise offices in the towns they had occupied, the Scots had while in England behaved with remarkable correctness, but now they were increasingly described as thieves and ruffians, an attitude epitomised by the verses written about a group of Yorkshire sportsmen who formed themselves into a unit of amateur warriors known as ‘The Royal Hunters’:
Let us unite
And put to flight
These monsters of our isle.
The fox and hare 
Awhile we'll spare
To seek a worthier prey…
Cumberland now sent orders to the Lords Lieutenant of Lancashire, Westmorland and Cumberland to break up the roads, tear down the bridges and block possible escape routes by felling trees but by the time he reached Preston, on 13 December 1745, when he was joined by the cavalry sent by General Wade from Newcastle, Prince Charles's troops had reached Lancaster, 20 miles [32 km]further north, though General Oglethorpe's detachment was a mere three miles [5 km]behind and almost in contact with the enemy rearguard.
Just when Cumberland seemed to be well placed to achieve his aim of fighting a full-scale battle against the Jacobites the government in London intervened.
It had been watching apprehensively the activities of Prince Charles's brother Henry, who, his father, the Old Pretender, had written to Louis XV a few weeks earlier, ‘cannot bear to remain in Rome while his brother is in Scotland’.
On 29 August 1745 the younger Stuart, still only 20, had slipped secretly away and on 24 October 1745, while he was on the road, a Treaty of Alliance was drawn up at Fontainebleau, under which the French king promised ‘James III’, as he was styled, to help him against their ‘common enemy’, described, for diplomatic reasons, not as king of England but as Elector of Hanover.
In fulfilment of this agreement a huge force, variously put at 15,000 and 30,000 men, had been assembled between Dunkirk and Boulogne, to follow up any initial success in a landing on the south or east coast, though the final choice of destination was to be left to the last moment, being largely dependent on the wind.
Although Prince Henry was nominally in command the real leader of the expedition was the Duc de Richelieu, a  worldly , loose-living sophisticate, who found Henry's piety irritating.
‘You may perhaps gain the kingdom of heaven by your prayers,’ he told him in an unkind moment, ‘but never the kingdom of Great Britain.’
The British government placed most of its faith in dealing with a second invasion on the navy, under the overall command of Rear Admiral George Anson [later Admiral Lord Anson], who reinforced the home fleet by 17 major warships, brought back from the Mediterranean or released from convoying duties.
Rear-Admiral John Byng was sent to patrol off the east coast of Scotland to intercept reinforcements arriving from France and though, as already mentioned, two ships did get through, at least three others were captured.
Responsibility for the defence of the coast rested on ‘Old Grogram-breeches’ or ‘Old Grog’, Vice-Admiral [later Admiral]Edward Vernon, a popular hero, but disliked by the Admiralty because of his brusque manners.
The dispositions Vernon made were to become a model on similar  occasions in the future and are best summed up in his own words:
It was always my opinion that a strong squadron kept at sea to the westward and a squadron of smaller ships in the North Seas were the only secure guardians to these His Majesty's kingdoms against invasions.
A strong force of 26 heavy line-of-battle ships was based on Plymouth to protect the western approaches and patrol up-Channel towards the Nore, while Vernon himself took command of a smaller fleet, of rather weaker vessels, in the Downs, which could either sail west down the Channel or north-east to intercept an enemy making for the Thames estuary.
A light squadron was also posted off East Anglia, to move north to support Byng or south to assist Vernon, as the situation demanded.
Vernon's most valuable innovation, however, was to establish an intelligence service and early warning system using the sloops, cutters and small yachts which regularly plied the Channel, all manned by volunteers.
Even the sceptical Horace Walpole was impressed at the result, as his diary for mid-September testifies:
The best of our strength is at sea.
The Channel is well guarded…
Vernon, that simple, noisy creature, has hit upon a scheme that is of great service; he has laid Folkestone cutters all round the coast, which are continually relieved and bring constant notice of everything that stirs.
The seaborne invasion danger only really became acute when, in November, Prince Henry finally reached Paris, masquerading, not very convincingly, as the Duke of Albany.
A meeting between him and Louis XIV was not a great success, but the young man made a generally good impression and though they had missed the ideal moment, when Prince Charles was threatening London from Derby, the French do seem to have been in earnest, as a letter to Prince Charles from the French Minister of Marine, the Comte de Maurepas, dated December 1745, confirms:
Here we are at last on the eve of the mighty event.
We have completed at Dunkirk and neighbouring ports all the necessary preparations for the embarkation of 12,000 men commanded by the Duc de Richelieu…
If all goes well…the disembarkation could take place before this month is out.
In England, false alarms, as so often at such times, added to the prevailing tension.
On 11 December the rumour spread that the French were landing in Pevensey Bay, like William the Conqueror 700 years earlier.
Although the truth was soon established the fright was sufficient to cause orders to be sent to Cumberland and Sir John Ligonier to bring the army back from the north.
Even before the order recalling Cumberland had reached him, on 15 December 1745, the government had regained its nerve and a second order, cancelling the first, was despatched the following day.
Cumberland, an eye-witness recorded, ‘jumped around the room with joy’ on learning he could resume his pursuit of the rebels, ‘and declared that he would follow them to the further part of Scotland.’
But the delay was sufficient to postpone the encounter which both the Duke and Prince Charles — though not the latter's generals — were seeking, though hostility to the retreating invaders was visibly growing.
In Kendal the Duke of Perth's horsemen were stoned and attacked by a mob armed with clubs, and as they approached Clifton on the outskirts of Penrith they came under fire from militiamen hidden behind the hedgerows.
Charles had done all he could to slow down the retreat, issuing orders that ‘not so much as a cannonball’ was to be left behind — an instruction literally, and profitably, followed by the Glengarry clan who, when the carts transporting ammunition up Shap Fell, between Kendal and Penrith, broke down, carried it up in their plaids, at sixpence [2. 5p]per cannonball.
The first real brush between the two sides came on 17 December when Cumberland's horsemen approached the rear of the baggage train between Shap and Penrith, but it was not till next day that a more serious encounter occurred.
Lord George Murray who had, as he had promised, skilfully directed the withdrawal, having got his cannon and ammunition safely over the River Lowther bridge into Penrith, found his rearguard about to be overwhelmed by Cumberland's advance cavalry at Clifton, six miles [10 km]to the south.
He therefore took up a defensive position behind a series of hedges, but it was 5 pm and almost dark by the time the two sides came into contact.
The fighting which followed took place spasmodically as the moon emerged from behind a cloud or one side fired at the other's musket flashes and the Battle of Clifton turned out to be little more than a skirmish.
The attempt to disrupt the retreat was, however, beaten off, with around 40 casualties, dead and wounded, on the Hanoverian side and a dozen on the Jacobite, and Charles was able to get the rest of his army safely back into Penrith.
On the morning of Tuesday 19 December the rebels re-entered Carlisle, where Charles left a garrison of 400 men, drawn largely from the ‘Manchester Regiment’ who had no wish to cross the Border, and all his guns, except the light Swedish cannon recently sent from France.
On 20 December the whole of the rest of the Scottish army assembled at Longtown, on the English side of the River Esk.
The icy river was at least 4 ft [1–2 m]deep and no boats could be found, but cavalry were stationed below the ford to catch any unfortunates who were swept away, and the infantry then crossed in lines abreast, holding on to each other.
Once on the far side the pipers played while the men danced  reels until they were dry.
Thus, damply and noisily, ended the invasion of England by the Young pretender; the whole campaign south of the Border had lasted less than six weeks.
As 1745, a year of defeat and near disaster, came to an end the government in London was far more concerned about the enemy presence just across the Channel than the more distant one beyond the Scottish border.
The county in most immediate danger was Kent, but the death of the Lord Lieutenant had left the local defence arrangements in disarray and one of his deputies could only promise ‘If the French come in March we shall be ready with our militia,’ which was not, in late December, very reassuring.
An appeal for volunteers in the local newspaper produced, however, an impressive response with 8000 armed men, including 4000 on horseback, parading on Barham Downs, near Canterbury, a traditional assembly point, on 22, 23 and 31 December.
‘What may not be expected,’ wrote the enthusiastic deputy-lieutenant previously quoted, to the Duke of Newcastle, ‘now that the spirit is lighted up, and the hearts of the country people inflamed with a desire to defend their country and particularly against the French?’
The Jacobites still had a toehold in England at Carlisle, which Cumberland reached on 21 December, the day after the rest of the rebels recrossed the Border into Scotland.
Clearly the town could not hold out without the castle, which the Duke contemptuously dismissed as ‘an old hen-coop which he would speedily bring down about their ears’.
Six heavy 18-pounder siege guns were brought from Whitehaven, a cumbrous, three-day, process, but on 28 December the siege began and on the morning of the 30th, after Cumberland had hanged four prisoners outside the walls as a specimen of what the rest may expect', a white flag was hoisted.
The garrison finally capitulated at 4 pm, enabling the Duke to write complacently: ‘Now we may have the happiness to say that this part of the kingdom is clear of all the rebels.’
Cumberland was for the moment needed in England and after, to everyone's relief, the discredited Field Marshal Wade had turned down the post of Commander-in-Chief in Scotland it was, on 24 December, accepted by Lieut-General Henry Hawley, known from his record as a disciplinarian as ‘Hangman Hawley’.
After crossing the Border Charles's army had split up, but the two sections were reunited at Abington, between Moffat and Douglas, after which, with a short interval between them, both went on to Glasgow, which was preached on 26 December.
The numbers under his command had grown since he bad re-crossed the Border, with the accession of some additional clans and the arrival of 800 men, Scots and Irish formerly in the French service, including two squadrons of horse, who had landed at Montrose on 22 November.
The same ship had brought two 16-pounder, two 12-pounder and two eight-pounder  [7.3, 5.5 and 3.6-kg]guns, which were now to prove their value.
With these new reinforcements about 4000 men were, by early January 1746, assembled at Perth and on the 3rd Charles left Glasgow to besiege Stirling.
The town, protected only by a dry-stone wall, surrendered within a few days, on 8 January 1746.
The castle, a very different proposition, still held out.
General Hawley had only reached Edinburgh on 6 January, and having built up his strength, wrote optimistically of ‘driving the rascally scum out of Stirling’.
His complacency remained unshaken when, on Thursday 17 January 1746, having advanced from Edinburgh towards Stirling he found that the rebels, far from fleeing, had moved forward to meet him at Falkirk, a small town about ten miles [16 km]to the south-east.
Hawley decided on an immediate attack by his dragoons on the enemy right wing before his own weary infantry had got into line, convinced that the Highlanders would break and run at the mere sight of the royal cavalry charging sword in hand.
The reality proved very different.
The rebels held their fire till the dragoons were within ten yards [9 m]of them, then replied with ‘a very sharp, popping kind’ of volley which did such execution that one bystander ‘saw daylight through them in several places’.
Eighty of 400 dragoons were brought down and the rest fled.
As the rebels, sword in hand, ran after the retreating cavalry, sonic of the royal infantry stood their ground and tried to take them in the flank but the heavy rain had left most of their cartridges too damp to fire and the frustrated musketeers thereupon also took to their heels.
It was the weather which really decided the issue for, one observer wrote, ‘It blew a great storm and rained and hailed so hard that the water came out of the soldiers’ shoes.’
Eventually, as dusk fell, both sides, ‘being sick of one the other’ abandoned the battlefield, the rebels retiring to Stirling, the royal troops to Linlithgow, en route for a humiliating return to Edinburgh.
The Battle of Falkirk had been another Jacobite victory, Prince Charles having lost 50 dead and 80 wounded, while Hawley's casualties, suffered in a mere 20 minutes, amounted to 350 killed and another 300 taken prisoner.
On Hawley's recommendation five officers were court-martialled for cowardice or neglect of duty but he himself survived, though in effect superseded by Cumberland, who, with the French not having stirred from Dunkirk, left London on 25 January 1746, taking over in Edinburgh on the 30th.
On the very morning after his arrival in the Scottish capital the Duke left for Stirling, where the castle was proving too hard a nut for the Jacobites to crack, and, several hundred men having been lost to no purpose, the siege was finally, soon after the Battle of Falkirk, abandoned, Lord George Murray and other senior commanders having persuaded the prince, much against his will —‘Good God!
Have I lived to see this?’ he cried, on receiving their joint letter — that it might take months to starve Stirling Castle into surrender.
They therefore favoured withdrawal beyond the River Forth, hoping to raise a new army of 10,000 men to resume the offensive in the spring.
The retreat began on 1 February 1746, the Jacobites splitting, for reasons of private convenience and internal politics rather than on sound military grounds, into three columns, all making for Inverness.
Prince Charles's stopped, on 7 February, at the fortified barracks at Ruthven, whose garrison and commander, now promoted to Lieutenant Molloy, had beaten off the Jacobites five months before.
This time, however, his dozen men engulfed by thousands of Highlanders, Molloy was forced to surrender, on favourable terms, the victorious Jacobites eagerly seizing his stock of food and then using its own gunpowder to demolish the barracks; the resulting ruins remain to this day.
An even easier victory followed, at Moy, nine miles [14 km]short of Inverness, where the prince was staying the night of 16–17 February at the local big house, Moy Hall.
Word of his presence had reached the army commander at Inverness and 1500 men were secretly sent off to capture him, but his hostess got wind of the plan and sent the prince to shelter in the woods, having posted four servants with a local blacksmith to watch for the approaching column.
When, at a dip in the road and in the faint light of dawn, they opened fire, while the stentorian-lunged blacksmith shouted orders to the imaginary battalions behind him, the advancing 1500 troops were seized with panic and fled, defeated by five civilians.
On 18 February, following ‘The Rout of Moy’, Inverness was occupied by the Jacobites without resistance, and three days later Fort George, the eastern pivot of Wade's Highland line, capitulated after only a few shots had been fired.
Next it was the turn of Fort Augustus, in the centre of the Great Glen.
The main barracks fell to the rebels on 28 February and the remainder of the buildings on 5 March, after a lucky shot had blown up the magazine.
The real prize, the main surviving government stronghold north of Stirling, was Fort William on the west coast, which Cumberland was not prepared to lose.
King George's command of the sea, which had already prevented French assistance reaching Prince Charles's headquarters at Inverness, proved valuable once again, for food was now sent to Fort William from Liverpool, arms from Dublin and troops from Glasgow.
The siege began on 7 March 1746.
The garrison consisted of 200 regulars, plus some Argyllshire militia, and was vastly outnumbered by the Jacobites, but the defenders enjoyed naval support, for several vessels lay alongside the fort and assisted its guns in some effective counter-battery fire.
Cumberland also felt some anxiety about the security of Blair Castle, situated about eight miles [13 km]north-west of Pitlochry, the ancestral home of Lord George Murray, who obtained permission  from Prince Charles to try and regain it from the government forces occupying it, but his light guns proved ineffective against the castle's 7-ft [2.1-m]thick walls.
On 2 April 1746 he gave up the attempt and headed hastily north ‘in a great hurry and confusion’.
On the following day Brigadier Stapleton, in charge of the investment of Fort William, also withdrew.
What had caused the sieges to be abandoned was the news that Cumberland was at last making his great move forward.
While Charles had been withdrawing northward the sloop Prince Charles , formerly, until taken as a prize, His Majesty's Ship Hazard , had been on its way to him from France with some Irish troops, arms and, most important of all, £13,600 in gold.
She had hardly set out when the unwelcome attentions of a British privateer forced her back to Ostend and, at her second attempt, she was intercepted again, off Banff, but for a second time escaped.
Third time, however, was to prove unlucky.
The Prince Charles was just about to anchor in Tongue Bay, midway along the northern coast of Scotland, on 25 March 1746 when the 24-gun Sheerness , which far outclassed her, appeared and opened fire.
After a heroic action, the Franco-Irish captain of the Prince Charles reluctantly gave the order to abandon ship and set off bravely to lead the survivors across country, carrying their precious cargo, to Inverness, 70 miles [113 km]away.
He proved unfortunate again, being stopped and, after a brisk battle, captured, by pro-government Highlanders.
The Royal Navy had meanwhile managed to refloat the battered Prince Charles , which once more changed hands, and again became H.M.S. Hazard .
During February Cumberland at last led his army forward from Perth, and on 27 February he entered Aberdeen, 70 miles [113 km]north-east of Perth, and 80 miles [128 km]due south of Inverness.
Between the two lay the formidable barrier of the River Spey, which, as late as 17 March, was said to be ‘so swelled with snow melting down from the hills that it will not be fordable without going a great way up the country’.
The duke had already sent forward a large detachment under General Humphrey Bland to the Strathbogie district, the principal town of which was Keith, seven miles [11 km]east of the Spey, but they were surprised by a far smaller fighting patrol of 200 rebel foot and 40 horse, who had crossed the Spey under cover of darkness.
Now, in a classic delaying action, they forced the royalists to surrender after a mere seven of them had been killed.
If not quite another ‘Rout of Moy’ it was not much better, but the only real consequence was to harden the hearts of the royalist commanders.
By 23 March General Bland was pleading to be ordered to advance and ‘drive this Highland banditti to…the Devil’.
At last the moment to silence all the doubters with a decisive victory arrived.
On 4 April two officers reported the River Spey to be ‘low and fordable in…many places’ and by 12 April, after being joined by the  forces from Strathbogie, Cumberland's army reached the river, where the water level had dropped significantly in the preceding few days.
The subsequent crossing ‘in the finest weather that could be wished’ was reminiscent of Prince Charles's negotiation of the River Esk four months before; the troops ‘with great cheerfulness’waded through water that ‘came up to their middles’, to be rewarded on the far bank with rum and a biscuit.
Tuesday 15 April 1746 was Cumberland's twenty-fifth birthday and he used the occasion to give his troops a rest.
Brandy, meat and bread and cheese were distributed and he rode round the encampment raising his hat in response to the men's cheers and delivering an admirably concise address: ‘My brave boys, we have one march more and then all our labour is at an end; sit down at your tent doors and be alert to take up your arms.’
With both sides eager for action the stage was set for a full-scale encounter battle.
It was Charles who, by barring Cumberland's way forward, really dictated the site, a stretch of open moorland about 500 feet [150 m]above sea level, between the Moray Firth and the River Nairn, five miles [8 km]east of Inverness, known to the Scots as Drummossie Moor.
The English called it Culloden, after the adjacent house and park.
It was Cumberland who dictated the time of the coming battle.
Between four and five o'clock his army was already marching in four columns towards Inverness, the cavalry, on the left, across open country, while the artillery and baggage on the right clattered and rumbled along the road.
A sharp easterly wind hurled hail on the troops' backs as they marched.
‘It was a very cold rainy morning,’ wrote one private later to his wife, recalling that pre-dawn march on Wednesday 16 April 1746, ‘and nothing to buy to comfort us…not a dram of brandy or spirits…nothing but a loaf and water.’
Many of the rebels, after a planned night attack had been called off at the last minute, had gone off into Inverness in search of food or were sleeping exhausted, unwilling to be roused, when news arrived of Cumberland's approach.
Charles refused, however, to fall back on Inverness to give the foragers time to come in.
He even rejected an emotional plea for delay which the senior French envoy made on his knees, after which the thwarted ambassador hurried back to Inverness and began to burn his official papers.
Around 11.30am Cumberland deployed his four marching columns into three lines abreast and the troops moved forward in their battle formation until, 500 yards [460 m]ahead, they found themselves facing the rebel lines, stretching from Culloden park on the rebel left to the walled Culwiniac farm enclosure on their right.
As it was by now one o'clock Cumberland's staff suggested the men might halt to have their dinner but he replied, according to tradition, ‘No, they'll fight all  the better on empty bellies.
Remember what a dessert they got to their dinner at Falkirk.’
Cumberland had around 9000 men under his command, consisting of 15 regular battalions, about 900 horsemen, and some 6000 locally raised Highlanders and militia.
His artillery, standard three-pounder [1.4-kg]guns, was arranged in five pairs between the various front-line regiments, with some additional guns and Coehorn mortars set on high ground to the rear and to the left.
The Jacobite army, thanks to the numerous absentees who had gone foraging, numbered no more than 5000, arranged in two ranks, with most of the Highlanders in front and the Irish and French in the rear.
The rebel cavalry were on the left of the second line.
The prince's artillery, a mixed bag of 13 pieces, varying from one-and-a-half- to five-pounders, was placed in three batteries in the centre of the front line and on the flanks, but was ill-served by inexperienced gun crews.
Although the royalists later alleged that the rebels had that morning received ‘a double portion of oatmeal and whisky for incouragement’ and that a ‘graite many…that we took prisoners were drunk’, these must have been a fortunate minority, but everyone agrees that the prospect of action had had a reviving effect on even the hungriest and weariest.
‘The highlanders,’ testified one Jacobite present, ‘though faint with hunger and ready to drop down with fatigue and want of sleep, seemed to forget all their hardships at the approach of the enemy.
Cumberland was on record as believing that a battle without a cannonade was like a dance without music and Culloden began as a gunners’ battle.
The Jacobite front ranks had earlier been faced by a wind hurling sleet and rain in their faces, but, according to one royalist eye-witness, ‘about one o'clock…the weather grew fair’ and the royal guns, firing at will, were soon causing great destruction in the enemy lines, first with round shot, then with anti-personnel grape and case.
‘Their lines were formed so thick and deep,’ observed one eyewitness in Cumberland's army, ‘that the grapeshot made open lanes quite through them, the men dropping down by wholesale.’
Prince Charles had intended to wait for Cumberland to attack, but after his troops had endured this merciless fire for 20 minutes or more one commander warned Lord George Murray that his men ‘were turned so impatient that they were like to break their ranks’ and the pretender agreed to an immediate attack.
So eager were the Highlanders to be in action that they charged forward prematurely, to be swept by further fire from the hated artillery as well as by musket shots from the opposing infantry and from a detachment under the 18-year-old [later Major-General]James Wolfe, posted on the royal left flank, which took them in enfilade.
One supply officer, watching from the rear, described the carnage which followed: ‘Nothing could be more desperate than their attack and more properly received.
Those in front were spitted with the bayonets; those in flank were torn in pieces by the musquetry and grape shot.’
The walls of Culwiniac Farm provided no real protection, being easily breached by the Argyll militia, after which ‘Hangman’ Hawley's dragoons poured through the gaps and round behind the rebel right.
Charles's cavalry rallied to hold off the 500 enemy horse which broke through into the rear of his lines and formed a protective corridor down which he, and those of his men still able to fight, slowly withdrew, fiercely resisting.
As the royal troops moved forward to take possession of the battlefield, littered with discarded weapons and the dead and wounded, Cumberland despatched a messenger to HMS Gibraltar , in the Moray Firth, for biscuits and cheese, rum and brandy for his victorious but hungry troops.
Then he rode among them, thanking each regiment by name, with such cries as, ‘Wolfe's boys, I thank you!
You have done the business,’ while his weary, bloodstained warriors hoisted their caps on their bayonet points and shouted ‘Billy!
Billy!’
It had been a classic victory, won by well-trained troops, skilfully handled.
Cumberland had lost only 50 men killed and 260 wounded, the Jacobites at least 1200 dead.
Prisoners and wounded were few, most of those who had fallen or been disarmed being killed as they tried to surrender or lay helpless on the battlefield.
The news that the nation was safe reached London on 23 April, when a special celebration edition of the London Gazette was hastily issued.
Next day the guns of the Tower fired a victory salute and Sir John Ligonier wrote to Cumberland on the 25th: ‘This town has been in a blaze these two days.
Return as soon as you please.
No lady that prides to the name of an English woman will refuse you.’
Two weeks after the great victory at Culloden the last battle of ‘The Forty-five’ was fought at sea in Loch nan Uamh, a sea inlet on the coast of Inverness-shire about 30 miles [48 km]west of Fort William.
Here, on 30 April 1746, two 36-gun French ships, the Mars and the Bellone , arrived bringing, too late, weapons, ammunition, brandy and gold and carrying soldiers for their protection.
The French had hardly anchored and landed their cargo of arms, powder and money when, on 3 May 1746, Commodore [later Admiral]Thomas Smith sailed into the loch, in HMS Greyhound , mounting 24 guns, accompanied by two smaller vessels, the Terror and the Baltimore .
The resulting battle continued for six hours and both sides suffered severely, though the Mars and Bellone managed to get away unchallenged next morning carrying  various prominent fugitives.
The trip home must have been hazardous for Mars alone had suffered 72 hits, leaving 29 of her complement dead and 85 wounded, and she now had three feet [0.9 m]of water in her hold.
Prince Charles Edward was not among the runaways although to rescue him had been the task force's real objective.
The most romantic period of the whole adventure now followed as, often resembling a ragged beggar more than a would-be king, the young prince moved across to the west coast, hiding in caves and foresters' huts, until at the end of June he made his most famous journey, ‘over the sea to Skye’, posing as an Irish sewing maid.
His former general, Lord George Murray, after a final reproachful letter to the Prince, had long since fled to Holland to end his days in exile, and most of Charles's other leading supporters had by now either escaped abroad or been rounded up.
While ‘Bonnie Prince Charlie’ was continuing his wanderings Cumberland was inflicting a fearful vengeance on all who had supported him.
The Duke, like many Englishmen of his time, seems to have regarded the whole of Scotland with almost pathological aversion.
‘I tremble for fear,’ he wrote, ‘that this vile spot may still be the ruin of this island and our family.’
General Sir John Ligonier described the post-Culloden operations in Scotland as ‘the disagreeable hunting of those wild beasts’, and one civilian address of thanks to Cumberland referred to his vanquished foes as ‘wolves and tygers…mountain savages’.
When, on 25 July 1746, he re-entered London it was like the day when the news of Culloden had arrived, with ringing bells and blazing bonfires, plus a thanksgiving service in St Paul's, at which Handel's specially composed anthem, ‘The Conquering Hero’, was sung for the first time.
Already, however, reports of the atrocities in the Highlands were causing revulsion in London and when that month Cumberland was made a freeman of a City livery company it was suggested that the most appropriate would be the butchers', giving Cumberland his enduring nickname.
The government's official vengeance was less severe than Cumberland's private campaign.
Only 120 of the 3400 rebels taken prisoner were executed and at least 40 of these were deserters from the royal army.
Nearly 1300 prisoners were ultimately released.
There was, however, a general attack on distinctively Scottish institutions.
On 12 August 1746 the Disarming Act became law, making it illegal for anyone in the Highlands to own or carry specified types of weapon, including broadswords, or to wear Highland costume.
But the real prize eluded George II's government.
On 6 September 1746 two new French privateers,L'Heureux and Le Prince de Conti , reached Loch nam Uamh and on 19 September the prince was summoned from his impromptu shelter on the slopes of Ben Alder in Inverness-shire, a mere 25 miles [40 km]from Fort William.
Before dawn next morning he was on his way back to France.
GOD AND LORD ANSON
They are certainly making such preparations as have never been made to invade this island since the Spanish Armada; but I trust in God and Lord Anson.
Lord Lyttelton in London, Summer 1759
The defeat of Prince Charles at Culloden lifted the danger of invasion from France.
By the time Charles landed, at Roscoff in Brittany, on 29 September 1746, his brother Henry had returned to Paris and the French had realised that the Stuarts could be of no further use to them.
The prospect of a Stuart restoration receded still further when, in May 1747, Henry, Duke of York, still only 22, was appointed a cardinal by the pope; becoming known as Cardinal York, he took priest's orders a year later.
‘Cardinal Stuart,’ wrote the British minister in Florence to Horace Walpole, ‘by putting on the cowle [i.e. cardinal's hat]has done more to extinguish his party than would have been effected by putting to death many thousand of deluded followers.’
Charles was horrified, conscious that his brother was now disqualified as a man of God from leading an invasion, and, as a celibate, from having a legitimate heir.
The news, wrote the Young Pretender, very typically, was ‘a dager throw my heart’.
Even sadder times followed.
Under the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle, provisionally signed on 30 April 1748, and finally concluded on 18 October, which ended the War of the Austrian Succession (and of Jenkins's Ear), the French agreed — as they had in relation to the Old Pretender under the Treaty of Utrecht in 1713 — to recognise the Hanoverian succession and to refuse shelter to those who challenged it.
Charles was reluctant to acknowledge that his cause was lost.
On his return from Scotland he had asked the French government to provide him with 18,000 men for a fresh attempt and had then visited Spain to seek help from Ferdinand VI, but, like Louis XV, the Spanish king was non-committal.
The Stuarts had had their chance and failed to seize it.
Henceforward they were a minor annoyance on the very fringes of European politics rather than a serious menace to British security.
When, on 1 January 1766, the Old Pretender died in Rome, aged 77, his elder son assumed the title of Charles III and six years later he at last married, but his wife bore no children.
The former Young Pretender himself lived to be 67, and on his death, in Rome on 31 January 1788, his brother Henry began to call himself Henry IX.
By the time he died, childless, at Frascati on 31 July 1807, aged 82, England had more pressing concerns to trouble her than a Stuart restoration and, by an agreeable turn of fate, the last of the line was kept alive by a pension from the real King of England.
Immediately after Culloden the British government resumed the policy of trying to tame the Highlands with brick and rubble.
Major [later Lieut. -Colonel]William Caulfeild resumed his former duties as Inspector of Roads, until his death in 1767.
Scotland was now divided into four military districts, containing 15,000 men, with new military posts scattered across them, and work on extending the road network in Argyllshire to link Dumbarton and the Western Isles began in September 1746.
All told, by 1767 Caulfeild had added nearly another 900 miles [1440 km]to Wade's original network at a cost — about which the government grumbled though they paid up — of £130,000.
Along with the new roads new forts were erected, the most important being a new Fort George [or Fort St George], built at Ardersier in Inverness-shire, several miles to the east of its predecessor, on a promontory projecting into the Moray Firth.
Long before it was finished, in 1769, at a cost of £175,000, Scotland was once more tranquil.
By 1755 serious friction had developed between England and France over their respective Far Eastern and North American colonies, and it was rapidly learned in London that the French had, though reluctantly, decided that only a major invasion of England itself could force the English to keep ships at home or bring them back from overseas.
The driving force was Charles Louis Fouquet Belleisle, Duc de Belleisle and Marshal of France, a soldier of vast experience who, reported one British agent on 26 January 1756, ‘told a friend of mine that it must be attempted, though [i.e. even if]they were sure to lose all the troops and vessels of the expedition.’
What was novel about the invasion plan of 1756 was the proposal to deliver the attack by three simultaneous thrusts, towards Scotland, Ireland and -the real attack — on England itself.
The French believed that as smugglers in rowing boats constantly managed to get ashore on the English coast, an invasion fleet, given a favourable southerly wind and a calm, dark night, should be able to do the same, and hoped to use some of these clandestine sailors as pilots.
The war was in fact fought largely in the Mediterranean and is best remembered for the execution of Admiral Byng, in March 1757, for his failure to protect British-held Minorca.
But the enemy success there was not followed by an invasion of England.
The warships based at Brest and Rochefort, at the mouth of the River Charente, were never able to sail up-Channel to escort the transports being assembled between  Dunkirk and Cherbourg, thanks to the effective watch kept by the Royal Navy, employing the dispositions which Admiral Vernon had pioneered in 1745.
The feint attacks towards Scotland and Ireland, designed to draw off the British warships from the Channel, were also frustrated by the patrolling frigates, ready to summon heavier support from Portsmouth and Plymouth.
The invasion danger, and the loss of Minorca, tapped a wave of fierce patriotism which carried into office an outstanding politician, detested by George II but destined to become one of Britain's greatest war leaders.
William Pitt the Elder [later Earl of Chatham]had been educated at Eton and Oxford before briefly serving in the cavalry and entering Parliament, for the ‘rotten borough’ of Old Sarum.
He now formed a highly effective partnership with the Duke of Newcastle, a superb party manager who as First Lord of the Treasury was nominally head of the government.
Pitt, however, as principal Secretary of State, was the real prime minister, directing foreign affairs and conducting the war.
Pitt realised that the defence of the British Isles could not be conducted in isolation and that the defence of the homeland must form part of a worldwide strategy.
He had such success that, late in 1758, the new chief minister of France, Lieut-General Etienne François Choiseul-Amboise, Duc de Choiseul, Louis XV's answer to George II's Pitt, decided to revive his predecessor Belleisle's plan for the invasion of England.
De Choiseul planned to enlist the help of Russia and Sweden and, less probably, to persuade the Dutch to use their navy to attack their former ally.
The year 1759 was the annus mirabilis , the year of marvels, in which British arms were triumphant throughout the world, but each fresh victory made the French more eager to strike at their enemy's heart and homeland.
Pitt had refused to hold back a single soldier intended for service overseas or to recall any vessels serving on distant stations, but he ordered a further 34 sail of the line to be commissioned and, during that dangerous summer, increased the number of seamen serving in home waters from 18,000 to 35,000.
In Admiral [later Admiral of the Fleet], George Lord Anson, Pitt had a First Lord of the Admiralty after his own heart, a resolute professional who had been a captain at 27.
Anson well knew that if control of the Channel was lost all was lost and on 5 April he assured the king that his fleet, with 30 ships of the line, would by the following month outnumber the French, with their 27 warships between Brest and Rochefort.
Anson was well served in his turn by Rear-Admiral Sir Edward [later Lord]Hawke, who after replacing the disgraced Byng in the Mediterranean, had been brought home to command the Channel fleet.
He first hoisted his flag at Spithead, but on 13 May was at Plymouth, a location entirely in line with Anson's thinking.
‘The best  defence for our colonies, as well as for our coasts,’ he had argued the previous year, ‘is to have a squadron always to the westward…[which]may in all probability either keep the French in port, or give them battle with advantage if they come out.’
Hawke, taking the strategy a stage further, now moved his ships from Torbay to enemy waters off Brest, maintaining from his arrival there on 24 May 1759 a close blockade of the port.
In spite of Hawke's presence the number of enemy ships at Brest rose, within ten days, from 11 to 17, as the French began the build-up to invasion.
The plan was essentially that first worked out in 1756 but it had now been elaborated and refined.
Thanks to the cooperation of the Austrians in Flanders, the French had been able to extend the embarkation area and the main assault would now be delivered second, not first.
The new intention was for an escort of 35 to 40 ships of the line, assembled from Toulon and Brest, to sail first to Brittany, to convoy the 20,000 men assembled there to somewhere near Glasgow, from where they were to march on Edinburgh.
While the British army was, the French hoped, hurrying north to cope with this initial attack, the same warships — here lay the originality of the plan — would sail north-about round Scotland and down through the North Sea to Ostend.
Here a second fleet of transports would be waiting with another 20,000 men, who would assemble and embark at the last moment to secure the maximum surprise.
While the escorts would hold off the Royal Navy the transports would make a short, 100-mile [160-km]crossing, to around Maldon on the River Blackwater in Essex, a mere 40 miles [64 km]from London.
As intended in 1756, there would also be a second diversion.
A French cruiser squadron, led by a famous privateer captain, would sail from Dunkirk to Ireland, to discourage the Irish army from coming to the rescue of the English.
The British public was well aware that an invasion was threatened.
In May 1759 the Annual Register revealed the scale of the proposed attempt:
Ten thousand workmen are employed at Havre de Grace in building 150 flat-bottomed boats, 100 feet [30 m]long, 24 [7 m]broad and 10 [3 m]deep.
100,000 livres are paid to them weekly.
These boats are to have a deck, and to carry two pieces of cannon each, and to use either sails or oars, as occasion may require.
Some will carry 300 men, with the baggage, and others 150 horse with their riders; 150 more are building at Brest, St Malo, Nantes, Port L'Orient, Morlaix and other ports of Brittany.
Although the army now had its largest-ever establishment of 85,000  men the great majority were serving overseas, but Pitt tried to offset the shortage of troops by increasing their mobility.
Many of the regulars left in the country were stationed, as a central reserve, in the Isle of Wight, ready to be carried round the coast by transports anchored at the Nore — the same craft that made the French fearful of sudden landings on their own coastline.
On 30 May the king announced that the militia was to be mobilised and might — an important innovation — be required to serve where ‘occasion shall require’, i.e. if necessary outside their own counties.
Few could have been less suited for the military life than the historian Edward Gibbon who, as he admitted in his Autobiography , ‘never handled a gun…seldom mounted a horse’ but, living with his father, a country gentleman, at Buriton, near Petersfield, he felt obliged to apply for a commission as a captain in the South battalion of the Hampshire militia, 476 strong, of which his father became major and a local nobleman, ‘after a prolix and passionate contest’with the Lord Lieutenant, lieut. -colonel.
He was duly commissioned, despite his total lack of training or aptitude, on 12 June 1759 and, after his unit had been called out in 1760, served in various parts of the country, though he soon regretted his patriotic impulse and did not enjoy what he called ‘my bloodless and inglorious campaigns’.
Though Pitt was always sceptical about the likelihood of an invasion he clearly thought the extra half a million a year it cost to keep the militia under arms was money well spent.
The public, unlike Pitt, expected the enemy at least to make the attempt and, with nerves at full stretch, there were the inevitable false alarms.
‘This day,’ recorded one diary-keeper in Sussex on 7 July 1759, with, in the circumstances, admirable sangfroid , ‘received by post the disagreeable news of the French being landed at Dover’— a complete fiction, as it soon appeared.
Pitt, however, set a splendid example of calmness, placing his faith in the navy, and sober-minded citizens followed his lead.
‘We talk of nothing here but the French invasion,’ wrote one London-based peer, Lord Lyttelton, that summer.
‘They are certainly making such preparations as have never been made to invade this island since the Spanish Armada; but I trust in God and Lord Anson.’
As always, England's first line of naval defence ran along the enemy's coast.
One group of ships kept watch on Dunkirk and the Flemish ports; a second, ready to protect the Thames estuary, lay in the Downs just north of Dover; a third was at Spithead, covering Portsmouth and watching Le Havre; a fourth was in the Mediterranean, off  Toulon; and the fifth, and most important, was Admiral Hawke's squadron, whose close blockade of Brest, from his base at Plymouth, was to become a model for the future.
Hawke's standing patrol along the French coast was maintained by three groups of ships, as closely in touch as sea and weather allowed.
Frigates patrolled close inshore along the two main passages leading into the Brest road and its splendid harbour.
An advance force, in two sections, situated near the Black Rocks and St Mathieu Point, at one end of the adjoining bay, provided a second line of defence.
Hawke himself and his remaining ships were a little further out, in a sea area 15 leagues [45 miles or 72 km]off Ushant, ready to hasten to wherever they were needed.
A purely defensive strategy made little appeal to Pitt and he now eagerly supported a plan devised by Anson to carry the war into enemy waters.
On the night of Wednesday 4 July 1759 Rear-Admiral George [later Admiral Lord]Rodney in the 60-gun Achilles , led four 50-gun ships of the line, five frigates and six bomb-ketches, described earlier, into Le Havre and, impudently anchoring in the main channel, began next morning a heavy bombardment of the docks, the warehouses storing timber, the construction yards, and, most important of all, the completed flat-boats intended for the coming invasion.
A neutral eyewitness reported that the building holding the stores of planks, pitch and cordage was entirely destroyed, while of the 600 shells which had fallen in the town 100 had landed on the basin and harbour.
Although the loss of the transports assembled or under construction at Le Havre delivered a serious blow to the French plans, others were still being built or collected at ports all along the Bay of Biscay, from Lorient [or L'Orient]to Bayonne, including Nantes, La Rochelle and Bordeaux, and the plan, as the English government knew, was for them to assemble at Brest, where the Commander-in-Chief of the naval side of the invasion, Admiral Conflans [Hubert de Brienne, Comte de Conflans]had arrived in early July.
The intention was for them to be escorted by the combined fleets from Brest and Toulon and the combination of the two, to outnumber any force likely to be brought against them, was a vital part of the French plan.
While, however, Admiral Hawke had been keeping a vigilant eye on Brest, Admiral Edward Boscawen had been busily patrolling off Toulon.
Boscawen was another of Anson's fire-eaters, a robust forthright seadog known to his men as ‘Old Dreadnought’, from the name of the ship he had captained during one famous engagement, and he had used his 15 large ships and dozen smaller ‘cruisers’ to cause endless annoyance to the French and to tie up ten battalions of French infantry, waiting to repel an anticipated but imaginary landing.
Even Boscawen, however, had to withdraw to refit and revictual and thanks to Byng's blundering, which had robbed England of Minorca, that  meant going all the way to Gibraltar, which he reached on 3 August.
At eight o'clock in the evening of 17 August 1759 the single frigate which Boscawen had left to watch the Straits arrived in Gibraltar harbour with the alarming news that the enemy was about to escape them after all.
Some of Boscawen's ships lacked sails, none was immediately ready for sea, and many of the crews and officers were ashore, including Boscawen himself, but the moment the message arrived the admiral leapt from his chair, leaving his dinner unfinished, and within an unprecedented two hours the first ships were weighing anchor.
Before breakfast on Saturday 18 August 1759 Boscawen was in sight of his quarry, or part of it, for eight of the Frenchmen had broken away to make for Cadiz.
That left seven, easily outnumbered by Boscawen's 15, plus frigates, and he used his superiority to crushing effect in an action which began around 1.30 pm and continued next day, when the last four French ships were driven into Lagos Bay, about 19 miles [30 km]east of Cape St Vincent, on the coast of Portugal, where Boscawen pursued them into Portuguese waters.
Two of the enemy ships, including the French flagship, were run on the rocks under full sail to escape capture, three more were burnt and two captured.
When the news of his victory in the Battle of Lagos, as it is known, reached London on 6 September even the perpetually anxious Duke of Newcastle gave way to optimism.
‘I own,’ he admitted unnecessarily to his colleagues, ‘I was afraid of invasion till now.’
Newcastle's natural nervousness soon reasserted itself for the French had clearly not abandoned their plan and had even managed to bring the transports at Nantes, on the River Loire, to join those further up the coast at Vannes in the Gulf of Morbihan, about midway between St Nazaire and Lorient.
But the main force of transports, along with the fleet intended to escort it, was still hemmed in by Hawkes's blockade.
On 14 October Louis XV himself signed orders instructing Admiral Conflans to set the whole invasion scheme in motion by clearing the way across the Channel.
‘I leave it to your experience and courage to profit by any circumstance you may think favourable,’ he wrote, ‘to go out and attack the squadrons and vessels blockading at Ushant and at Belle Île [or Belle Isle or Belleisle, in Quiberon Bay].
Then…
I give you full authority to…escort the Morbihan flotilla as soon as it is ready to sail.’
Fortune for the moment seemed to be favouring the French.
A second attempt by Admiral Rodney to attack the transports at Le Havre had found the defences there too strong for his bomb-vessels to get within range, while a storm off Dunkirk had enabled a French squadron shut up in the port to make its escape.
The very night that this news reached London, however, 16 October, a far more sensational despatch arrived from Canada, reporting General Wolfe's capture (during which he was fatally wounded) of Quebec, the decisive  event in the loss by the French of their North American colonies.
Defeat in Canada merely sharpened France's desire for revenge in Europe and as October gave way to November conditions in the Channel and Bay of Biscay worsened, making it ever harder for the British squadrons to hold their stations.
Finally, on 10 November, Hawke warned the Admiralty that he had been forced by a gale and the resulting damage back into Torbay and two days later, when he tried to return to Brest, he was driven back again.
Before the British fleet was back in position Admiral Conflans was able, on 14 November, to get out to sea with 21 ships of the line and five smaller warships.
His intention was to pick up the 18,000 troops assembled in the area behind Quiberon known as the Morbihan and transport them to Scotland, as the first stage of the great invasion plan.
By fortunate chance, often a major factor in war, Hawke, on the afternoon of 16 November, learned from a victualling ship which was returning empty from taking supplies to the blockading force that it had sighted the French fleet the previous day.
Although he could only guess at the enemy's destination Hawke did not hesitate, as his despatch to the Admiralty next day confirms: ‘I have carried a press of sail all night, with a hard gale at south-south-east, in pursuit of the enemy, and make no doubt of coming up with them at sea or in Quiberon Bay.’
It was in fact off Belle Île just south of the entrance to the Bay, which then curves east towards Vannes, where the invasion force from the Morbihan was waiting to embark, that soon after dawn on the morning of Tuesday 20 November 1759 Hawke was able to make the classic signal ‘French fleet in sight’.
The southern entrance to the Bay was protected by a fearsome group of rocks, Les Cardinals, to port and a treacherous shoal, Le Four, to starboard and, with the weather worsening, Admiral Conflans was confident Hawke would not dare to pursue him through this hazardous gap without the benefit of local pilots, but he had underrated both his adversary's daring and his seamanship.
So, too, had Hawke's own navigating officer, who having warned him of the dangers was firmly told: ‘You have done your duty in this remonstrance; you are now to obey my orders.
Lay me alongside the French admiral!’
Hawke's squadron, 28 strong, now bore down upon the French from windward at top speed, all sails set, and around 2.30 in the afternoon the eight warships in the van opened fire on the French rear division, the start of a fierce engagement which caused its most powerful unit, the 80-gun Formidable , to surrender, and three 74-gun warships, the Héros , the Superbe and the Thesée to founder.
Hawke himself  achieved his wish, fighting a private duel in his flagship, the Royal George , with Conflans in the Soleil Royal , the largest vessel in the French navy, which, for the moment, escaped.
Darkness fell around 5 pm and the ships that had survived the battle faced heavy seas and a fierce gale.
Three French ships, having jettisoned their guns, managed to get over the bar into the Vilaine [or Villaine]River and some others successfully stood out to sea.
Next morning the gale frustrated attempts to use fireships against those which had got into the Vilaine but, in attempting to evade its pursuers, the Soleil Royal was forced on to an offshore shoal and burned by her own crew.
The final French losses were seven ships of the line, with about 2500 men killed in action or drowned, and another four vessels, trapped in the Vilaine, unfit for action for a long time.
Hawke's own losses amounted to two ships, a 74 and a 64, and 300–400 men.
There could be no question now of the French fleet overwhelming the British and escorting an invading army to Scotland and Essex.
‘Thus we wind up this wonderful year,’ wrote Horace Walpole on 30 November as the news of Quiberon arrived, the phrase heard on all lips and picked up that Christmas by David Garrick in the aptly named pantomime,Harlequin's Invasion :
Come cheer up my lads, 'tis to glory we steer,
To add something new to this wonderful year;
To honour we call you, not press you like slaves,
For who are so free as the sons of the waves?…
They swear they'll invade us, these terrible foes;
They frighten our women, our children, and beaus;
But should their flat-bottoms in darkness get o'er,
Still Britons they'll find, to receive them on shore.
For centuries to come English schoolchildren were to learn the rousing chorus which followed:
Hearts of oak are our ships,
Hearts of oak are our men,
We always are ready,
Steady, boys, steady,
We'll fight and we'll conquer again and again.
Hardly had Admiral Hawke received, on 28 January 1760, the thanks of the House of Commons and a £2000 a year pension, when the sole surviving fragment of Choiseul's giant invasion plan was at last implemented.
The same storm which had swept Hawke's blockading                  cruisers away from Ushant and enabled Conflans to get out of Brest had made it possible for the privateer captain, François Thurot [or Thourot]to take his little five-ship fleet, carrying some 1270 soldiers and 700 seamen, out of Dunkirk.
They faced, in that notoriously stormy winter, a long and arduous voyage, and via Sweden and Norway, the most roundabout invasion route ever adopted.
Thurot's first attempt to land in Ireland, near Londonderry, was a failure and one of his ships became separated and never rejoined him, leaving four to turn up next on the Isle of Islay off the coast of Argyll in western Scotland, where, with a courtesy rare among invaders, he paid for the provisions he needed.
With his supplies he received news of Conflans’ defeat at Quiberon Bay, which meant that his small-scale diversion had now become the main, indeed only, invasion, but he bravely pressed on to Ireland and, by now having lost another ship, finally landed a force variously put at from 600 to 1000 men at Carrickfergus, on the north side of Belfast Lough, on Friday 21 February 1760.
1 The Dutch attacking the British fleet in the Medway, 1667
2 Harwick and Landguard Fort (on right), c. 1700
3 The Citadel, Plymouth, 1737
4 Tilbury Fort today
5,6,7 Contemporary playing cared commemorating Monmouth's rebellion.
They show the collapse of Argyll's simultaneous rising in Scotland, Monmouth's triumphant entry into Taunton and his defeat at Sedgmoor, near Bridgewater
8 The landing of William of Orange in Torbay, 1688
9 William III's victory at the Battle of the Boyne, 1690
10 The Duke of Cumberland, c. 1758
11 Field Marshal George Wade, with road-builders in background
12 The Battle of Culloden, 1746
16 (Below) The defence of Dover Castle, 1803.
17 (Right) William Pitt as Commander of the Cinque Port Volunteers
18 The barracks at Weedon in the Midlands to which the Royal Family would have retreated in the event of a successful French invasion, pictured 50 years, in 1859.
19 The flotilla at the Hope near Gravesend in line of battle, 1804
20 Martello Tower at Bexhill, drawn in 1817
21 Metropolitan Volunteers, being reviewed by George III in Hyde Park, 1799
Belfast itself was a mere eight miles [13 km]away but Thurot's military commander, General de Flobert, who was already at odds with his naval colleague, refused to attack it.
Carrickfergus itself, lacking walls and protected only by a ruined castle, rapidly surrendered when the garrison's ammunition ran out and the Belfast authorities were sufficiently intimidated to send the French provisions when they demanded them.
Then, to their relief, on 26 February, Thurot sailed off, having heard that a force of several thousand regulars and volunteers was being got together to attack him.
News of the attack on Ireland reached the Admiralty the day after the French had re-embarked.
Orders were sent to no fewer than four squadrons to try to engage him in the Irish Sea or, as a last resort, to intercept him off Brest on his way home; but in the event none of them was needed for he was caught, almost by chance, near Kinsale on the southern coast of Ireland at daybreak on 29 February 1760, by three frigates which had taken refuge there during the recent storm.
In 90 minutes, the battle was over.
Thurot fell on the deck of his flagship, the Maréchal de Belleisle , and all three French ships, having suffered 300 casualties — the English total was 40 — surrendered.
It was a fitting postscript to the year of victories and the real end of the invasion danger.
During 1760 the long run of British success continued, culminating, on 8 September, with the surrender of all Canada to the British crown.
But the war had not finally been won when, on 25 October 1760, George II died suddenly, a venerable 76, of a heart attack, ‘in the greatest period,’ as Horace Walpole wrote, ‘of the glory of his country and of his reign’.
The new king, 22 when he ascended the throne, had studied fortification in the schoolroom, but he was not, by either temperament or training, a soldier.
An amiable, approachable individual of wide interests, he rapidly became known to his subjects as ‘Farmer George’.
To his first speech to Parliament, on 18 November 1760, the king added in his own hand the robust declaration: ‘Born and educated in this country, I glory in the name of Britain.’
This was all very fine, but glory came expensive.
The war, which cost £15,500,000 in 1760, required supplies of £19,600,000 to be voted for 1761, to support a huge army of 110,000 men, mainly serving overseas.
The navy consisted of nearly 81,000 men, serving in 378 vessels, though only 285 of these were of any size, qualifying as first to sixth rates, and what really counted in any major action were the 121 ships of the line, manned by 70,000 sailors.
For home defence on land the government looked largely to the militia, which was brigaded with regular formations to improve its training and hurried about the country to each area that seemed in danger.
New recruits to keep the militia up to establishment, and to allow longer-serving members to go home, were selected by ballot.
Edward Gibbon's battalion of the Hampshire militia had finally been mustered at Winchester on 4 June, 1760.
Recalling his comfortable officers' quarters in the south, he commented that ‘the ballot of the ensuing summer renewed our vigour and youth’, but the working-men of the north resisted having their lives interrupted and at Hexham in Northumberland a serious anti-ballot riot occurred in which 42 men were killed and another 48 wounded.
The war, seemingly interminable, was by now unpopular, and in October 1761, having failed to persuade his colleagues to declare war on Spain before she entered into an open alliance with France, Pitt the Elder resigned.
He was rapidly proved right; Spain pledged herself in December to a Family Compact with France, forcing England, on 2 January 1762, to declare war on her and reviving the old nightmare of a joint Franco-Spanish fleet sweeping up the Channel to land a papist army on English soil.
The French invasion plan of 1762 was very different from all those that had preceded it.
The Duc de Choiseul did not expect to occupy England, much less incorporate it in Louis XV's empire, but merely to distract his enemy from further conquests overseas and encourage an early peace.
A copy of his plan was sent to Spain on the very day, 14 April 1762, that he replied encouragingly to a British approach about opening negotiations to end the war.
Although the Spanish fleet numbered around 49 ships of the line, including those inadequately manned for sea, and its army perhaps 70,000 men, their part in his plan was  purely diversionary, to invade Portugal, a traditional ally of England.
The Spaniards themselves were keen to attack Gibraltar, make yet another descent on Ireland, or pay off old scores in the West Indies, but de Choiseul discouraged all these ventures.
All previous invasion attempts had been betrayed by the massive concentration of troops and ships begun long in advance.
De Choiseul planned to collect only eight small vessels between Dunkirk and Calais, too few to attract any agent's notice but sufficient to carry a small force to secure the initial beachhead, which would then be rapidly reinforced.
The main, second and third wave, army, consisting of 100 battalions, or about 50,000 men, would be held in reserve until the last moment between the Lower Rhine and the River Meuse, apparently intended for Westphalia.
Only at the last minute, by forced marches, would it suddenly make for the Channel coast.
The British fleet in September 1761 consisted of 54 ships of the line on home stations or within easy recall, plus 58 frigates, but was seriously undermanned by more than 15,000 seamen.
France should, de Choiseul hoped, be able to assemble a striking force of 22 large vessels from Brest, Ferrol, 13 miles [21 km]north-east of Corunna, and Cadiz, sufficient to obtain local superiority at the decisive point, provided Spain contributed eight ships.
De Choiseul acknowledged that the invasion depended on securing ‘the command of the Channel and a superiority in that sea for at least five weeks’.
Before, however, the plan could be put to the test preliminary peace terms had been agreed and England's victory in the Seven Years War was confirmed by the Treaty of Paris on 10 February 1763.
Although George III's government behaved generously to their recent enemies, the French felt hard done by.
The cry, as so often and so disastrously in European history, was for revenge and preparations for a new invasion began immediately.
The driving force was again provided by the king's chief minister, the Duc de Choiseul, author of the never-implemented plan of 1762, and by Louis XV's principal private adviser, Count Charles-François de Broglie, who shared de Choiseul's implacable hostility towards Great Britain.
He attributed earlier failures to inadequate intelligence and sent a number of agents to England, including an engineer skilled in map-making, Captain Louis de la Rozière, who was installed, supposedly as a diplomat, in London.
De La Rozière was instructed to collect information about arsenals, shipyards and the location of British troops as well as to survey the coast between the Thames estuary and Cornwall.
He had managed to reconnoitre the area between the South Foreland and Beachy Head and to study the roads between there and London when he was given away by the careless talk, prompted by malice, of the ambassador's homosexual secretary, a subsequently notorious transvestite, the Chevalier d'Éon, who later lived as a woman.
La Rozière had to leave in a hurry, but he brought back much useful information and, promoted to lieut. -colonel, was employed to survey the facilities available on the French coast for embarking the invading army.
By 1765, when de Broglie submitted his plan to King Louis XV, the French government already had in their archives detailed invasion schemes going back for at least a century.
. Profiting by the lessons of earlier failures, de Broglie identified the principal problem as forcing the British fleet to disperse by mounting, with Spanish help, simultaneous threats to Jamaica, Minorca, Gibraltar, Ireland and Scotland.
The way would thus be opened for the real attack, by 60,000 men landed simultaneously at Rye, Winchelsea, Hastings and Pevensey, who would march on London.
Louis XV was not, however, enthusiastic about the scheme and, after trying for a year to interest him, de Broglie, a soldier, decided to pool his information and ideas with de Choiseul, who, controlling the Ministries of Marine, War and Foreign Affairs, had been making independent plans of his own.
De Choiseul recognised, even more acutely than de Broglie, that no invasion was possible without defeating the Royal Navy.
He therefore concentrated his attention not on the Kent coast but on the Isle of Wight, where the French had actually landed in the past and which, once occupied, could serve as a base to paralyse and capture Portsmouth.
De Choiseul, not to be outdone by de Broglie, sent a spy of his own, Colonel de Béville, to England in September and October 1768.
De Béville's proposal was for a landing in west Sussex between Littlehampton and Chichester harbour.
Part of the army would then advance inland, to Guildford and Dorking, while the remainder marched, via Chichester, to Portsdown Hill, just behind Portsmouth and the main dockyard on Portsea Island.
This was protected on the landward side by the Portsea Lines but the garrison would be harassed by small boats taking them in the rear via the channel between Portsea and Hayling Island.
Other troops would meanwhile attack Southsea Castle, gain control of the Spithead anchorage beyond it, and be landed at Gosport, the peninsula stretching into the Solent on the other side of Portsmouth.
Once Gosport and the Portsea Lines had fallen the Portsmouth dockyard would become unusable, and — reversing the usual proposed sequence — the invaders would then capture the Isle of Wight.
Some troops would be left to besiege Portsmouth, while the rest of this force, forming the left wing of the invading army, would turn inland, through Petersfield to Farnham, to come into line with the right wing, already expected to be well established in Surrey.
The whole army was then to advance on London, crossing the Thames to the west at Hampton Court, Kingston, Kew and Putney and moving round to occupy  the northern heights of Hampstead and Highgate, to cut off London from relief from that direction.
Every invasion attempt so far had foundered on France's naval weakness, but after the end of the Seven Years War in 1763 de Choiseul had put in hand a whole series of reforms.
The total number of large vessels, a mere 40 in 1763, was raised by 1771, when he left office, to 64 ships of the line and 50 frigates; stocks of stores were built up and a fourth arsenal, at Marseilles, added to those at Brest, Rochefort and Toulon; improved training and signalling methods were introduced, along with a more scientific study of tactics.
Above all, the French managed, where the English had failed, to devise a satisfactory system of lower-deck recruitment, so that eventually 67,000 first-class seamen were enrolled.
After the end of the Seven Years War, in 1763, the Royal Navy suffered its customary peacetime fate of neglect and decay.
Within a few years most of its nominal 100 ships of the line were unfit for sea, although by 1770 a new conflict with Spain over the Falkland Islands seemed likely.
That year the great Earl of Chatham, formerly the elder Pitt, laid down the basic principles of British naval policy:
The first great and acknowledged object of naval defence…is to maintain such a superior naval force at home, that even the united fleets of France and Spain may never be masters of the Channel…
The second naval object with an English minister should be to maintain at all times a powerful western squadron…
Without it, the colonies, the commerce, the navigation of Great Britain lie at the mercy of the House of Bourbon.
The third object…is to maintain such a force in the Bay of Gibraltar as may be sufficient to cover that garrison,[and]to watch the motions of the Spaniards.
In France invasion was in the air at court and anyone who put forward a promising scheme was sure of an audience.
This receptiveness increased with the succession of Louis XVI in 1774, for he was interested in the navy and his chief minister, the Count de Maurepas, was a former Minister of Marine.
De Broglie now revived and expanded his original plan into a so-called ‘grand design’, the most elaborate yet compiled.
The moment was propitious, for on 19 April 1775 the first shots were fired, at Lexington in Massachusetts, in the rebellion of the American colonists, which rapidly developed into a full-scale war and led, on 4 July 1776, to the new United States of America formally proclaiming their independence of Great Britain.
This was a serious threat to the homeland's security as well as to its prestige, for England's  North American possessions were of great importance to the Royal Navy.
Chatham described them, in November 1777, as ‘the nursery and basis of our naval power’, for they had been not merely a dependable source of tar and timber, especially for masts, but of seamen; the outbreak of hostilities meant that 18,000 American sailors were lost overnight to the British crown.
The turning point in what had become the War of American Independence came in October 1777, when a British army under General Burgoyne suffered a spectacular defeat at Saratoga, 180 miles [288 km]north of New York.
France now came out openly on the American side and began actively to prepare a new invasion to take advantage of England's difficulties overseas.
At the end of 1777 de Broglie submitted to King Louis XVI an improved version of the proposals he had drafted 12 years before while at about the same time a new figure appeared on the scene, the 39-year-old Edward Dumouriez, an able army officer who had caught the eye of the king and been appointed Commandant of Cherbourg.
Dumouriez was, like so many Frenchmen, fascinated by the idea of humbling the hitherto unvanquished islanders, and he now undertook a thorough study of the reasons why past attempts had invariably failed.
His thinking is reflected in his later autobiography, which incorporates his Historical Note on the Various Projects of Descent on England .
A descent upon England was long looked upon as an impracticable chimera in face of the countless and invincible naval forces that encircle this island-empire with a line of floating citadels, collected or dispersed at will at any threatened points around the coast…
Seeing the shortness of the crossing, the frequency of fog in the Channel, the length of the October and November nights, and the species of calm that characterizes this narrow sea for more than six weeks of December and January, I deemed the obstacles by no means insuperable, especially for partial ‘diversions’ and in the winter of 1777–81 laid before the ministry the plans of an expedition against the Isle of Wight which were but the preliminary of a great project of descent.
Dumouriez made out a powerful case for this initial effort:
In 1778 England had 50,000 men in America and not 10,000 regulars at home that could be collected at any one given spot.
The militia were not embodied…
There were in Portsmouth only one battalion of foot, 600 pensioners, a few marines doing duty in the port, or ready for drafting on to the ships or frigates then fitting out…
The Isle of Wight contained a large number of sick men in Newport hospital, the corn and foodstuffs for the Portsmouth squadrons at Brading and St Helen's, and stacked timber and shipyards in full work for  the frigates, corvettes, and cutters of the Portsmouth division at Cowes.
All the defence of the island consisted of a little artillery in Shanklin Fort, with 150 pensioners…
The island would have been a most excellent stronghold, beyond all danger of starvation if communications with France were cut off.
The soil is very fruitful; there are corn, cattle and horseflesh in abundance; and by sending away to Hampshire all the inhabitants not required in the fields one could have held out there several months.
The little matter of the actual crossing Dumouriez dismissed with the usual landsman's casualness:
The distance from cape to cape is eighteen leagues [62 land miles; 100 km]or at most twenty to twenty-two [69–76 miles; 111–122 km]with the bends of the island coastline.
A time was to be fixed for the expedition in the month of November, and by leaving in the evening on the ebb tide we could expect to reach the shores of Wight with the full morning flood.
English and French smugglers would have provided us with enough of pilots and we had indeed already a few…
The embarkation was to take place in the harbour and roads of Cherbourg in 200 oyster ketches known as chasse-mapées .
These craft are decked, sometimes sternless and double-prowed, of shallow draught, and excellent sailers.
Thirty were to be converted into gun-sloops, by shoring up the bows to accommodate a 24-pounder [11-kg gun]…
These 30 gunboats were to sail in three divisions, at the head and on the flanks of the flotilla, which in addition would have enjoyed the escort of the eight gun-sloops of the [French]royal navy stationed between Havre and St Malo and a few privateers from there and Cherbourg.
The essence of the plan was surprise.
All these warlike preparations could be made quickly and unostentatiously…
We were to wait for the oyster-fishing season in the Bay of Cancale without giving the boats notice and stop them as they sailed past Barfleur Head…
The dragoons would take with them saddle, bridle and pistols.
Horses would not have been lacking in the Isle of Wight.
Two hours would have sufficed to embark the men in Cherbourg Harbour, after a previous rehearsal.
Every chassemarée would have easily held 60 men and the landing would have taken about the same space of time…
The landing was to be executed from east to west and embrace the whole southern coast of the island, from Sandown Bay, where the main body would land, to Chale, Brixton and Freshwater Bays…
The longest march for any of the four columns was about ten miles, which the French foot soldiers could have done in four hours…
At Newport the troops would have taken an hour's rest and then made in several extended  columns for the northern shore of the island, to occupy it in its entirety.
Dumouriez was equally optimistic about the operation's longer-term aim ‘to deprive England for ever of her finest port and greatest naval establishment’:
There were to accompany the army corps a number of shipwrights, caulkers, sailmakers and six hundred seamen, who [would]have settled at Cowes and Yarmouth for the winter, and built with the timber in the local yards a large quantity of gun-sloops…
Some would have been formed into bomb-ketches and armed with mortars and howitzers.
This flotilla might have made Spithead untenable and certainly uncomfortable for the home guardships.
At the same time the fleet's normal exit from Portsmouth harbour would have been blocked, forcing it to use instead the more dangerous, shoal-encumbered, Needles passage:
Last, all the vessels found in the island or fetched from Cherbourg were to be brought into Brading harbour laden with stones and sunk the 800-fathom [4800-ft; 1460-m]fairway that lies between…the outer road of St Helen's and the inner one of Spithead.
All this sounded remarkably easy to accomplish, as invasion plans invariably did on paper.
Nothing, however, had been done to implement the proposals when, in March 1778, the French signed a treaty of friendship with the Americans.
England's oldest enemy was now united with her newest, with results that were soon to become apparent.
HERE COMES PAUL JONES
Here comes Paul Jones, such a nice fellow!
Contemporary Dutch song commemorating the exploits of John Paul Jones off the English coast, 1778–79
The new spirit of cooperation between France and the United States was soon being displayed in the operations of an American privateer sailing from French ports.
The full story of his operations against the British Isles may conveniently be given here, though this began before and continued after the main French invasion effort.
John Paul Jones, though the Jones' was added later to conceal his real identity, was the son of an estate gardener from near Dumfries in Galloway.
At 13 he sailed as apprentice to a ship-owner operating out of Whitehaven in Cumberland, 36 miles [58 km]south-west of Carlisle, and from ship's boy rose to be third mate on a ‘black-birder’ or slave ship.
The outbreak of war with England gave him his great chance and on 7 December 1775 he was commissioned lieutenant in what was soon to become the US Navy.
On 1 November 1777 he sailed from Portsmouth, New Hampshire, in command of the 318-ton USS Ranger , a sloop with a crew of 150, armed with 18 nine-pounder [4-kg]guns, to carry news of General Burgoyne's defeat at Saratoga to Benjamin Franklin, the US ambassador in Paris.
On his arrival Jones received new, and even more congenial orders to use the Ranger ‘In the manner you shall judge best for distressing the enemies of the United States’.
Jones, still only 30, already had a reputation as an experienced seaman and he began his new career by capturing several British ships in the Irish Sea, but his announcement that he intended to raid Whitehaven in Cumberland and burn the vessels moored there nearly provoked a mutiny, for his crew, already disgruntled that so many ships had been sunk instead of seized, saw their prospect of prize money once again going up in smoke.
Jones dealt with the dissidents characteristically, by holding a pistol at the ringleader's head, but his call for volunteers to go ashore produced such a poor response that he had to lead one boat himself, while a marine officer commanded the other.
Jones's acknowledged aim was to seize some important person as a  hostage to exchange for the American sailors taken prisoner by the Royal Navy, who were imprisoned indefinitely as pirates, and in his own words, ‘to put an end of burnings in America by making a good fire in England’.
He selected Whitehaven as the scene of his demonstration merely because he already knew its waters, though a reconnaissance revealed not a single large ship, much less any naval vessel, in the port, the 250 craft there being mainly small colliers or fishing boats.
The port consisted, in April 1778, of two harbours, the North and the South, divided by a stone pier, at the end of which there was a small fort.
The South Harbour was also covered by a ‘lunette’ or ‘half-moon’battery, so called from its shape, on the beach, 200 yards [183m]away, the fort and lunette mounting, in theory, 36 cannon between them.
Jones was not deterred.
His plan was based on the marine lieutenant landing at the Old Quay slipway in the North Harbour and creating a diversion there, while Jones himself landed, undetected it was hoped, on the south foreshore, put the battery there out of action and then, passing round the town, knocked out the North Battery, before joining up with the other party to burn the shipping in both harbours.
They would then regain their boats, with the Ranger , no longer in danger from shore-based guns, coming close inshore to re-embark the raiders.
The night of Wednesday 22 April 1778 was misty and cold; snow was visible on the Solway Firth, to the north, and the Isle of Man, to the west.
The two small boats, containing between them about 40 men, had no option but to row towards the shore and duly grounded around 3.30 am on the morning of Thursday 23 April.
By 5 am the guns of both batteries had been spiked as planned, by having iron wedges driven into their touch-holes, and the two groups had met as agreed and set about their work of destruction.
At this point an Irishman among the raiders unaccountably chose to dash off through the still sleeping streets to raise the alarm.
After setting fire to a collier and a house by the harbour, not very successfully, thanks to a sudden heavy storm, Jones successfully withdrew, despite the fire of a party of militia, and, when he had re-embarked, of cannon shot from some guns in the batteries which had escaped being spiked.
The Ranger got safely out to sea, with three prisoners aboard, some others who had been taken having been released, and by 6 am was making course for Kirkcudbright Bay in the Solway Firth.
He left behind him a town in uproar and the foundations of his fame, for he had been recognised while in Whitehaven and his identity had been confirmed by the Irish deserter.
Not much damage had been done.
No one had been killed and only 20 or so people, all on shore, even slightly injured.
But the shock to the local population, and indeed to the whole nation, defied on its own doorstep by a rebellious colonist, was enormous.
‘What was done…’,
Jones himself wrote later, ‘is sufficient to  show that not all their boasted navy can protect their own coasts,’ a disagreeable lesson for any Briton to digest.
The Cumberland Packet Extraordinary , faced with the biggest story in its history, made the most of it.
Late last night or early this morning a number of armed men (to the amount of 30) landed at this place, by two boats from an American privateer, as appears from one of the people now in custody…
A little after 3 o'clock this morning he rapped at several doors in Marlborough Street (adjoining one of the piers) and informed them that fire had been set to one of the ships in the harbour [and]matches were laid in several others; the whole world would soon be in a blaze, and the town also destroyed…
An alarm was immediately spread, and his account proved too true.
The Thomson , Captain Richard Johnson, a new vessel and one of the finest ever built here, was in a flame.
It was low water, consequently all the shipping in port was in the most imminent danger and…there was the greatest reason to fear that the flames would, from it, soon be communicated to the town…
By an uncommon exertion, the fire was extinguished…and thus, in a providential manner, prevented all the dreadful consequences which might have ensued.
John Paul Jones's second landing on British soil within a single morning is notable as the most courteous invasion it ever suffered.
His aim was to kidnap the Earl of Selkirk from his house on St Mary's Isle, a promontory stretching out into Kirkcudbright Bay.
It is highly unlikely that the British government would have agreed to exchange this nobleman, an amiable figure of no political importance, for its American prisoners but at around 11 am on 23 April 1778, John Paul led his little force of a dozen armed sailors through the garden of the mansion.
When challenged by the head gardener the Americans pretended to be a press gang, which was sufficient to set ‘all the stout young fellows’ on the estate running off to the town for safety, but he also informed them that their intended victim was taking the waters at Buxton, and Jones set off back to his boat, until the two officers with him pointed out that, having left Whitehaven empty-handed, the crew should at least be allowed to loot the house.
Faced with his second mutiny in barely a day Jones agreed, though insisting his men must not search or damage the house but merely demand the family silver.
The Countess of Selkirk, finding her house surrounded by ‘horrid-looking wretches’, sensibly agreed and when the butler tried to hide the coffee pot and teapot, still damp from breakfast, she ordered that these, too, be handed over.
The members of the household, once they realised that their watches and jewellery were safe, ‘asked them a thousand questions’ about America, and, as the  children's governess later wrote ‘they behaved with great civility’.
After 20 minutes the officers accepted a glass of wine from their enforced hostess and one, until restrained by the other, even began to write out a receipt for what had been taken.
Then they left and, following a three-mile [4.8-km]row, rejoined the Ranger .
Half an hour after the intruders had gone, a horde of volunteers arrived — since ‘the Forty-five’ Scotland had had no militia — and a cannon, dragged from the town on to the Point of St Mary's Isle, fiercely engaged a supposed ship which turned out to be a rock.
This somewhat absurd episode was a mere interlude in a fiercely fought campaign.
After leaving the Solway Firth the Ranger returned to Belfast Lough to attack the nearest British warship, the 273-ton Drake , armed with 20 six-pounder [2.7-kg]guns; the Ranger (316 tons) with her 18 nine-pounders [4-kg guns]somewhat outclassed her.
During the battle between the two, which began an hour before sunset on 24 April 1778 off Kilroot Point near Carrickfergus, Jones kept his distance, disabling his opponent by cannon fire and pistol shots aimed at the crew until, resistance having ceased, a boarding party was sent across, to find the decks running with blood and rum — a keg, brought out prematurely to celebrate the expected victory, had been breached by a cannon ball — and the Drake was taken in tow.
John Paul Jones's activities had strikingly demonstrated the vulnerability of the coastline and the Morning Chronicle and London Advertiser accompanied its report of the raid on St Mary's Isle with some distinctly sharp observations:
The audacious conduct of the crew of the American privateer at Whitehaven, and on the coast of Scotland, will have this good effect; it will teach our men of war on the coast station, and our cruisers in St George's Channel, to keep a more sharp look out.
The ruinous state of the fortifications of many of our seaport towns, so likewise the open and defenceless posture of many others, at present seems to suggest some very alarming reflections.
In all places like Whitehaven, the want of a necessary range of fortifications seems almost inexcusable, especially as the materials are in great plenty at or near the spot, labour cheap, etc.
On his way home to Brest, sailing north-about round Ireland, Jones confirmed his reputation as a maritime Robin Hood by releasing, with a new sail and money in their pockets, some Irish fishermen he had captured, but his arrival back in port, on 8 May 1778, proved a disappointment, for the French failed to give him the hero's welcome he had expected.
Nor, since he lacked the four generations of noble blood required for a commission in the French navy, was he offered the command of a French ship.
When France declared war on England, on 17 June 1778, Jones remained unemployed and he also managed to fall out  with his own crew who, in a petition, called ‘his temper and treatment [of them]insufferable’.
The new democratic notions of his countrymen clearly made the traditionally harsh maritime discipline difficult to enforce.
His own officers, he complained, instead of setting an example ‘of dutiful subordination…introduce the mistaken and baneful idea of licentiousness and free agency under the specious name of ‘’ liberty’''.
While the famous privateer was waiting impatiently ‘on the beach’ in Paris he filled in his time producing ambitious schemes to harass the common enemy, including a large-scale raid up the River Clyde to attack Glasgow, and a major amphibious assault on Liverpool.
This last had the support of the man who had come to symbolise the Franco-American alliance, Marie Joseph de Motier, Marquis de Lafayette, who having gone to America to fight for the rebel colonists, in May 1779 returned to France a major-general in the US army.
Benjamin Franklin, the official US representative in France, talented inventor as well as an effective diplomatist, considered that Lafayette himself should be in nominal command, with John Paul Jones leading the actual assault.
‘There is,’ Franklin assured him, ‘honor enough to be got for both of you.’
The French, it soon appeared, were preparing a new invasion, of which more will be said later.
Jones had been cast for the minor but useful role of leading a small diversionary force of ships to the north of England and Scotland, but his attempts to make his ships ready for sea involved him in constant arguments with the French authorities, and his reputation as a tyrannical captain made it hard to find a crew.
It was not till 14 August 1779 that the little five-ship force led by the self-styled ‘Commander-in-Chief of the American squadron now in Europe’ finally left Brest, but by the 21st it had taken its first prize and others rapidly followed.
The Royal Navy had had ample warning that Jones was putting to sea again but, guarding the door of the already raided stable, was patrolling the Cumberland coast, while he made his way round the far side of Ireland and soon reports were reaching London of his activities in Irish waters on the early stages of his voyage, though they took several weeks to arrive.
From Ireland he moved on to the Outer Hebrides, which he reached on 30 August, and then to his most northerly landfall, Foula off the Shetlands, on 3 September.
On 16 September, with extraordinary effrontery, Jones sailed up the Firth of Forth towards Leith, the port of Edinburgh, intending to demand a huge ransom of £200,000 — though he was prepared to settle for £50,000 — for not laying the town ‘in ashes’, the first instalment of the indemnity ‘which,’ Jones explained, ‘Britain owes to the much injured citizens of America.’
A change of wind and tide forced the abandonment of this plan, and the marauders had no more luck at their next port of call, Kirkcaldy, for again the  wind changed, thanks, it was asserted, to the prayers of the townspeople, gathered on the beach under their minister.
Jones now sailed on through the North Sea, towards England, his progress marked by a trail of prizes which were sent back to France, his own ships, as he later wrote to Louis XVI, being ‘weakened and embarrassed with prisoners’, whom he still hoped to exchange for Americans.
Meanwhile another ‘insult to the coast’, to use a long popular term, had occurred.
On Wednesday 15 September 1779 the cutter,Black Prince , sailing under French colours but with an American commander, and crewed by a mixture of Englishmen and Irishmen, suddenly appeared off Fishguard on the west coast of Wales.
A boatload of men came ashore to demand a ransom of 2000 guineas [£2100], or the surrender of the local vicar as a hostage, for not attacking the town.
When the townsfolk refused the Black Prince began to bombard Fishguard with its six-pounder [2.7-kg]guns.
The American, or English, renegade in command, Stephen Manhant, got more than he bargained for.
A Fishguard smuggler whose ship happened to be at anchor there opened fire with his single cannon, and another gun was dragged to the edge of the cliff and joined in.
By the time the local defence force, the Dewsland Gentlemen Volunteers, had been mobilised and reached the scene Manhant had withdrawn.
John Paul Jones was less easily discouraged, and much more feared, as he began to seem uncatchable.
On 20 September he appeared off Newcastle, but decided against attacking it, as his fellow-captains were eager to move on before the Royal Navy, fully aroused since his intrusion into the Firth of Forth, caught up with them.
‘I have had the mortification of seeing him…this afternoon with three prizes…’ wrote one irate resident to the Admiralty, ‘and nothing in the world to oppose him .’
Thwarted in his attempts to cause a shortage of coal in London by attacking Newcastle, as the Dutch had done in 1667 when they controlled the Thames estuary, Jones did what he could to disrupt the coastal trade.
Early on 22 September he captured a Scarborough collier and another vessel and, later that morning, with typical effrontery, signalled for a pilot off Spurn Head, at the mouth of the Humber, and then captured the two boats sent out in response.
Finally, to his delight, he came upon a 41-ship convoy from the Baltic, escorted only by a 20-gun sloop, the Countess of Scarborough , and a 44-gun frigate, the Serapis .
The action that followed was to become a classic of naval warfare.
Captain Richard Pearson, of the Serapis , on first sighting his opponent, remarked, ‘It is probably Paul Jones.
If so, there is work ahead!’ and his challenge was duly answered by a broadside.
Thus, on a smooth sea, under a clear sky and later a full moon, about seven miles [11 km]off the Yorkshire coast, the Battle of Flamborough Head began, around 7  pm on Thursday 23 September 1779.
The Countess of Scarborough was rapidly captured by one of Jones's squadrons and a two-ship duel developed between his own flagship, the Bonhomme Richard and the Serapis .
Jones, challenged early on in the action to surrender, made the subsequently famous reply: ‘I have not yet begun to fight!’, refusing to lower his equally famous flag, made for the Ranger by the admiring young women of Portsmouth, New Hampshire, who had cut the ‘stripes’ from their silk dresses and the ‘stars’from the wedding gown of a naval wife.
The captain of the Serapis had meanwhile nailed his Red Ensign to its staff, so that it had to be torn down, when, around 10.30 pm, the English vessel, with five feet [1.5 m]of water in its hold, its holed topsides open to the moonlight, and its rigging and sails almost cut away by gunfire, was forced to surrender.
(Jones, as everyone would have expected, welcomed his vanquished opponent on board with great courtesy, and invited him to his own wrecked cabin for a glass of wine.)
Although the Bonhomme Richard sank two days later, the Battle of Flamborough Head was an American victory, for the Serapis and the Countess of Scarborough were sailed back to France as prizes, and 504 prisoners were taken, including, a bitter blow for the Royal Navy, 26 officers.
The inevitable ‘butcher's bill’ was evenly balanced.
The Bonhomme Richard suffered 150 killed and wounded, almost half its complement of 322, while the Serapis acknowledged 49 killed and 68 wounded.
‘That Celebrated Seaman’, as a sixpenny biography described him, continued to embarrass the British government even after he was on his way back to France.
On 24 September 1779, the day after the Battle of Flamborough Head, a member of the government, Lord Carlisle, wrote from his Cumberland estate: ‘We have alarms here on our coast.
One Paul Jones flings us all into consternation and terror and will hinder Lady Carlisle's sea bathing.’
In the last week of September the newspapers were full of reports of the recent battle and rumours of his current whereabouts, but none of the patrols sent in search of him managed to find him until, on 1 October 1779, the Morning Post commented despairingly: ‘Paul Jones resembles a Jack o’ Lantern, to mislead our mariners and terrify our coasts.
He is no sooner seen than lost.’
By 3 October Jones's squadron, now consisting, with its prizes, of five large ships, was safe at anchor in the Texel, the roadstead lying behind the island of the same name which shelters the Ijsselmeer [formerly the Zuider Zee]and forms the harbour for Amsterdam, 75 miles [120 km]away.
The Dutch were still officially neutral but the public made no secret of their sympathies, as a new song confirmed:
Here comes Paul Jones, such a nice fellow!
A born American, no Englishman at all…
He does many bold deeds for the good of his friends.
On the 12th one Englishman resident in Amsterdam wrote angrily to a London newspaper about the Dutch reaction to Jones's presence.
This desperado parades the streets and appears upon ‘Change with the effrontery of a man of the first condition.
No sooner was it known in France that he was in the Texel, than a courier was dispatched with orders for him to go overland to Paris, where he says he is to have the grant of a fresh commission and a larger squadron, sufficient to make a descent on any part of Great Britain or Ireland…
The Dutch look upon him to be a brave officer.
Nay, they even go so far as to lay odds that before Christmas he lands a force in England or Ireland.
On 27 December 1779 John Paul sailed from Holland.
‘For God's sake, get to sea instantly…,’ the First Lord of the Admiralty signalled the captain in command of the squadron assigned to blockade the Texel.
‘If you can take Paul Jones, you will be as high in the estimation of the public as if you had beat the Combined [i.e. French and Spanish]Fleets.’
But, in spite of the Royal Navy, Jones, after a voyage to be described later, sailed safely back to France, where his reception more than made up for the much cooler one he had received after his ‘Whitehaven’ cruise 18 months before.
‘The cry of Versailles and the clamour of Paris became as loud in favour of Monsieur Jones as of Monsieur Franklin,’ wrote Franklin himself, ‘and the inclination of the ladies to embrace him almost as fashionable and as strong.’
’ He is the most agreeable seawolf one could wish to meet with,’wrote one enraptured Parisienne to a friend.
For all his achievements and popularity, Jones was again refused a commission in the French navy and instead sent back to the United States with despatches.
On 20 December 1780, soon after his departure, Great Britain declared war on the United Provinces of the Netherlands, giving as its first reason ‘That, in violation of treaty, they suffered an American pirate (one Paul Jones, a rebel and a state criminal) to remain several weeks in one of their ports’.
Even in his adopted country Jones failed to receive the command for which he had hoped, but, returning to Europe, did succeed in becoming Kontradmiral Pavel Ivanovich Jones, in the Russian navy.
He eventually settled in Paris and died at the early age of 45, in 1792.
His last appearance in England was in 1786, when he was entertained by the City of London.
It was, said one speaker forgivingly, ‘better to have him at Lloyds seeking to insure his own cargoes, than at sea seeking cargoes insured by others’.
A CHANNEL PROMENADE
We do not wish to commit Spain to entering the war merely in order to frighten England into…making peace by a naval promenade in the Channel.
Spanish minister Count Florida Blanca to the French ambassador, February 1779
While John Paul Jones had been captivating the ladies of Paris the French government had been preparing for the most serious attack on England since the Dutch incursion into the Medway.
Aptly known as ‘the grand design’ its basis was the plan, already described, on which the Count de Broglie had first worked in 1777, which was expanded into a far more ambitious document in December 1778.
Some useful intelligence was provided by a renegade Scot, Robert Hamilton, a former lieutenant in the Royal Navy, who became a captain in the French fleet and was employed in reporting on likely landing places.
Having considered Plymouth, Dartmouth, Torbay and Harwich he finally, in a memorandum dated 20 March 1779, delivered almost simultaneously with Dumouriez's, recommended, like Dumouriez, Portsmouth and the Isle of Wight.
Portsmouth and Gosport between them, he estimated, were protected by only 1000 men and under the right conditions, perhaps after a gale, when few ships were at anchor there, Hamilton believed it might be possible to gain control of Spithead and get men ashore both on the Isle of Wight and at Stokes Bay, on the seaward side of Gosport, and Spit Bank.
This latter force would then seize Gosport and bombard Portsmouth Harbour and town from their exposed, western, side.
The British public had not so far been inclined to take the latest invasion threat very seriously and its chief effect had been to encourage feminism.
‘I was sorry to see them striding along the walks at Tunbridge Wells with their arms akimbo, dressed in martial uniform,’ wrote the authoress Elizabeth Montagu that spring of some fellow members of her sex.
‘As many our modern dames want the modesty of women, I hope they will have the courage of men and…drive the French back again if they invade us.’
The nation's real defenders were meanwhile still suffering from those perpetual enemies, neglect and corruption.
When war again  broke out with France in June 1778 it proved difficult to scrape together 21 ships of the line ready for sea, in spite of a nominal strength of 199 first, second or third rates.
That month saw a new invasion alarm, as a French fleet cruised up and down the Channel under Admiral D'Orvilliers and a large French army under Marshal de Broglie was assembled at Vaussieux in Normandy, though this was in fact only a routine ‘camp of exercise’.
On Monday 27 July 1778 the first major action of the new war was fought some 70 miles [112 km]west of Ushant, and proved indecisive, but convinced Louis XIV's chief minister, the Comte de Vergennes, that he needed Spanish help to clear the way for a successful invasion.
Charles III of Spain was well aware that his country, unlike France, could not support a long, full-scale war; a sudden, successful invasion was another matter, and, in August 1778, the Spaniards suggested an immediate attack by their joint fleets, as a preliminary to a major landing.
Vergennes's assessment was more realistic:
It could not be attempted before next year.
A fleet of 60 French and Spanish ships could not easily be concentrated, and it would have to fight in the Channel against an English fleet of 45 of the line…
A storm or violent gale might disperse the combined fleets; France has no port in the Channel; in fact, innumerable mischances might ruin the enterprise.
Vergennes next toyed with the idea of an attack on Ireland, but the Spaniards proved unenthusiastic about anything short of an invasion as the Spanish minister, the Count of Florida Blanca, made clear to the French ambassador in February 1779:
We do not wish to commit Spain to entering the war merely in order to frighten England into a peace from which nothing but the independence of the Americans would be obtained…
You must…convince us that you do not want us to declare war simply in order to terrify the English into making peace by a naval promenade in the Channel.
Vergennes bowed to the inevitable.
On 8 March 1779 he wrote to his ambassador, ‘We can provide plans which will be sufficiently to the taste of M. de Florida Blanca’, and a small planning group, which included the French Minister of War, the Prince de Montbarey, and of Marine, Gabriel de Sartine, was set up.
The target date for the operation was fixed at 15 May 1779, at latest, when 30 French ships of the line, plus frigates and corvettes, would join up, off Corunna, from which the Spanish Armada had set sail in 1588, with the 20 battleships promised by Spain.
Two weeks of manoeuvres, in which the two  navies practised working together, would follow and they would then set sail for Portsmouth, defeating the British fleet, correctly estimated at around 35 major warships, en route.
The lighter ships would then be sent to escort the transports previously collected at Cherbourg and in the mouth of the River Orne.
The ‘army of England’ would consist of 20,000 infantry, brought together from Picardy and Artois as well as from the main camps in Normandy and Brittany, and another 12,000 men would be assembled around Dunkirk to divert British attention from the real threat.
The task force from Normandy was first to seize the Isle of Wight, then land at Gosport, from which Portsmouth and its dockyard would be bombarded and neutralised, while, as a further distraction, a minor attack would be made on Bristol, with others on Liverpool and Cork, to destroy supplies collected there for transport to America.
A fall-back plan, if the opening attack failed to take the Isle of Wight, called for the combined fleet to anchor in Torbay, from which raids might be made on the Channel Islands and Plymouth.
The French and Spanish negotiators now spent some happy weeks agreeing how to divide up England's overseas possessions once she was defeated, the agreement between them being formally signed on 12 April 1779.
The French used this period of waiting to obtain up-to-the-minute intelligence about Portsmouth.
A French engineer officer, Major Berthois de la Rousselière, and a companion disguised themselves as British seamen and during April ‘made several tours of the fortifications on the outside, and of a great part on the inside’ of the town.
They also studied Gosport, Spithead and the Portsea Lines, finally crossing to the Isle of Wight before, on 7 May, returning to Paris with a highly encouraging report.
The fortifications of Portsmouth, they had discovered, were in excellent shape but inadequately manned, by a single militia battalion and some ‘invalid’ companies.
The Portsea Lines also looked formidable, but were ungarrisoned.
Gosport was found to be ‘virtually without defence, protected on the landward side only by an ill-maintained entrenchment…which would fall at the first assault’, while the Isle of Wight contained so few troops, so thinly scattered, that it was bound to succumb to a determined attack.
De La Rousselière, newly promoted lieut. -colonel, was set to drawing up a plan of attack.
A force of 4000 men, landing on either side of the Cowes river and marching on Newport should, he estimated, be sufficient to secure the Isle of Wight in a single day.
Another 6000 to 8000 troops should be sent simultaneously against Gosport, which should be secured with equal ease and from there 24 mortars would make the dockyard and lower town of Portsmouth untenable.
To capture and occupy Portsmouth would, however, be a much more difficult matter, requiring not less than 30,000 men.
After the capture of the Isle of Wight 20,000 would be collected there and 5–6000 of them  would be ferried across the Solent in small boats and landed along the creek separating Hayling Island from Portsea to take the Portsea Lines in the rear, which would only be possible if the guns of Fort Cumberland, on the eastern tip of Portsea Island, were knocked out beforehand by a bombardment by French battleships and bomb-ketches.
A simultaneous assault would be made by 4000 of the army which had taken Gosport, while the boats landing on Portsea Island would return to the Isle of Wight to bring the total force up to 20,000 men, and eventually, for the siege of Portsmouth, to 30,000, an operation de la Rousselière predicted would be completed in a week.