

He was fifteen years old and out of school, with the hope to become a motor mechanic, a bicycle thief.
It was a red machine that he had painted blue; and summertime mornings, early July, he would wheel on his quest.
But it was not easy for a motor mechanic to find a start.
At the youth employment they offered only dead-end jobs.
‘We don't have no apprenticeships.’
And neither did the garages.
He tried almost every one in Glasgow, and sometimes even the same place twice; they all said no, like bad luck with the bicycle.
‘Nae luck yet?’
‘Naw.’
His sister — she was a couple of years older than him, blonde where he was dark, and running away — last night she had told him she was running away.
‘Tae London.’
‘Ye're going with Johnny?’
‘Aye.’
‘I don't know what ye see in him.’
‘I hate it here.’
‘But how wie him?’
She said nothing.
‘He's a creep,’ Anton said.
‘Ye know he's a creep.’
‘But,’ his sister said, ‘he's got money and I'm skint.’
Anton laughed: nothing shocked him; they were in some ways alike, he and his sister.
‘Something'll come up,’ she said, ‘ye've just tae keep trying.
If ye keep trying something must come up.’
‘Naw.
I've tried every place.
I don't think that there's a garage left that I've not tried.
They just don't want tae know.
Ye need somebody tae speak for ye, tae take ye in by the hand.’
The night, the summer sun flooded the room, the kitchen, and the cat at the window hunted for flies.
‘When's it yous are going,’ he asked, ‘Johnny and ye?’
‘Saturday.
We're getting the train Saturday night.’
‘Ye're telling mammy?’
She shook her head.
‘But ye'll leave a note?’
‘I might leave a note.’
‘She'll not like it.’
‘Ye must split sometime,’ his sister said.
‘How?’
‘Because ye'll never get nae place here, in Glesga.
It's rubbish.’
‘Ye used tae like it.’
‘Aye.
Maybe when I was at school.
That's about the only time I've liked it here.’
She worked on the assembly line of a bottling plant, and hated it.
‘It might be okay for some people, like thae toffs that mammy cleans for, but it's nae use for the likes of us.
I've thought about it.
I know what I'm talking about.
In a few years I'd be just like mammy, cleaning for toffs; and I'd have weans and it'd be too late then, and my man'd be just like daddy was before he died, working a' week and getting drunk on Friday nights and a' day Saturdays.’
Anton stood by the window, listening; looking out, down; the street was full of children; you never saw so many children, boisterous ragamuffins, as on a tenement street on a hot summer night.
‘Ye'll soon find out,’ his sister said.
‘Once ye start tae work ye'll soon find out.’
Her departure Saturday night, and with her her wages, had him find out harsh reality much sooner than he had supposed.
For, poverty crushing, his mother nagging, he was made to swallow his pride, his hope to become a motor mechanic.
At the youth employment he begged just any job.
The factory built electric generators.
A private concern, it employed some fifty men, mostly tradesmen, fitters or winders, and two apprentices — lads of around Anton's age with fathers working for the firm.
It was that sort of place, closely knit, tight, and all go: working to horns, starting at eight and ending at five.
Tuesday and Thursday you worked late, until seven-thirty; and there was Saturday and Sunday too, if you wanted — and Anton wanted.
He worked all the hours, intent on saving, though loathing the place, in particular the foreman: a thick-set foul-mouthed brute named Parker whom there was no pleasing.
He found fault with everything.
Nothing Anton did was right.
He was too slow, or too fast; so that sweeping — and most of his day he spent sweeping, brushing the floors, the shavings from the machines — he was either busy or, conversely, slack to stand on his brush, an affront to Parker who would move him on to some other task.
But his dislike of the work, his loathing for Parker, he kept to himself.
And when, on the street, guys asked how he was doing he said just fine.
Why not?
It did no good to groan.
The summer went, August and September.
‘Any news from yer sister?’
Rab asked.
‘Naw.
Not for a while.’
‘She's still in London?’
‘Aye.
At least I think so.
She was anyway the last I heard.’
Rab was older, married and drove a scrap wagon.
He stayed over the river, the Clyde, in a ground-floor house in a slum equal to Anton's.
Nights, sometimes, Anton would cycle over for a visit to Rab, to play chequers.
They would sit across one from the other and study hard, for they bet on their games.
Some nights Anton lost, others Rab, for they were squarely matched; but whichever way, the winner won .
That was Rab's style.
He gambled mean and if he loaned money he was looking for interest.
‘I've a wife and snapper tae support,’ he said.
His wife, Phillis, was sixteen years old and fat, and sick of Rab and his mean ways.
She walked in rags while Rab (who  was sick of her) had a full wardrobe of clothes, and — swarthy and well built, he was not bad looking — a woman on the side.
The snapper, a boy, gurgled at five or six months old.
‘She was always a bit of a tomboy, yer sister,’ Rab said.
‘Ye think so?’
‘Aye.
I think so.
I was at school wie her.
Remember?’
The end of a night's play and Anton (Rab's new interest, his sister) wondered what it all was about.
‘What part of London's she in?’
‘Walthamstow.
That's where she last was anyway.’
Phillis was in bed in the room.
She was always in bed (or in the room) before Anton went.
‘She was working?’
‘I don't know.’
‘She never said?’
‘Naw.’
‘How about Johnny?’
Anton shrugged.
‘She never said?’
‘Naw.’
‘What did she say?’
There was a gleam in Rab's eyes.
Brown.
His head was shaggy.
‘I'm not being nosey or nothing.
It's just I'd like tae know — ye know, how she's getting on and that.’
‘So would I,’ Anton said.
‘But she's only wrote one letter.
She promised tae write but she never writes.
How, are ye thinking of going tae London?’
‘Naw,’ Rab said.
‘How could I?
I've a wife and snapper tae support.’
‘That's not stopped a lot of men.’
And it would not stop Rab.
He was dreadfully unhappy.
With Phillis.
This forced marriage.
‘I'm pregnant, Rab.’
‘Take a train,’ his mother had said.
‘But it's my snapper, mammy.’
‘How dae ye know it's yer snapper?’
And indeed how did he know.
Phillis had been no virgin.
But  either way Rab hardly cared.
He hated the snapper, a perpetual howl and mess in the morning, and Phillis,whatever had he seen in her?
‘I must hiv been daft.’
‘Mad,’ his mother said.
‘It's for ever and ever,’ the priest had warned.
‘I know.’
Rab lit a smoke and shook his head.
Know.
He had known nothing.
For ever and ever.
Such twaddle.
He would jump in the river first.
Phillis came through from the room.
‘He's away?’
‘He's not under the table,’ Rab said.
‘Who won?’
‘A draw.’
Looking at her, dirty lank hair and a face aglow with night-cream.
Just sixteen.
So fat.
She had always been stout, endowed he had thought.
But now, since the snapper, quite without shape; drooping tits to a swollen belly; and, to support it all, big flat splayed feet.
She prepared a snack, some cheese on toast.
‘Want some?’
‘Naw.’
‘I'm starving.’
‘Ye're always starving.’
‘Just a wee bite.’
‘Fat as a fool,’ Rab said, ‘and still she's eating.’
‘It's a' the snapper's fault, me being fat.
I never used tae be fat.’
‘Ye were always fat.’
‘How're ye always so crabbit?’
‘How're ye always eating?’
‘Because I'm unhappy,’ Phillis said.
Rab said nothing.
‘I wasn't always fat,’ Phillis said.
‘It's just since the snapper.
Ye know it's just since the snapper.’
‘Gie me peace, woman.’
‘How'd ye marry me then, if I was always fat?’
Rab wished he knew.
Looking at her.
As some grotesque child.
How'd he ever fancy her?
At the cooker in her nightie.
Bare fat legs and naked feet.
Making her ‘bite’, some loaf of bread and pound of cheese.
‘Sure that ye don't want some?’
‘Naw.’
Rab rose from his chair for a visit to the closet.
It was in the close.
A dungeonous place where once a rat had bit his arse.
Phillis had thought it funny.
But he hadn't.
‘Another inch and it would hiv had my balls.’
Now, visiting the closet, Rab first flushed the pan.
No other rat would bite his arse.
Not if he could help it.
But the place, the slum — round the corner they called Wine Alley — was getting him down.
If it wasn't for Winnie — so understanding, knowing that he'd been tricked, snared in this vile trap — he knew not what he'd do.
‘Leave her,’ Winnie said.
‘Run away wie me.’
Having a drink with Winnie.
She was dressed in her bus conductress's uniform.
Drinking gin, but only a little, lots of tonic.
‘I don't like tae drink too much when I've work tae go tae.’
Rab understood.
‘It takes the pleasure right out of it, so it does,’ Winnie said.
Rab liked her eyebrows.
Phillis shaved hers.
Looked like a cat when she stencilled them in.
‘A fox,’ Winnie said, ‘that wan.’
‘Vixen,’ Rab said.
Winnie laughed.
She was much older than him.
Easily the oldest woman he'd ever been with.
About thirty, he thought; and he liked her laugh, the few wrinkles it caused.
At the eyes.
Brown and warm.
He preferred brown eyes to blue.
Phillis had blue eyes.
‘Naw,’ Winnie said, ‘but seriously, she trapped you.’
‘I know.’
‘You were just a wee milk boy then.’
Rab looked sad.
Pensive.
‘She had her eye on you right frae the start.’
‘I suppose so.
She was right fly tae be still at school.’
‘She led ye on.’
‘Ye kin say that again.’
‘Standing flaunting herself when ye went wie the milk.’
‘It was a right temptation,’ Rab agreed.
‘Her flashing her tits and I never knew she was still at school.
If I'd known she was still at school I'd hiv run.’
‘I bet noo ye wished ye'd run.’
‘Aye.
But it's a wee bit late noo.’
Winnie held Rab's hand.
Over a little round table.
‘We'd need money,’ he said, ‘if we ran away.’
Winnie pressed his hand.
‘I've a wee nest-egg,’ she told him.
‘Enough tae get us started.’
Rab smoked in the closet, in the dark.
Thinking.
That Winnie looked good in her uniform.
But there was something about her; he knew she was leading him on.
Why?
Was it that she loved him?
Or that, getting on, she was looking for adventure, a final fling?
For, he was sure, no mistake, there had been a few flings in her life.
But why him?
There were plenty other guys, or were there?
Might it be that living with Phillis had turned him patsy, a dope to any skirt?
Rab weighed the cons and heard the rats.
Scurry.
Foul things.
One of whom had bit his arse.
He flushed the pan and buckled his belt.
It was late and his rise was early.
He should be sleeping.
There was much to do in the next few days.
He lingered, smelling the smell.
It was like nothing he had ever smelled.
Thick and pungent, physical almost.
And now an ache in his gut, that he thought first wind, then diarrhoea.
So he unbuckled his belt and squatted again, exploding farts and twisted guts.
Sweat lashed his brow: he had never felt like this before.
As dissolving .
But the spasm passed, like an opening fist; and wondering what he had eaten, what Phillis had cooked, and wiping his brow he was glad that that was over.
He'd have a word with Phillis, you bet that he'd have a word with Phillis — the dirty cow.
She was sleeping, or in the room in bed anyway.
Rab drank a glass of water.
God, that had been a powerful shit.
His anus hurt and his legs were weak.
He determined to buy some toilet paper.
A man's entitled to a little comfort, isn't he?
Newspapers must dirty your bum.
Just look what they did to your hands.
You could get black as a sweep just reading newspapers.
He was glad that Phillis was gone, in the room, for, after the violence of his shit, he felt fit for no argument, hard words.
What he had to say could wait until morning.
For his gut was still queasy with occasional pain: Rab hoped not to be up all through the night.
Phillis snored.
Rab pushed her over against the wall in the wall-recessed bed.
The snapper was quiet in his cot.
Rab lay on  his side, curled up.
His stomach rumbled and he flushed both hot and cold; tossing and groaning when the pain came strong, twisting wracking spasms.
Four times Rab arose for visits to the closet: endured the smell, the cold, the rats, the protest of his tortured anus.
Then, towards dawn, he could take no more and messed the bed.
A shameful spew and tears in his eyes at that, the ultimate indignity.
Yet still more to come; more from he knew not where, this stuff — what wasit?
He pulled down the blankets and fumbled for his matches.
Phillis snored.
Rab felt a new pain, spasm; the gurgling flood.
He wondered how Phillis could sleep through it all.
Waiting for the spasm to pass, and now not caring about the bed: fuck it, he was sick.
At the flare of the match Rab almost fainted.
He certainly swooned: the sheer volume of the blood, bright and red and over his thighs and smearing his belly, and sticky now on his fingers.
And he saw only some of it.
He shook Phillis.
‘Wake up, ya prick.’
She seemed, some kicks and a punch, as a long time stirring.
‘What is it?
What's the matter?’
‘Me.
It's me.
I'm dying, ya shit.’
Phillis sat up in bed.
‘What?
What'd ye say?’
‘I need a doctor.’
‘What's the smell?’
Phillis wrinkled her nose.
She looked at Rab.
‘It's ye, it's ye — ye've shat the bed, ya bugger.’
‘Never mind the fucking smell.
I said I need a doctor.’
‘Ye stink,’ Phillis said.
‘Ye stink worse'n a pig.’
‘It's blood,’ Rab said, ‘all's running out my arse-hole.’
Phillis yelped.
‘It's on my leg.
Ye dirty shit.
It's all over my leg.’
Rab blinked back tears and the snapper began to wail.
‘Now look what ye've went and done.’
Rab wished he had a phone: he'd phone himself if he had a phone.
Phillis began to climb over him.
He felt her nightie brush his ear.
She put on the light.
Bright.
It hurt Rab's eyes.
‘Will ye go phone the fucking doctor?’
‘What doctor?
Ye don't hiv a doctor.
Ye always said ye never needed a doctor.’
‘Then the snapper's doctor.
Say it's for the snapper.’
‘O naw, I couldn't dae that,’ Phillis said, ‘get doctor up oot of her bed for ye.’
‘Then just phone a fucking ambulance.’
Phillis stood barefooted cradling the greedy snapper.
‘He's hungry.’
Rab, for the first time, thought of death, his own, and he held his head and his shoulders shook.
Some six months after her First Communion she still felt very holy and full of Grace and ever aware of her Guardian Angel.
It was Miss Hazelwood that had first told her about her Guardian Angel.
‘He watches over you both day and night.’
‘Miss,’ Jeanie enquired, ‘dae Protestants have Guardian Angels?’
‘Yes,’ Miss Hazelwood said.
‘All good little girls and boys have Guardian Angels.’
‘But Protestants don't go tae chapel,’ Jeanie protested.
‘They don't have First Communion.’
Miss Hazelwood said that they would discuss the matter another time: ‘Right now we have arithmetic to do.’
Jeanie watched as she chalked the board.
Miss Hazelwood had golden hair.
She wore a navy skirt and cotton shirt.
Pink.
Her tits looked small and hard.
Sharp.
The face both pretty and smooth with high, almost Indian cheekbones.
Jeanie liked her hands, clean fingers; the risen, polished nails.
And how Miss Hazelwood walked, briskly bold but so feminine, the hit of her heels on the classroom floor.
Jeanie wondered if anyone liked Miss Hazelwood the way she did, had the same warm feeling when she came near.
It was something that you just couldn't talk about, it seemed weird — others would think it weird — liking the teacher like she did.
Even now they sometimes teased her, called her, ‘Teacher's Pet.’
But she did like Miss Hazelwood, and there was nothing wrong with liking someone — was there?
Yet somehow, sometimes, with the other kids, she felt guilty enough to blush just thinking about Miss Hazelwood.
The class began to copy down from the blackboard.
They used pens with nibs and it was a trouble not to blot the page.
Miss Hazelwood got rather annoyed if a page was badly blotted.
Jeanie sat across from Maggie, who was weedy with mousey hair and bad eyes.
She wore thick-lensed glasses to compensate, and, supposedly, to straighten a squint.
The class was quiet, just the scratching of the pens; all the small heads studiously lowered.
Miss Hazelwood sat at a high centre desk, seemingly reading a book.
Maggie tried to copy from Jeanie.
She always did.
But Jeanie would just turn away, hunch her shoulder and hook her arm, covering the page.
It was, she thought, the thing to do — what Miss Hazelwood would do.
‘Teacher's pet,’ Maggie whispered.
‘Squinty,’ Jeanie said.
‘Wee miss goody-goody.’
‘Copycat.’
So it went.
Goes.
The heads and tongues of eight-year-olds.
First Communion and Guardian Angels.
A crush for Miss Hazelwood, who, raising her head, with clear blue eyes, looks your way.
Accusingly.
The class is very still, hushed to hear a pin drop.
‘Jean Friel.
Margaret Hughes.’
The girls, looking one to the other, darting hate, hardly three foot tall, arose and walked down to the front of the class.
Miss Hazelwood stepped up from behind her desk, slender and poised and gripping the tawse.
Jeanie's legs (her feet in sandals, white socks), tanned with the summer sun and muscled as a boy's, quaked somewhat, gazing at the tawse; at Miss Hazelwood's white nail-varnished hand.
But she stood her ground, brown hair twisted in pleats, garnished with a yellow ribbon, quite solidly; shoulder to shoulder with the weedy, bespectacled and protesting Maggie.
‘I never done nothing, miss.’
‘I saw you talking,’ Miss Hazelwood said.
Up close Jeanie could smell her perfume.
It was as a cool  scented meadow.
Not pungent and sweet, cheap, like her mother's was.’
‘It was her,’ Maggie said.
‘It was her was talking tae me.’
‘She tried tae copy me,’ Jeanie said.
‘She's always trying tae copy me.’
‘She's a liar.’
‘Ye dae.’
‘I don't.’
‘Be quiet, both of you,’ Miss Hazelwood said.
All the class was looking at them, all the boys grinning.
Jeanie clasped her hands in front of her.
She had never had the belt before.
Not from Miss Hazelwood, not from nobody.
And it wasn't her fault, she hadn't tried to copy.
So why?
Out here like this with Maggie?
‘Hold out your hand,’ Miss Hazelwood said.
She began to cry.
The tears mutely tumbling down.
But it wasn't so much that she was scared as bewildered and full of shame, then ashamed of her tears and one thing hard-tailing the other her head fuzzed and the classroom swam.
‘Put out your hand.’
Miss Hazelwood's voice was new, sharper; and her tits sharper, harder; bold enough to poke out your eye.
Jeanie felt a little afraid of Miss Hazelwood's tits.
‘Jean Friel, are you refusing punishment?’
She could hear the class behind her murmur, the muffled mirth of the boys.
The degradation of the thing.
Feeling small and lousy, not knowing what to do; fit for nothing, not even to stick out your hand.
Miss Hazelwood stayed with her mother in a house above a dentist's surgery.
She had stayed there all her life, her twenty years, in the house above the dentist's.
A three-roomed flat with an inside toilet, a shower and a bath, which, mornings (the shower) and nights (the bath), she used, washing with a special soap: imported lather that was not cheap.
But that hardly troubled Miss Hazelwood, for her salary was there to squander; to lash out on the soap and a hundred perfumes, satins and silks and frilly things.
Joy was a Saturday morning  out on the town.
Shopping.
Through all the stores.
Halting here and there, three times at least, for coffee.
Which she held stiff-fingered with her pinkie up.
Hoping for elegance (such a strive) and wishing she was taller for, although her figure was fine, given the height, two inches or four, she might have been a model.
Her life, comparative ease from the cradle up; she had to thank her father.
Doctor Hazelwood.
A somewhat elderly man, with a solemn way; but good at his job and pleasant (in his solemn way) in manner so that his practice flourished, and there were holidays abroad and private schools for Miss Hazelwood, whom, it was supposed, would also become a doctor.
Indeed not ten years old she knew such words (and the meaning) as larynx and spleen and rigor mortis.
But she did not want to become a doctor.
The profession was too professional, a long study, and she had been at university, a giddy time.
The worry was how best to tell her father — he had set his heart on her following in his footsteps — when a coronary had spared them both.
As of the moment there was no man in the life of Miss Hazelwood.
In truth there had never been, man nor boy.
Not seriously.
Some fleeting affairs, but things without heat; all the passion of her being, head and heart, which she sought and longed to give with a fierceness that no one knew, that belied her cool exterior, varnished nails and (she hoped) elegant way.
Such, briefly, was the young schoolmistress in the slum school, caught with the tawse in her hand, and hating herself for being caught this way — these crying children, and feeling like an ogre.
They called him Rubberneck because a good third of his height was neck.
And it was fluid .
He could swivel his head and look at his heels, at, more often than not, his pursuers.
For Rubberneck had the unfortunate habit of hanging around outside school play-yards.
That he was deficient was obvious, given his neck; that gargantuan root, with an Adam's apple big as a fist.
His age?
He could have been fifty but possibly thirty.
It was hard to say, even hazard a guess.
His face was small and his head no bigger than his Adam's apple.
The eyes were protuberant and surprisingly wide, a washed blue or grey in colour.
In dress he was no better than a brickwork tramp, though, in fairness, he wore a tie.
Always.
Even without a shirt, and he was often bare-chested beneath his jacket.
There were no hairs on his chest, which was concave, frail, sharp, small-nippled.
Yet even in winter, thick snow on the ground, he was fit to run bare-chested.
For Rubberneck never walked.
He either stood rooted child-gazing or ran, though gallop was perhaps a better word.
And it was quite a sight to see him in flight, for he sped straight as a pole; inclined, if anything, backwards; but his great neck thrusting, a ginger balance, for one thrust too far and he would have all come tumbling down.
Where he stayed none seemed sure, for he was mute; or appeared to he, and he appeared — for all his child-gazing — as harmless.
(The Glasgow slum dweller had a touching trust, gave a shrug to the odd.)
But wherever it was — he ran to — he was a pest for the teachers to chase.
‘The man should be put away.’
‘Locked up.’
‘Certified.’
But none took the trouble to complain, to seek out the origin, true name and the lair of Rubberneck.
Who, in passing, it might be noted, wore not boots nor shoes but canvas sneakers.
Sandshoes .
Winter and summer.
Perhaps for stealth, though (so hard to hide his soaring neck) more likely for speed.
Or, simply, it may have been that his feet were bad.
At times Rubberneck wept, shed, and for no apparent reason, bucketing tears in dreadful fits of sadness.
That the children liked him he knew for, even if they did mock, gesture rudely and scream and call, they did so with a laugh.
Gathered, all of them, boys and girls aged eight to twelve, at the play-yard railings when he came near.
But then a teacher would come and ruin it all, scattering them and chasing him.
Such times, sometimes, Rubberneck would run with his fists  clenched tight and his mouth snarled to bare his teeth; yellow fangs, side incisors, and it was lucky for the teachers that they did not catch him.
Winnie waited, from seven o'clock until after nine she stood.
Waiting.
Standing in the lighted alcove of a furniture store at Glasgow Cross.
A meeting spot of note for lovers, but they, those lovers, were all gone now; just her and the closing night, the street lights on and a soft rain falling.
Winnie smoked and her feet hurt, thinking to go but hoping each moment that the next he would show.
Anything might have happened.
There were a million things.
Reasons.
Yet, before, on their secret dates, Rab had been most punctual — a big smile and hug for her — while she, to have him more keen, had hung back a little late.
But now it was her waiting and more keen than Rab had ever been.
‘Has he grown tired of me?
I'm old enough tae be his mother.’
And Winnie pacing the ground, in (under her coat) a trouser suit, blue and new, frilled collar and cuffs with lace.
If that she even knew his address.
But they were intimate strangers, with their clandestine meetings: in two months of loving, the thought of a happening such as this had never occurred.
Dear Jesus,make him come.
He would like her, in her trouser suit, blue and new, frilled collar and cuffs with lace.
Above her a big steeple clock with big gold hands.
Turning.
She could almost hear the tick of its works, that and the beat of her heart; for, if Rab was young enough to be her son, then her husband was old enough to be her father.
Standing.
At Glasgow Cross near Gallowgate where, once, men had hung, and where a saint, John Ogilvie, was martyred.
He'd had, as Winnie had in her way (less physical) his heart torn out.
The night wore on, the life of Winnie, who, sick with worry — I might never see him again — looked her age, all full forty years.
And now all around her winos and tramps, assorted bums; for there were a couple of doss-houses and a tent-hall not far away.
Three times Winnie had to elbow their advances, which she was good at — not being slow, scared or nothing.
‘Fuck off,’ she told the bad-luck men.
Another time a car drew up.
‘How much?’
‘More than ye've got, buster.’
At the stroke of nine the big clock chimed; it chimed every hour on the hour.
He'd never come now, not two hours late; and slowly, reluctantly, ever glancing back, Winnie walked.
She walked out along Argyle Street — a favourite place (the big stores) for Miss Hazelwood on her shopping sprees — towards the overhead bridge that carried the railway south, to London and beyond.
Far, far away from this place, this city, the weight of which bore upon her, and never so low.
Lonely, yet dressed so nice, so ready to smile; laugh and love the night away, she could now — the ache in her heart — but ponder between the river and the gas oven.
She even forgot about Rab, pondering between the river and the gas oven.
There were guys at the factory that Anton liked; in a place with some fifty men, there must be some you like.
That or there is something wrong with you.
And there was nothing wrong with Anton, nothing that is, in that place, but Parker.
A new meaning to hate — the spite to give a finger that Parker might lose a hand.
Yet, for the money, the brown pay packet on a Friday night, he endured.
Swept the floors, the shavings from the machines; and Saturday and Sunday and two nights late.
‘He'd dae anything for money,’ Parker said.
‘He'd go up the coffee stalls and peddle his arse for money.’
Anton blushed.
He blushed very easily.
Still very boyish, smooth and neat; no imbalance yet, he caught a wonderful perfection.
To Parker, who, it was rumoured, held major shares in the firm.
That may or may not have been.
It hardly matters, given the man; the essence, his core, a sly pederast (Parker was a regular subscriber to magazines entitled such as Boy and Superboy ,Kimand Pim ); he thought it best, and he felt safer (it was his constant dread that the magazines — delivered from an English P.O. box number — should go adrift or burst in transit) that as a cover-up he acted crude; and he did it so well (it might be a hateful zest for what he could not have) that you would have never thought.
Miss Hazelwood had a rare despondency.
She usually so high and bright, a breezy chatter of her day in class, but now; her work, the tawse, the first time she had used it, her tearful minute victims, she did not feel herself at all.
‘What is the matter, Violet?’
‘I don't want to speak about it, mother.’
‘It's that awful school, those terrible children.’
Mrs Hazelwood, like a mother hen, her arms crossed her ample bosom.
‘I don't know why you work there.
You don't need to work there.
Daddy left us quite enough.’
‘It's not the school, mother.’
Mrs Hazelwood raised her brows.
Her eyes were blue and milky.
‘Then what is it if it's not the school?’
‘You wouldn't know.
Understand.
And they are not horrible children at all.
It is more the teachers, some of them, that are horrid.’
With that Violet — she felt somewhat better, her mother was such a snob (even her father had thought her mother a snob)— went through for her bath; the bliss of hot scented soothing waters.
There was steam enough and Violet, her pampered flesh surprisingly (the trim young miss when she was dressed) voluptuous.
A curvaceous bum.
Her breasts were full, and a saucy tilt, cheeky nipples.
She sank in the water with a grateful sigh.
This troubled day, night.
And some of the teachers at the school were horrid.
Brutish.
One woman, Miss Pennycott — once a nun, long years in a convent — had swung a boy clean off his feet by the hair of his head.
Round and round.
Violet had gasped.
She had come on an errand and was greeted by a mad woman, an amazon.
She fled.
Back to her own classroom, which was a couple of doors down from Miss Pennycott, who, at lunchtime, in the staff mess, had taken her aside.
‘I'm afraid I lost my temper.’
‘I won't say.’
Miss Pennycott smiled.
‘There is nothing tosay,’ she said.
‘I lost my temper, that's all.
It happens to the best of us.’
Up close Miss Pennycott was taller, thicker, with the neck and shoulders of a man.
She had bright, quick eyes; and her hand on Violet's arm.
It was as good as a caress and Violet could only squirm.
A true brute.
And it might mean something else.
One never knew.
All those years in a convent.
Violet had heard of women like that.
She wasn't sure but she would take no chances and she would not drink with Miss Pennycott.
‘A wee night out.’
‘I can't.
I have a boyfriend.’
‘You don't meet him every night.’
‘Most nights I do.’
‘Is he handsome?’
‘I think he is.’
‘I think he would need to be,’ Miss Pennycott smiled.
It was as good as wink.
She had small white teeth.
‘The lucky thing whoever he is.’
Violet shuddered.
In her bath.
The very thought of Miss Pennycott.
She could never forget how she had swung the boy, a little thing of six or seven; that nor the heat; as all the purr of a pussy cat, the linger of her hand.
But all that was some months ago and she had a cold front since for her hefty swinging colleague.
She closed her eyes.
The scented water.
It might be a waft of opium; for she was dreamy now; but a knock on the door.
‘What is it?’ she asked.
‘Gloria is on the phone for you.’
‘She knows I'm in the bath?’
‘I told her, but she said it was important.’
Violet felt most annoyed, this rude intrusion.
It had better be important.
Stepping out from the bath.
All her glory.
Dripping and glowing.
A big pink fluffy towel.
There were two phones, one an extension in her room.
Violet lay on her belly on the bed.
‘Hi, Gloria.’
They were pals since tots, from prep school; and Gloria's father also a doctor — it somehow lent a bond.
‘I've finished with Tom,’ Gloria said, sounding close to tears.
‘No.
Never.
Whatever happened?’
It's a long story.’
You will make it up?’
‘Not in a hundred years,’ Gloria said.
‘Just wait till you hear.’
‘I can hardly wait.’
And that was true.
‘Poor Gloria,’ she said, but secretly delighted; for there had been a tinge of envy, and she had missed her chum, always out with Tom, tall and crisply blond, blue-eyed, and whose father was a lawyer.
‘You won't believe,’ Gloria said.
‘But I'll know it's true.’
‘You bet it is.’
‘Can we meet tonight?’
‘I hope so,’ Gloria said.
‘I need to speak to someone.’
‘Gloria seems most upset,’ Mrs Hazelwood said.
‘I thought that she was going to cry.’
‘A lovers' tiff,’ Violet said.
‘Her and Tom.’
‘Oh dear.’
‘And they were almost married.’
Violet could hardly hide her glee.
‘I thought any time she was going to ask me to be bridesmaid.’
‘You are meeting her?’
‘Tonight,’ Violet said.
‘You know, a shoulder to cry on.
I do think that she needs one.’
Rab recovered by shifts.
But his humiliation was mighty.
He had wept like a baby.
And if he had disliked Phillis he hated her now.
He had begged her for a doctor.
She seemed to smirk superior.
Rab lay in bed and, hate — it could be powerful as his shit had been.
He had fantasies of punishment.
The fat slut.
Like that to chain her up and keep all the food away.
Or the food in sight but out of reach of her reaching arms.
That he thought; sugared cakes, a block of cheese, would be all the more exquisite; fitting — for how she had treated him.
But he was in no fit state.
She now was much the stronger.
The snapper was stronger than him.
Rab had dropped a lot of weight.
His eyes and teeth, his head, looked bigger; a pipe-stem neck, as a skin of bones.
The man he once had been.
Running away to London.
He could not now run to cross the street.
The first week of his convalescence.
And a woman doctor, to make matters worse.
She had had him in to hospital.
‘It is contagious.’
‘What?’
‘Dysentery.’
‘That's what it is?’
‘It would seem to be.’
She was a tall woman with a feather in her hat.
A dowdy look, but decisive way.
How she had got an ambulance.
‘You wouldn't want to inflict your wife,’ she said.
‘And we must protect the baby.’
Rab said nothing.
‘It would seem a virulent strain.’
‘I don't want tae die.’
‘Let's hope not.’
Phillis seemed not to care.
Either way.
She changed the snapper.
Rab was stretched out with his complaint; put in hospital, in isolation.
The last he saw, remembered of Phillis, she was eating a sweetened bun.
For all the world, Rab thought, through all his agony, like an elephant in the zoo.
But now home again.
If you could call it that.
He should have been in London.
With Winnie.
Such rotten luck.
When things were looking up.
The chance to escape.
Flee this unhappy marriage.
Rab lay on his bed and brooded.
He thought, considered ground glass for Phillis.
A sprinkle in her pudding.
She had a pudding most every night.
Thick and sweet and creamy.
For she would never notice.
Not her; she worked her spoon like an Irish navvy, the way she wolfed it down.
It would be a fitting tickle — if he could have got away with it.
But, with the run of his luck, how things stood, in what, so they said, were the best years of his life, he would be in chains for the rest of them.
Still some consolation: he was alive.
It had been damn close, touch and go; so he had thought, for Phillis, a widow's pension.
But he had survived and was out of hospital, the attempt to push his weight up.
Some meat on his bones.
He joined Phillis in the pudding eating.
It was, he thought, the look of her, guaranteed to beef you up.
Heavy shit, but not tooheavy.
Rab went ginger — he had, in the hospital, stolen some toilet tissue — to the closet, still, to him, a hairy place, as dreaded as the graveyard.
‘I poured a whole bottle of lysol down it,’ Phillis assured him.
‘After ye.’
‘Ye should have poured a whole bottle of lysol down it before me.’
‘It was ye contaminated it.’
‘Shit.’
It would be only too easy to murder Phillis.
‘Doctor told me.’
‘Told ye what?’
‘Tae pour down the lysol.’
‘So ye poured down the lysol.’
Phillis said, ‘Ye're dead mean wie yer toilet paper.’
Rab ignored her.
‘Ye could gie me a wee bit.’
‘A wee bit?’
Rab thought, for Phillis, her huge arse, more a Sunday newspaper.
‘It's too much tae ask?’
Rab rolled a smoke.
‘I had tae strip the entire bed,’ Phillis said.
‘Wash all the blankets.
Doctor told me — ye might, ye see, hiv smitted me.’
Rab wished that he had smitted her.
The fat fool.
How she prattled.
Doctor this and doctor that.
Rab thought of Winnie, her featherweight and money in the bank.
Now snared again by this pennyless fattie.
And, if that was not enough, Phillis had bought a record.
It went:if you loved me then can't you love me once again ?
Rab thought not.
And he was sick of the record.
Phillis played it all the time:for old times sake won't you give my heart a break?
It was his heart (old times, nights with Winnie) that was breaking.
He waited for the first time Phillis was out, and scored the record.
Wicked slashes.
An end to that nonsense.
‘Ya rotten buggar.’
‘I done nothing.’
‘Ye broke the record.’
‘What record?’
‘Ye think ye're a big man,’ Phillis said, with a rare spite, ‘but I saw ye greeting.
Ye greeted worse'n the snapper.
A wee bit blood.’
‘I'll warm yer arse.’
But Phillis stood defiant.
‘You and who?’
Rab felt so weak he could have cried again.
‘Away tae the doctor,’ he told her.
‘Ye need yer head examined.’
‘She thinks ye're a rotter tae.’
Rab cocked his head.
He sat in the fireside chair.
The doctor thought him a rotter.
‘A meanie,’ Phillis said.
‘She told me.
She said she doesn't know how I put up wie ye.’
‘How you put up wie me ?’
‘I don't hiv a pair of knickers tae change.’
‘Ye had the money tae buy a record,’ Rab said.
‘And don't tell me somebody gave ye it.’
Phillis stood by the radiogram.
It was a secondhand affair.
About twenty years old.
‘Why'd ye dae it,’ she asked, ‘break my record?’
‘Ye got yer money's worth,’ Rab said.
‘Holy fuck, woman, ye must have worn it out.’
‘Because ye never liked it.’
‘I never said I never liked it.’
‘But I know,’ Phillis said.
‘Ye know fuck all,’ Rab said.
‘I'll buy it again,’ Phillis said.
‘Only this time I'll take it wie me when I go out.’
‘Ye don't hiv a change of knickers,’ Rab said.
‘Yet ye kin buy music.’
He felt suddenly self-righteous.
‘Ye call me a meanie.
Ye eat like a wolf.
How do ye think ye are so fat: It's me should be complaining.
Ye go wheezling tae the doctor.
A pair of fucking knickers.
I just might have a word in her ear.’
‘It was for ye,’ Phillis said, ‘as much as me that I bought the record.’
‘We'll forget it,’ Rab said.
‘Ye don't talk about the record and I'll say nothing tae Doctor.’
Phillis stood.
Considering.
She did not trust Rab.
‘A rum fellow,’ the doctor had said, ‘if ever I clapped eyes on one.’
Phillis agreed, if she had small idea of ‘a rum fellow’.
But Doctor wasn't praising him.
Rab said, ‘I'll be changing doctors anyhow.’
‘Ye will?’
‘I don't like that woman.
And I never really asked for her.
It was just, ye know, any port in a storm.’
‘Ye'll tell her that?’
‘Too true I will.
As soon as I'm back on my feet.
Ye would think I was a dog,’ he said, ‘the way she looks at me.’
Phillis forgot about the record.
She would never mention the record again.
It was worth a dozen records, that Rab was treated like a dog.
‘I'll tell that veta thing or two, you bet,’ he said, ‘just as soon as she's cured me.’
The front door knocked.
‘See who it is,’ Rab said.
‘Only if it's anybody wanting money I'm not in.’
‘Ye're never in if it's anybody wanting money.’
There were still a few small debts, persistent agents, forlorn hopes, who pestered Rab, who — on wise advice, another cheat — would only pay the house insurance.
‘It's yer pal,’ Phillis said.
Rab had been waiting for him.
A test .
The few new moves (the draughtboard) he had figured out — Christ and he had time and more — in his convalescence.
‘I hope that ye're not skint,’ he said.
‘I got paid tonight.’
‘I might lookfucked,’ Rab said.
‘Ye don't half.’
Anton considered, Rab's new big head, his teeth.
‘Ye look like ye met a vampire.’
‘But he never sucked my brains,’ Rab said.
He had high expectations of a big win; his new moves.
‘Ye want tae double the stakes?’
So they set to play.
The draughtboard on a stool.
Phillis went through the room with the snapper.
She held it in her arms.
A rare comfort, from Rab's crude ways; he tried, he succeeded, he bamboozled her.
This and that.
That she was fat.
But only the very cheapest food.
Phillis was a prudent shopper.
Very.
She had to be, her allowance a pittance.
Half stale buns and mouldy meat.
She chuckled to herself; Rab not so smart, the mouldy meat.
The butcher had thought she had a dog.
‘That,’ he said, ‘will make it growl — it will fight a lion if it gets that down it.’
And Rab thought the rats.
Phillis thought perhaps, in a little time, when he had another doctor, then another dose of the meat.
It was a good thought as she made ready for bed; then, her one luxury, she daubed her face with night-cream.
Rab, with his new moves, a much more attacking play — he shifted his chequers like a whirlwind — won the first few games in fine style.
Anton was shaken, taken aback by this new opponent.
Moves he had not seen before, had not known existed.
There seemed no stopping Rab.
The power, sheer pace of his play.
Wizard stuff.
He was always like two, three moves ahead.
But, from a first fierce onslaught, ambush almost, the night wore on more hard-fought games.
Anton was beginning to hold him, that or Rab, in his weakened state, could not hold his concentration.
Anton's problem then (what had gone before) was he had no money left.
Rab shrugged his shoulders.
‘It's the way it goes.’
‘How much'll ye gie me on the bike?’
He knew Rab would not loan him money, a game on credit.
‘I'm not a pawnbroker.’
‘Ye could sell it.’
Rab looked at the bike.
‘A couple of quid,’ he said.
‘I'll sell ye it back for two and a half.’
‘Ye'll gie me a week?’
The bike was worth ten pounds at least.
‘That's if I get beat.’
‘But it'll cost ye three quid,’ Rab said, ‘if ye get beat, if it takes a week.’
Anton had no option but to accept the crooked deal.
To try to win his money back.
His hope was that Rab was through, his concentration all shot.
They began to play, half quid games.
It was the highest stakes ever.
Anton's bike now on the line.
He had begun to wish he had never come here, to Rab's house.
This guy, he was hardly — it would be hard to say he was — a pal .
Rab won the first game; nip and tuck, not much in it; to lose the next.
And the next.
Anton thought to have his measure.
But Rab came back, two fast wins.
‘Let's make it all  or nothing,’ he said.
‘It's late.
I'm tired.
Ye've still a quid and a half.
If ye win ye kin buy back the bike.’
‘For two and a half?’
‘That was the deal.’
They began.
The diced board, squares black and white.
It looked so easy, it was so simple; but no end to the combinations.
You moved this way or that.
But one mistake.
…This new crafty Rab.
The truth was, in his stay in hospital he had read some books on chequers.
It had proved a big advantage.
But the fucking board was blurring now.
A shifting fog.
He knew the moves, he had won so easily, but now something like a ouija board.
It was certainly magic how he lost.
Rab rubbed his eyes, caught short his greed; he had won all night he could win once more.
‘Ye want tae double-up?’ he asked.
And so it went, three quid to six to twelve — if he sometimes almost won, that lent him hope and kept him playing on — that the tables turned and Rab was skint.
‘But I've money in the post office,’ he said.
‘It's nae use tae me, yer money in the post office.’
‘My watch.’
Anton looked at it.
‘I'll gie ye two quid.’
‘It's worth seven.’
‘My bike was worth ten.’
‘Ye'll sell me it back?’
‘For two quid and a half.’
Rab then, his watch gone, a new hard concentration; short shrift, he won that game but lost the next and back to nothing.
And his cuff-links went and a sovereign ring.
Anton won his suit and coat.
Rab tried to stage a comeback.
He lost a transistor radio.
It was the end, he could play no more.
‘I don't know,’ he said, he shook his head, ‘what happened.’
Anton smiled.
He looked angelic.
About twelve years old.
‘Ye watch my stuff.’
‘Don't worry.’
But Rab was thinking different things, thoughts to square the damage.
‘It's not the end of the world,’ he said.
‘Not after what I've been through.’
Anton looked at the time.
Rab's watch.
It was almost five.
A mammoth session.
He would have no sleep now, just home to eat and then to work.
Rab let him out, into the morning air, almost dawn, then began to wreck the kitchen.
It was not for nothing that he paid house insurance.
Parker had a hangover.
A fierce affair.
He had been drinking all night long, beer and whisky.
Direct from work, he had not gone home; till, he knew not how, but a fight of sorts, he now had stitches in his eye.
He had awoken early, the hurt; the grip of the stitches, what felt a boulderous bruising.
Parker — his first name was Hugh, if his pals called him Shug or Shuggie — it was his first sore eye, his first fight, if you could call it that, since he was a child; about six or seven, a girl had beat him up.
He still remembered, all these years; his tears and his father's scorn: ‘Bubbling like that, and a lassie by Christ.’
And he had shaken his fist at him.
But his mother called him, ‘My little flower pot.’
She was, had been, a treasure.
Always on his side.
Against his father.
Who, an old soldier, was intent ‘one way or the other’ to make a man of him.
He had died, thankfully — Parker had almost clapped his hands — shortly after that first black eye.
It brought it all back.
The present hurt eye.
What he had thought forgotten.
His old man, he remembered his crutch; one leg shot off in Flanders.
He had often wondered, in later years, how he had performed — the amputation awful high, almost at the hip; but, of course, he could hardly ask his mother.
A dear lady.
He had mourned her.
She did not mind if he ran away.
Parker still missed her dreadfully.
Lonely nights, why he got drunk — just nothing to go home to.
And nothing, nobody now; this mean morning.
His eye.
But his whole head throbbed.
His limbs felt heavy; stiff, without sap, and he felt old and feeble.
It took all his time to wash and shave.
He had to shave, grey bristles; for Parker had gone bald suddenly (and very young, a terrible fright, he had awoke one morning, all his hair was on the pillow) and his wigs — he had three, short to long to shaggy; the ploy, he hoped, visits to the barber — were black for blue.
Which was okay when he was younger; his mother, she had helped him choose his first wigs (even if he could not tell her the cause of his fright, all his hair was on the pillow).
Parker's life was one long deceit.
Haunted secrets.
He belonged as much (all his days) where he was as a man on the dark side of the moon.
Shaving.
He cut himself.
The top of his lip.
A touch of the shakes.
The blood ran bright and red.
Parker licked at it and stuck on a bit of brown paper.
But, he stood, not a little giddy, the fear to fall, and this must be (sweat popped his head like bubbles), a long way, the worse hangover — and there had been a few — of all his thirty-seven years.
There were gaps last night — he had no idea the when of his visit to the hospital: if he had come straight home or stayed out drinking — that, try as he might, Parker could not remember.
The room was strewn with his clothing, his wig: Parker in his vest and drawers.
Bare feet.
His bald head.
He rummaged the bed — another fright, his life was full of them — for his false teeth.
He found them in a mess of vomit.
Some solid stuff; half digested, so he must have eaten.
It was lucky he had not choked.
He had no recall of his feast or vomit.
This vomitous morning.
He rinsed his teeth; a flashy set, a lot of gold, cold water.
It was a big, old house; a lot of doors for a single man, if Parker lived in a single room.
Some parts of the house he had not seen for twenty years.
You get to live a habit.
Parker slept and ate at an upstairs window.
Where he now sat down and nursed his hangover.
He had a wetted towel to cool his head.
To dab at his eye.
He thought to make some tea.
But, as he rose, he almost tripped on a carrier bag.
The clink of bottles.
He could not remember buying them.
A bottle of what he took for whisky and four of beer.
Parker closed his eyes, the effort to think — a useless task.
He could not be bothered to check his pockets, what (his wild night, all this booze, the booze he had drank) he had left of his money.
He suspected very little.
He got drunk; he was the sort, his ribald jokes, drinks for everyone.
He grimaced.
His head.
His eye.
He could see them all far enough now.
He sat in his drawers and had a bottle of beer.
Parker downed it in one swallow.
It might be the best bottle of beer he had ever drunk.
Cool and rich with hops.
It picked him up immensely.
He felt some fluid in his bones.
Some ease in his head.
His big gut heaved, and a mighty belch.
He drank another bottle.
Strong stuff.
He felt the kick.
A German brew.
He wondered where he got it.
Parker did not go in for German beer.
No.
You could get drunk on this stuff without whisky.
His third bottle, he began to feel quite merry.
There was still the nag of his eye, like a dulled toothache; but he began to think in a whole new light.
That, more a badge of honour.
Virility.
It was only men who got in fights.
Parker smoked and drank his beer and it was not nearly so bad as he had first supposed.
It was a pity about the bed — he thought now more of the work to change it, messy sheets, than that he might have died, choked on his spew.
It was strong medicine, this German beer.
Parker approved enough to remember the name.
He would buy some more.
He chuckled.
They should have named it resurrection.
The frightened nervous wretch he'd been.
A mouse of a man.
He extended a hand: not a quiver.
As steady as a rock.
It called for a spot of whisky.
It curled his toes.
Parker broke a fresh sweat.
What the fuck, this weird morning; he was drinking banana rum.
Still, after a bit, he held it down, a new charge.
He felt twice bold.
But enough was enough, this fast drinking; alien booze, much more of it and he could not drive to work.
Which reminded him, where was his car?
He was almost sure he must have ditched it some place.
But he was not too worried; he had had enough of worry for one morning; if it came to the worst he would just report it stolen.
Not the first time, Parker, after a lost night, had reported a stolen car.
He felt now fit, a proper look at his eye.
What damage?
It was much more important than his car.
He wondered which bastard had hit him.
He was almost sure he had left his car outside the pub, but what pub?
He shrugged his beefy shoulders.
There was nothing, not now, that he could do about it.
Still, it lent excuse, another belt of the banana rum.
He might need it, his eye; that first view, an almighty fright, he had almost fainted.
A now more close examination.
In the closet.
It was not so bad.
Only three stitches.
More flamboyant.
A puff bruising.
Parker thought he looked a boxer.
Tough.
A mean hombre .
There was a new swagger, belly bounce — he might be more an all-in wrestler — he went to dress, to begin his day.
Rubberneck hated Saturdays.
And Sundays.
He was forbidden to go out.
And all the schools were closed.
He knew.
A few successful bids for his liberty, to tearful disappointments.
And his sister (she caught him; Rubberneck had returned — for where else could he go?) had starved him — not, locked up in the room, a bite to eat nor drop to drink — in, she saw, a righteous punishment.
It went on for days and thirst was a terrible thing, much worse than hunger; so that, remembering his torture, how his lips had cracked, one rainy day, at random , on impulse, he had lapped a drink out of a puddle.
And the children had seen and liked it; he, like some stray dog, was drinking out of puddles.
He knew they did, the laughter;, the little ones, they would all gather to watch, for, to please, even rank water he would kneel to drink.
The problem with such puddles, Rubberneck would suffer violent bellyaches and explosive diarrhoea.
Yet he could not stop, his wish to please; if he drank, he knew the consequences.
‘Ye silly fool,’ his sister said.
She knew he drank from puddles.
‘Will ye never learn, William?’
Rubberneck looked down on her.
She was tiny, midget almost, with a bird-like look.
A thin wiry woman, her name was Meg and not herself the full shilling.
She was given to religion; to quotations from the Bible.
Rubberneck was her cross to carry.
The Lord saw fit; Meg did not question that hers was the heavy load.
Or it might be — the Lord worked, she knew, in mysterious ways — his blessing, that, such a brother; a saintly trial her worth in heaven.
Meg thought herself that they both had sinned, like Mary Magdalen.
Her favourite saint.
How she loved the very name.
It was Meg's fondest wish, when this life was through, the risen and the dead, to walk hand in hand with Mary.
So, through this earthly time; it but a blink, all the preachers said so, she bore her cross and crosses.
Life was no rosegarden, flower-walk for Meg.
It had never been.
Her one sin, since repented — again and again repented, in her prayers to Mary Magdalen — with a black-eyed tinker lad, who, afterwards, a swifter punishment, had beat her up and robbed her.
Meg remembered, shuddered with the memory; the whole deal: he had given her a just beating, then pissed all over her.
Meg did not think for that — foul wash, the tinker boy; his thing; he had roared with laughter — as just or justifiable.
But she had told no one.
She couldn't.
Such shame.
And she had went to the carnival.
She had let the tinker boy have her one and only fornication.
She was about nineteen, twenty then.
Her vow of chastity.
Hardly hard.
She sinewy lean with a withered leg.
The boys shunned her.
She had no pals.
Not that she wanted them, the flighty painted girls in the street.
How then Meg had wished, she had almost prayed, that one of them have a run-in with the tinker boy, he might wash their sins away.
But they were all married, mothers, grandmothers now; Meg went her way, the path, she hoped, redemption: hand in hand, a walk in Heaven, Meg and Mary  Magdalen .
Still, though; stuck on earth (it was sometimes the longest blink) it was Meg's ambition to visit Jerusalem.
And so she saved.
She had been saving now almost forty years.
They both scrimped and starved; Meg (she worked in a ragstore) filled a suitcase with banknotes.
It was not so much that she distrusted banks as the bother for the visit.
And her savings, to begin with, had been meagre, hardly worth the time: Meg had hardly dreamt her dream — as now; her suitcase crammed, tight-packed with money — fully to fruition.
Of course she had help.
She was sure it was divine.
It was Meg's miserable job, the ragstore; she sorted out the wools from linen.
And occasionally small finds, some coins; a banknote in a pocket.
She would offer up a silent prayer.
Her journey to Jerusalem.
Then one fine day, what holy light; in that dungeonous place — it was beneath a railway arch, a perpetual gloom — a jacket filled with money, almost all its pockets: thick-stuffed envelopes.
Meg had — this gift; the Lord saw fit — no qualms, she stole the jacket.
The next day, though, at the ragstore, a frantic search; three crude if well-dressed men who ‘Ye fucking Jew’ broke Mister McGregor's arm.
‘Ye wouldn't know nothing about it?’
Mr McGregor asked; he had recovered, his arm set in plaster.
‘They really thought we had the jacket.’
Meg pretended not to hear.
Mr McGregor did not press.
He would never, not the wages he paid, find another such assistant.
So life remained much as before; the sister, odd guardian of Rubberneck.
She worked the ragstore, she had worked there all her days, since she had left school — and a whisker away from a special one — what wits she had; and wit let her steal the jacket, Mr McGregor's broken arm.
What money could buy, for, over the years — Rubberneck ran in rags, dressed from the ragstore — she became a compulsive miser hoarder.
She would walk, in lashing rain, a howling wind, rather than pay a bus fare.
Her suitcase overflowed.
She and Rubberneck, they both ate scraps.
Meg, on dark nights, would forage in bins too; her dream, in Jerusalem, alms — distributions from her suitcase — to the poor — Christ's own true chosen people.
Rubberneck, on his part — he saw his sister gloat over the suitcase, the bits of coloured paper — well, he preferred that she gloated; it was a rest, his knees on the hard floor, that they knelt in endless prayer.
‘You won't tell anyone?’
‘Not a soul.’
‘Not anyone?’
Violet shook her head.
Assuredly.
She would not tell a ghost.
They were in a lounge bar.
A discreet up-market drink.
Two bright young things.
‘I have to tell someone,’ Gloria said.
‘Tell me.’
‘Tom gave me a dose.’
‘A what ?’
‘The pox.’
‘No.’
‘Yes.’
‘Are you sure?’
Violet was shocked but delighted.
Her oldest friend.
It was just, she thought, it must be a woman's nature.
If Gloria, she had been in a smash.
‘Of course I'm sure,’ Gloria said.
‘You would be too.’
‘Heaven forbid,’ Violet exclaimed.
Gloria began to cry.
Very softly.
They were far back from the bar.
Thankfully.
A quiet corner.
Violet — this was something else — edged a little from her.
One just never knew.
She looked so clean, healthy; fresh, indeed, as a dairy maid.
‘The rotten bounder.’
‘Tom?’
‘Who else?’
Violet thought.
‘Then he must have it too.’
‘Ask him.’
‘I couldn't do that.’
Then take it from me.
‘Have you been someplace — you know, a clinic?’
Gloria dabbed her eyes.
‘Black Street,’ she said.
‘(t's confidential.
At least that's what they tell you.
But they still want your name and address.’
Violet sipped her bloody Mary: vodka and tomato juice.
Gloria — she nursed a lemonade, ‘I can't drink the treatment’— rummaged in her bag, another paper tissue.
‘I must look a frightful sight,’ she said.
‘You have had a frightful experience.’
‘I feel like a whore.’
Gloria looked at Violet.
‘If anyone should ever find out about this.’
‘They won't from me,’ Violet replied.
'What do you take me for?’
‘It's — Oh, I'm so confused.
Nothing like this has ever happened to me before.’
‘I should hope not,’ Violet declared, rather primly.
‘And I should hope that it won't again.’
‘You are a brick, Vi.
I don't know who else I could have turned to, have told them all of this.’
‘It issurprising,’ Violet conceded.
‘Did you tell the clinic it was Tom?’
Gloria shook her head.
‘I don't want to speak about him.
But no.
If I had told them him they would have found out my name.
I just said that I didn't know.’
‘What name did you give?’
‘I forget.’
‘They believed you?’
‘The place is full of — of vagabonds.’
Violet considered.
‘But Tom, if he goes to the clinic — won't they ask whom he was with?’
‘I suspect,’ Gloria said, ‘he'll tell them something the same as I did.
Decent people, even Tom; they don't want to get involved with that place.’
‘I shouldn't wonder.’
‘You want to see it.’
‘I don't want to see it.’
‘You could write a book.’
‘Not about a place like that, I wouldn't want to write a book.’
‘They treat you like — like shit ,’ Gloria said.
‘I've never been so humiliated.’
She began, new tears, yet another paper tissue.
Her bag lay open.
It had a yellow metal clasp.
‘I just wonder who she was, that's all.’
‘I don't quite follow.’
‘Tom's tart.’
‘Oh.’
‘She has caused us all, we have come to this — we had a dreadful row, you know.’
Violet patted Gloria's hand.
‘It might be hard,’ she said, ‘but better to find out now about Tom than later.’
‘He said that he was drunk.
That he didn't know.
That he still loves me.’
‘But he would, wouldn't he?
He has a nerve if you ask me.
He smites you with something vile and declares that he still loves you.
I know what I would do with him,’ Violet said, yet, too, Tom must be a lusty brute and delightfully wicked.
‘You should be only too glad to be rid of him.’
Gloria said, ‘I threw his ring away.’
Violet thought.
‘But I hope you didn't throw it at him,’ she said.
‘I shouldn't have?’
‘You could have sold it.’
‘You think he'll sell it?’
‘I shouldn't be the least surprised.’
Gloria, a whole new flood of tears.
She had not thought of that.
Not her dramatic throw at Tom.
She had aimed to hit him in the eye, what else; just back from the V.D. clinic.
‘It's a trick, I think,’ Violet said, ‘by some boys to get their money back.’
‘It was expensive.’
‘It was a beauty.’
‘Then I was silly.’
‘But you were mad.’
‘As a hatter,’ Gloria said.
‘I must have been.
I get the pox, I don't even have a ring to show.’
‘Still it was no good if you weren't happy.’
‘But I was happy.
For God's sake, Vi, we were going to be married.
You don't think just any man.’
Gloria let her sentence drop.
‘I wouldn't be drinking lemonade for just any man,’ she said.
‘I'm sorry.’
And for the first time Violet was sorry.
This disaster.
Her old chum, her very best friend.
She puzzled why she was bitchy.
Her taunt — and it was a taunt, the ring.
‘I wish that I could help,’ she said, ‘do something.’
‘It's enough that you listen.
That you are here.
That you don't think me bad.’
‘You know I don't.’
‘It could have happened to anyone.’
‘I thought,’ Violet said, ‘first of all you were going to tell me you were pregnant.’
‘That would have been easy.’
‘I suppose.’
‘But instead of a baby he gave me gonorrhoea.’
It was pique; poor Gloria, and with the help of the bloody Marys, Violet put an arm around her friend.
‘There's plenty more fish in the sea,’ she said.
‘I don't know,’ Gloria said, ‘that I'll ever want anything to do with another man.’
‘That's only how you feel just now.’
‘How would you feel?’
‘Still, you mustn't let it get you down.’
Trying her best to cheer Gloria.
Who couldn't drink, drown her sorrows.
One day you'll look back on it all and laugh.’
‘I don't think so.’
‘You will.’
‘You are really a brick, Vi,’ Gloria said, repeated.
She smiled bravely.
‘I don't know anyone else would stick up for me the way you do.’
But it was all too much, that Gloria, now threatening tears and out of tissues, repaired to the loo.
‘Do you want that I come with you?’
Gloria said no.
‘But you'll wait for me?’
‘Surely,’ Violet promised.
Where else would she go?
She sipped her bloody Mary.
Gloria still, if riddled with the pox (their secret), good to turn men's heads.
The way she walked.
She couldn't help it.
All bounce and sway.
Taunt and tease.
Violet smiled.
One never knew, did one?
The drinks were, in a delightful way, worming in her head.
She had forgotten all her troubles, the long school day — how she had felt, so monstrous, the little children, standing with the tawse.
It should be a whip to take to Tom.
There were some men in the bar who eyed her up, who had eyed Gloria.
If they only knew.
It was why there were places such as Black Street.
She would, not in a hundred years, have ever thought for Tom.
It was Tom?
For — and Heaven knew Gloria was no saint — there were two sides to every story.
But whatever way now, both of them, the damage done, had a lesson in the warning.
There was low music in the lounge.
It was very relaxing.
Sophisticated.
The plastic potted plants, a wild profusion, looked real, for, a few drinks in you, it might be a bar in Seville, which was, of all the places she had been, her most romantic city.
She sat.
This fraud in Glasgow.
Here, this city, no jasmine nights.
Swarthy Spaniards with gleaming teeth.
Violet often thought Glasgow folk, both rich and poor, had the worse teeth in the world.
Why?
It had puzzled her often, the rotten teeth in Glasgow.
Shocking smiles.
And even in the young, the children at school, it was rare to see regular perfect teeth.
It should, she thought, by law, be an apple a day, a total ban on sweeties.
Violet sought a cigarette.
they browned your teeth, especially the backs, but so did tea, and coffee, and a girl couldn't be just perfect.
But rummaging in the wrong, in Gloria's, bag for her cigarettes, some things fell out.
Violet saw her mistake about the same time as the card.
Something familiar.
She held it up.
It was hard to believe and she couldn't at first.
She read it over.
It was written in bright red ink.
Her name and heraddress; and a couple of visits, dates and times that she had made.
Of all the dirty low-down tricks, this had to be the daddy.
The cow in the closet.
Violet rose to go, there was nothing to say, be said.
The card screamed it all.
She sat it on the table beside Gloria's drink.
But strangely sad, as hurt as mad; her best friend, and you really could not argue, make a show, in public, about a thing like a V.D. clinic attendance card.
Anton smelled the booze on Parker.
The foreman in a fine good humour.
He had been late, and Anton had thought, had hoped for his absence.
But now he was here, and posing, with his fists, at some of the men, like kidding he was a boxer.
His bruised and swollen eye.
Anton wished it was his mouth.
Saturday morning.
At least he finished at twelve.
He thought, after his long night with Rab, swinging fortunes, to sleep the afternoon.
It was usual, weekend mornings, men with hangovers.
You would catch them corners drinking beer.
But a difference between them and Parker.
The foreman swaggereddrunk.
‘Shuggie's laid one on.’
‘Somebody laid one on Shuggie.’
The talk revolved around the foreman.
His drunken night, and morning.
Parker, most of the time — Anton heard loud laughter — with his cronies: his drinking pals.
‘They all of them were drunk.’
‘Shuggie's still drunk.’
‘He's a fat porkie.’
It was not all of the men who liked Parker.
‘They tell me he was squealing like a pig,’ the man said, ‘when they put the stitches in.’
Anton listening.
Snatches.
He brushed the floors, shovelled shavings.
But at least Parker kept away from him.
For most of the morning.
They had a break at ten.
The buzzer went.
Fifteen minutes.
Most guys read their newspaper.
There was a special feeling Saturday mornings.
The place, the pace more leisurely.
Anton sat, a mug of tea.
He was feeling smug after his win from Rab; his hunch, late in play, that Rab was shot, his concentration all through.
He had played a wizard, but Anton now wore his watch.
His biggest win.
About three weeks' pay he had taken from Rab.
It had become money; he now tallied it in hours, his work in this place.
‘Where'd ye steal it?’
‘What?’
‘The watch,’ Parker said.
He sat down beside Anton.
‘It's not my watch.’
‘I thought that ye said ye stole it.’
‘Ye said I stole it.’
‘Then why're ye wearing it if ye never stole it, if it's not yer watch?’
‘I'm holding it for somebody.’
‘Ye mean like a debt?’
Parker asked.
‘Ye gave a loan out on the watch?’
‘Something like that.’
It was the first time this close to the foreman.
They sat at a low bench hard against the wall.
Anton had the feeling, of Parker's bulk, of getting squeezed.
He shifted a bit along the bench.
But Parker still, as a big fat humpty-dumpty; an enveloping weight, too close for how he liked it.
Something about the guy.
Pressing close.
Anton was shocked enough that he spoke to him but almost jumped when the hand fell on his knee.
‘Ye like money, don't ye?’
‘I work this place,’ Anton said.
He looked Parker square in his one good eye.
‘What dae ye think?’
‘I don't think that ye like it here.’
‘Only the pay.’
The foreman had removed his hand.
As touch by accident.
Anton was none too sure.
He had heard of funny guys.
He had heard of Parker's wig and wigs — the whole place knew — but never nothing he was that way.
Still a spooky feeling.
His hand was on his knee.
‘We all kid around a bit,’ Parker said.
He smiled.
A glint of gold.
He had red rubbery lips.
‘Ye don't, ye're not supposed tae take it personal,’ he said.
‘Naw?’
‘It's all only fun.’
Anton thought Parker, this drunken clown, his battered eye, had laughed, had had fun enough this morning.
‘I'm half pissed, ye know?’
‘I know,’ Anton said.
‘Ye wouldn't be speaking tae me if ye weren't half pissed.’
‘Ye don't like me?’
Anton said nothing.
Parker slapped Anton's thigh.
A sudden strike.
Hard.
As all his weight.
‘What the fuck,’ Anton said.
‘What is it with ye?’
‘My old daddy,’ Parker said, ‘he had only one leg.’
‘What's that got to dae with ye slapping myleg?’
Parker shrugged, his lips a pout; his good eye dreamy.
‘It beats me,’ he said.
Anton crossed his legs.
‘The wee virgin,’ Parker said.
‘Dae ye always dae that?’
‘Dae what?’
‘It doesn't matter.’
Parker lumbered to his feet.
The buzzer went.
‘Back tae work,’ he said.
But Anton knew that this man, one way or the other, wouldn't be working in this place much longer.
‘Rab.
Rab.’
Phillis shook Rab like a fishwife.
‘Wake up,’ she cried.
‘We've been robbed,’ she sobbed.
‘Who's been robbed?’
‘Us.
They came in the windie.
Ye want tae see the kitchen.’
Rab had been soundly asleep.
This shrieking witch.
She would wake the dead.
‘So we've been robbed,’ he said.
‘What dae ye want me tae dae?’
‘They were in the hoose,’ Phillis exclaimed.
‘We might have been murdered in our bed.’
‘When were we robbed?’
‘In the night,’ Phillis said.
‘It must have been.
I told ye, they came in the windie.’
Rab got out of bed.
‘Always fucking trouble,’ he said.
‘If it's not one thing it is another.’
‘It's not my fault,’ Phillis said, ‘we were robbed.’
Rab pulled on his trousers.
He looked for the time.
But a naked wrist.
‘The bastard's stole my watch,’ he said.
‘They were in here tae.’
Rab rubbed his eyes.
‘They must hiv been.
I was wearing my watch when I went tae bed.’
‘I've still got my wedding ring.’
Phillis (her fingers had thickened, sudden weight) now wore her ring, on a length of string, around her neck.
‘Then ye're lucky.’
‘I would have felt them,’ Phillis said.
‘I never felt a thing,’ Rab said.
‘They could hiv cut my throat I never felt a thing.’
Phillis bare-foot (she had great long dirty toes) in a tom dressing gown.
‘They might hiv killed the snapper,’ she said.
‘Don't make it worse,’ Rab said.
‘Ye want tae see the kitchen.’
Rab, his illness, his long night's play; he still felt awful tired.
But important, in his interest, to put up a show.
They would need — he knew, he claimed insurance — to have the law called in.
The sooner to get it over with.
His mind ran stuff; heirlooms, his grandfather's gold watch, untraceable treasures he might claim.
It could, if it worked out, what he did not have, prove a tidy windfall.
‘Fucking hell,’ he said, looking around the kitchen.
Some wonder at his own destruction.
The stuffing from the chairs now littered the floor and — where Rab banked his hopes, his swindle — the chest of drawers was looted, clothes ripped and strewn for, ‘They didn't,’ he said, ‘when they robbed us, need tae wreck the place.’
‘Maybe,’ Phillis said, ‘it was they were mad we had nothing much tae rob.’
‘I wouldn't say that,’ Rab said.
He looked around the kitchen.
It was an impressive mess.
‘We better leave it how it is till the law gets here.’
‘For fingerprints?’
‘But they might hiv worn gloves.’
‘I don't know how we never heard them,’ Phillis said.
‘It hardly looks like they tip-toed.’
‘That's for the cops tae find out,’ Rab said.
He looked at Phillis.
‘Ye're sure that ye heard nothing.’
Phillis pursed her lips.
‘But I didn't think.’
‘Then ye did hear something?’
‘I thought,’ Phillis said, ‘that I saw a shadow.’
‘A what?’
Rab almost laughed.
He could wind her up.
She just had to come up with something.
‘And ye never screamed?’
‘I must hiv thought that I was dreaming.’
‘This fucking thing gets worse,’ Rab said.
‘It must hiv been when they took yer watch.’
‘I know it was when they took my watch,’ Rab said.
‘They probably hid a knife at my throat tae,’ he added.
‘It was a good thing that ye didn't scream,’ the detective said.
Phillis had now seen the shadow.
‘God only knows what might have happened if ye had screamed.’
‘My wife and kiddie,’ Rab said.
He ground his teeth.
‘If they had touched, just laid a finger on either one of them.’
Phillis felt light, giddy with pleasure.
The rage in Rab.
She only wished that he was fatter, for the old Rab, when he was angry, looked a lot like Elvis Presley.
It was, for what it's worth, how they had first met, Rab in a leather jacket, with his milk bottles, his resemblance to Elvis — in Jailhouse Rock — what had made her wild about him.
The cop looked at Rab.
Rab still scowled.
Phillis said, ‘Ye'll be looking for fingerprints?’
‘We've left it how we found it,’ Rab said, ‘in case ye want fingerprints.’
‘We won't be needing fingerprints,’ the cop said.
There were two of them but one stayed silent.
Not a word.
Rab figured him the one to watch.
He certainly watched Rab.
The hint of a sneer.
Don't think that I swallow this, it said.
But his mate, a long tall one in a trilby hat, no doubt at all about the robbery.
‘Ye see,’ he said, ‘we've already caught the villain.’
‘Yous hiv?’
Rab was astonished.
‘That was fast work,’ he said.
‘We hiv our ways.’
‘Ye must hiv.’
‘Now a' we need,’ the cop said, he smiled at Phillis, ‘tae wrap the whole thing up is for ye tae pick him out.’
‘But I told ye I only saw a shadow.’
The cop looked to Rab.
‘They'll help ye,’ Rab said.
‘Ye've nothing tae fear.’
The silent cop a look of disgust.
The whole show.
His mate and Rab.
But he went along, said nothing.
Phillis said, ‘I wouldn't want an innocent man in jail.’
‘But ye'll know him,’ Rab said, ‘if ye see him again.’
He whiffed a deal; his insurance, no questions asked.
‘Phillis never forgets a face,’ he told the cop.
The cop told Phillis, ‘Ye only need tae touch him.’
‘I only wish,’ Rab said, he shook his fist, ‘the dirty craw, my wife and kiddie, I was a fit man, so I dae.’
Phillis said, ‘Rab's waiting for the doctor.’
‘A wee infection,’ Rab said.
‘I was going tae say,’ the cop said, ‘now that ye mention it, ye look right peely-wally.’
‘But I'm getting better.’
Rab smiled bravely, all eyes and nose and long, long teeth.
‘We were hoping ye'd be able tae go wie Phillis, when she identifies the Weasel,’ the cop said, ‘that's this fellow's nickname.’
‘I'll try tae come,’ Rab said manfully.
‘Naw,’ the cop said.
Neither him nor his mate, they were never too close to Rab.
‘It's enough that we hiv Phillis, she never forgets a face.’
‘Ye don't need tae worry about my Phillis.’
‘He's got half of his nose bit off.’
‘The Weasel?’
‘I thought that he looked scary,’ Phillis blurted.
The cop looked at Rab, the smirk a smile.
‘I think,’ he said, ‘there might be more tae this than meets the eye.’
About the same time, for whatever reason, that the cops, they stitched up the Weasel — who would almost collapse at fat Phillis's tap, her grave face and hand upon his shoulder — Anton went for a piss.
The lavatory was high, old fashioned, a blast of disinfectant, all hard white walls, a cemented floor and three opened black-doored loos.
They each, the loos, as if built for giants; like small rooms, that you might walk inside, and gigantic pans.
Usually, you went there, a couple of doors were closed and you could smell the smoke, guys sneaking breaks.
But today, now, Anton stood at the wall, the urinal, he was all alone.
A strange morning, to say the least.
The oddest feeling about Parker.
He zipped his fly and was about to go when, and casually, as if he was half expecting it, in some sense he turned, and almost collided with the foreman, who was positioned, his weighty bulk to block the door, at the exit.
‘Caught ye,’ Parker said.
‘I only had a piss.’
‘But ye don't like it here anyhow,’ Parker said.
He was drunker now, a definite sway, but his stance too, and he seemed bigger, thicker, so that Anton was trapped, like baited, as netted as a fish or a bird.
‘Ye told me yerself that ye don't like it here.’
Anton, he felt to tell this bastard where to put his job.
And might have too, if they were in the open.
But, dark thoughts, full of dread, he felt the beat of his heart, only wanting out of here, this bog — it echoed almost as in an indoor swimming pool — had sunk a pit to him.
‘The trouble is, ye don't know very much,’ Parker said.
‘But I'm beginning tae, I think.’
‘What dae ye think?’
Anton made to go, to push by Parker who pushed him hack.
‘Ye don't know how long I've waited for this.’
‘Then ye must be crazy.’
‘Ye won't go unrewarded.’
Anton never felt so small, so light.
So scared.
Parker like a polar bear, suddenly hugging him.
Anton stumbled back, but Parker, now on his knees, as a terrible need, his big bald gleaming head — his wig had flown — crashing, crushing in on him; all of his mass, so that, the sheer weight of it, a fierce momentum, found Anton up off his feet and dumped inside a cubicle.
Parker turned to bolt the door.
Anton recovered a shade, his wits, what had happened, where he was; he began to beat on his head and back.
But puny blows, the beastly man.
And it was hard to fight, your trousers down; ripped by Parker's first assault; the thought buzzed his head, he was fighting like a girl.
He was forced then backwards, knee-bent, the weight of the man, over on the pan.
And almost nothing he could do, about Parker, his affections; he felt the mouth slobber his belly, his thighs, and the head, thick with bone that he might have punched a cannonball.
This mad affair.
Parker now, one hand, the flat of the palm, moving up his chest, under his shirt, and the other down between his legs digging in his anus.
But the maddest thing, Anton, how he was and what was happening to him, he could not scream out the shame of it.
Parker, his head now following his hand; up over Anton's belly, wet hot kisses.
The foreman still on his knees, between Anton's legs, his naked thighs.
They were splashed with blood from Parker's eye.
But he could not see, not flung, sprawled, on the flat of his back over the pan and his head against the cistern.
And Parker so lost that he did not care.
But the blood now fairly spewing.
A fluid fight if nothing else for they both were crying, weeping.
The head now up, almost under Anton's chin, beneath his bunched-up clothing, and he felt the teeth on his nipples.
He, his body — and he had fought till then, all he could — went lax, he closed his eyes, the fear (this madman good for anything) that Parker bite one off.
It was the first lull in the struggle, and Parker, he must have, mistook it for surrender.
The boy lay passive, stripped; ripped half naked, it was almost unbelievable.
He was the author of all this.
The thought was dizzying.
He raised himself, his eye, now split wide-open, lashing blood, but, and such his thrall, he brushed at it, more an inconvenience.
In some sense, dormant, through all of this Anton did not move.
He was crazily frightened and awfully ashamed, so that, when he heard voices, men speak outside the cubicle, he could not yell out to be seen this way.
Parker too, he had heard the men and there was nothing he could do.
If Anton had yelled.
That he didn't seemed to prove a point.
He would triumph.
He felt to roar in victory.
It, this, in the cubicle, the boy, the pan, what he had done, the summit of his life.
Anton, his eyes still closed, felt Parker raise his feet, his legs, and tug his shoes, his shorts and trousers off.
He felt, all that had happened, had gone before, this new humiliation — the foreman sniffed his underpants — as wretched as any suicide.
Parker swiped at his bleeding eye.
But so strung up, his  trophies; Anton's underpants, that — and this a man to swoon at blood?— it might be the merest scratch.
The cubicle like an abattoir: walls splashed with blood.
Anton, he lay, his thighs were spread, as (he felt) a sacrifice.
His shirt and jersey pushed up high, almost around his neck.
Parker let him keep his socks, that so full of holes his toes peeked through.
His chest, his nipples were swollen and red, bitten and sucked and bleeding.
Parker stood, he felt a bull.
Anton's belly and thighs, so white, a thick dark curling pubic bush, his only body hair.
Anton — this little ease, Parker's admiration — again, and a splash of blood on his forehead, felt the foreman over him, his lips at his ear, nibbling, and the hand squeeze down between his thighs and the fingers stroke and poke his anus.
Parker he played, practised fingers, a devil delight, with Anton's cock and balls, his anus, his own cock pulsed.
He had had a hard-on all the time, even as they fought — and why the fight — and he struggled with his braces.
Anton, it felt like hours, and he would never know, what instinct, as survival clutch — his fright to lose a nipple?— had kept him there, still passive, half-closed eyes, as, inviting, masochistic, as he almost accepted.
What fate dished out.
And Parker.
The foreman, hopping, one foot to the other, to get his trousers down.
Violet had left the lounge, had walked in circles and for miles.
She must have, for it was late then, the pubs long closed, and she was still in the city centre.
But she could not go home, given how she felt; fit to throw a tantrum.
To stamp her feet as a child again.
And she could not, never explain to her mother.
She thought to never explain to nobody.
That nobody would understand.
She could not.
Gloria's trick.
Whatever had possessed her?
Violet walked the city streets.
She was unused to booze, the bloody Marys; still a little woozy.
She would not, other than woozy, carefree in her anger, have walked the city streets so long, at, now, such an hour.
She found herself in St Vincent Street, when, new horror, the instep strap of a high-heeled shoe gave out on her.
Violet was stranded.
Literally.
She could walk no more.
Not with a useless shoe that she, each step, was walking out of.
So standing, looking for a taxi, on a street, the hour, was no place for a lady.
It was all too obvious, too late; Violet, where she was, her broken shoe.
The place a hive of industry.
Violet would have not believed.
Such a brazen throbbing world.
In Glasgow.
It was more for Rome or Naples.
Flaunting whores brightly dressed.
A brisk, fast trade.
They must, Violet figured, some of them, turn twenty, thirty tricks a night.
Easily.
The cars drew up for a quiet haggle, the girls got in.
It was usually cars, but, some men on foot too and walks inside alleys.
A technicolour, surrealistic night.
Something out of an Italian movie.
It had the same clinging, sullen heat.
Violet, trapped or captured, was despite herself enthralled by it all.
Waiting for a taxi.
One tall thin negress, a swift performer: in Violet's wait, three times in and out an alley.
Violet, watching the tall negress, a bold haughty bearing; she appeared the star attraction out of all the women — and there must, all smoking, posing, rude as the renaissance, be at least a hundred whores — wondered (such a rate, turnover) at the money in her handbag.
It had, whatever way, and all night long for all she knew, to amount to a pretty penny.
But the problem was that standing, anchored there, it seemed that she was up for sale.
It was the logical conclusion.
You would not think a broken shoe.
A girl alone, in this street at this hour.
Violet increasingly aware of prowling men — and, much more alarming, threatening — that she should move, only she could not move: the scowls of the whores, and some mean faces, eyes like flints, that she was poaching.
Violet, in this place, now feeling very vulnerable.
It crossed her mind to ditch her shoes and run.
Then, why should she; then, all at once, she wished she had, she was propositioned.
He was a small, scanty-haired man.
‘Two pounds,’ he said.
‘What for?’
‘My hole.’
The man shrugged a smile.
‘I don't go in for other stuff,’ he said.
‘But I don't do that.’
‘I'll give ye three.’
‘I'm waiting for someone’ Violet said.
‘I'm not a weirdo.’
‘I don't think that you understand.’
‘Ye're on yer daps,’ the man shrugged again.
‘It doesn't matter tae me — and I'll go four, so there.’
‘My daps?’
For the first time the man looked sceptical.
‘Yer period,’ he said.
‘No,’ Violet said.
She shook her head, even if she did not know why she shook her head, told this man anything.
It was nothing, after all, her broken shoe, to do with him.
‘I'll make it five,’ he said, ‘I had a win at the horses.’
Violet said, ‘You don't understand.’
‘It's yer first time out.’
‘I'm not out,’ Violet said.
‘At least not the way you think.’
‘Then what're ye doing standing there?’
‘I'm waiting for a taxi.’
The man moved closer to Violet, gripping her arm.
‘Ye don't want tae get funny wie me,’ he said.
Violet shook free from his grip, this dwarfish creep; she felt like hitting him with her shoe.
‘You keep your hands to yourself,’ she said.
The man leered, he had rotten coal-black stumps for teeth.
‘Just because ye hiv a stickman.’
‘Look,’ Violet said, ‘I'm not what you think, so if you will just go away.’
‘But I want my hole.’
‘That's your problem.’
‘I'm offering ye a fiver a short time.’
‘There's plenty of girls,’ Violet said, it must be the bloody Marys.
‘You could get your hole easily for a fiver.’
‘I know,’ the man said.
‘I've never went a fiver before.’
‘It's a lot of money.’
‘I told ye I had a win at the horses.’
Violet was surprised, that she should even speak to this man — and the crudest talk at that.
‘You really think it worth it?’
‘What are ye?’
‘A schoolteacher,’ Violet said.
‘I teach in school.’
‘Ye dae this part time?’
‘I'm not doing anything.’
‘Ye kin say that again.’
‘Only waiting for a taxi.’
‘Ye know what I think?’
‘No.’
The man peering in at Violet.
‘Ye might be a boy,’ he said.
‘That's what.’
‘Would it matter?’
‘Damn right it would.’
‘I'm not a boy.’
‘Then give us a feel tae prove it.’
‘I'll scream,’ Violet said.
‘('m not touching ye.’
‘And I'm not kidding.’
‘r don't have all night.’
‘Who's keeping you?’
‘I won't go six.’
‘You could go sixty,’ Violet said.
‘I'm still not in business.’
‘I'm beginning tae believe you.’
‘Suit yourself.’
‘But ye shouldn't be standing here, if ye're not a whore, if ye don't hiv a stickman — it's dangerous.’
‘I'll get a taxi.’
‘If I was ye,’ the man said, ‘I'd take a walk away from here thenI'd get a taxi.’
‘You would?’
‘Believe me.’
Violet did not know what to believe.
‘Having trouble, dearie?’
It was the tall negress.
‘I'm okay,’ Violet said.
‘If you says so.’
‘I'm waiting for a taxi.’
The negress, a whiplash weight; white eyes and teeth and a low deep chuckle.
‘You think I just come up de Clyde on a banana boat?’ she asked.
‘But it's true.’
‘We's been watching yo.’
Behind the negress, scaring Violet; as all the street and crowding in, like something from a freak show, the spiteful leering painted faces.
Violet, cocky  till now, she had held her own with the man — where was he?— backed hard against the wall.
‘Ye's been trying to steal our mens away.’
‘I'm only looking for a taxi.’
‘You says.’
‘I don't want your men.’
‘We pays this patch.’
‘Honest to God,’ Violet said, begging, pleading, ready to go down on her knees she saw, a glint; it quaked her bowels, the steel of the cut-throat razor.
‘Please, just let me go and I won't ever come back.’
The negress, a long moment.
She was older, close-up; some scars on her face, on the tip of her nose and her chin, black silk, were knife or razor marks.
The crowd impatient behind, crazed for blood.
‘Go cut her, Bella.’
But Bella paused.
The hard black face.
From where, what calypso island, a hovel or shack-to; she held the pack, she had progressed to queen-bee of St Vincent Street.
‘You have got to believe me,’ Violet beseeched.
‘Who is you?’
‘I'm a schoolteacher.’
‘Well, glory be,’ Bella said.
‘I had a few drinks,’ Violet was stone-cold sober now.
‘I got lost,’ she said.
‘We all is lost.’
Bella, the strange look, for a woman; all the dignity, pride; like a hundred wars, savage nights, of a once great hut ageing boxer.
‘They wants I cuts yo,’ she said, the whores behind her.
‘But I believes yo.’
Violet — her hot tears tumbled; she had been crying all the while, since she had first seen the razor and — felt like kissing her.
‘Yo go home, girl.’
Violet left her shoes.
She might (she ran; she had fouled herself) have left her knickers too.
Rubberneck was gripped by a restlessness.
Which was not at all unusual.
The urge to run.
He felt, it might be, as some  giraffe fettered in a too-low cage.
The call was so strong.
But there was Meg, and he knew his sister, her wrath, should she find out; he was reluctant to escape.
So, caught between, a huge decision.
Rubberneck chewed his fingernails; they were long bony fingers, bitten to the quick.
He peeked outside the window curtains, at the children on the street.
They were so free.
Rubberneck, sometimes — Meg had told him about St Francis, his favourite saint — thought of them as birds.
So, he had one time, from his window, thrown out bread for them to eat.
But they had all laughed and Meg, for the missing loaf, had punished him the usual way, locked-up thirsty in the room.
She would be now, as she had been all that day, out praying for his soul.
In a proper church; for they had an altar, a one-inch crucifix ‘It's all we sinners deserve’ here at home.
It was, with Rubberneck, a long habit, beat into him, each time he passed the tiny cross to kneel and genuflect.
So that, days like this; he paced the house, forever up and down.
The altar was built of orange boxes, covered with a white silk cloth that Meg had found in the ragstore.
There were, with the tiny crucifix, a few old and tattered Bibles, some rosary beads and, on holy pamphlets, the images of saints.
Rubberneck knew them all, pious lives; he had been lectured them a hundred times, even if he still could not fix a face to a saint, or only (he felt an affinity) St Francis.
The trouble for Rubberneck, he lived with a fanatic, he had not the gift .
The altar, if you could call it that, was as a block of ice to him.
He, in his prison — or cage — began to howl.
His great neck.
He could bay as a wolf.
And he had bitten his nails so that his fingers hurt and ran with blood.
Rubberneck sat on Meg's bed, this howling.
His head, craning neck; one moment high, straining to the ceiling; then, a sigh, utter dejection, dropped down between his knees, his forehead pressed to the floor.
Which was, as things turned out, lucky for some but (Jerusalem) a tragedy to Meg.
Rubberneck, as he sat on the bed, his head way down, under it, saw the suitcase.
He must, days like this, years of them, have seen the suitcase many times.
But this was the first time that he showed an interest.
Why?
You might well ask the  moon.
But down on his belly; soon, his hands were sunk deep in banknotes.
He had no idea about all the crinkly coloured papers.
Rubberneck knew only pennies, copper coins.
He thought, what twinkle, his discovery, that they were Christmas decorations.
Meg always, for the birth of Christ, had decorations and a lighted Christmas tree.
But such a lot.
He began, with the banknotes, to shape them as darts that he could fly across the room.
Then, as she had so many, she would not miss a few, he had the thought to sail them out the window.
It seemed, as inspiration; his darts, how far they flew, a great idea to Rubberneck.
His problem was, he could not show himself.
He was not supposed to — her strict orders (it was worth, if he was caught, a two-day punishment — even peek behind the curtains.
So Rubberneck crouched: he lay on the floor, and the window opened just a trifle, two, three inches, but enough, for his darts, for a dream to sail out.
Rubberneck was astonished.
The children.
They all stopped their games and looked up.
At his window.
He flew some more darts.
The children chased them, and all at once a crowd below.
Grown men and women, they all chased to catch his decorations.
Rubberneck could only compare it with a wedding, the crush, as a fight, when the cars drove off and they always threw out coins.
How he had longed, had wished and wished, to get in that happy scrum.
‘More.
More.
Give us more.’
Rubberneck scratched his head.
His scattered wits.
This wonder.
The people below, looking up.
Clutching the bits of paper.
He wondered if it was him.
He looked around, beneath the window; the floor was thick with the decorations.
But they might tell Meg.
Rubberneck almost closed the window.
He almost, in a flutter of panic — the strange reaction down below, the street now black with people — fled under Meg's bed himself.
‘God bless ye, Rubberneck,’ a voice cried out, and, at that, at least, he knew it that they were not mad at him.
It was an odd feeling —‘God bless ye, Rubberneck’— his sudden popularity.
He felt in his neck, the feeling to choke.
So used to being chased away.
Meg's magic decorations.
He opened the window.
A little higher.
How many darts?
There were plenty more where they came from.
It was all now, to him magnificent — his hour of glory — and he forgot all about Meg; she appeared as insignificant, her endless prayers, to the rapt attention of the crowd.
A beggarly, greedy lot; like dogs, as if — Rubberneck felt to swell — he was their lord and master.
‘Gie me something.’
Who?
It was hard to aim the darts.
And all of the crowd, reaching, beseeching arms, looking up at him.
‘Rubberneck .’
‘Rubberneck .’
‘Rubberneck .’
The sound crashed around his ears.
‘Good auld Rubberneck.’
Was he?
He did not know his age and no one had called him good before.
It was almost, he stood at the window, the host below, as if he felt a new St Francis.
‘More.’
‘More.’
‘We want more.’
Rubberneck now made no attempt to hide; they wanted him, he had raised the window high as it would go.
But an impatient, demanding audience, he found it hard, as he shaped his darts, to keep them satisfied.
He was carried away with it all, the homage, the serious danger that he might fall, for it was a perilous balance, his great neck straining out the window.
It was for his dogs, such fervour in each, as he was bestowing blessings.
But Rubberneck wished — for he was a pariah still, how he felt, on his high perch, even when they called his name — that he was down below, in the crush: part of the people.
It was all he really ever wanted.
He did not want, even if thrust upon him, to be a saint or saviour.
He began — for the crowd, as the mood had shifted, alarming him; some fights down there, a mass hysteria — to, fast as he could, in handfuls, what they wanted, throw out the decorations.
Banknotes wafted, wavered in the air above the street.
Others, they were all balled up, dropped as stones.
It was a wild mad festival.
Never, not even for Moses such jubilation.
What had begun as a horrible day.
Rubberneck, for the first time of his life (he no longer wished to be a part, not when people fought as animals), felt close to God.
Or something.
Within himself.
Content to be alone.
But they would not leave him alone.
‘More.’
‘More.’
‘We want more.’
Rab would not have minded Rubberneck's treat.
He would have been in there swinging with the best.
Free money.
He had to fake a robbery.
Waiting for the doctor.
But at least the snapper was quiet, sleeping in its cot.
Phillis was away to help the law, she fingered out the Weasel.
Now that poor guy, charged with attempted rape and robbery.
It had taken small effort for the cop to lead her on.
‘He must have touched ye, he stole Rab's watch from off his wrist.’
Rab faked suspicion, a jealous concern.
‘I thought as much,’ said the talkative cop.
He still kept a respectful distance from Rab, who felt some indignation, like a leper.
But he had to bear with it.
They had all to bear with it, Phillis, the doubtful prize — still it might stand up, the Weasel only half a nose, he could hardly be particular — the crooked cops they got their man and Rab claimed his insurance.
It was a good thought that; almost money in the bank.
He could just beef-up.
He would not be long here, in this house, with Phillis.
Not when soon richer than in all his life.
Rab still had the niggle to go to London.
Where the bright lights were.
But, with a keen instinct (what illness was) that all the money in the world was no use if you were sick.
Rab rolled a smoke.
His hands, his fingers looked longer; more knuckley, and his arse not worth the mention.
He could not, even when he sat on two cushions, sit easily.
Forever shifting; for, as nothing for nothing, not a fingernail, you just never thought of being without meat on your arse, and how you missed the padding.
The front door knocked, Rab supposed the doctor.
He did not like her visits; not only had she viewed his bum, but his rolling tears, so that he now felt a sissy.
The quicker he got rid of her the better.
But it was not the doctor at the door.
‘Hello, Rab.’
‘Winnie,’ he said.
‘Surprised?’ she asked.
Rab held his breast.
‘What's happened tae ye, Rab?’
‘I've not been well, Win.’
Rab ushered her into the kitchen: he wondered how she'd found him.
‘I kin see that.’
Winnie felt a huge welling, seeing the shrivelled Rab, that, and now she knew, he had not stood her up.
‘I've not been that well myself,’ she said, ‘I've been worried sick about ye.’
‘I was at death's door,’ Rab said.
‘Ye could fly ye on a kite.’
‘And I'm fatter now.’
‘It's good feeds ye need,’ Winnie said.
‘Proper care and attention.’
‘I'm waiting for the doctor.’
‘I kin hide in the room.’
‘Phillis'll soon be home.’
‘We have tae talk, Rab.’
‘I know.’
Rab looked at Winnie.
They should now be in London.
A wrecked dream, or was it?
Rab's head whirled, this busy day, night; he had lost his goods and found his lover — his wife, the crooked cops, were out to frame the Weasel.
‘Ye don't know how I've missed ye.’
‘But if Phillis had answered the door?’
‘I'd had spun her a fanny.’
Rab clutched his breast.
He did feel faint.
‘It's all too much for me,’ he said, ‘ye know, seeing ye again.’
‘Ye wanted tae, I hope — see me again.’
‘Ye don't know how,’ Rab said.
‘But look at me, the state I'm in.’
‘Poor Rab.’
‘I'm a bag of bones.’
‘But ye'll fatten up.’
‘I feel better already,’ Rab said.
Winnie smiled.
‘But I don't know how ye found me.’
‘I had tae find ye.’
‘I'd have found ye,’ Rab said.
‘If I'd been on my feet.
Wild beasts would not have stopped me.’
Winnie showed a touch of coyness.
At Rab's brave words.
That she had doubted him.
Wild beasts would not have stopped him.
She felt to hug him but was afraid to hurt; like a fragile bird, this new scrawny Rab.
Enough for now that she held his hand.
And even then afraid to squeeze.
‘It must have been something awful,’ she said.
‘You'll never know.’
‘But I kin see.’
The door knocked again.
Winnie looked at Rab.
‘You go into the room,’ he said.
‘It'll be the doctor.’
‘I think so,’ Rab said.
‘But if Phillis comes back and she's still here hide under the bed.’
‘But not too long?’
Winnie looked concerned.
She had her best clothes on.
Her trouser suit.
Blue and still new, frilled collar and cuffs with lace.
She hoped that the bed was high.
‘What on earth,’ the doctor said.
She looked at Rab suspiciously.
‘Where is your wife?’
‘With the police,’ Rab said.
‘We were burgled last night.
She's away tae identify the robber.’
‘Only one robber?’
The doctor eyed around the kitchen.
Rab's impressive damage.
‘He must have been a lunatic.’
‘He's called the Weasel.’
‘Phillis sawhim?’
‘That's why she's with the cops,’ Rab said.
‘The dirty buggar tried, ye know —‘
‘And you were there?’
‘I was fast asleep.’
‘Then he couldn't have tried awful hard.’
‘Ye'd best ask Phillis.’
‘I will.’
Rab thought, trust Phillis, this doctor; she had a squintish look and a tweedish swish in her jacket and skirt, and — Rab always thought of Robin Hood — the feather in her hat.
A long hatpin.
A real oddball.
‘And how is baby?’ she asked, moving to the cot.
Cooing.
A tickling finger.
as if he could wait.
A sheer contempt.
And Rab, he did not have to take this snash, she was supposed to get him better.
‘At least, this fellow — the Weasel — he did not harm baby.’
‘Naw.’
If he was half-way well he would tell this bitch, boot her out the door.
‘I just wish,’ he said, ‘I was half as well as baby.’
She turned to him.
The hatpin gleamed.
It was, it had to be, a weapon.
Concealed?
It was the first time that Rab admired Doctor.
A fucking pin to kill you, but he wished, this tumbling day, Winnie in the room, that she would get a move on.
‘You're still very thin.’
The doctor looked at Rab, in a critical way.
‘What was it that you weighed?’
‘About twelve stone.’
‘I should think about eight now.’
‘I was told,’ Rab said, Winnie's stinging remark, and it had stung him, ‘that ye could fly me on a kite.’
‘Who told you that?’
‘A friend.’
‘Do you worry a lot?’
‘Would ye,’ Rab asked; he thought it the daftest question, ‘if somebody tells ye they could fly ye on a kite?
‘About other things?’
‘What other things?’
‘Well, this robbery — it would upset many a man.’
‘It's my health,’ Rab said, ‘my weight more what worries me.’
‘I used to be a psychiatrist,’ Doctor said.
‘It was my first love.’
‘It was?’
Rab wondered about Doctor, had she gone mad; speaking to him, almost as if he was human.
‘But I didn't have the looks.’
Rab didn't know what to say.
‘You see, people just didn't trust me.’
Rab still didn't know what to say.
‘My eyes’ Doctor said.
‘I see,’ Rab said.
‘But I don't think you understand.’
‘I'm trying tae.’
‘You weren't robbed at all, were you?’
Rab said nothing.
This woman.
His present state.
She could cow him at a glance.
‘But don't worry, I won't say — I won't even tell Phillis.’
‘I'm not saying I wasn't robbed.’
‘Of course you're not.
You would be a complete fool if you did.
All I'm saying is that worry can make you thin.’
‘It kin?’
‘You should be a lot heavier by now.’
Rab thought of Winnie in the room, his worry, her money, their run to London, that he had lost her.
‘If you want to talk to me,’ Doctor said.
Rab said naw.
‘But ye might be right,’ he conceded.
‘I've been feeling a wee bit down recently.’
‘Depressed?’
They were seated now, on Rab's ruined chairs; and Rab noticed that Doctor — some surprise — had not a bad leg.
She was tough and stringy, hard to chew, but good long strong legs.
Rab though of cork-like nipples.
He had no idea why; for he certainly did not fancy her, his thought of cork-like nipples.
‘You have been taking your medicine?’ she asked.
‘But I'm still skinny,’ Rab said.
Doctor looked at him.
‘I should really speak with you and Phillis.’
Rab held his breath.
‘Another time,’ Doctor said.
Rab said nothing; this woman, her new approach; she did not fancy him?
It was hard to tell how Doctor was thinking.
‘In the meantime,’ she said, she wrote on her prescription pad, ‘I'll give you something that should buck you up immensely.’
But all Rab needed — to buck him up — was waiting in the room.
Listening at the door?
It was an odd examination, he wasn't even sounded.
Or only his head.
The queer thought: Doctor, she could read him like a book.
‘I take it you are insured?’ she said.
‘A wee policy.’
Doctor smiled, or smirked Rab thought.
They were standing now, in the as bomb-hit kitchen, Rab and Doctor; and Doctor — she was taller than him, what with her feather and hat, by a good head — said, ‘Those pills that I've given you, take them only as prescribed.
We wouldn't want a stomach pump.’
‘I don't think I'd want a stomach pump,’ Rab said.
‘I'm sure you wouldn't, so only as prescribed.’
Rab nodded his head.
Doctor pondering at the door.
Her fucking pills.
She thought that he would take them?
People didn't trust her.
Her hatpin gleamed.
It must have been six, seven inches at least; glittering steel, and she thought she should be trusted?
‘I thought that she would never leave,’ Winnie said.
‘I had tae humour her,’ Rab said.
He palmed his brow.
‘But a fucking queer fish.’
‘She sounded it.’
‘I don't know where Phillis found her.’
‘What did she give ye?’
‘I don't know.’
Rab looked at his prescription.
‘But whatever it is I don't think that I need it now.’
‘Still ye'd better take it.
It might dae ye good.’
‘I know what'll dae me even better.’
Rab bared his teeth, his shocker smile.
‘And I think they're only worry pills and I'm not worried any more.’
Winnie smile.
Sweetly.
Proudly.
Rab's complaint.
He was
listing over her.’
Rab sneered, he tore up his prescription.
‘I don't believe in pills,’ he said.
‘I know what's best for me.’
Looking at Winnie, who, it might be, closed her eyes that she did not see his teeth.
But a kiss denied, for Phillis was knocking on the door.
Winnie looked at Rab.
Rab said, ‘I'll send her out tae the chemist.’
‘Ye tore up the prescription.’
‘I'll put it together again.’
And Winnie was back inside the room again.
Phillis asked, ‘Did Doctor come?’
‘She's only away.’
‘Did ye tell her where I was?’
Rab was down on the floor gathering his prescription.
‘I told her.’
‘I might need tae go tae court,’ Phillis said.
‘That man — the Weasel — swears he was in bed wie his wife.’
‘But we know different.’
‘His wife, she swears he was in bed wie her.’
‘She would,’ Rab said.
‘What dae ye expect?’
‘She spat at me,’ Phillis said.
‘Ye want tae hear what she called me.’
Rab said, ‘Sticks and stones kin break yer bones but words kin never hurt ye.’
‘I'm not so sure,’ Phillis said.
‘It took two cops tae hold her back.’
‘Ye might never see her again.’
‘I hope I don't.’
‘Ye're tae go tae the chemist for me.’
‘If I hiv tae go tae court,’ Phillis said.
‘She'll be there.’
‘It's only her word against yours.’
‘But I don't wanttae see her again.’
‘Ye picked him out?’
‘r wished now that I never.’
‘But ye know it was him?’
‘I think it was him.’
‘If ye picked him out it must hiv been him.’
Rab viewed Phillis sternly.
‘Ye don't think ye kin change yer mind,’ he warned.
This was a much changed Phillis from the buoyant, flushed — as a blown-up frog with her self-importance — righteous one that had left the house hardly an hour before.
It was not a game no more.
Not an outraged wife with wide wild-eyed stare.
‘My man, he wouldn't even look at that .’
‘Ye told the truth,’ Rab said.
‘Ye picked him out.
Ye keep tae it.’
But Phillis was worried; the wife, spitting spite, her statements —‘My man would run from her, from the likes of that fat bun’— she repeated them out loud in court.
‘She shouldn't have been there, his wife,’ Rab said.
‘But she was.’
I wouldn't be surprised,’ Rab said, ‘if she was in here wie him last night as well.’
Phillis said, ‘She wouldn't have let him touch me if she was here.’
‘Are ye going for my prescription?’
Rab asked.
‘Doctor said I had tae have it.’
‘But it's all torn up.’
‘The chemist'll put it taegether again.’
‘Why'd ye tear it up if it was all that important?’
‘I didn't know what I was daeing.’
‘Then it'll jist hiv tae wait,’ Phillis said.
‘Because I don't think I knew what I was daeing either.’
And with that, the taunts of the Weasel's wife still ringing in her ears, vinegar words, she had felt so good about her allegations, now storming tears, humiliation — and not a little frightened — she fled through to the room.
Rab stood.
Aghast.
Phillis's speed.
He had never seen her move so fast.
Rab waited for the explosion.
And waited.
Silence.
Rab stood in his ruined kitchen.
This day of surprise, surprises.
No end to them.
And nothing he could do.
But silence.
Rab looked at his prescription.
Confetti.
Resigned to it all.
He imagined first a slanging match, fat Phillis and his lithesome Winnie.
But too long, and Rab, thinking fuck it all, whatever happened, sat down and rolled a fag.
Anton, his torture, laid out as for sacrifice, locked in with the madman.
Parker now with his trousers down.
Bare-legged in his shoes.
But a long shirt tail flopped down around his thighs.
Anton looked out from lowered lashes.
Parker's face was a mask of blood and he kept brushing at his eye.
But crazed with lust, it rode him on: he had come so far, and bunching up his shirt.
Anton, he saw the cock, it stood to quiver, it all seemed hardly possible.
Yet how things stood, he could fight no more, anything was possible.
This savage day, and he thought, inexplicably, for it was a long time ago — he had thought to have forgotten it — of a boy who was swallowed in a sewer.
They had played, a gang of kids, on the walls above the sewer; it pitched its load into the Clyde.
A cesspool rose and fell.
It rose sometimes; swirling turds, a frightful spew, alarmingly high.
The one pipe pumped it full, the other — you were always scared it stuck, some sort of ballcock worked the thing — splashed it out.
Into the river.
And there were always, summertime, kids up there, on the walls; some attraction, dare, above the pit.
But the walls were heavy and thick, quarried stone; that you could leap-frog on top, and there must (the tenements) be generations of kids up there.
Till the boy fell in and they fenced it off.
What should never have been opened.
But it always takes a tragedy.
The boy had a history of fits.
He threw one the very worst time, up on top of the wall, and the other kids all shunned away.
More horror of him than the shit of the pit.
Something, it might be a human condition, a fear of epilepsy.
The boy — Anton knew him by sight but not his name — twitched and rolled and jerked and strained and foam bubbled from his mouth.
He was about Anton's own age, ten or eleven; and still, as were they all, all the boys up on the wall, dressed in shorts and sandshoes.
Anton remembered wine socks, his small white twitching legs.
The sun beat down.
A scorcher of a day.
Heavy with insects.
The pit was thick with flies.
Heavy fat bluebottles, so gorged, stunned by the heat that they could barely fly.
The river black, flat, wide on the turn, and solid as a road.
This place, you called it ‘The Big Garden’ remote from the slums; a waste land, crooked trees, and head-high grass, and easy to think (Tarzan pictures) that you were in the jungle.
There must be a good twenty children there that day.
Anton remembered a girl, a terrible tomboy.
He knew her brother who, strangely, was as timid as she was bold.
Always with the boys.
What games they played.
She was, later, with her wild ways, treated to a stay in a borstal.
It was a vivid recall, he remembered the girl; in dungarees, short golden hair (it glinted in the sun) and bright blue — the first he was aware, the beginning of a crush?— sparkling eyes.
As that she should make a move.
The boy, his spasms; like some beached fish, but they all stood back.
And a definite hush.
You didn't even speak.
The drama.
But you heard the  surge, the source of the drama; the foulest gush, the sewer filling up.
On and on, the boy; his thrashing, and Anton remembered his eyes, great bulging orbs; it seemed to last forever.
He, as a rag doll, contorted, controlled by invisible strings, jerked one way and then the other and the sewer filled up high, not a half-foot from the top of the walls, so that his tumble, when he fell into the swamp, it was more a plop than a splash.
He surfaced once but his fit had passed.
You knew at a glance, his eyes.
A terrible dawning.
He tried to swim, to claw at the wall but he could not; not against years of shit, clinging slime — he might easier have climbed a glacier — get a grip, and still no one; no reaching hand to help him.
And they could have pulled him out then.
The sewer was flat.
Calm.
There was always a pause, in the pit, some law, that it levelled out before the spew.
But they all stood there as dummies.
The boy swum a little in the shit, in the sun; in the vivid brilliant day.
But then, sluggish at first, at the top, like a whisper, the pool began to whirl.
The boy: he splashed, no hope in the current, pulled round and round; like an insect, and hitting the walls, sickening thuds, cracked his head, whirling round and round, ever faster; so that, as the level dropped, your eyes spun watching him.
All the kids, still not a word, a silence; as if gripped by a spell; afterwards, you thought about it, the whirling boy, he could have easily been you.
A nudge or push.
A trip.
You simply lost your balance.
But at the hack of your head you had always thought for rescue, reaching hands.
Not this.
That they had all stood and let him go.
Whirl away with the whirling turds, dead dogs and cats and rats.
They then, after a bit (the boy had disappeared, the sewer gurgled empty) moved to the end wall over the river: you did not want to miss, not now, that small boy, he had been carried out, floating face-up, his opened eyes to the burning sun in the tar of the hard still river.
He felt Parker's cock in his face.
A searing heat.
The tickle of hairy balls.
And Parker's hands at the back of his head.
Lifting it.
Coaxing.
The tip of his cock.
It rode up and down his face, his eyes and nose, and pressed against his lips.
‘Come on.
Come on.
Open up.
It won't hurt.’
Parker gripped and pulled, tugged at his hair.
Was this the man, he straddled the boy, who had once run from a girl?
Anton was caught helpless, limp; as beaten as the long ago boy, he was trapped in the cesspool.
The cock; stiff as rock, a big plum of a gland, pressing at his mouth.
And afraid the man might kill him.
The insistent, pressing cock.
It rubbed his lips apart — he had the crazy thought (it flashed through his head) of a white-mouthed golliwog.
‘The teeth.’
Parker tugged his hair.
‘Watch the fucking teeth,’ he said.
Anton drew them back, under his lips.
He now covered the plum.
as if stuck on it.
Parker clapped his head.
He was master now; a fine control, his cock, or the gland at least, in Anton's mouth.
‘Ouch.’
Rubberneck clutched his ear.
Meg swung her handbag.
‘Ouch.’
Rubberneck backed away.
The handbag was heavy, solid; it took Meg all her time, a weight of love, to carry it, filled with her favourite Bible.
But with a new-found strength she swung it as a feather, at the luckless Rubberneck.
Caught still standing at the window, Meg's scattered treasure, her, now lost forever, blown wits.
She had long teetered on the brink.
A thing like this.
It was enough, Jerusalem lost, to unhinge a saint.
She whipped the handbag as a lash: Rubberneck dropped down as a dog.
Rubberneck; the sudden strike, the clout on his ear.
He (the people below; they cheered him wildly) had not heard Meg behind him.
She had stood a moment, a long pause; at first(her suitcase, the littered money) she could not believe her eyes.
And she heard the people, the shouting below, Rubberneck, full handfuls, dispensing her alms.
Meant for another people another city another time.
And then, a scream stuck in her  throat; the whole, this idiot, an awful truth dawning — all her years, as a drudge, working in the ragstore, a scrooge for every penny, her hopes and dreams for nothing; her teeth were bared and her eyes stood out and Rubberneck — he had done something awful wrong — rolled over meekly on his belly.
But Meg, it might be that he had stole her cubs, was not for his surrender.
Swinging, ripping his face — she broke his nose, a gush of blood — with her handbag.
‘Viper.’
Rubberneck squirmed.
On the floor.
Beside the sink.
Which was near to the window.
And lucky for Rubberneck.
He tried to cover his face with his hands.
But with the weighted handbag, and swung as a mace, they afforded small protection.
‘Jackal.’
Rubberneck whimpered.
He did not scream.
Why?
The swinging, ripping bag.
His sister.
He was conditioned to obey, but never this.
She had not spilled his blood before.
And Rubberneck, through it all, his scourging, felt a great sadness.
It overrode the pain, as, each slash, cut by the bag, or she kicked at him, just another woe; as a crashing, endless tide; all the sins of the world his sadness.
‘Infidel.’
There was a hush, the street, below the opened window;, with the slum folk, an age-old code, it was against the grain, to interfere in a thing like this, Rubberneck and his sister.
‘A fucking shrew,’ one man declared.
‘The poor do-lally,’ a woman said.
‘She's beating him half to death.’
‘Poor auld Rubberneck.’
But still — within the house, in open view, Meg might have murdered Rubberneck — they would not make a move.
Meg was unaware of it, them; heads craning up, a murmuring on the street.
Her cringing bloodied brother.
She was aware of him, as a demon; the wrecker of all her dreams, of Jerusalem in the sun.
She saw now, so clearly, she kicked at him; this ruination, contamination, a conjure up from Hell.
It dizzied Meg.
She realised.
A bolt of thunder.
Satan's trick.
All down the years.
But his truth was out.
This loathsome  thing, as a festering sore, a scuttling crap, that it was a holy duty to destroy.
On the street, a hush below: from a festive air to witnessing a hanging, the crowd — two, three hundred strong, men, women and children; much, a lot of them, richer than they had been before — looked mutely on.
The lore of the slum.
Old as the tenements.
A wink from the cave.
A brother and his sister.
It was not their place to do a thing.
But there was the law.
Sometimes.
Cops happened by, two casual burly uniformed cops.
Meg shrilled, and she had lost her bag in her frenzy.
Rubberneck, the beating stopped, a pause, peeked out between his fingers.
Meg was over by the fire.
It was his chance, but he did not even think to run.
Rather he lowered his trousers.
So skinny, wasted legs and narrow hips that his genitalia showed gigantic.
Lewd.
Freakish.
Obscene.
Meg turned, a new abomination.
‘Whore of Babylon,’ she cried, irrationally; but nothing now was rational, half-way sane, not Meg, not as she gripped the coal poker.
The two cops; they had knocked, then, that moment, crashed down the door.
Meg stood riveted.
She could not comprehend.
The cops.
Her eyes narrowed.
‘Police,’ one cop said, and he felt ridiculous, in full uniform, his truncheon out, but, twenty years in the job, he had never, in all his time, seen a house like this before.
‘Mammy.
Mammy.
Mammy,’ Rubberneck wailed, an echo from the cradle.
‘I want ma mammy.
Mammy.
Mammy.
Mammy.’
‘Put down the poker.’
Meg glowered.
The cops, a glance one to the other; at the smelling — he had messed himself — wailing Rubberneck, his small defiant (and very dangerous) sister.
‘Imps,’ Meg cried.
She stood between the cops and Rubberneck.
‘Thou shalt not save thy master.’
‘Put down the poker.’
‘Begone foul things.’
‘We don't want tae hurt ye.’
‘Begone.’
‘Missus, we can'tgo.’
‘I command ye.’
Meg waved the poker, it might be a wand or Moses's magic staff.
‘Go now.’
‘Mammy.
Mammy.
Mammy.
I want ma mammy.’
‘In the name of the Lord,’ Meg said.
‘What were ye going tae dae tae him?’
‘Yer master?’
‘He's not our master.’
‘Pull the other one,’ Meg said, deadly serious.
‘It's got bells on it.’
‘Missus, we can't stay here all day.
Will ye put down the fucking poker?’
Meg Appeared to falter.
She blinked her eyes.
The policemen closed in on her.
Meg, she dropped the poker, did not even try to fight.
Standing.
Small and forlorn, as if exorcised.
Her own particular demon gone but with it her freedom.
The cops — near to the window the floor was littered with money, Meg's hoard — now in control; the lawmen, they determined, before other lawmen got there, to get a share.
One kept a grip on Meg; she might be too quiet, another madness; the other pulled over the curtains; he blocked out the mob, the street below, and stuffed his tunic pockets.
Meg, he reasoned, where she was going, would not be needing any.
Winnie, dear Jesus, beneath the bed, and she had never moved so fast, would the fat sow never rise?
She must need to feed the bairn.
Winnie grimaced and bore it.
For the love of Rab.
But it was taxing, pressing; with Phillis's weight, the bed sagged down upon her.
Winnie flat on her back and a crick in her neck now she had to turn it, for air, peeking out from under.
She heard Rab, ‘Get up ya lazy swine,’ but Phillis did not stir; there was little he could do.
No, not now, the weighty slut, she easily the stronger, and Winnie's heart went out to him.
His condition.
Winnie was still pushed to credit it, skinny to not believe.
Yet, it must, this new thin man, he had seemed a gleam of randiness, be the old Rab.
But Winnie, in all, though glad he was sick, that he had not jilted her, would have much preferred a broken leg — she had hoped for a broken leg — than  the way he was, like those newsreel horrors: Hitler's Jews, like something out of Belsen.
Rab, fat Phillis: he felt to lift the coal hammer but settled for a feather.
There were a few, in the wreckage of his chairs.
The day had been a hummer: a huge leap nearer London.
The bright lights.
Rab, with his feather, began to tickle the snapper's toes.
It was one, the only sure, way to rouse Phillis.
The snapper's wails.
It surely took after her, a greedy noisy mouth to feed.
Rab sat down and held his ears.
Phillis asked, she stood in the doorway.
‘What's the matter wie the snapper?’
‘He must need fed.’
‘He's yer'n snapper the same as mine.’
‘But I don't hiv a fucking tit, dae I?’
Phillis gathered up the infant, Rab went through to the room.
‘It's me,’ he whispered, sitting on the bed.
‘Thank God for that,’ Winnie said, emerging from under and dusting down her clothing.
‘I thought tae suffocate in there.’
Rab sneezed.
The dust.
Winnie in a billow.
‘I'm not, I won't never hide under a bed again,’ she declared.
‘Out the windie,’ Rab said, a sudden thought.
‘I'll meet ye in the corner pub.’
‘Ye kin — I mean, ye're fit tae meet me in the corner pub?’
‘I'll make it,’ Rab said.
‘Don't worry.’
But Winnie did.
Worry.
She wondered about the wind.
The slightest breeze to carry her love away.
But, and a squeak from being caught, Phillis in the kitchen, she could only agree, to meet Rab in the corner pub.
It was a sawdust floor and red cheap wine.
The barman was a beefy guy with his sleeves rolled up and tattoos on his arms.
Rab admired them.
He had often thought of a tattoo himself.
A touch of manliness.
Tattooed men were most manly.
Winnie sat in the far corner of the pub; a twilighted place and the sawdust thick for the feel of sand.
‘A dump,’ she said.
‘It's handy, is a'.'
‘But the wine's not bad.’
Rab looked at her glass, wine red as blood, for they did not in this place sell gin and tonic.
‘They call it Dragon's,’ he said.
Winnie made a face but drank it down.
Greedily.
Rab raised his eyebrows but, at least(Winnie's drooth, it must be the dust beneath the bed) the stuff was cheap.
‘How did ye find me?’
‘I traced ye back tae the dairy — ye know, the place ye worked when ye were a boy.’
‘That was clever.’
‘I got yer second name and it was easy after that.’
Rab looked at Winnie's empty glass.
‘My throat's full of stoor,’ she said.
‘Ye don't want a beer?’
‘Another wine.
They gie ye a lot of wine in here, I'll say that for this pub.’
Rab went up to the bar.
‘Another wine and beer, Stick?’
‘Only the wine.’
Rab felt bagged by what beer he had already drank and he did not like the nickname.
The beefy tattooed barman.
He looked a bruiser but was free with the wine, a half pint glass and sloshing over.
‘That'll put some hair on her tits,’ he said.
Rab paid his money and took Winnie's wine; he spilled a little, feeling so skinny: his trousers flapped around his legs and he should be out?
Winnie asked, ‘Ye feel okay?’
‘A wee bit light.’
‘Ye looked a wee bit shaky at the bar.’
‘I'm okay,’ Rab said.
But he had small taste for the bagging beer and wished to have bought himself a wine.
The stuff, one glass, had put new sparkle in her eyes, good to laugh, it worked a treat with Winnie.
‘Still it's good that ye're out,’ she said, a swallow of her wine.
‘It shows that ye're getting better.’
‘I suppose, '’ Rab said, but he hardly felt the better; not, with hobo drinkers, they looked at him and the tattooed barman called him Stick.
It was enough for Rab, a sip of Winnie's wine.
‘Ye like it?’
Winnie asked.
Rab thought a hint of metal.
‘But I don't like that barman, he said.
Winnie looked.
‘He's just a big fattie,’ she said and laughed: a shade too loudly, a lot too widely, so that the fit of her dentures showed.
‘Don't worry about him.’
‘I'm not worried,’ Rab said.
‘At least not about him.’
‘That doctor, she said that ye worry too much.’
‘I was worried about ye.’
Winnie's hand caressed Rab's thigh.
‘I thought tae have lost ye.’
‘But I'm back again,’ Winnie said.
‘If I could,’ Rab said, 'if I was fit enough ('d ask ye we run away the night.’
‘I'd go.’
‘Ye would?’
‘Just ask me.’
‘If I was fit enough.’
‘Ye'll soon be fit again.’
‘I have ye back,’ Rab said, ‘I think I will.’
‘And quicker than ye know,’ Winnie enthused.
Her face was flushed and her eyes were bright, as burning with a fierce love.
‘We'll hit the high spots, ye and me.’
‘Ye bet,’ Rab said, ‘we will.’
Winnie pecked him on the cheek.
‘A right couple of lovebirds yous are,’ a tall tramp said.
He stood swaying and a jug of wine.
Looking at Winnie.
‘Ye might kill him, hen.’
‘I'll kill ye.’
A ragamuffin woman, his mate, a dung-like waft, appeared to pull the tramp away.
‘He gets a bit of wine in him,’ she avoided Rab, a look at Winnie who looked to scratch her eyes out.
‘I'm awful sorry.’
‘I'm sorry tae,’ the man said.
He produced a dirty horny hand.
‘Shake on it.’
But the woman, not so drunk, seeing the protective Winnie, cuffed his head and hustled him away.
‘Phew,’ Rab said.
He held his nose.
‘She smells like a fucking stable.’
‘I don't like,’ Winnie said, ‘people poking their faces in where it doesn't concern them.’
‘It's that I'm so skinny,’ Rab said.
‘But they'll not take advantage, Winnie said.
‘Not if I'm with ye.’
Rab thought (the barman) that it better Winnie went, for a couple more wines.
‘I'll treat,’ Winnie said.
Rab rolled a smoke while Winnie was at the bar.
This dive of bums, the drunkards of Wine Alley.
But early yet and a kind of hush, just scattered bodies here and there and a rag-glad snore on the floor, in the sawdust.
Winnie returned with the wines.
‘It's a good full measure,’ she said.
‘I've never known a place where ye get so much wine.’
‘Did he say anything?’
‘Who?’
‘The barman.’
‘Naw.
Should he?’
‘I just wondered.’
‘He never said a word.’
Rab drank his wine, a good, a manly, swallow to almost drain his glass.
The half pint tumbler.
The stuff spun his head, he felt his hair: an instant sprout, so that he sat a half-inch taller.
‘Ye want another?’
Winnie asked, Rab's empty glass.
‘Why not?’
Rab shrugged his shoulders.
They felt not so slender nor fragile now.
‘But don't speak tae that barman.’
‘Ye don't like him?’
He called me Stick.’
‘But ye are thin, Rab.’
‘He could have called me Slim.’
‘It's something the same.’
‘It's nothing the same,’ Rab said.
He was about to explain, how a whoremaster in Glasgow slang, was referred to as a stickman, when Winnie said, ‘I think I understand.’
‘Just don't speak tae him.’
‘I won't.’
While Winnie was away Rab sneaked a drink of her wine.
It did not taste so metallic now, rather he thought quite juicy.
And it had lifted him all right, and not his hair alone.
Rab a whole new confidence; the miserable wretch, like a cowardly freak, had tip-toed into this place.
Indeed he almost felt for  music, wild dancing now: Winnie returned, with two wines, which was just as well as Rab had all but drained her glass.
‘He said nothing?’
‘Not a dicky bird.’
Winnie looked at Rab.
‘I think he knew better.’
The wine was sticky on Rab's fingers, tackety stuff: but it wormed a treat his head.
Rab was beginning to enjoy himself.
It was, sitting in the pub, with Winnie, like old times again.
So long ago.
Aeons past his nightmare.
‘Ye're a real wee smasher,’ he told her.
‘Ye don't know how ye've cheered me up.’
Winnie flushed her pleasure.
Her sham teeth gleamed.
Some sweat on her brow.
As a soft dew.
Rab felt to lick it off but the time, the place, was wrong; a dump like this, it was hard to be anything, anyway romantic.
This drunken night.
It was fast becoming.
How Rab sat, his weakened state: his first night out, and he thought to be seeing things.
The pub had filled considerably; the swiftest time, a squeeze at the bar, a fight for wine, when, casually, almost dead centre in the sawdust floor, the rag-glad snore had risen up and lowered down his trousers.
Rab held Winnie's hand.
The drinkers, drunk as they were, full of glasses of wine, fell back from the man, who, with the rags he wore, had surprisingly clean white underpants — what struck Rab — raised his coat and squatted down as the most natural thing in the world.
There was a silence in the pub.
The man.
A held audience.
He went about his business.
Then a sudden roar of rage: the beefy tattooed barman.
He burst through the drinkers, but too late his swinging foot: a mighty kick that raised the man, who was a scrawny fellow, withered haunches, a good foot in the air.
A cat-like squeal.
He landed on all fours.
The pub stood back in silence.
The burly barman, it might be he was once a footballer: he booted the man up and down and up and down and out into the street.
‘It must be why they've sawdust,’ Winnie observed.
‘He'll have a sore arse in the morning,’ Rab said.
A barmaid emerged with a brush and shovel.
Rab began to laugh.
It was quite the funniest thing — all of it, the squeals from the man, the sounds of a cat — that he had ever seen.
But the rest of the pub, the drinkers: they downed their wine, the incident seemed forgotten.
‘Ye don't think it happens often?’
Winnie asked.
But Rab could not speak for laughing.
A convulsive fit so that his thin frame shook.
How the guy had squealed.
Kicked out like a cat.
But such contempt.
A true ‘fuck you’ and if only he had fought.
It would, to Rab, be an heroic deed if the man had fought.
But how it was — he booted out, thumping kicks, as a squealing cat — it was turned into a farce.
‘I've never seen nothing like it,’ he said.
‘And I don't want tae see nothing like it again,’ Winnie said.
‘The dirty thing.’
The barmaid poured some disinfectant.
It smelled strongly of pine.
At the far end of the bar a fight broke out, and again the tattooed barman.
He appeared to have a talent for leaping the counter.
This time with a club, what looked like an Irish shillelagh.
But the fight broke of its own accord.
There was nobody booted, or clubbed, out.
The barman, a big fat arse, with what must be a practised vault of the bar, was again serving wine.
‘But it's only winos he's dealing with,’ Rab said.
‘If a real man walked in he'd soon dance another tune.’
Winnie agreed.
What else?
But she was not so sure that Rab was right.
The barman looked tough enough to her.
She had heard his boot and roaring oaths.
‘It's nothing tae dae wie us,’ she said.
‘But if a real man did walk in.’
‘He would need tae be a fit real man,’ Winnie said.
At that very instant, as Winnie spoke, the barman leapt the bar again.
‘He's a big bully,’ a woman told Rab.
‘Just look at him.’
Rab did.
Look.
The energetic barman.
This time, and for no apparent reason, the grip of a woman by the hair of her head.
A peculiar hold.
As hefting her out on his back.
The woman up in the air, screaming by her pigtails.
‘Why did he dae that?’
Rab was honestly astounded: the caveman heave, and what, in this place, had gone before.
‘She must hiv tried tae steal another body's wine,’ the woman, a greasy looking hag, told him.
‘He stands nae nonsense then,’ Rab said.
‘Ye don't think we should go?’
Winnie asked.
‘We'll have another wine.’
‘Ye really think we should?’
‘I'll go get them,’ Rab offered.
But Winnie was already on her feet.
‘She's yer mammy?’ the hag asked Rab.
‘Ye'd better not let her hear that.’
‘Then it's as well that she's not here.’
The woman — Rab, with the wine, and so took-on with the barman, had not noticed her before — sat across from him, over a small, square tin-topped table.
‘I should watch my mouth,’ she said.
‘It would be wise,’ Rab said, a look at her head: the length of her hair.
‘She's my lover.’
‘And a fine figure of a woman tae.’
Rab lit a roll-up.
The barman was back (a leap) at his station behind the bar, as if nothing had happened.
‘Even if she had stole some wine,’ Rab said.
‘Ye don't know the half of it,’ the woman said.
‘Just look what he done tae Paddy.’
‘He biffed me on the nose,’ Paddy said.
‘I kin see that,’ Rab said.
Paddy's nose, the bridge was smashed giving an upward tilt and a hog-like look.
‘His fist did that?’
‘One punch,’ said Paddy, rather proudly.
Rab swallowed Winnie's wine.
He would not want a nose like that.
And Paddy looked a husky, strong guy.
He had big rough hairy hands.
‘Then he must be even stronger than he looks,’ Rab said.
‘He gave ye a snout like that.’
‘And Paddy with only the one leg tae,’ the woman said.
‘It takes away the balance,’ Paddy said.
‘It's hard tae fight if ye have only one leg.’
‘The fucking craw,’ Rab said.
‘Who?’
Winnie asked.
‘That barman.’
‘I wish ye would forget him, Rab.’
‘We were talking about Paddy,’ the woman said.
‘Look at his nose,’ Rab said.
‘Ye could go out for yer Halloween wie a snout like yon.’
‘I think we should go, Rab.’
‘We're going tae run away,’ Rab told the woman.
‘Winnie and me.’
‘Yous are?’
‘Tae London.’
‘That's dead romantic,’ the woman said.
‘I always wished I'd been in love and run away when I was young.’
Winnie smiled: but sadly.
‘Rab has not been well,’ she said.
‘Otherwise we might have been in London,’ Rab said.
‘Ye look a bit skinny,’ the woman said.
‘But then ye know what they say, the lean hungry ones.’
‘He's skinny okay,’ Paddy said.
‘Do ye eat at all?’ he asked Rab.
‘I bet,’ the woman said, ‘he eats like a wolf.’
Rab, this talk about him, his complaint, wondered, the pair, were they trying to be funny?
But, dear Christ, they could hardly talk: Paddy with his bashed-in nose, the look of a hog and a missing leg; and the woman — his wife?— she was lucky for even a guy like him.
Winnie — she was half seas over; so that her teeth were loose and her speech was slurred — said, ‘Rab's right sensitive about his health, so he is.
He used tae be a real fine build of a man.’
‘But I got sick,’ Rab said.
‘My name is Pol,’ the woman said.
‘He nearly died,’ Winnie said.
‘I kin believe that,’ Paddy said.
‘He gave me a fright the look of him.’
Rab bristled, the hog-like bum.
‘Have ye ever looked in a mirror?’ he asked.
‘Now.
Now,’ Pol said.
‘We're all friends here.
We don't want tae fight now, dae we?’
‘That depends on him,’ Rab declared, emboldened by the wine, and Paddy had only one leg.
‘I told yous,’ Winnie said, ‘Rab's right sensitive.’
‘And he's a right tae be,’ Pol agreed.
‘It's Paddy was in the wrong.’
‘He was going tae go for the barman,’ Winnie said, ‘he thought that he insulted him.’
‘I was in the wrong,’ Paddy said.
‘He might be a sick man, but he's proud.
He didn't even want tae come out: he tried tae hide away he is so proud.’
‘He was going tae got for Big Lurch?’
‘If he's the barman,’ Winnie said, ‘too true he was.’
Rab looked at Paddy's nose.
He was?
It demanded a taste of the wine.
‘He looks like ye could blow him away tae,’ Pol said.
Then, no wish to offend.
‘But looks kin be deceiving.’
‘Better him than me,’ Paddy said.
‘I told ye, the lean hungry ones,’ Pol said.
‘A skinny man will always beat a fattie.’
‘Big Lurch is a beefy bastard,’ Rab said, and quite loudly: this was him they were speaking about?
‘Shoo,’ Pol said.
‘We all know he is but it's better we keep it quiet.’
At the bar a group of dossers began singing Roaming in the Gloaming .
‘Wie a lassie by yer side ,’ Paddy chorused.
‘But I'll never go roaming in the gloaming again,’ he said.
‘What happened tae yer leg?’
Winnie asked.
‘A lion bit it off,’ Pol said.
She nodded her head for emphasis.
‘We're really gipsies, Paddy and me.
It was the circus life for us.
We went everywhere wie the circus.
Everywhere.’
Her head nodded again.
It might be the help the wine.
‘All over the world.’
‘Only Europe,’ Paddy said.
‘But we were going tae South America: tae Brazil, when I got my leg bit off.
Raja, that was the name of the beast.
I'll never forget that one.
Don't never think animals don't know.’
Paddy drank some wine.
‘Raja had it in for me and just waited its time.
The bastard knew when I took a drink.
It knew the nights when I was more drunk than others and the first time that I turned my back.’
Paddy made a gnashing gesture: he had a few brown nail-like teeth.
‘I wouldn't have turned my back only I was drunk.’
‘How had it in for ye?’
Rab asked.
‘It thought that I'd sold its mate.
Sheeba.
The two of them was mates since cubs.
She was one fine lion and I don't blame Raja, only it wasn't me.
I even begged the circus owner not tae sell her.
But he laughed at me.
He didn't know lions and it wasn't him had tae go inside the cage.
I didn't like it but I needed the money — the bastard threatened tae evict us from our caravan if I wouldn't train the lions — and I was scared of Raja and it knew I was scared and I got drunk and drunker and’— Paddy held his crutch aloft —‘ye see what happened.’
‘I warned him,’ Pol said.
‘I warned him time and again— he got sometimes so drunk they had tae carry him inside the cage — but what kin ye dae wie a man that won't listen?’
‘Is this all true,’ Rab asked, engrossed by the story, ‘yous two in a circus?’
‘But I wished it wasn't,’ Paddy said.
‘I bet ye dae.’
‘I still get nightmares.’
‘He wakes up screaming,’ Pol said, ‘sometimes in the middle of the night.’
‘Ye want tae be a man about it,’ Rab rebuked Paddy.
‘So ye lost yer leg, so what?
It's no big deal — screaming like a sissy.’
Rab drank some wine.
It was good stuff.
He felt never so manly, tough: and he did not notice the look in Paddy's eyes nor the feel of Winnie tug his sleeve.
Anton, he lay over the rim of the pan: panting, thoroughly wretched, ruined.
Spoiled.
It would take a long, long time to heal, if ever.
This violation.
Mortification.
And he could never tell no one what had happened.
Not, scared beyond belief, the whole thing beyond belief, a cock rammed down his throat.
He felt bruised and battered, the edges of his mouth; his throat hurt, worse than worthless.
That he might die, he did not much care, not, as he lay, and without protest, after what had already happened.
The foreman still with a mighty, a gigantic, hard-on: his victory complete, or almost.
The naked, yielding boy.
How he had made him.
Parker felt to beat his chest.
A warrior.
There was blood enough, a tremendous battle.
It drenched the prize, his skin: smooth belly and thighs, for all the more exciting.
Parker wished more time, more, with the boy; this almost crucifixion, to feast his eyes.
But too long already: the fearful chance that he be discovered.
Anton levered, with his hands, the sides the pan: the attempt to rise.
Parker pushed him down.
Easily.
Contemptuously.
The heel of his hand on Anton's forehead.
‘Ye don't think it's finished yet,’ he said.
‘I'm going tae fuck ye proper.’
Anton's eyes widened.
‘Up the arse,’ Parker said.
‘Ye've never been fucked before, I don't think.’
Anton pressed his thighs together.
‘Ye don't think that'll help,’ Parker said.
‘Ye'll just get hurt some more.’
‘If ye let me go now,’ Anton said, ‘I won't tell anybody.’
But ye'll still not tell anybody after I've fucked ye.’
Anton, in this cubicle, stuck time, it seemed as a hundred years, the boy; he was surprised how innocent, trusting — for he saw it all so clearly now, Parker's mask — he once had been.
‘I've fancied ye rotten,’ Parker said, ‘all the time, since ever I first saw ye.’
‘Please let me go.’
‘After.’
‘I'll shout.’
‘I don't think so.’
Parker daubed his eye (the blood appeared no worse, but a steady, it must be an annoying, trickle) with the tail of his shirt.
‘And I don't want ye tae struggle.
Yer arse'll rip — have ye ever heard of a torn arse?— if ye even try and struggle.’
Anton lay sprawled out, his thighs still closed.
Parker said, almost as a dentist might to a tearful fearful patient.
‘We don't want that, now, dae we?’
He stood over Anton, big: his bloated belly, as heavy as a sumo wrestler.
‘I want ye to turn over.’
The cock; always that — he would never forget it.
Its tilt and thrust, throb, full of veins, the purpled plum-like head.
‘Come on.
Come on,’ Parker said, pulling at him.
‘Who knows ye might even get tae like it.’
Anton, he was half-way up and, by Parker's hands, half turned over,hismeat: he felt more a lump of mutton, sobbing like a baby.
He felt a baby: helpless, wet and dirty in the cradle.
Parker punched his head to shut him up.
An almost reflex action.
He was now so used to hitting the boy.
With the blow on his head, Anton saw stars: flashing, exploding in his eyes: blue and red and colours he had not known existed.
He began again to give some fight, so acquiescent, afraid till then; a new hot rage and hatred.
His ears burned hot: the exploding stars, he could almost smell the singe, hear the crackle; seeing colours never seen, for, in his agony, caught in shock, screaming his tortured soul, he swung out on a new dimension.
He tried to rise, his full height: to face Parker, for now he had no intention of turning over, but the foreman, a first alarm, felt a coldness, and punched him down.
It was the first, all the time, in the cubicle, the lavatory, that Parker took a backward step.
He forced though — even if going back: the sheer weight of his blows — Anton down on his hands and knees.
But still coming in, and so gone that he did not feel the punches.
This man had dragged, shifted him a million years, more wolf than human.
Wrecked and wretched.
Hurt so much that he could be hurt no more.
To Parker, it was, from a lovely yielding boy, to a demon sprung against him.
He backed to the door, a jelly of fright.
This sudden swing, forceful as a storm: the boy, gnashing teeth, snapping as an animal.
Parker, his punches did not work, and he punched Anton's back: resounding blows, and the back of his neck with all his might, the attempt to push him down.
But the boy was too quick, too sweat-wet slippery he could not gain a purchase: use his weight.
What had gone wrong?
A blink from a monster victory now threatening disaster.
And he would have run, he could; even, shamelessly, in his shirt-tail as he was.
But he had blocked the door.
What he had thought protection.
The boy — such stupendous change — gnashing, hands as claws and teeth as fangs for already he was bitten and bleeding.
Anton, his rolling bobbing head, in and out: and his mouth was ghastly, streaming blood and he bit at random, where he could: a cannibal feast, and there seemed no end to Parker, elephant big, but soft and white and easy to bleed, full of smells; he could, heightened senses, whiff the slightest reek, the ebb and flow, as might a jackal, the strength drawn out of Parker.
‘I don't need tae take his lip, a skinny fucker like him.’
‘He meant nae harm,’ Winnie said.
‘Calling me a sissy.’
‘But ye dae scream, Paddy,’ Pol said.
Rab said, ‘I don't think ye were a lion tamer either.’
‘I'll fucking tame you,’ Paddy said, and he knocked over the table in his attempt to rise.
The ruckus brought the barman, a swing-like vault, on his fingertips, over the top of the bar.
Rab said, ‘He might have worked in a circus.’
‘He's wie ye,’ the barman looked at Winnie.
‘But it wasn't him,’ Winnie said, she looked to the upturned table.
‘We were only in for a quiet drink, is a'.'
Paddy said, ‘He's been insulting me a' night.’
‘So he has,’ Pol said.
‘I don't know who he think he is.’
‘My name is Rab.’
‘He's drunk,’ Winnie said, looking at the barman.
‘Ye see, he's been sick in bed and he shouldn't really be drinking.’
And indeed Rab shouldn't for, in mortal danger, that all could see but him, he began to laugh.
‘A fucking lion tamer,’ he said, looking at Paddy, ‘ye couldn't tame a pussy cat.’
Paddy rose, his crutch aloft.
‘I'm mighty handy wie this auld pat when I've a need tae be,’ he said,
‘Sit down, Mick,’ the barman said.
He looked at Rab.
‘How did ye mean, I might have worked in a circus?’
‘Because,’ Winnie said, very smartly, ‘of the way ye leap the counter.’
Rab was about to say, the barman, in the fucking monkey house, but Winnie cut him off: ‘We'll be pleased tae pay the damage,’ she said.
‘Yous will?’
‘And buy us all a drink.
Yerself included of course.’
‘That's the ticket,’ Pol said.
‘Good on yer,’ Paddy said, and stamped his crutch.
‘It was all just a wee misunderstanding.’
The barman, a long hard look at Rab: it was?
Still the dame was smart, she had saved his hide: bought him out, the crack about the circus: a stay — if he was lucky, the look of him — in intensive care in the hospital.
‘Four pounds,’ he said, ‘the damage.
And I drink whisky.’
Winnie held him a five pound note.
‘But it wasn't me’ Rab said he saw the money: four pounds for what?
The tin-topped table good as new and nothing, not even a tumbler, broken.
‘I don't see how that we should pay.’
‘Be quiet,’ Winnie said and dug her elbow in his ribs.
‘Ye'd be well advised tae listen,’ the barman said to Rab.
He looked at Winnie.
‘I'll send the barmaid over.
Four wines.
And you have better watch yer friend.
Any more shenanigans.’
‘There'll be no more shenanigans.’
‘All just a wee misunderstanding,’ Paddy said.
‘Ye handled him well,’ Pol said: the barman, with a swing, was back behind his bar again.
‘And it was worth the money, I'll tell ye that.’
‘I know,’ Winnie said.
Rab said, ‘I still don't get it, four pounds for what?’
‘Ye see my nose,’ Paddy said.
‘But we're running away tae London, we need all our money.’
‘It was worth a broken head?’
Pol asked.
‘It's best,’ Winnie said, ‘I think, that we leave this place.’
‘But first we'll drink our wine,’ Rab said.
‘We paid enough for it.’
‘Then after the wine,’ Winnie said, ‘and only the one, I don't want tae be having tae carry ye out.’
‘That shouldn't be tae hard,’ Paddy said.
But the remark was lost on Rab.
He was still bemused about the money.
But if Winnie didn't mind then why should he?
It could be, there might be a lot more where that came from.
The thought cheered Rab.
He was drunk for sure and unafraid, of the barman, Paddy's crutch, but stilt a miser's eye for money.
The barmaid — a fresh young girl for such a den, perhaps (a true contender) the crudest pub in Glasgow — came over with their wines.
Pol said, ‘She's Big Lurch's fancy bit.’
‘She is?’
Winnie sipped her wine.
It was the bold tipple.
No wonder that Rab was drunk.
For Winnie herself, it required the tightest hold, the fumes of the stuff, to keep her wits about her.
One close call the barman.
You could, for nothing, real or imagined, the slightest slight, get crippled in a place like this.
It was madness they had stayed, drank still, and deeply, of the heady wine.
‘He buys her lots of pretties,’ Pol said.
‘Bangles and beads and rings and things.’
‘He would need tae, wouldn't he?’
Winnie determined to elbow the company.
They had caused nothing but trouble, a five pound note.
‘This is awful good of ye, treating us a wine.’
‘Yous kin treat us back,’ Rab said.
‘We're going,’ Winnie said.
Rab said, his head on Winnie's shoulder, ‘We're running away tae London, so we are.’
‘Yous must have been saving up.’
‘Aye,’ Paddy said, looking at Winnie, ‘ye must have a right fat purse tae be going away tae London.’
Winnie, she did not like the sound of this: the pair, who, with the help of the wine and the need for more, felt fit to hint, to (she saw Pol's eyes, black and hard) almost threaten.
‘We have a wee bit put aside.
In the bank.’
‘But I think there's still another wee bit in yer purse.’
Pol smiled.
‘Don't worry, we're poor folks but we're honest.’
Paddy drained his glass, and, not a word, Rab almost asleep, his wine untouched, he drained that too.
Winnie said, ‘That's one ye owe me.’
‘Now don't be mean,’ Pol said, ‘and where would the likes of us be getting any money?’
‘Not out of me,’ Winnie said, her dander up, ‘if that's what yous are thinking.’
Out on the floor, on the sawdust, some revellers, in jaunty rags, were forming a circle.
A dance.
Rab opened his eyes: ‘What's this?’ he asked.
Winnie said, ‘We're leaving.’
‘How?’
‘We never done nothing,’ Paddy said.
‘I thought that we all were friends,’ Pol said.
‘We was only trying,’ Paddy said.
‘Ye can't blame us for trying.’
‘Trying what?’
Rab asked.
‘It doesn't matter,’ Winnie said.
‘Tae cadge a couple of drinks,’ Paddy said, ‘that's what we was trying.’
‘Nae harm in that,’ Rab said.
He looked down at his empty glass.
‘I could go another myself,’ he said.
‘But ye promised it was the last,’ Winnie said, the drunken Rab; and she could have pulled her hair and needed a pee but was frightened to leave Rab alone.
God knew what would happen.
Paddy's crutch or Big Lurch and his shillelagh.
It was nothing, this reunion, for what she had imagined.
‘Who'll come in tae ma wee hoose, tae ma wee hoose tae ma wee hoose; for who'll come in tae ma wee hoose and make it a wee bit bigger!’
The circle; arms linked, a rag-tag lot, shuffled round, some kicks and whoops, and, Winnie, enough of it, this wild place, a pair of mooching vagabonds, hustled Rab up on his feet, surprised anew by his lightness: as a bird, for she was not strong, but his fragility (he could barely stand) gave the illusion of an amazon.
But, for Winnie, it was only that, illusion, for, when she tried to move, she was a stuck; skunk-drunk with the wine, it struck her as a hammer, and caught in the circle, the linking arms, soon both she and Rab were dancing.
Whirling.
A merry jig.
Round and round.
Kicking and whooping.
The night gone mad to soon be madder.
The unhinged wine.
Bamboozling.
Treating Pol and Paddy.
And she must have had five pees or six.
Rab slept and danced.
Paddy rolled his smokes for him.
He spoke of ribs and cabbage.
Big Lurch smiled on indulgently.
He liked this: what his pub was all about, for people to let their hair down.
Enough of his wine and the Pope would dance, swing his kilt — of whatever he wore — and clap his hands.
Winnie and Rab, whatever else: the sloshing wine, they kicked and whooped the party, it was not a night to be forgotten.
Parker, he was all caught up; for he could not ward what he had himself created, fumbled for the door-bolt.
It was all he could think, he had to get out, away from the animal boy.
Anton though, as if waiting for this opening, Parker's panic, caught him for his best bite yet, a chunk: with all of his teeth, his werewolf mouth, from high inside of a beefy thigh.
Parker screamed; he did not care; he wanted to be heard, but, and he screamed some more, no one came running.
Still, the pain of the bite, like white-hot tongs, drove him into a new fury; battering fists, to again fell Anton.
But in a terrible state and his hands shook so that he could not work the door-bolt.
He heard Anton stir behind him.
But he turned to kick at him — he still wore his heavy work shoes — no strength in his wounded leg.
He could not even stand on it.
And the blood, pumping, arching out as a bright red fountain, he began, with the flat of his hands, slapping on the door.
But no sound outside and he tried again: now with both of his hands, one to steady up the other, to work back the locking door-holt.
Anton watched him, narrowed eyes.
He lay for dead but very much alive.
Waiting.
A little.
For the foreman to be dreened some more.
He knew the damage to Parker's leg, and he hoped no one could come.
Not now.
This day was his and Parker's.
It might be, all his life, his worth or lack of it, that this was always down the line.
Finally Parker, with all his effort, he gripped the bolt and drew it back.
But not out yet, his savaged leg: and he had to turn — the door opened in on him — and Anton, sprung as a cat; this opening, what he had sought, again flung himself at the foreman, who, caught by surprise, new horror, staggered back so that both of them, locked as one, a horrific beast, fell out against the far wall, the urinal, where: so long ago, as aeons past, Parker had first made his move.
Two men came then.
‘Jumping Jesus.’
‘Holy Christ.’
The howling growling blood-drenched boy was eating up the foreman.
Winnie awoke.
A start.
Jolt.
It might be the jolt had awakened her.
Sweet dreams?
Hardly.
It was more, she blinked her eyes, as if roused out of a coma.
The train.
It must be a junction, jerked and pulled, and strong shafting morning sunlight.
And the pong of the place, the carriage: Pol and Rab across from her, sound asleep; and Paddy, his head, snoring on her lap.