

Introduction
During 1984, a survey was carried out of in-service training in public library authorities in the UK.
This report forms an account of this survey and discussion of its findings.
Supporting evidence is also taken from data collected by a survey of libraries in the UK carried out by CRUS (The Centre for Research on User Studies), during the early part of 1984, which included a series of questions concerning training, not all of which were analysed at the time (see Appendix 1).
BACKGROUND
In recent years there has been increasing emphasis on the importance of training for staff at all levels in libraries of all kinds but apart from a circular letter sent out by The Library Association in 1976, and two publications on the subject, one in 1977 and another in 1978, there have been no systematic attempts to assess overall provision of training in the UK.
All students undergoing courses of study approved by The Library Association, commencing in and after January 1981 have been required, after successful completion of their courses, to undergo professional training approved by the Association.
A Board of Associateship was set up to manage the new regulations for admission to the Register of Chartered Librarians, and delegated to the Association's expert Sub-Committee on Training the task of detailed assessment of the training programmes designated to meet these new regulations.
As it became apparent that considerable variations in training were to be found, the (now) British Library Research and Development Group for Research into Public Libraries felt that more information was needed about current practice, and in September 1982, British Library Research and Development and The Library Association agreed to liaise on the development of an exploratory survey.
THE SURVEY
A proposal, drawn up by The Library Association, was accepted  by British Library Research and Development, for a one-year project from February 1984 to February 1985, funded by BLR&D, housed by The Library Association's Development and Research Department, employing one part-time researcher.
Aims
The aims of the investigation were formally defined as:
1
To collect data on in-service training of public library staff in the UK (excluding manual and secretarial staff).
2
To identify how training objectives are being met in practice.
3
To consider needs that are being, or could be, met from external/co-operative sources.
Methods
All 167 public library authorities in the UK were sent questionnaires during the spring of 1984 (see Appendix 2 for copies of survey documents).
Each questionnaire also contained a specimen ‘data sheet’ and respondents were asked to complete a data sheet for each in-service training programme planned for the financial year 1984–5.
Just under 70% of authorities participated in the survey and nearly 400 data sheets were completed (see Appendix 1 for sample details).
The quantitative results were analysed by the Survey Research Unit of the Polytechnic of North London, during the autumn of 1984.
As most of the questions were open-ended, and because detailed descriptions of training programmes were requested, a considerable amount of anecdotal observations and examples of practice were supplied.
These have been used to supplement statistical observations, where appropriate.
(See also Appendix 3 for examples of training practice.)
Respondents' comments are reproduced in italics throughout the text.
SCOPE
This was a wide-ranging exploratory survey, designed ‘to obtain some basic information about current training provision which could be used in identifying more specific areas of enquiry…a pilot study  focussing on public libraries only’.
Definitions used
The report of The Library Association Working Party on Training, when discussing training methods under three broad headings of (1) on-the-job/individual,(2) internal courses,(3) external courses, noted that ‘no single method of training is  appropriate for all situations.
Libraries must select the methods that are relevant to their particular objectives and restraints’.
They also note, earlier in the same document, that ‘in order that training should be effective and consistent it must be planned and implemented systematically’.
These statements embody two key components of the conceptual boundaries of the project:
1
that training should be planned, and implemented systematically,
2
that objectives should determine methods: therefore no methods should be arbitrarily excluded, ignored, or given undue prominence.
Authorities were therefore asked to respond within the framework of the following definitions:
Training
Any course of instruction, carried out on or off site, directed by your Library Department, your Local Authority/Board, or any other external organization.
Please include all qualifying, vocational and non-qualifying instruction.
Programme
A course of instruction with a pre-determined timespan, content and structure, whether a short or long course.
This did not inherently exclude any method of training, formal or informal, although the unplanned, sometimes unintended, day-to-day learning and reinforcement that takes place ‘on-the-job’(for better or worse), was regarded as outside our official remit.
Of course, an intentional consequence of any effective training programme should be to permeate ideas and attitudes throughout the working environment via the ‘day-to-day training which is always going on whether we specifically plan it or not ’, not least of all to counteract existing erroneous ideas and/or unwelcome attitudes.
Current in-service training
THE OVERALL PICTURE
On the most general level, theoretical commitment to the concept of in-service training was widely in evidence.
Only a very small number of authorities were unable to say that some money was being directly spent on training or were unable to indicate a person or people at least nominally responsible for training (see Chapter 3 for discussion of resources available for training).
However, the practice of training, as within the remit of this survey, shows a very wide range within every parameter examined, so that national averages conceal considerable differences found between authorities.
Size of establishment is a significant factor, for various reasons.
Partly because a large staff generates a greater amount of training need and sometimes more specialized needs, partly because the logistics of co-ordinating the movements of a large number of people generates greater need for formal timetabling, and partly because size of establishment can have a significant effect on staff mobility.
In general the larger libraries engage in more structured training and much more training as a whole, than small libraries, and perhaps their domination in this field has tended to obscure the problems faced by smaller authorities who never could — or increasingly, no longer can-base their training programmes on the assumption that staff can easily, or frequently be released from their normal workplace:
‘Increasingly more training is having to be organised internally, which brings us up against the major constraint of time’…
‘Staffing is now so minimal that it is difficult to second staff on a regular basis for internal training’.
Scottish authorities, faced with the lowest average size of establishment of all types of authority (see Table 1), engage in less formal training than any other type of authority (see Table 3).
Edwards noted in 1977 that ‘reorganisation in Scotland, based as it is on small authorities, is unlikely to do much to stimulate development’.
Perhaps the cutbacks in staffing that many libraries are currently experiencing will finally provide the ‘outside stimulus’ that Edwards felt would be necessary to alter this situation, in the sense of accelerating a move away from equating a ‘formal’or planned training programme, with any particular method of training.
The inherent danger of reliance on any particular method, and one that was apparent in some responses, is the tendency for libraries who cannot utilize external courses or release staff internally as they would ideally like to, largely to abandon (or never fully entertain), the concept of systematic training for all staff.
Although there was evidence of awareness of the need to adapt training programmes rather than simply abandon them, there was also evidence of lack of any systematic in-service training, justified by inability to employ methods that depend on staff mobility:
‘The number of library service points and hours open in relation to the staff establishment do not allow any in-service programmes to be implemented’.
The combination of methods utilized by smaller authorities may have to be different from those employed by larger authorities, but they have similar training objectives, and many similar needs, which should be recognized as such.
A situation where at least 27% of libraries appear to provide virtually no systematic training at all(see Table 2) is inefficient and inequitable.
EXTENT OF TRAINING PROVISION
Number of programmes
A broad count was made of the number of individual programmes or courses, described or referred to, within all the information supplied by each authority, in order to impose a general framework on the data collected.
Over 2,000 programmes were referred to by our sample, ranging from specific short courses to six or twelve month programmes, which altogether represents a quite considerable commitment of resources to training on the part of public librarianship as a whole.
Furthermore this number underestimates the number of external programmes which were expected to be attended during 1984/5 because a number of authorities (16 in our sample) were not able to indicate or estimate this, in the spring of 1984:
‘I do not yet have a programme for 1984/5 and we always hope to send staff on courses as they are advertised, so this isn't programmed…’
‘No planned programmes — staff attendance on courses decided as course details received’.
These 16 authorities were therefore kept in a separate category (Cat IV),(see Table 2).
Category I contained the 27% of authorities who mentioned 30 or more programmes or courses.
This was a broad grouping: some, particularly the larger authorities, mentioned between 100 and 200 individual programmes.
Category II contained the 32% of authorities who referred to between 5 and 30 programmes or courses, and Category III, the 27% of authorities who mentioned 5 or less.
Only four authorities categorically stated that no course or programme would be attended by any member of staff during the year, although many respondents in this group mentioned very low numbers:
‘(two) because staff levels so low and no turnover’…‘none apart from pre-licentiate programmes’…‘none at all’…‘one external course plus health and safety training’.
Looking at the location of authorities, it appears that County, Inner London, Metropolitan, Northern Ireland and Outer London libraries carry out more training than libraries in Wales and Scotland respectively (see Table 3).
This corresponds exactly to rank order of average size of establishment (see Table 1), although average size of establishment itself conceals considerable variations within each type of authority.
(For example, the majority of County authorities have an establishment under 300 although the County ‘average’ is over 300).
Size of establishment is associated with number of training programmes (see Table 4) as one might expect it to be, although there are differences to be noted within authorities of similar size: while none of the large libraries said that they engaged in no planned training programmes, they did not fall into Category I (Category I was 30 or more programmes and was a very broad grouping, with several libraries mentioning well over 100 programmes).
While the number of programmes undertaken is not in itself an indicator of quality or effectiveness, it may be assumed that undertaking relatively little, or virtually no planned systematic training, is certain to be ineffective.
It is perhaps disappointing to note that over a quarter of the total sample fell into this latter category, and it may be emphasized that staff in libraries of all sizes have training needs.
Type of programme
Libraries were asked to say whether pre-planned formal induction, job or development training was automatically offered to their professional or non-professional staff.
This indicated that Inner London and County libraries were most likely to regard themselves as offering formal induction training, County libraries were more likely to say that they offered formal training of most types, and that Outer London and Metropolitan libraries made most distinction between training offered to professional and non-professional staff, Scottish, Welsh and Northern Ireland libraries, least.
Metropolitan libraries favoured more induction and job programmes for non-professionals than professionals (see Table 5) contrary to the situation noted in most other types of authority.
Once again, size of establishment was relevant, indicating that larger authorities were more likely to offer more of any type of formal training (see Table 6), other than that described as development training for non-professionals.
The data sheets indicated that in practice, there is considerable overlap between what is regarded as job and development training, with many programmes being assigned dual functions, usually job and development, sometimes induction and job, occasionally all three.
(At times this was the result of rather haphazard planning, at times the result of extensive planning, for example with pre-licentiate courses.)
This overlap in practice may partly explain why Edwards was  surprised ‘at the relatively high amount of continuation and education training’ uncovered, albeit within his sample of large authorities only.
He noted that whilst his responses were ‘accompanied by a considerable body of information regarding induction and development training, there was very little specifically on job training’.
We also received a relatively high proportion of data sheets describing development training (49%) as against specifically stated job training (10%:see Table 7).
With a further 25% of the data sheets describing qualification training (which may also be regarded as an aspect of development training), there was indeed far less evidence of commitment to specific job training programmes.
This may be because low staff turnover creates less need for induction and job training and more need for development  training or it may be that job training is more likely to be taken for granted.
There are inherent dangers in assuming that systematic job training is occurring, as both Edwards and Casteleyn have emphasized:
‘Job training may be, in its simplest form, almost universal but that is no reason for complacency.
Too few libraries train according to a pre-arranged plan and many are not only unable to justify the methods used for the processes taught but may actually be unaware of what these methods and processes are.
There tends to be an easy assumption that satisfactory job training exists because everyone who remains in post in a library must of necessity have learnt to do his job to at least minimum standards…’
‘On the job training is the most common form of training in any form of organisation…it has its disadvantages however…the quality of this kind of training will vary from service point to service point, depending on the availability of the individual trainer, his interest and his understanding of the need to impart knowledge.
Because of this the training given may be spasmodic and may follow no organised pattern, the trainee only being taught items as and when the need occurs, whilst some areas of the work may be neglected altogether, and never be officially taught to the trainee.
If this happens he will be left to his own devices, with possibly disastrous results, caused by ignorance.’
Professional/non-professional staff
Approximately half the courses described by the data sheets were for professional staff, one-quarter for non-professionals and one-quarter for both or either (both or either typically meant new professionals and/or senior assistants or all staff with supervisory responsibilities).
The majority of the training programmes specifically for non-professionals were qualification courses (see Table 8), covering BEC, City and Guilds courses, and  Librarianship degree/diploma courses, with SCOTEC courses being mentioned by some authorities.
These qualification courses form a greater proportion of the total training carried out by the libraries who listed only a few programmes for 1984/5 (see Table 9), in general tending to constitute the main type of development training for non-professionals, especially in smaller libraries.
For professional staff, qualification courses form a minority of the programmes undertaken, though suggested changes in routes to Fellowship currently being debated, may alter the balance of qualification-related/non-qualification training.
Pre-licentiate training formed a significant proportion of the qualification-related training for professionals, described by the data sheets, with a further group of 20 libraries noting staff currently undertaking other types of training, largely for management studies qualification (DMS or CMS).
Programme content
The content of the programmes described by the data sheets (see Table 10) ranged widely, in subject coverage, width and depth.
Courses for professionals were more likely to be more specific, while larger authorities were more likely to carry out more specific training and more management training.
Management training was mentioned most often by County and Metropolitan libraries, community relations were more likely to be mentioned by London, Metropolitan and Welsh libraries, and computer and technical training was most in evidence in Inner London.
General non-professional training was more likely to be specifically noted by Scottish libraries, and least likely to be noted by Inner London libraries.
Of the courses that were specifically described as management training, 67% of them were carried out by libraries who expected an above average number of programmes for the coming year, who themselves comprised 27% of the sample.
Thus just over a quarter of libraries were carrying out two-thirds of the formal management training noted by our sample, constituting an inequitable distribution of available expertise.
Broadly speaking, the overall picture is one of apparent general theoretical commitment to training, but with wide differences in amount and type of systematic training found.
The extent of training undertaken is obviously related to resources made available,(or perceived as being available) for training.
Not surprisingly, a closer look at these resources indicates a similarly widely varying distribution.
Resources
Information about resources was collected in terms of money spent on training and staff committed to the organization of training, the emphasis being on how far authorities and libraries are committing resources directly.
There may of course also be hidden or indirect costs involved in training.
While some respondents recognized that this could be used to advantage —‘Would like to organise more internal courses within the department.
The true cost of these is hidden, i.e. cover at workplace, cost of speakers etc. is minimal by comparison ’— in general, there will be a limit to the amount of hidden costs any library department can or will want to absorb on training, in the face of competing priorities.
Direct budgeted allocation of resources will aid, encourage and allow planned systematic training.
The likely result of reliance on indirect, ad hoc use of resources ‘found if necessary’ is going to be random, inequitable and almost certainly inefficient.
MONEY
Respondents were asked to describe how training was funded in their authority and how much was budgeted or spent in 1983/4 and 1984/5.
The total direct expenditure on training of our sample was just under £280,000 in 1983/4, and estimated at just under £300,000 for 1984/5.
Only four authorities stated categorically that they spent nothing on training, although some very low sums per annum— £25, £50 — were mentioned.
As Table 11 indicates, a fifth of the sample expected to spend under £500 during 1984/5, just over another fifth between £500 and £1,500, just over a quarter between £1,500 and £3,000 and approximately a further quarter over £3,000.
A small percentage of authorities (5%) were not able to specify any amount, though indicating that some money, or access to facilities, were available.
For example, one Inner London library authority indicated that access to funds was available through the Head of Personnel and Management Services, for post-entry in-service training, but that  only the total available to the Council (£100,000/£101,200) was known.
An Outer London authority noted that funds were specifically budgeted for training but that there were no budgets for individual departments, and that therefore they could not state a specific amount.
A Metropolitan authority said that they did not yet know how much their training allocation from the central training budget would be, as training is organized to coincide with the academic year.
However, 95% of authorities were able to state an amount, or estimate an amount, quite specifically.
The distribution of money allocated was very skewed: it ranged from nothing to over £20,000, with 50% of libraries spending under £1,800 (the modal value).
Nineteen of the 31 authorities who spent over £3,000 (see Table 11) actually spent £5,000 or more, and it should be noted that this group of 19 library authorities accounted for 55% of the money directly allocated to training by our sample, while employing just under a quarter of all staff.
One would of course expect library authorities with large establishments to spend more on training, and as Table 12 indicates, this is broadly true, though with two large libraries spending under £3,000 and four smaller libraries spending over £3,000, it is not an inevitable relationship, as the authority ‘training profiles’ in Appendix 3 also clearly indicate.
Thus, our sub-sample of 19 libraries spending over £5,000 were not all of uniform size: 10 had establishments over 300, 9 under 300.
For example, this group included a county authority with an establishment of 187 who specifically allocated £8,100 to training and who also expected to have access to a further estimated £2,000 from a Central Training Fund, for special training projects.
Looking at type of authority, County libraries appear to directly budget the highest amount on average, to training (see Table 13).
Type of authority is related to average size of establishment, as has been noted, although as Table 13 also indicates, there is a wide range to be found around average spending.
This may correspond in part to the relatively wide range found around average size of establishment, though it would be unwise to necessarily assume this to be so, given the variety of practice found within authorities of similar size.
All but one County authority and all but one Inner London authority allocated over £1,500, while the majority of Outer London, Welsh and Scottish authorities allocated under £1,500 (see Table 14).
The majority of Metropolitan authorities allocated over £1,500, as did all but one of the Northern Ireland Library Boards: that one Board allocated just under £1,500.
In terms of changes in spending, responses indicated a 7% overall increase in expenditure from 1983/4 to 1984/5, but as with all parameters this was by no means uniform.
Table 15 indicates that 45% of authorities experienced an increase in allocated money, while 31% had the same amount and 11% had less for 1984/5.
An overall 7% increase in spending was recorded because the three groups with the highest average spending were the groups who were most likely to experience increases in budgeting allowances — i.e. Counties, Inner London and Northern Ireland authorities (see Table 16).
Outer London authorities were mostly likely to report a decrease in allocation of money: only Wales and Northern Ireland uniformly reported no decreases, while Northern Ireland authorities were the only group uniformly to report an increase in expenditure.
Sixty-nine percent of authorities in our sample (see Table 17) said they directly budgeted money for training,(70.5% of the CRUS sample, with one-quarter of the authorities who directly budgeted money also calculating a specific further amount, e.g.:
‘£8,000 a year allocated for external course fees, travel and subsistence, plus an estimated £6,500 per annum indirectly spent on staff library training films, video tapes etc.‘
In total only four library authorities did not say that some money was available to be spent, from one source or another, although some named very small amounts:
‘£50 to allow staff to attend day courses…no allowance made for internal training programmes which are arranged as required’.
A further small group of six authorities said that some money was available but could not estimate how much.
Directly budgeted money accounted for 71% of the total amount of money that was stated by our sample as being spent on training, money allocated under other wider budgetary headings accounted for 16%, money ‘indirectly’ spent accounted for 8%, and ‘extra funds’money for 5%.
Looking more closely at the authorities who directly budgeted money, 90% of counties were in this group, and 73% of Outer London authorities (see Table 18).
Inner London authorities normally had access to funds via Central Personnel/Management Budgets, for example:
‘Training funds are controlled by the Authority's personnel service but are allocated each year to departments.
They are however not part of departmental budgets but a centralised resource’.
Nevertheless, their average spending on training was relatively high (see Table 13).
Within our group of 19 authorities who spent over £5,000, only one did not formally allocate a specific amount of money for training, and that one authority was still able to be very specific about the amount estimated for 1984/5 (£6,000), though not  formally budgeted.
Within the group of authorities with an establishment over 300, 12 of the 15 libraries (80%) specifically budgeted an amount for training, 71% of libraries with establishments of between 100–300 did so, while only 55% of small libraries specifically budgeted money for training.
One of the recommendations of The Library Association Working Party on Training was that ‘training is an integral activity in the achievement of a library system's objectives and this should be properly recognised in the allocation of resources’.
In practice, the allocation of money appears to show quite considerable variations between libraries of different types and sizes, and also within libraries of the same type and size.
Presumably there is an equally considerable variation in the extent to which ‘planned, consistent and systematically implemented’ training is regarded as integral to management.
STAFF WITH TRAINING RESPONSIBILITY
The Library Association Working Party on Training also recommended that:
‘A senior member of staff should be designated to co-ordinate training.
We endorse the recommendation of the Working Party on Post-Qualification Training that:
1
For a staff of less than 100 there should be a named senior member of staff to be responsible inter-alia for training,
2
For a staff of 100 to 300 there should be the equivalent of at least one full-time training officer,
3
For a staff of over 300 there should be a suitably augmented training team under the direction of a senior member of staff.’
Virtually all libraries did nominate someone as having responsibility for training (only six libraries did not) so at first sight it would appear that theoretically at least item (1) above has been largely fulfilled.
However it should be emphasized that nominal responsibility is not necessarily indicative of time devoted to training.
For example, a further group of authorities indicated that although nominal responsibility had been allocated, involvement in terms of time allocated to training was very low.
This group of authorities added to the six mentioned above, equalled 14% of our sample.
Typical replies within this group were ‘Nominal responsibilities but proportion of time very low’…
‘Very little time ’.
None of the libraries in this group had a staff establishment  higher than 130, so it appears to be the smaller authorities in particular who found it difficult to allocate more than largely nominal responsibility.
At the same time it should be noted that while 14% of authorities fell into this group, 26% of the total sample had establishments of less than 100, so that not all small libraries found this an insurmountable problem.
Even formal titling is not necessarily indicative of time devoted to training.
While it was possible to identify a group of 27 libraries with staff members whose title included ‘training’, ‘development’ or ‘personnel’, they did not uniformly devote a major part of their time to training, and there were instances of authorities who named individuals apparently spending more of their time on training than ‘named’training officers.
The evidence certainly suggests that full-time training officers, who can spend all their time on training, are rare.
In this group of 27 respondents, only two specifically noted that they were able to spend their full time on training, another two did not offer any estimate of time, and a further two indicated that their time plus their assistant's time equalled one full-time post.
Of the remaining 21, seven said they spent under half their time on training, and 14 said they spent between half and three-quarters of their time.
It was interesting to note that the responses to the CRUS question as to whether a member of library staff was designated as training officer also indicated that title held is not necessarily indicative of time devoted to training.
Thirty-nine per cent of CRUS's respondents said that they ‘employed a member of staff designated as training officer ’, but added comments indicated that this question was not uniformly interpreted.
For example, one respondent who indicated that a ‘training officer ’ was employed, added ‘staffing officer, ⅛ time on training ’while another respondent who had indicated that they had no designated ‘training officer ’added ‘if you mean literally, the answer is no.
But we have an officer designated ‘staff officer’ who spends 50% of time on training ’.
Another respondent who indicated that their library had a ‘full-time training officer ’, qualified this response by adding ‘partly ’.
It seems likely that responses were sometimes in terms of whether the post was full-time or part-time, and sometimes whether training responsibility was full or part-time, and that this genuinely reflects the rather confusing diversity of titles held by library staff with training responsibilities.
(Nevertheless, there were some interesting differences between the group who felt that they had a ‘training officer’ and those who did not amongst the CRUS sample, further discussed in Chapter 5.)
If training officers who devote their full time to training are  rare, it is usually because they combine the role of training officer with other functions.
As Casteleyn noted: ‘many libraries are unable to appoint a full-time training officer but tend to link the training function with another job, very often involving personnel work’.
While she noted the advantages of this: ‘Indeed, the post combining staff and training responsibilities is a fairly successful combination since both jobs require an overall view of the entire system and neither job is particularly attached to any of the service functions’,(as opposed to designated training officers also being attached to any particular aspect of the service), lack of sufficient time to devote to training was often commented on by the named training officers in our sample.
Authorities as a whole divided themselves clearly into three groups (see Table 19): firstly, those who said that one person or a small specified group allocated the equivalent of a quarter of their time to training, secondly, those authorities who estimated a smaller amount of one person's time (normally 10–15% and most commonly Deputy or Assistant Chiefs) and thirdly, those allocating largely nominal (or no responsibility) for training.
Respondents who indicated that ‘all senior staff ’ or all ‘section heads ’or all ‘supervisory staff ’have training responsibilities, but who did not specify any individuals as having a co-ordinating role, or spending at least one-quarter of their time on training, were also included in the second group.
Indicating that all supervisory staff have a training responsibility is not the same thing as having a ‘suitably augmented team ’.
Some respondents pointed out that all managers had training responsibility, which in the sense of training being integral to management is true.
However, this does not necessarily ensure that in practice ‘the allocation of [training]responsibilities, which will be different in every organisation,[will be]clear and unambiguous’, or that the training will be planned and implemented, systematically and uniformly.
There was some indication of specific training teams or working parties, if not commonly found:
‘In addition to the personnel and training officer, the libraries department has a training services team consisting of seven elected officers.
They each spend 3% of their time on training duties during their term of office…’
‘All members of staff with any supervisory responsibilities also have training responsibilities.
The overall training plan is coordinated by myself (Chief Administrative and Training Officer), approximately 50% of time in training and development, and the training sub-committee, whose members change regularly, drawn from all members of staff’,
and it was interesting to note a few groups apparently in their infancy, not all of which were in the larger authorities:
‘In the past no one individual has had responsibility for training, but in an effort to formalise and develop staff training a working party has just been set up (to be chaired by the Branch Development Officer) to organise and develop staff training at all levels’.
(Library with a number of part-time one-person branches, establishment = 59).
There was a relationship between the amount of training undertaken and allocation of a staff member's time, so that all of the 27 authorities who employed specifically named training officers engaged in a higher than average number of training programmes.
There was also a relationship between money budgeted, and the number of programmes undertaken, and between the presence of a training officer and money spent.
Thus, the average amount indicated as spent by the authorities with an above average number of programmes was approximately £5,000, for authorities with a medium number of programmes it was approximately £2,000, and for other authorities, £600.
Perhaps not surprisingly, the average spending of the 27 authorities with named training officers was also just over £5,000: the presence of a training officer would be expected to influence expenditure on training, and conversely, it is logical to appoint a training officer if a significant budget is being allocated to training.
In terms of location, County libraries were most likely to devote specified managerial time to training, more likely to describe specific training functions of managers and more likely to note a named training officer (see Table 20).
Size of establishment was once again significant (see Table 21) indicating that all but two (13%) of the large libraries allocated at least a quarter of a specified staff member's time to training.
At the other end of the scale, none of the small libraries indicated that over a quarter of any individual's time was devoted to training, although there was an overlap between small and medium sized libraries in other categories.
It should be noted, however, that the group of 27 authorities who had training/development/personnel officers, all of whom were categorized as providing a higher than average amount of training, were varied in size of establishment.
Seven had establishments under 200, eight under 300, and twelve over 300, so that although there were no very small authorities in this group, training officers were not only found in large authorities.
It was revealing to note that the single most commonly voiced response to being asked how the library would like to develop its  overall programme, was in terms of training officers, or more training officers’ time, mentioned by libraries of all sizes and types:
‘With a staff of 600 the first priority would be a full-time training officer’…
‘Undoubtedly a full-time training officer for the library service would improve training considerably’…
‘Our greatest need is for additional staff resources.
My own post is not a full-time training one ‘.
(County authorities)
‘If resources were available the first priority would be to appoint a full-time personnel/training officer’.
(Inner London authority)
‘Training to become a full-time responsibility for a member of staff’.
(Welsh authority)
‘It would be desirable to appoint a member of library staff who would have formal responsibility for training’…
‘To have more staff time available for planning and implementation of training i.e. Assistant training officer’.
(Metropolitan authority)
‘A full-time training officer for internal courses’…
‘Appoint a fully qualified training officer for all staff’.
(Scottish authority)
‘Provision of a full-time staff training officer to co-ordinate and run a programme of courses’.
(Outer London authority)
‘Reinstatement of full-time post of training officer — currently frozen due to financial restrictions’.
(Northern Ireland authority)
Once again, there is considerable diversity to be found in the current pattern of who has responsibility for training and exactly what that responsibility entails in practice.
If training officers themselves are not common, staff who can devote as much time as they would like, to training,(whatever their title) appear to be very rare indeed.
LOCAL AUTHORITY TRAINING DEPARTMENTS
Another potentially significant resource is local authority training departments, as providers of either expertise or actual courses.
Chapter 5 discusses courses offered by central training units, but respondents were also asked to indicate if centrally appointed staff or any other staff not on the library establishment, had responsibility for training library staff.
Although all but 20 library authorities noted at least some  courses offered by central units, not all of these libraries perceived central training staff as having any responsibility for their staff.
In general, County and Inner London libraries were more likely to note more central involvement than Outer London and Metropolitan libraries (see Table 22).
Most of the Northern Ireland libraries noted some involvement, although relatively fewer Welsh and Scottish authorities; the involvement of Scottish authorities tended to be restricted largely to health and safety training.
In total 51% of our sample did not indicate any perceived central responsibility for library staff.
Amongst those who did, it varied from considerable provision of courses, facilities and time of central training officers, to largely nominal involvement:
‘Full-time training officer, time allocated to library department unspecified and as required’.
‘Training officer and his deputy, minimal time spent on library staff’.
‘There is no organised programme of in-service training in any department of this authority, nor any council training officer or section’.
Size was also associated with central training involvement: small libraries, who are less likely to have their own training officers, were also less likely to note any central staff taking responsibility for staff training (see Table 23).
Casteleyn observed that ‘Smaller libraries may not need a full-time training officer but may be able to benefit from the advice of a training officer employed to develop training centrally for the whole organisation’, and suggested that ‘smaller authorities who were unlikely to have their own training officers should look to their authority's training department for support’ but it seems that in practice, smaller libraries are least likely to have an existing strong centre of training expertise to turn to.
It was noticeable that the libraries who listed a substantial number of local authority courses were often the ones who listed substantial numbers of internal and external courses as well, so that there was a strong relationship between total number of courses and involvement of local authority (see Table 24).
Furthermore, commitment of such central training resources to libraries often went hand-in-hand with commitment of library management time to training, presumably because to an extent both are aspects of the same overall policy of the parent authority towards training.
This overall policy can be crucial: the following comment was made by a library whose training officer post on the library establishment was frozen, in response to being asked how they would like to develop their overall programme, if adequate resources were available:
‘Commitment of our authority to a training policy: adequate resources will not, without such a policy, solve the problem’.
Central units did not commonly tailor courses to library requirements, although this is not necessarily a disadvantage.
There are a range of management/supervisory skills in particular, indicated by many libraries as training priorities, that are well suited to central provision, as Casteleyn noted: ‘Training courses designed to teach managerial techniques can be aimed at candidates from all kinds of professions and different departments, and it will be extremely beneficial for library staff to mix with colleagues from other departments and disciplines’.
However, once again, this is a benefit that is not evenly distributed.
STAFF TO BE TRAINED
Library authorities were asked to say how they would like to develop their training if ‘adequate resources were available’.
Although three authorities objected to even hypothetically assuming that sufficient resources (which they defined as money) would be available, the extent to which respondents mentioned insufficient staff to cover staff absent from normal duties whilst attending off-the-job training (rather than lack of any other resource), was striking.
A small number of respondents specifically noted that inability to release staff, rather than lack of money for courses, was their major problem:
‘It is not the resource of money we specifically need, indeed we cut our training programme budget last year by almost half, as we did not have the staff employed to be able to spare enough of them to take part in training sessions.
The resource of more staff is one that is unlikely to be resolved, as staffing has been cut over the years.
The resources for training programmes are available in the form of premises, training staff and ideas — it is just the time that is missing to allow staff to participate’…
‘The problem is more one of dire under-staffing at all levels than cash for courses’.
Authorities of all types and sizes commented on this problem, some just touching on it, others indicating that it is now paramount to them:
‘Higher staffing levels to enable staff to be released from duties more often’…
‘Would like to develop training areas which would help offset the problems of lack of mobility of staff…regretfully none of our posts are supernumerary and hence the problems of removing staff from their work to attend training is a real difficulty’…
‘Adequate resources would have to include extra staff, as this shortage contributes a  great deal to our lack of staff training, i.e. the staff we have are all needed to run the service’…
‘Increasingly more training is having to be organised internally, which brings us up against the major constraints of staff time’…
‘Staffing is now so minimal that it is difficult to second staff on a regular basis for internal training’…
‘Our staffing levels constrain the time off which can be allowed’…
‘Staffing inadequate to permit sufficient time away from the job’.
Libraries with very small branch establishments have always faced this problem, and it is perhaps not surprising that Scottish libraries who face the additional problem of very low population densities and widely spaced service points, do not score highly on ‘amount’ of formal training:
‘We have a number of small part-time one-person branches scattered over a wide rural area — the furthest one is 40 miles distant from headquarters.
The staff at these branches are perhaps in most need of training, but manpower budget for relief staff and travelling expense budgets prohibits inclusion of these staff at present time’.
OTHER RESOURCES
Some further resources (or facilities) that are available for libraries to utilize other than those discussed in this chapter, are looked at in Chapter 5, but one resource that is fundamental to an effective training programme i.e. effective use of resources allocated — and one that is available to all libraries — is a positive training ‘climate’.
The Library Association Working Party on Training emphasized this in strong terms:
‘A person who returns from a course anxious to practise a new technique or skill will quickly lose enthusiasm if efforts are met with hostility or indifference.
Where a member of staff  was previously satisfied with work practice in a section, he or she may become a discontented or frustrated worker, because expectations were increased, together with knowledge and skill, only to be stifled by lack of interest on return to work.
The make-or-break factor in this delicate post-course period is the attitude of the person's immediate superior.
If this is a negative or carping attitude towards new-  fangled theories the trainee's performance, instead of improving, may well deteriorate to a point below that individual's pre-course standard.’
As they quite fairly concluded:
‘It is a waste of time and money to send a member of staff on a course yet frustrate every attempt to use this new found knowledge.’
Edwards notes in a similar vein ‘the support and status given by top management is fundamental to how effective a training officer will be’.
The use made of resources allocated is as important as the extent of the original allocation: it cannot be assumed that budgeting money or designating a staff member as training officer, will ensure more than nominal training unless there is more than nominal commitment to the concept that systematic training should be integral to library management.
Training objectives
The Library Association Working Party on Training used a simple diagrammatic representation of a training cycle, as follows: Within the wider context of this training cycle, the following areas were considered: identification of needs, planning of programmes, and assessment of the effectiveness of training.
IDENTIFICATION OF NEEDS
Training needs can be considered at several levels, for example in terms of general categories of need, such as induction, job, or development needs, or in terms of specific subject needs.
The range of general categories of need has been well covered by existing literature.
Edwards conducts a rigorous analysis of potential needs, in terms of:
a
Initial induction — Housekeeping, the organization, place of the entrant, attitude training.
b
Job training — off the job, on the job.
c
Development — for better performance in the job, for new skills in a growing job, promotion, management development.
Casteleyn adopts a slightly different approach, and discusses induction courses for professional and non-professional staff, on the job training for non-professional staff, further training for non-professional staff, pre-library school trainees, training for newly qualified staff, and continuing professional training.
The Working Party on Training emphasized the importance of identifying training needs, and produced a comprehensive checklist and analysis chart to facilitate this:
‘When discussing why it is necessary to assess training needs, it is essential to consider the problem of scarce resources.
A library, like any other organisation, has a limited amount of manpower and money to carry out the activities required and expected of it; training is just one way of ensuring that these resources are used in the most effective possible manner.
However, if training is to contribute to this effective working, then it must be applied in the areas where it is most urgently required or where the benefit is greatest.
In order to assess the priorities in a systematic way, to determine the jobs for which training is required, how many people are involved and how the training should be organised, it is necessary to undertake systematic assessment of training needs.’
One of the problems facing analysis of needs is that there are often several sets of needs in operation, for example, the needs of the individual, the needs of the library, needs of the parent authority, needs of the profession.
The Working Party on Training noted that:
‘A survey designed to assess training needs and priorities will not in itself, produce all the solutions.
What it will do is indicate areas where the maximum benefit will be obtained from the use of the resources available.
It should indicate where further action is necessary, both for departmental management and for training staff.’
What it will not do of course, is reconcile needs competing for the same resources.
The strongest evidence of awareness of the importance of analysing needs tended to come from the libraries with the most developed training programme, usually the larger libraries:
‘Our extensive training available to staff is currently under review, so that it meets the needs of the organisation, library users and staff.
Predicting needs and evaluating how successfully  courses fulfil them is a key area for any further development of the training scheme’.
Although it may be that the libraries without extensive programmes are precisely the libraries who could benefit most from more vigorous analysis of training needs.
Once again, the Working Party on Training emphasized this point:
‘For the smaller systems, with only a few staff, much of the context (their list of potential training needs) may seem irrelevant.
However, we emphasise again that training is not an activity that is only undertaken by large organisations.
There may be more overlap between levels than in the smaller library but each level still has training needs to be met, and those needs do not differ greatly from those indicated.’
Respondents were asked to describe how they would like to expand their training programmes: this elicited needs that libraries perceived as significant but which were not being satisfied, and information about the factors that they felt were preventing them from undertaking ‘enough’ training.
The need for more staff time to organize training, or a member of staff specifically employed to organize/co-ordinate training, was mentioned by over a quarter of all authorities (see Table 25):
‘A specialist to coordinate and bring management training skills’…
‘First priority — a full-time training officer’…
‘A full-time training officer would be desirable to organise the training of staff at all levels.
Plans for this were made some years ago, but it has not been possible to proceed with them (a) because of lack of funds, and (b) because the personnel department has overall responsibility in all departments of the authority’…
‘To have more staff time available for planning and implementation of training’…
‘Appointment of a full-time training officer to organise and operate fully integrated training courses’…
‘We need a training officer, though size of authority probably does not justify’…
‘Someone in overall charge of training who should have had some formal training in that field themselves’.
Large libraries were just as likely as small ones to want more training officers' time, even though they were far more likely to employ a designated training officer (or someone who devoted at least a quarter of their time to training).
Nearly as many people mentioned the problem of not being able to release staff to be trained (see Table 25):
‘If enough staff available would achieve training aims in a much more controlled (shorter) time’…
‘Better staff cover to allow circulation of staff between departments’…
‘Extra staff to release staff for attendance at courses’…
‘We do not have the staff employed to be able to spare enough of them to take part in training sessions’…
‘Sufficient staff to be able to withdraw small groups for intensive three/four-day courses’…
‘A wider spread of staff, particularly junior professional and non-professional staff, able to release to attend all types of training’…
‘Extra staff, as this shortage contributes a great deal to our lack of staff training’.
In view of the problems associated with training and staff mobility, not surprisingly, some respondents particularly wanted supernumerary posts for trainees, especially pre-licentiates:
‘The allocation of trainee posts on the department establishment to allow for intake and progression through pre-licentiate and licentiate periods’…
‘Would wish to have a number of super-numerary posts to enable training to be done without disrupting work’…
‘In order to be able to respond to the new breed of pre-licentiate librarians, I regard it as desirable to establish a number of trainee posts’…
‘Reactivate trainee posts for pre-professionals’.
However, this may be self-defeating.
What would be more relevant, and what was sometimes commented on, was the need to develop and produce training that would require possibly less money directly spent and/or less time away from service points, so that needs could be met, perhaps more effectively, within existing constraints and resources.
Nearly one-sixth of authorities mentioned that the development of training packages, to be used in-house, and preferably developed by themselves, was needed to expand their training, indicating their belief that this was where expansion would need to come from, and that such training packages were likely to achieve more effective training because they would be tailor made.
It was also noted by several respondents that internal residential courses, useful for fostering team/departmental/individual development, were the area they would particularly like to expand:
‘Separate training room and staff library together with projection facilities, own video camera and CC TV’…
‘Establishment and maintenance of a multi-media training library’…
‘Development of A V training, including making of our own training films/packages which would match system requirements’…
‘Packaged learning for on-site application’…
‘Purchase of appropriate equipment/projectors/screens/TVs/ tape recorders and training packages’…
‘We would hope to compile our own training programmes, specifically adapted to procedures adopted in our own libraries.
This would probably be done in tape/slide format’…
‘Would continue as at present but would hold more internally organised development courses on a residential basis’…
‘Arrange more residential seminars/ schools to foster a team spirit in learning’…
‘We are already behind on our non-professional staff training programme and this has necessitated a review of training methods.
In future, less will be done through central training courses and more by individual branch managers.
A working party of professional staff has been set up to devise and control the resulting programmes’…
‘More training equipment which would enable branch managers to undertake more training in the workplace using pre-structured packages’.
However, small libraries,(or those who didn't send staff on many external courses), often looked first to the opportunity to be able to attend external courses rather than develop internal programmes.
One-fifth of small authorities mentioned this,(see Table 30) approximately the same number as those who wished to extend internal training.
In general the smaller libraries were more preoccupied with just achieving ‘more’ training, and were usually much less specific than larger libraries:
‘As a small library authority covering a very large geographical area, I would arrange for formal internal training programmes to be held for all staff’…
‘Attendance at more external courses and full-time training officers for internal courses’…
‘Encourage more attendance at professional meetings, visits to other services and appropriate seminars’.
Larger libraries were more likely to mention expansion of management training, and even more likely than small libraries to want greater flexibility with staff.
Larger libraries were also more likely to want trainee supernumerary posts, perhaps because small  libraries did not expect to be able to achieve this and therefore rarely mentioned it.
Sometimes a specific progression was noted — first, attendance at more external courses, then development of more internal programmes, with a distinction being made between more external courses wanted for professional staff, more internal training wanted for non-professional staff:
‘To send qualified staff on external courses for professional up-dating, particularly management, and more in-house training for library assistants, particularly routine administration ‘…
‘Training of non-professionals, including a more structured programme: better opportunities for outside courses for professional staff’…
‘We would wish to ensure that the appropriate staff, professional and non-professional, were introduced to relevant skills, initially by utilising external courses, but ultimately by developing internal and/or cooperative programmes’.
Utilizing neighbours in the form of developing co-operative schemes or arranging/extending reciprocal visiting arrangements was mentioned by just under one-sixth of authorities, and by Metropolitan authorities in particular:
‘Increased involvement in cross-authority activities and events’…
‘Extending the range of visits to library and related establishments beyond the London area to which we are limited through lack of funds’…
‘Arrange experience exchanges with other Authorities’…
‘Participate in and develop cooperative training schemes with neighbouring Authorities and with library schools’.
The need for better planning, and the need to organize and consider training courses within the overall framework of each individual's development needs was mentioned in various ways, by a fifth of the sample,(see Table 25), although more often by larger libraries (see Table 30):
‘I am interested in organisational development, in individuals taking responsibility for their own learning, and in line managers taking responsibility for facilitating development of their staff’…
‘To meet new career development and professional training needs on a more extensive basis’…
‘Proper use of external day/weekend courses tailoring the needs of individuals and what is available’…
‘Planned timetables, linked  to staff appraisal’…
‘Provide tailor-made training courses for each member of staff’.
In terms of content of training, management and computers/new technology were the main subject areas specified for expansion:
‘Much more training for managers on management’…
‘Management training, including some academic work, e.g. DMS, and new technology, giving more staff the opportunity to learn about new technology in a practical setting, both as personal development and to improve contemporary decision making’…
‘With regard to future developments, I feel there is a need for some more training in new technology, particularly in the field of computers and perhaps a more systematic approach to training’…
‘Systematic training in supervisory and personal skills and further professional and managerial development’.
For professional staff, external or off-the-job courses were most likely to be mentioned, generally either management or highly specialized and usually within an overall developmental context.
For non-professional staff further training was likely to be envisaged as internal courses, or City and Guilds/BEC courses.
Although lack of staff was mentioned often, lack of direct funding was mentioned much less so: in fact more libraries actually said that resources were adequate than specifically noted otherwise:
‘On the whole we are able to provide the training that we wish to offer’…
‘Within present resources non-professional staff are catered for reasonably well’…
‘The training resources, although limited, particularly in terms of finances are nevertheless adequate for the current needs of the department.
Support from the central personnel department undoubtedly helps in this area’.
Unless needs are clearly identified, it is difficult to proceed to the next stage in the ‘training cycle’: planning a programme to ensure that effective use is made of available resources.
As one (large) library honestly noted, in response to being asked how they would wish to develop their overall training programme:
‘Implementing [by]a planned training programme — too much of what we do is done ‘as and when’ we have the money, time, staff availability, planning time etc’.
PLANNING PROGRAMMES
Evidence of extent of planning programmes varied as widely as did descriptions of training undertaken.
The need for better, or more planning was mentioned in various ways, by over a quarter of the sample.
It was the second most commonly made point:(see also section 4.1).
‘Develop a more comprehensive policy and programme’…
‘Second priority (after a full-time training officer) would be the development of a more complete training strategy’…
‘Develop more comprehensive programmes for personal development of all staff, ensure adequate recording and controlling systems’…
‘The training, whilst extensive, needs pulling together more and aims and objectives in some cases need to be redefined’…
‘Plan to institute formal training programmes for all staff with system of record keeping and control by designated senior librarian’…
‘By creating structured programmes for different types of levels of staff’.
Some authorities made a point of saying that they did not have a training programme because they depended on courses that presented themselves, e.g.: ‘We always hope to send staff on courses as they are advertised ’.
There is of course a difference between a flexible general programme, able to expand/develop/change emphasis, as and when circumstances alter/new needs emerge/relevant external courses present themselves, and waiting for a course to be advertised before a need is identified, or taken notice of.
The Centre for Research on User Studies (CRUS)’ asked its respondents how decisions were made about which courses are attended by which staff.
This was largely interpreted to mean decisions about attendance at external courses, and was revealing, particularly in terms of the extent to which decisions were taken corporately or individually.
Approximately half the respondents described the first stage of the process: how interest in attending  courses arose.
This fell into three categories: those who waited for applications to come from staff, those who nominated or requested staff to attend courses, and those who had a system combining the two:
‘Staff members interested in attending courses apply first to chief librarian, then proceed to personnel department’…
‘By a desire by staff themselves to attend courses that interest them, enthusiasm is the best form of staff training’.
‘Course programme is examined and areas of relevance identified.
When course matches known developments in certain libraries, librarian is nominated (I) if receptive,(2) if due an opportunity to attend’…
‘The chief librarian decides which external courses, seminars and visits would be beneficial to which staff’.
‘Staff are encouraged to submit requests to attend courses, senior staff are encouraged to nominate and management sends out prospectuses as appropriate’…
‘Two methods of selection take place.
If a certain course appears particularly relevant to an individual, then the County Librarian may suggest he or she attends.
Otherwise staff apply to attend courses that they consider will benefit the service’.
It was also frequently noted that staff were encouraged to request attendance at external courses, but likely to be nominated for attendance at internal courses (normally developed in the frame-work of their perceived training needs).
‘For external short courses... staff usually asked to attend a course…for internal courses participants usually volunteer or are recommended to attend for personal development.
Council wide policies occasionally make attendance on a course compulsory, e.g. recruitment and selection, if people wish to select staff ‘.
Not surprisingly, it was noticeable that the authorities in the CRUS sample who said that they had a training officer were much more likely to describe a corporate/consultative process,(see Table 32), than those who did not indicate any designated training officer.
Again, in terms of how final decisions were made there was much more evidence of consultation/team decisions within the ‘training officers’ group, than the ‘no training officer’group (see Table 33).
Libraries with no training officers were more likely to say that decisions were made by chief executives, and to specifically note that local authority approval was needed.
None of the ‘training officer’ group specifically mentioned this, although formal Chief Executive/Local Authority approval is assumed to be required in all cases.
‘Frankly, very little is offered in this area.
As an independent small library, all such decisions would be submitted to the library committee for consideration if they involved expenditure or day release implications’…
‘Authorisation to attend courses must be obtained from the education chairman’…
‘Control is exercised by the chairman of the establishment committee who needs to be convinced of the value of each and every application’…
‘If the cost involved is very high, the Chief Officer of the Library Authority has to approve attendance’.
(All ‘no training officer’ group: None of the ‘training officer group’specifically mentioned this point).
Cost, or the need to plan within specific budgets, was more likely to be mentioned by the training officer group, perhaps because they were more likely to have specific budgets.
Approximately one-fifth of authorities without a training officer mentioned cost, and one third of those with training officers:
‘Economic constraints play a large part in deciding who attends which course.
For external short courses we are concerned to get value for money.
Some courses have to be rejected because the cost of travelling makes the course uneconomic even though the course content may be very appropriate’…
‘Cost obviously plays a big part-we are more likely to support a car load for a day nearby, than a person for a day in Carlisle or Penzance’.
(Training officer group)
‘Limited finances mean that only courses important and of use to the library service are considered ‘….
‘Due to lack of finance the only courses attended are normally one-day courses which are held locally’…
‘Unfortunately training budgets are very tight at the moment and therefore staff are not sent to external courses as frequently as would be desirable’…
‘Decision is made by County Librarian within the financial restraints of the financial budget’.
(No training officer group)
Relevance to post was also mentioned by both groups, but given greater prominence by the group with no training officers:
‘Factors include…whether the subject of the course is relevant to the person applying to attend’…
‘Attendance at external courses must be justified against training objectives or be seen to acquire for the county library some new or up-date skill/ knowledge/experience which would otherwise be a noticeable gap’.
(Training officer group)
‘Limited funds prevent attendance at many courses which could be of general rather than specific value’…
‘Preference is given to staff working in the field covered by the course’…
‘Must have a direct relevance to the needs of the authority’…
‘Staff are selected on the basis of whether the course is directly relevant and how much practical use can be made of the training’…
‘Relevance of course to particular responsibility of member of staff’.
(No training officer group)
A small number of authorities in both groups emphasized that relevance to post was not of overriding importance:
‘Members of staff are encouraged to apply for any course they wish to attend’.
(Training officer group)
‘Certain courses are generally attended by staff of specific sections but care is taken that all staff know they may go to any course.
Priority between applications is partly based on frequency of paid training in past and partly on use made of attendances on return, e.g. wrote good report, organised something similar here which worked or has stimulated others to develop the ideas expressed there’.
(No training officer group)
Amongst the group with no training officer, evidence or specific mention of a training plan, based on assessment of needs of individuals and organizations was rare: the following comments were all made by authorities with training officers:
‘Is course relevant to functions and development of library service, how does it fit in with the needs of the employees who should attend?
Is it concerned with one of the library ‘s priority areas?’…
‘The department will also decide to send staff on courses as part of its responsibility for the development of professional and non-professional staff’…
‘Nominations based on needs of the service and individuals’ career development made by head of department’.
In total, in the ‘no training officer’ group there was less evidence of team decisions, less evidence of decision-making in the frame-work of existing plans/priorities, more mention of need to have local authority approval, and more mention of relevancy to post as a criterion.
The training officer group were more likely to refer to joint or group decisions, none of them specifically mentioned the need for central approval, few mentioned relevancy to post as being essential (or if they did it was within a wider framework of reference than relevance to post alone), and they were more likely to specify that the needs of the service and the needs of the individual were both taken into account.
Planning, is of course likely to be more than just identification of needs.
Other than in the early stages of a completely new programme it also requires evaluation of existing training, so that evaluation may be as important as identification of needs.
The CRUS findings undoubtedly indicate a relationship between the presence of a training officer and extent of analysis of needs (an essential prerequisite of planning).
Given the uneven provision of training officers already noted, it is not surprising to note that the extent of planning is uneven, and varies considerably.
ASSESSING PROGRAMME EFFECTIVENESS
The Library Association Working Party on Training was quite unequivocal in its emphasis on the need to pursue evaluation:
‘Assessment of effectiveness is not a ‘one-off’ activity at the end of a training programme but is an integral part of the training system, with assessment of effectiveness being related back to original training needs and used in the compilation of future programmes.
The measurement of training is therefore an essential part of the cycle of training.’
However, although all current work on training emphasizes the importance of evaluation and its crucial part in any on-going training cycle, limited practical advice is to be found on how to actually do this (compared with how to assess training needs, for example).
Thus, the Guideline on Evaluation, one of a series of Guidelines produced by The Library Association's Sub-committee on Training, goes into considerable theoretical analysis, but its practical conclusions are limited and somewhat pessimistic:
‘The evaluation of training remains a somewhat uncertain area.
There are ways, however, of improving on the guesswork…if there is a willingness to assess performance on the part of senior managers, organisation level validation can become feasible.
It will, however, always be difficult…all we have said about organisation level validation applies to evaluation: it is hard to see how we can evaluate training unless our validation has reached the organisation level…‘
This is not highly encouraging, and perhaps it is not surprising that although the need for formal systematic planning was noted in our sample, and the concept of appraisal was mentioned by a small number of respondents, evaluation was rarely described in any depth, although 62% of the programmes described by the data sheets indicated that an assessment procedure was employed.
Thus, some type of course assessment if not programme evaluation was carried out in the majority of cases.
It was most likely to be in the form of a questionnaire (40% of the 234 assessed  programmes), or a written report (22%), with examinations being appropriate in a further 25% of cases.
It will of course be impossible to attempt to evaluate an overall programme rather than assess a specific course, if no clear overall programme exists.
Evaluation has its own jargon and this can be a major stumbling block, leading the Working Party on Training specifically to suggest that this should not be allowed to confuse the issue:
‘Some writers divide assessment of training effectiveness into two distinct processes, evaluation and validation.
Evaluation is concerned with the results of training and validation with the training process itself.
Terminology in this field tends to be somewhat confused and it is more helpful to regard the assessment of training as one integrated process, while recognising that the facets described as evaluation and validation are contained within the general concept.’
Nevertheless, ambiguity of terminology does arise, fuelled by the fact that evaluation theory contains so many concepts that are interrelated, but which have very different implications, particularly for non-profit making organizations such as libraries.
While Edwards emphasized the need for evaluation:
‘Evaluation may be seen as ‘closing the circle’ of training, for in the light of its results the training officer will revise his overall policy, modify his methods and begin the whole process again.
Evaluation may be somewhat subjective and less than mathematically accurate, but it must be attempted if the desired cycle of planning, implementation appraisal and replanning is to achieve its object of providing even better and more relevant training within the library.’
 By discussing evaluation solely in terms of cost benefit, virtually insurmountable problems are raised, as he notes:
‘Even in industry it has not always proved possible to cost training effectively…
When we consider training in a librarianship context, the difficulties are even more obvious.’
It is interesting to note that although cost benefit has undoubtedly remained attractive to local authorities operating in difficult financial circumstances, evaluation theory has long recognized that cost benefit analysis cannot be applied uniformly:
‘Many sub-units of companies simply cannot be measured by revenue, contributions to profits, or costs related to output units…for a department of this kind, the best and perhaps the only measure of performance is achievement of predetermined programmes within budgets.’
Barbara Conroy, in her book on library staff development discusses evaluation in terms of how far stated objectives have been achieved, and emphasizes that although evaluation requires careful identification of what is being evaluated and why, to decide the ‘how, when and where’, of evaluation if it is to be more than ‘just a way of channelling impressionistic information into a required report form’, that it is not a highly ‘esoteric’ activity, necessarily involving ‘complex research methodology’.
Within a generally pragmatic and positive approach, she notes that ‘a suitable level for each specific situation can be found, to fit the capabilities, resources and requirements of both the programme and the organisation’.
The Working Party on Training felt that it was ‘vital that thought be given to the effectiveness of training and that the problems of evaluation be faced’.
Some fundamental problems still appear to be very largely in evidence.
It may also be noted that indistinct analysis of needs will contribute to problems associated with evaluation.
If evaluation is defined as assessing how effectively needs are met at a given cost, then precise identification of needs is obviously paramount, as the Guideline on Evaluation notes, most emphatically: ‘Without proper identification of need, evaluation is meaningless’.
It could also be said that without evaluation, proper identification of need is pointless!
External and co-operative training
EXTERNAL TRAINING
Edwards, in his book on in-service training, excluded short courses held by outside bodies as being ‘properly outside the scope of this study (although they deserve a mention because they are commonly used to supplement in-service training)’.
However, they are more usually included in the scope of in-service training, and they are indeed commonly used.
As has been observed:
‘Managers and employers tend to see [external]short courses and internal training as different but allied ways of meeting the same basic needs.
Both are part of the process of informal education and have developed in answer to a single underlying requirement to adapt more closely to a profession and within it, to a specific job.’
Nevertheless, common use is not necessarily the same as discriminate use, and considerable criticism is occasionally voiced Or indiscriminate use of external courses:
‘It is our view that even when libraries do take training seriously, they all too often waste resources by selecting the wrong priorities in training e.g. by sending professional staff to expensive external courses, when an internal training programme might have been cheaper and more useful.’
The Working Party on Training went on to comment that:
‘The main problem of the external course is that it can be an ad hoc activity bearing little relation to a current problem or systematic training scheme, and thus the wrong people can be trained at the wrong time by the wrong methods.
It is often a matter of trying to rationalise an individual's request to go on courses rather than a positive management attempt to meet real training needs.’
Certainly, rationalizing individuals’ requests was clearly evident (see Chapter 4).
Several respondents noted that their choice of course and/or individual staff member to attend, was at least partly based on the principle that, as attending an external course was ‘inherently good ’, that therefore everyone should be ‘allowed a turn ’ if at all possible.
This does not mean that external courses are necessarily being  inapproriately used.
They may well be the best, or only currently available method of satisfying some needs on some occasions, but of course no method is inherently good in every situation.
As has been emphasized, ‘Choice of method will depend on a careful analysis of aims and objectives, time available, the range of staff available to assist, and, not least, the cost of the exercise’.
The Centre for Research on User Studies asked its respondents to indicate ‘topics for which you think there is most need for external provision of training’, and while there was little evidence of lack of interest in external training or lack of perceived need, there was also little evidence of discrimination between needs that could be met by a range of methods and needs that could only be met by external provision.
The following response: ‘Topics which cannot be adequately covered by the Council's training policy ’ was rare.
Few people mentioned a need for external training for non-professional staff, although at least one who did, thought it was strongly needed: ‘Desperate shortage of topics for the interested non-professional ’.
Occasionally, courses for junior professional staff were referred to, usually in connection with management training, though in most instances, level of staff was not specified: ‘Seminars on staff control and management for young professionals are most useful ’.
Specialist skills, apart from technology/computerization, did not figure very highly or very uniformly in responses, perhaps because it is felt that these are widely catered for already.
The topics that were most consistently noted (see Table 34), were:
1
Management areas
2
New technology/computerization/automation
3
User/community awareness
4
Professional awareness/updating
Courses on computers/new technology were mentioned by one-third of respondents.
If level of the course was mentioned, it was usually to indicate that basic, rather than advanced training, was wanted:
‘Basic courses on computers’…
‘Computers — actually touching and using the things’…
‘Library automation for small library systems’…
‘New technology and computers — but at basic level for top management who know nothing about it but have to see an authority through a changeover’.
‘Management’ covered a wide range of concepts, including supervisory and personal skills, statistics and marketing, and was mentioned by over one-third of respondents.
Other additional areas that are related to managerial skills, such as publicity, and industrial relations/local authority structure, were listed by a further 15% of authorities, so that this topic in general figured quite highly as one for which a considerable number of authorities perceived a need for external course provision.
Greater awareness and/or knowledge of users or communities was mentioned by nearly a fifth of all authorities, in various ways, e.g.:
Community profiling
User needs
Communication with readers
Difficult clients
Reaching the community
Service to unemployed
Attitudinal training
Services to minorities
User relations
Community skills
while professional awareness and/or updating, was mentioned by approximately one-sixth of respondents covering a range of phrases such as: ‘Broadening the experience of junior professionals’…
‘Updating’…
‘Top up courses’…‘practice in other authorities and practical information’…‘a greater exchange of ideas’…‘new developments in libraries ’.
In theory of course, no topic is necessarily only suited to ‘external’ course provision.
For example, management training, which figured prominently as a topic for which there is most need of external course provision has been noted as being very suitable for courses run by own local authority central training units: ‘Training courses designed to teach managerial techniques can be aimed at candidates from all kinds of professions and different departments, and it will be extremely beneficial for library staff to mix with colleagues from other departments and disciplines.‘
There was evidence in our sample that more training was being organized internally, and that thought was being given as to how to achieve training objectives within this changing framework.
More internal training emphasizes very clearly the importance of having a training co-ordinator,(who has more than just nominal responsibility for training).
This may be why the authorities with relatively extensive training programmes, who were most likely to be the ones who were extending their internal programmes, were also likely to want more ‘training officer time’.
It is also likely to bring even the larger authorities face to face with the problem of staff mobility — where the absence of one or two people attending an external course may be relatively easily absorbed (except in smaller authorities), internal training is uneconomic for one or two people — and ideally, lends itself to a continuous programme.
There was noticeable interest in moving towards greater cooperation with/utilization of ‘outside’ agencies, to produce tailor-made training that would satisfy the library's own training objectives more effectively:
‘In-house courses would use outside lecturers, e.g. from library schools, who would tailor courses to our requirements’…
‘Use of external lectures on internal courses’…
‘More on-site training days through CLW’…
‘Control of a separate library training budget by library staff would make operational training easier — facilitate greater use of external trainers’…
‘Need a training officer, though size of authority probably does not justify — perhaps what should be done — though it won ‘t be — is that a library school or SLA should employ somebody to look after staff development’.
The traffic was not always one way only: ‘Organising our own ‘external’ courses for the benefit of the profession as a whole ’.
In some ways, the boundary between ‘external’ and ‘not external’training can be very indistinct in practice.
The data sheets described a wide range of shades of co-operative activity in the  planning, developing, or running of programmes, which made it inappropriate at times to define the programmes as either internal or external.
Local authority central training units, for example, can be described as providing ‘external’, ‘internal’ or ‘co-operative’training — according to the extent of the activity of the central department, and their relationship with library departments, as can other local authority funded groups, organizations, or institutions.
Library schools were noted by 30% of respondents as contributing to their in-service training, usually by the provision of short courses, occasionally with help in preparation of training aids.
All the library schools were mentioned, but CLW (College of Librarianship Wales) in particular was referred to by almost half of the authorities mentioning library schools, as providing on-site courses, as requested — and in total making a significant contribution to training in the Welsh county libraries, and some neighbouring authorities, e.g.: ‘Up to 50% of our courses held annually are arranged by (CLW) or contributed into ’.
(Welsh County Library).
LOCAL AUTHORITY COURSE PROVISION
Local authorities contribute to training directly and indirectly in many ways, for example:
Via central training departments and other inter-authority groups specifically designed to assist training, such as Local Government Training Boards; funding/staffing library departments, sometimes being directly responsible for the allocating of funds on training; and by funding other organizations that may ultimately contribute to training in libraries.
In terms of local authorities as suppliers of courses, use made of central training units is wide: only 22 authorities did not say that they used their central training department for some courses, though extent of use (and availability of courses on offer) varied widely, from:
‘Very occasional courses in health and safety’…(through — a typical grouping)‘Courses on management, industrial relations, health and safety, microcomputers’…(to)‘55 courses for staff, and will do special courses on request’.
Health and safety, and management/supervisory courses were the areas of training most likely to be specified, if the type of training offered by central departments was delineated.
Of the authorities who did not note any use made of central training units, half were  Scottish, or Welsh district libraries, with no County libraries in this group.
County libraries in particular were likely to indicate high involvement of central departments, offering predominantly managerial and supervisory courses, occasionally running courses especially for library staff.
They were also most likely to note involvement of central training staff in ‘developmental’ training:
‘Management development programme being set up for all departments and supervisory training for clerical and manual staff’…
‘Various career development and management courses’…
‘Numerous management development programmes for several levels of management and supervisory’.
The general impression was of a considerable amount of training being offered to county librarians, geared towards professionals, or senior non-professionals with supervisory duties.
The great majority of Metropolitan authorities also indicated that centrally run courses were available to them, though not always quite so many.
A quarter of this group noted ‘occasional’ courses only.
Management again was the most commonly noted subject area, with induction/introduction to local government/ advice on own courses also being mentioned.
Development training was specifically mentioned by fewer respondents than in the county libraries.
Two libraries categorically noted no central department involvement in training and one said involvement was only in the form of approval required for all external courses:
‘Run general courses for all departments from, for example, supervisory duties for clerical staff to management training-courses infrequent’…
‘Provides four introductory talks on local government’…
‘Provision of local authority induction courses, health and safety courses, development courses etc’…
‘General induction of new library staff, general management courses’.
Outer London authorities almost all noted courses run by central departments, largely management, although several authorities just said ‘general courses’:
‘Training on various aspects from induction to personnel training’…
‘Occasional courses to which professional staff are sent’.
Northern Ireland authorities all indicated that courses were run, several by the Inter-Board Training Panel.
Induction, management, computers, health and safety, were mentioned by this group as well as need for approval of attendance at courses: ‘Micro-computing courses, attitude training’…
‘Management, supervisory and interviewing skills ’.
Welsh district libraries did not note any courses on offer from their local authorities, though most Welsh Counties did.
Courses on offer varied from occasional to: ‘Wide range of courses on pervasive and managerial subjects ’.
In Scotland 60% of authorities noted some courses offered by local authorities but it was comparatively limited in scope.
Half of the libraries said health and safety training only, and several others noted limited provision: ‘Occasional involvement in local authority procedures’…
‘Gaelic classes ’.
Inner London authorities varied, with the majority noting courses offered by central departments:
‘Provides short courses in handling public, administration proceedings etc’…
‘Induction, equal opportunity, interviewing, first aid’…
‘Management training for professional and non-professional, advice and help in internal courses’.
Another way in which local authorities contribute to training is via Local Government Training Boards, or similar groups, which are intended to, and which have, contributed towards creating a training climate in local authorities generally.
LGTBs help in a variety of ways, in particular by offering support for training officers, as several respondents noted:
‘Training for our own trainers’…
‘Training packages’…
‘Financial help in training Assistant Director as a registered training officer’.
They also help, for example, by producing a training newsletter for trainers, and offering general advice, guidance and help for registered training officers.
They can also run courses or help with internal courses, e.g.: ‘Members of staff registered to attend courses and they provide tutors/input to locally arranged courses ’.
Approximately one-third of County libraries and one-quarter of both Inner London and Metropolitan authorities felt that their LGTB made a contribution to their training.
Northern Ireland has an Inter-Board Training Panel and a Library Information Services Council, and a Public Service Training Council, one or both of which were noted by all Northern Ireland respondents.
There are also Regional Provincial Councils mentioned by a small number of authorities in various locations.
How far local authorities, via their central training departments or LGTBs or any similar groups, can be of value, will obviously vary according to what is on offer, but also according to the facilities that the library department is able to take up.
The LA Working Party noted that:
‘An important part of the training officer's task is to co-operate effectively with other (non-library) parts of the ‘parent’ organisation.
This will include the maintenance of a constructive working relationship with the organisation's personnel department.
Indeed, the training policy of the ‘parent’ body may well dictate to some extent the training policy of the library service.’
However, if the ‘parent’ body doesn't have an extensive or coherent training policy, or if the library doesn't have a training officer who is more than training officer in name only, this important task is going to be difficult to achieve.
CO-OPERATIVE TRAINING SCHEMES
Libraries have long co-operated in areas such as provision of materials and technical services, and also informally in the area of visits/exchanges by trainees, so that neither co-operative programmes nor co-operation in training is a particularly new phenomenon.
However, as interest in training, and co-ordinated training programmes has developed throughout the 70s and 80s, so has interest in co-operative training schemes.
There appears to be a continuing strong interest in extending or formalizing existing links with other libraries and/or creating new co-operatives, presumably in order to better utilize scarce resources.
The pre-licentiate scheme in particular, has undoubtedly had an  effect on the development of interest in co-operative schemes, and further impetus has come from training officers or training co-ordinators who themselves need to co-operate, in the sense of exchanging ideas, and establishing their own network.
Co-operative schemes can range from being small and informal, to being relatively large, and highly formally organized.
For example, LRCC (The Library Resources Coordinating Committee) set up in 1973 to ‘promote the coordination of rationalisation of resources between the 65 libraries of the University of London and between these and other libraries in the London area’, is very formally organized, with a committee of 28 members and ‘a complex structure of Boards, Panel and Subject Sub-Committees’.
Alternatively, ‘BBC 3’, a co-operative of three senior children's librarians (see page 67), has no formal structure.
Looking at co-operation across its whole spectrum, from informal local arrangements to formal co-operatives, there is indication of a considerable amount of activity, much of it still developing, or in very early stages.
Use made of ‘external’ agencies, such as local authority training departments, and library schools, has already been noted.
Although these institutions can be regarded as providers of ‘external’ courses, considerable co-operation on production of courses is possible, and desirable from the library's point of view.
This is an area of co-operative activity that could be greatly developed.
Even the organizations that are always likely to provide wholly ‘external’ courses would want to, and do, engage in communication with their potential users.
Library co-operatives, apart from being producers/suppliers of courses, could also constitute a significant market for courses and be in a position to request economically viable, tailor-made ‘external’ courses.
Library training co-operatives can undertake to fulfil, at little direct cost, many of the objectives currently fulfilled by external courses — for example, offering staff the chance to meet and exchange views with staff working for other authorities or in different types of libraries; encouraging professional awareness and commitment to professional values — two of the indirect objectives that are sometimes thought of as the ‘real’ value of external course attendance.
Not only are external courses not the only way to achieve exchange of experience or heightened professional awareness, but more importantly, they may be inefficient and/or ineffective, if course content, or membership, is only marginally relevant to the person attending.
As was noted at a recent conference ‘Cooperatives are real work…not just a day out at a course!’.
Co-operation can work well between libraries of the same type or between libraries of different types, depending upon extent of joint needs, and practical factors such as proximity and location.
For example, BCOP is a co-operative of a public, university and college library, the NMCCL Training Coordination Group is a co-operative between public libraries, and LRCC already mentioned is a co-operative of university college libraries.
As the Guideline on Establishing Local Cooperative Training Schemes notes: ‘There is no ideal composition…
The important thing is to have agreed objectives and a programme which meets the needs of all members’.
One common and developing need that all libraries are increasingly aware of, is the need to introduce new members of the profession to a wide range of working situations, and arrangements for visits or exchanges of trainees, with local university libraries, were noted by a quarter of our sample of public libraries.
Several small co-operative schemes had been developed specifically to cope with needs created by pre-licentiate programmes:
‘Occasional cooperative ventures with Reading University, e.g. pre-licentiate training’…
‘Hull University/Humberside College of Education: cooperative training under development’…
‘We run joint courses with Hatfield Polytechnic’…
‘Exchange of staff with St. Andrews’…
‘Enfield, Barnet, Haringey and Middlesex Polytechnic — joint quarterly meetings of pre-licentiate and senior staff responsible’…
‘Exchange of trainees with Kent’…
‘Nottingham University, Trent Polytechnic, Nottingham Library meet four times per annum to discuss training’.
A similar pattern of co-operation between public libraries being fostered by the needs of pre-licentiate programmes was also evident in some of the examples of co-operative schemes noted in our sample:
‘Pre-licentiate days and possible job exchanges between licentiates’(with neighbouring authorities)….
‘Bromley, Lewisham, Greenwich, Croydon, Kent — licentiate training’.
Training officers' needs have also provided a stimulus for co-operative groups, both in terms of their need to obtain maximum benefit from resources (benefits which can improve when resources are pooled) and also in terms of their need to meet and exchange information/ideas:
‘I am part of a small group of training officers from neighbouring authorities who are considering the feasibility of regional and local cooperative training’…
‘Local training officers group, exchange of information, one-day courses’…
‘Librarians responsible for central training initiatives in Derbyshire, Leicestershire and Nottinghamshire meet four times per annum to discuss cooperation, Nottingham and Derbyshire are developing a training package cooperatively on inter-personal skills for library assistants’…
‘MNCCL Training Coordinators Croup, annual cooperative course’…
‘West Yorkshire trainers group — various courses’.
Library co-operatives rarely require much financial outlay but a minimum resource required is some staff time, and it seems likely that authorities with designated training officers (or teams), are going to be in a much stronger position to be able to utilize the considerable potential possibilities of library co-operatives.
Thus, the following document, produced by a very recently formed co-operative, has the need for a designated (and trained) training officer within each member library, as its first recommendation:
Eastern Region Training Officer's Group
On Wednesday, 5th September 1984, a meeting of the officers responsible for staff training within Hertfordshire, Bedfordshire, Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex, Northamptonshire and Cambridgeshire recommended that:
1
Each of the seven library authorities should have a member of staff responsible for training whose job description included the responsibility for co-ordinating and promoting staff training and development.
2
The nominated officers should receive training for these duties including, if necessary, registration with the Local Government Training Board.
3
A joint training group should be established to improve and promote staff training.
The role of the group should be:
1
To promote a greater awareness of the value and importance of effective staff training.
2
The identification of and response to training needs.
3
The provision of training and development opportunities for training coordinators.
4
To facilitate the training of the trainers.
5
To advise the LA branches, groups of the AAL and other appropriate groups in the region of identified training needs.
This should assist in the formulation of meetings and course programmes.
6
Where identified needs are not met by existing groups to initiate and organise appropriate training activities.
To organise joint courses as required and offer places on internal local authority courses as appropriate.
7
To encourage a systematic planned approach to training including the provision of adequate resources in terms of time, money and skills.
8
To facilitate the shared use, provision and production of training materials as required.
To compile a directory of training aids.
9
The mutual exchange of training information and ideas.
10
To liaise with other education and training organisations e.g. Local Government Training Board, Provincial Councils, Local Authority, Central Training Officers, Library Association Groups etc and to coopt other members as appropriate.
11
To prepare combined responses to national training and educational initiatives.
12
To monitor and evaluate training activities in the region.
The following practical checklist on starting a co-operative, produced by a London college which has developed a local scheme (for pre-licentiate training in particular), indicates a range of practical factors that they considered necessary to take into account:
STARTING A COOPERATIVE TRAINING SCHEME
Checklist
1
Decide why you want to cooperate
a
To bring staff together (to help combat stagnation)
b
To widen the skills available to you
c
To make internal programmes viable eg. Pre-licentiate training
d
To keep you on your toes
e
To avoid duplication of effort
f
To provide a local resource for other libraries
2
Decide who (in your own library) is going to represent you
a
Someone with a vested interest in training or a personal commitment to it
b
Someone whose job allows them the flexibility to attend meetings and participate in programmes
c
Make sure you choose an enthusiastic volunteer!
3
Look at the geography of your area.
Where might the scheme be centred?
(Not necessarily in your Authority or library)
4
Decide whether your scheme is initially going to include different kinds of library.
(You can change your mind later)
5
Decide who to contact
a
Find out who is responsible for training in the libraries you select or someone you know who might be enthusiastic.
b
Arrange an informal meeting to talk about possibilities
c
Remember to include Local Library School and/or college running BTEC or City and Guilds courses.
6
Start small.
Don't let bureaucracy take over
7
Make a list of your resources or where you can get hold of them
a
Accommodation.
Meetings/courses
b
Training aids and materials
c
Speakers, helpers, course organisers
d
Graphics skills for publicity
e
Duplicating, photocopying, printing facilities
f
Specialist help.
Internal/external
g
Ideas
8
Think about costs.
Do you really need a budget?
a
Will members make an ad hoc contribution as necessary? eg where you want to book a speaker or hire a film 
b
Will they be prepared to give you a regular budget? eg £100 per library per year
c
What costs can you hide? eg photocopying, refreshments, accommodation, travelling expenses
d
Can you raise income to cover costs? eg by publications or allowing outside participants on courses.
9
Think about programmes
a
Find topics of (more or less) common interest
b
Decide on priorities
c
Keep programmes practical.
Don't be over ambitious
It is interesting to note that very few existing co-operatives, even the larger ones, appear to have any significant directly allocated budget: LRCC has no formal budget, relying totally on internal resources: the Sheffield Libraries Coordinating Committee (SLCC) has a formal budget allocation of £100 per annum, and BCOP, the Birmingham Cooperative, formally budgets £50 per year.
In fact it was noted recently that co-operation works best when there is no money available: ‘People need each other’!
The following article, written by the architects of a relatively small public library co-operative of children's librarians, from three authorities, based on shared needs but limited resources, illustrates how valuable such schemes can be.
BBC 3: A report on cooperative staff training
For the past year, the London Boroughs of Bromley, Bexley and Croydon (BBC3) have been involved in cooperative training sessions within the field of work with young people.
The scheme was initiated by Senior Children's Librarians who were frustrated by the apparent lack of external training for non-professional or non-specialist staff, and by the knowledge that they were each working hard to provide training for probably only ten people within each Borough.
A great deal of duplication of effort was taking place.
Further motivation came from comments expressed at external training sessions that each Borough could afford to send only one or two people to courses costing £30 plus per person per day, and also from the need for specialised training for non-professional staff.
Talks began early in 1983, and a ‘pilot’ day was held for Bromley staff in April to gauge their reaction, and to gather comments which could be analysed when planning joint ventures.
The first integrated training day was held in June in Bromley, and dealt with ‘Library Services to the Under 5s’.
The guest speaker was the Playgroup Adviser for the Borough.
This was followed in October by a day in Croydon on ‘Library Services to the Primary School Child’, with a guest speaker from the Language Unit.
There was no fee involved for either of these speakers as they were each on the Establishment of the host Borough.
Completed questionnaires from participating staff showed that they had welcomed the training, had greatly benefited from it, and had enjoyed the opportunity to discuss problems with staff from other Boroughs.
Plans for 1984 therefore went ahead, and in May ‘Activities for Children’ was the topic for the day at Bromley; ‘Getting it right: Library Services to Teenagers’was the programme for Bexley; and ‘Learning about learning to read’is planned for  October session in Croydon.
When a guest speaker is invited, the cost of the fee is borne by the host Borough, each Borough taking its turn.
No charge is levied for attendance.
The programme for each of the training days contains formal talks, group practical work, and plenty of time for discussion.
The anonymous questionnaire filled in by participants after each course highlight areas of need for further training, give the staff opportunity to criticise the day, suggest improvements, and to spotlight what they found most helpful.
The answers to the questionnaires are reviewed by the senior staff when planning future courses.
Each training day is open to staff working with children and teenagers in the three Boroughs.
Attendance is generally around 30, with equal numbers from each Borough.
This has proved to be a very workable group.
The integration of staff for training has led to a good exchange of ideas, greater enthusiasm, and higher staff morale.
Evidence shows that they actually enjoy their training.
But it is not only these staff who are benefiting — the three senior staff who devised the scheme, and who organise the sessions, have found their meetings and discussions to be very useful.
Sharing problems, discussing policies and pooling ideas, have all proved helpful and stimulating.
Following the course on ‘Activities’, cooperation has now been extended to include exchange of practical information on library activities.
Information on the organising of any activity which has been tried and tested by one Borough, will be passed to the others in a set format, together with templates etc where needed.
It is hoped that shortly the Boroughs will also embark upon joint booklists.
In this time of cuts, and insecurity, is it not time that local authorities lost their insular image, approached their neighbours, exchanged ideas, pooled resources, and generally helped each other a lot more?
It is certainly working for the BBC Junior Library Services, and there must be other areas which could benefit from a combined approach.
It is apparent that there is considerable, if still tentative, interest in initiating and pursuing co-operative training ventures; and that their potential for satisfying many of the objectives currently being met (adequately or inadequately) by external courses has barely been harnessed.
This is undoubtedly an area where further advice, guidance, encouragement and practical support now, could be of considerable benefit in the long run towards co-ordinating the current uneven and inequitable distribution of in-service training.
Summary
CHAPTER SUMMARIES
During 1984 a survey was carried out of in-service training in public libraries in the UK.
This report forms an account of this survey and discussion of its findings.
Supporting evidence is also taken from data collected by a survey of libraries in the UK carried out by the Centre for Research on User Studies, l during 1984, and a one-day conference on Cooperative Training in Practice, held during November 1984.
Just under 70% of the 167 public libraries in the UK participated in the investigation, and extensive descriptions of current training programmes, either in the form of individual ‘data sheets’ describing specific courses/modules, or general descriptions of overall programmes, were provided.
In total nearly 400 data sheets were completed, which, with our questionnaires and the CRUS questionnaires, as well as further material supplied, provided very extensive anecdotal comments and examples of practice, as well as statistical information.
Examples of practice have been compiled in Appendix 3, and comments made by respondents have been quoted throughout the text.
As an exploratory survey the primary aim of the project was to collect current data on in-service training, and Chapters 2 and 3 provide an account of the information collected, indicating that within apparently general theoretical commitment to in-service training, the actual practice of training shows a very wide range within every parameter examined.
Training undertaken, money and staff devoted to training were analysed, in relation to‘type’ of authority following CIPFA categories: County, Inner London and City, Metropolitan, Northern Ireland, Outer London, Scotland and Wales; and size of establishment, following the groups used by the Working Party on Post-Qualification Training:4 under 100, 100–300, over 300.
The fact that ‘in order that training should be effective and consistent it must be planned and implemented systematically’ was regarded as fundamental, and respondents were asked to  provide information on training that constituted a programme, defined as any course of instruction with a predetermined structure.
This did not inherently exclude any method, or type of training: ‘on-the-job/off-the-job’, ‘formal/informal’, ‘internal/ external’.
It did exclude the unplanned,(and sometimes unintended!) learning and reinforcement that takes place ‘on-the-job’.
This was regarded as being outside the remit of this survey although it was noted that an intentional consequence of any effective training programme should be to diffuse ideas and attitudes throughout the working environment, not least of all to counteract erroneous ideas or unwelcome attitudes.
Size of establishment is related to amount of systematic training undertaken, as is type of authority, partly because there is a relationship between type of authority and average size of establishment.
Thus, the ‘rank’ order of extent of systematic training undertaken coincides with the ‘rank’order of average size of establishment of the seven ‘types’of authority, although average size of establishment conceals a considerable range of actual sizes.
It was observed that the theoretical and practical commitment of local authorities themselves to training-the overall ‘training climate’— with its implications for availability of resources both in the library department and elsewhere in the authority, can have a significant effect on the extent of training undertaken.
It was noticeable that county libraries were on average, more ‘advantaged’ within every parameter examined.
A total of nearly £300,000 was directly budgeted by our sample for training during 1984/5 with the budget for individual library departments ranging from nothing to over £20,000.
As a relatively small number of library authorities carry out a high amount of training, so a small number of libraries spend a high proportion of the money budgeted: 19 libraries accounted for 55% of this money, although employing just under a quarter of all staff.
Money budgeted was related to extent of training indicated, though there were exceptions to prove the rule at every level of spending,(except the highest and the lowest).
Training officers constitute a significant and arguably essential resource if systematic, evaluated training is to be carried out.
The endorsement by The Library Association Working Party on Training of the recommendations of the Working Party on Post-Qualification Training, was noted.
These were that:
1
For a staff (all levels) of less than 100 there should be a named senior member of staff to be responsible inter-alia for training.
2
For a staff (all levels) of 100 to 300 there should be the equivalent of at least one full-time training officer.
3
For a staff (all levels) of over 300 there should be a suitably augmented training team under the direction of a senior member of staff.
Although there was a diversity of titles held by staff nominated as training officers, nearly all libraries could name a member of staff responsible for training.
It was clear however, that neither nominal responsibility nor title was indicative of actual time spent on in-service training.
Of CRUS's respondents, 39% said that they had a training officer, while 32% of our sample indicated that a designated or nominated officer (or specified training team) spent at least one-quarter of their time on training.
As none of the small libraries with establishments under 100 were in this group, this represents 43% of the libraries with establishments over 100.
In our sample, 70% were of this size.
Training officers who noted that they were able to spend their full time on training were very rare, although it was noted in Chapter 4 that a training officer or more ‘training officer time’ was the most commonly wanted further ‘resource’to expand or develop existing training programmes.
While the presence of a training officer was associated with size, it was noted that of the group of 27 libraries who had a member of staff formally titled training/staff/development/research officer, seven had establishments under 200, eight under 300, 12 over 300.
Training teams were not specifically mentioned by more than a small number of respondents although ‘involvement in training’ of all professional or supervisory staff, or all senior management, was more likely to be noted.
The extent to which central training staff of local authorities were seen by libraries to be involved in their training was examined, and the provision of central courses they offered was also looked at (in Chapter 5), leading to the conclusion that central training provision reflects the overall policy of, and general commitment to training of the parent authority, and thus is likely to coincide with existence of other resources.
Size of establishment and type of authority were again associated with the presence of this potential resource so that the authorities who were less advantaged in terms of their own resources were also less likely to have a strong centre of training expertise to turn to.
The problem of insufficient staff to be able easily to absorb absences from the workplace to attend group training sessions was  commented on by all except the largest libraries, with some libraries apparently regarding this lack of (indirect) staff resource as paramount to preventing any in-service training programmes being carried out, although as was emphasized by The Library Association Working Party on Training:
‘No single method of training is appropriate for all situations.
Libraries must select the methods that are relevant to their particular objectives and restraints.’
Size of establishment would be expected to be related to amount of training undertaken though in practice many libraries (and not only small libraries) appeared to undertake both less training and far less systematic training than must be considered ideal given that all staff in any size library will have training needs:
‘We emphasise again that training is not an activity that is only undertaken by large organisations.
There may be more overlap between levels in the smaller library but each level still has training needs to be met and those needs do not differ greatly from those indicated.’
Smaller library authorities have traditionally faced the problem of lack of staff ‘mobility’, with difficulties in releasing staff from normal service points: the ability of libraries with larger establishments to release groups of staff, making internal training viable and economic, or to be able to afford external courses, has perhaps contributed to a tendency to define training largely in terms of off-the-job courses which may have discouraged some libraries from even attempting to develop a coherent overall training plan.
Although size is related to training undertaken, in all parameters there are exceptions to be noted indicating that library departments can have a significant impact on effectiveness of training undertaken, and the use made of resources available to them, if they choose to do so.
A positive training ‘climate’ in the library department itself is an essential resource.
The second aim of the project was to identify how training objectives are being met in practice.
At the most fundamental level the primary objective of any training is to be effective, but to achieve this, as the Working Party on Training noted, the process, or ‘cycle’ of training, has certain inherent needs of its own.
These are:
1
[for the library authority]to clearly identify training needs,
2
to set objectives and plan programmes, designed to satisfy identified needs using the most effective methods,
3
to assess programme in order to know whether or not objectives have been achieved, to achieve other objectives effectively, and/or to achieve the same objectives more effectively next time.
Chapter 4 considered this training cycle, noting a tendency for some libraries to regard the problems inherent in small or falling establishments as insurmountable.
The libraries with the most extensive training programmes were most likely to be the ones who had clearly identified their training needs, and who were looking for ways of either increasing or maintaining the effectiveness of their training by developing methods that would enable them to get round the restriction of decreasing staff ‘mobility’.
A trend towards more on-site/on-the-job training was observable, along with more internal training generally, and development of tailor-made training ‘packages’ to facilitate this, particularly among libraries already undertaking a relatively greater amount of training.
Libraries of all sizes were likely to indicate a belief that more and better planning was needed.
More management training was the area most commonly specified as the way in which programmes would like to be developed, less so by smaller libraries, who were more likely to indicate an undifferentiated need for ‘more’ training of any type.
It was noted that without clear identification of needs, programmes cannot be evaluated to see how effectively needs have been satisfied, and without evaluation, programmes cannot be planned to achieve their objective of effective satisfaction of needs.
While the majority of individual courses described by the data sheets were assessed, assessment of effectiveness of overall programmes, in the sense of the needs of the individual and the organization being identified and considered, was much less in evidence.
The Library Association Working Party emphasized that they considered it ‘vital…that thought be given to the effectiveness of training and that the problems of evaluation be faced’.
This need is still apparent.
The third aim of the project was to consider needs that are being, or could be, met from external/co-operative sources, and Chapter 5 examines the topics that libraries indicated as those for which there was most need for external training provision.
The broad areas of management, new technology/computerization, user/community awareness and professional awareness/  updating, were the most commonly mentioned topics.
It was noted that, in theory, any needs could be met by co-operative and/or internal training, particularly as the context of co-operation encompasses a wide range of possible co-operative relationships, so that the boundary between an ‘internal’ and an ‘external’programme was at times very indistinct.
Thus, a range of relationships was noted with, for example, central training units in the ‘parent’ organization, other libraries, library schools and other companies/organizations/groups.
It was also noted that central training units in particular, can be defined as offering ‘internal’, ‘external’, or ‘co-operative’ training, according to the prevailing local relationship,(some library departments are ‘charged’for centrally run courses).
Furthermore, authority-wide training units are likely to provide management training and are well suited to do so.
A growing interest in developing co-operative training schemes was noted, fostered partly by the introduction of the pre-licentiate scheme which has encouraged libraries of all types to look at how to use resources to maximum advantage for programmes that may involve a small number, or possibly only one, staff member, and it was concluded that the potential for co-operative schemes to satisfy many of the objectives currently being met (adequately or inadequately) by external courses, has barely been harnessed.
CONCLUDING COMMENTS
In the light of the information collected, the following observations are offered:
1
Most of the resources examined, currently devoted to training, are concentrated in a minority of authorities.
These resources tend to be associated with each other, further compounding their uneven distribution.
While the distribution of resources will inevitably continue to be uneven, it should be emphasized that awareness of, and use made of resources can be as important as funding or staff available.
The pessimistic assumption, occasionally evident in this survey, that systematic in-service training can only be undertaken by larger or wealthier authorities-those able to release staff from service points easily, or able to afford expensive external courses — is disturbing, inequitable and inaccurate.
Better, or greater use can often be made of resources that are available.
For example, more systematic planning and evaluation of training, greater exploration of the possibilities of co-operative schemes, more extensive utilization of expertise  available within parent authorities and other local organizations, could all have an impact on amount of training undertaken.
2
Co-operative training in particular, deserves further attention at this stage in its development.
It is an ideal way for less advantaged libraries to develop training programmes, and to acquire confidence in their own ability to plan and execute internal training.
It may also constitute the most effective way of utilizing scarce resources for many such libraries.
To leave the continuing development of training co-operatives to those libraries best able to help themselves would almost certainly only serve to reinforce the existing inequitable situation.
The establishment now of a co-ordinated network of Regional INSET (in-service training) offices, or officers, with the primary function of advising and promoting self help, would be timely, in view of the stimulation to training that has been engendered by the introduction of the pre-licentiate scheme, and could make a major contribution towards combating the inefficient and inequitable distribution of training.
While this survey has been concerned with public libraries, co-operation potentially encompasses a wide range of institutions, and an INSET network that concerned itself with training across the whole spectrum of librarianship would be of maximum value.
3
External courses are likely to continue to be the only viable way of meeting some needs in some circumstances and in the interests of promoting maximum effectiveness, further attention could very usefully be given to two areas in particular.
Firstly, as needs are not static, improved liaison between suppliers and users could prove to be the best way to ensure a close match between future supply of, and demand for, courses.
INSET staff would presumably be in a good position to carry out this role.
Secondly, and perhaps more significantly they would also be in an ideal position to carry out supplier/course assessment.
Currently, external course assessment is carried out either by the organization providing the course, or by individual users for the benefit of their own authorities.
However, it is inefficient from a user's point of view to leave course assessment to suppliers (who will not necessarily be assessing the same thing as users), and inappropriate to expect individual users to be able to evaluate courses within any framework other than their own needs.
Furthermore users are not likely to  be in the situation of being able to contrast comparable courses.
Objective supplier/course evaluation, which would include comparison of costs, could significantly improve the cost-effectiveness of use made of external courses.
4
The training of trainers, programme evaluation and staff development were regarded as areas requiring further attention by many respondents.
More practical guidance, advice and support in those areas would be valuable particularly if it came from within librarianship rather than management science generally.
In the areas of evaluation, widespread dissemination of case studies could prove to be a very useful practical exercise.
It has been said that ‘a training programme based on identified needs is necessary in every library’: this necessity does not appear to have been universally accepted nor uniformly translated into practice.